NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MAKING NUTRITIONAL INFORMATION DIGESTIBLE:
EFFECTS OF A RECEIPT-BASED INTERVENTION ON RESTAURANT PURCHASES
Kelly Bedard
Peter J. Kuhn
Working Paper 19654
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19654

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2013

Funded by NIH grants R21 DK075642 and 3R21DK075642-02S1. We thank Kyle Dean, Jay Ferro,
Molly Chester and Nitin Pai for their patience and cooperation. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Kelly Bedard and Peter J. Kuhn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Making Nutritional Information Digestible: Effects of a Receipt-Based Intervention on Restaurant
Purchases
Kelly Bedard and Peter J. Kuhn
NBER Working Paper No. 19654
November 2013
JEL No. C33,D03,D12,I12
ABSTRACT
We study the effects of receipts that include personalized ordering suggestions designed to reduce
fat and calorie consumption on purchasing behavior at a restaurant chain. We find that customers,
in the aggregate, made most of the item substitutions that were encouraged by the messages, such
as substituting ham for sausage in a breakfast sandwich, or substituting frozen yogurt for ice cream,
though effects on overall calories and fat consumed were small. The results illustrate the potential
of emerging information technologies, which allow retailers to tailor product marketing to individual
consumers, to contribute in meaningful new ways to the battle against obesity.

Kelly Bedard
UCSB
kelly@econ.ucsb.edu
Peter J. Kuhn
Department of Economics
University of California, Santa Barbara
2127 North Hall
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
and NBER
pjkuhn@econ.ucsb.edu

1. Introduction
Countries throughout the developed world are concerned about rising obesity rates. By
2007-2008, 34 percent of American adults and 17 percent of American children were obese,
double the shares in 1980.1 While there is no shortage of proposed explanations for this trend—
ranging from changes in food prices and increasingly sedentary lifestyles to technological change
in food production—a popular candidate is consumption of restaurant food, particularly fast
food.2 Part of this explanation’s appeal lies in the fact that the share of American food dollars
spent on meals prepared outside the home rose from 26 percent to 46 percent from 1970 to
2003.3
In response to concerns about the link between obesity and restaurant food consumption,
a number of U.S. jurisdictions have recently enacted mandatory calorie posting laws. In
California, for example, restaurants with more than ten sites must now post calorie information
on menus and/or menu boards. Despite this increase in regulations, there is still little evidence
that providing such information changes purchasing patterns. The two best known studies find
that calorie posting may have a small effect on calories purchased: Bollinger, Leslie and
Sorenson (2011) find that calories per transaction at Starbuck stores fell by 6 percent after New
York City mandated calorie posting at all chain restaurants. Wisdom, Downs, and Loewenstein
(2010) found that randomly providing calorie information to a sample of Subway customers
reduced calories per meal by about 8 percent. Both sets of authors, however, acknowledge that
the interventions and settings they study are special, and that the effects identified may not be
large or permanent enough to affect overall obesity levels. In consequence, additional, effective
tools for improving food choices at restaurants may be needed.
The intervention studied in this paper is called the Nutricate receipt and was designed by
SmartReceipt Corporation. In June 2009, it was implemented at a trial store in Burgerville, a
restaurant chain in the Pacific Northwest. A distinct feature of this intervention is that it is
printed on customers’ receipts; thus in principle it could be implemented either as a substitute
for, or as a complement to calorie posting on menus. While at first glance a receipt-based
intervention might not seem promising—it relies on consumer memory and can only affect
consumption on future restaurant visits—receipt-based interventions also have some potential
advantages. Of these, probably the most promising is the capability to deliver targeted purchase
suggestions promoting healthier products that are close substitutes to what the consumer just
bought.4

1

Flegal et al (2010); CDC (2011).
See Lakdawalla and Philipson (2002); Cutler, Glaeser, and Shapiro (2003); Lakdawalla, Philipson, and
Bhattacharya (2005); Bleich et al. (2008) for assessments of various candidate hypotheses. Anderson and Matsa
(2011) find little evidence for an effect of restaurants; as do Davis and Carpenter (2009) and Currie at al. (2010) who
focus specifically on restaurants’ effects on children.
3
See USDA-ERS 2003 and NRA 2004. More importantly, the proportion of fat and calories coming from foods
consumed away from home has risen substantially. In 1995, foods away-from-home provided 34 percent of total
caloric intake and 38 percent of fat intake, nearly double the 18 percent caloric and fat intake in 1977-1978 (USDAERS 2000).
4
In addition, restaurants and customers may consider receipt-based interventions less intrusive than menu-based
ones.
2

2

Using store-level weekly purchase data from all 39 restaurants operated by Burgerville
over a 125-week period, we estimate the effects of the Nutricate Receipt treatment on a variety
of outcomes. Aside from the distinct nature of the Nutricate Receipt intervention, novel features
of our study include a two-stage econometric approach that, in addition to accounting for store
and week fixed effects, allows for persistent unobserved store-specific shocks. In addition, since
we have 38 possible control stores, some of our estimates use the method proposed by Abadie,
Diamond, and Hainmueller (2010) to construct an optimal synthetic control group, whose pretreatment sales trends match the treatment store’s more closely than those of an arbitrarilyselected set of stores.
Under our preferred specification, which applies both the above innovations, we do not
detect a statistically significant effect of the Nutricate Receipt intervention on total calories per
transaction at Burgerville. We do, however, estimate a reduction in average cholesterol per
transaction of 2.1 percent. More significantly, we find robust evidence that consumers shifted
their mix of purchases in the directions encouraged by the most common purchasing suggestions.
For example, the share of adult main course items requesting “no sauce” increased by 6.8
percent, the share of kids’ meals with apples (instead of fries) rose by 7.0 percent, and the share
of breakfast sandwiches without sausage increased by 3.8 percent. Together, these patterns
suggest that a significant share of fast food customers implemented their personalized ordering
suggestion on future restaurant visits.
What mechanisms might account for the observed effects of ordering suggestions in our
data? Since ordering suggestions on a receipt can only affect consumption on future purchases,
we think it is unlikely that simple salience—i.e. reminding consumers of facts and consequences
they already know—plays a major role. Instead, we propose that Nutricate receipts work
because they provide information in a way that is personally relevant, and then combine this
information with simple action suggestions. To see this point, it is worth noting—as the
restaurant lobby has argued—that menus can be complex items, especially when customers can
customize their orders. For example, even a simple deli sandwich can be ordered in over 4000
ways; selecting the optimal combination of taste and nutrition from this many choices can be
cognitively demanding.5 Faced with this complexity, consumers can respond in a number of
suboptimal ways, including some heuristics that can be highly ineffective. For example, two
recent experimental studies—Iyengar and Lepper (2000) and Bertrand et al (2010)—find that
expanding consumers’ choice sets led to choice avoidance: consumers were less likely to buy the
product at all when offered a larger menu of possible product types. Relatedly, Hirshleifer, Lim,
and Teoh (2009) provide highly suggestive evidence that information overload (in the form of a
large number of earnings announcements) slows price adjustments in stock markets.6

5

If a sandwich consists of one choice from each of 4 meats, 4 breads, 4 cheeses [including none], 4 spreads (e.g.
mayo, mustard, butter, none) lettuce (yes/no), tomato (yes/no) and 4 condiments (olives, peppers, etc.) the total
number of possible sandwiches is 4,096.
6
Rubinstein and Salant (2006) review an extensive psychological literature demonstrating humans’ reliance on
simple, suboptimal heuristics when making choices from lists, such as restaurant menus. See also DellaVigna
(2009) for an excellent recent review of the broader literature on psychological determinants of consumer choices.

3

In sum, we hypothesize that simple suggestions to make a health-improving switch from
something the consumer recently chose to a close substitute may circumvent many of the
cognitive difficulties associated with making choices from lists, such as menus. Further, since
customized receipts are likely an early stage in the development of information technologies that
allow retailers to tailor product marketing to individual consumers, our evidence that fast-food
customers respond to tailored, health-improving suggestions suggests that these new information
technologies may have the potential to contribute meaningfully to the battle against obesity.7

2. Food Labeling and its Effects
Long before the current wave of state and local mandates requiring restaurant menu
labeling, the 1990 Nutrition Labeling and Education Act (NLEA) established mandatory
nutrition labeling for packaged foods. The cornerstone of the NLEA is the Nutrition Facts Panel
(NFP), which provides a variety of information including total calories, calories from fats, and
amounts of other nutrients per serving and as a percentage of a recommended daily value. Until
recently, restaurants were exempt from these labeling requirements. However, pressure to
extend nutrition labeling to restaurants has increased in response to restaurants’ expanding role
in the American diet. Since New York introduced mandatory calorie posting in 2008, a number
of other jurisdictions including California, Seattle, and Philadelphia followed suit. At the federal
level, the Federal Drug Administration is currently drafting regulations mandated by the 2010
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. The proposed regulations would require restaurants
with 20 or more locations to post calories on all menus and menu boards, clearly and
prominently, adjacent to the number of calories.
Throughout this process of expanding legislation, the National Restaurant Association
(NRA) has consistently opposed attempts to require posting of nutritional information on menus
and menu boards.8 The NRA argues that this method of nutritional disclosure presents many
costly logistical and operational constraints. Among these is the fact that 70 percent of
customers customize their restaurant meals; as noted this poses significant difficulties in
providing accurate information in an easily-digestible form.9 Other difficulties include the fact
that restaurants have daily specials and that the FDA and other organizations periodically make
changes to their nutrient recommendations, which would increase costs. Also, posting
nutritional information poses special challenges for drive-through customers, who account for 60
percent of quick-service restaurant sales (NRA 2004; NRA letter to FDA 2003). Many of these
costs associated with menus are less of a concern in the case of receipt-based interventions,
7

Put a different way, menu-based interventions assist consumers by providing new information about calorie
content, and by providing salience: before the customer orders, he/she is reminded of the calorie content in a meal
he/she is considering. Receipt-based interventions provide little salience: the information they contain cannot be
acted on till the next restaurant visit. On the other hand, they provide both information and guidance, i.e. assistance
with the cognitively-demanding task of choosing from a large set of options. Guidance takes the form of suggesting
a potentially welfare-improving perturbation to the consumer’s previous choice.
8
That said, there is some support by the restaurant association for a uniform federal law that would replace the
expanding patchwork of state and local regulations.
9
In the case of the deli sandwich consisting of 7 items in 4096 combinations, providing complete information
would require the restaurant either to list values for all 4096 combinations, or to post the information for each of the
24 possible components (4+4+4+4+2+2+4=24) and rely on the consumer to add up seven two- or three-digit
numbers.

4

which do not occupy new physical space and can be easily reprogrammed. Thus, receipt-based
interventions may be a useful complement or substitute for menu-based ones.10
As noted, the key existing studies of calorie posting are Bollinger, Leslie and Sorenson
(2011); and Wisdom, Downs and Loewenstein (2010).11 Bollinger, Leslie, and Sorenson (2011)
use internal company data from Starbucks to study the reaction of Starbucks’ customers to a
mid-2008 law that required all chain restaurants in New York City to post calories on menus or
menu boards. While average calories per transaction fell from 247 to 236, this effect was
entirely driven by the small fraction of consumers purchasing food—there was no decline in
purchased drink calories. Whether or not the reduction in calories at Starbucks constitutes a
large or a small impact is to some extent in eye of the beholder. The 11 calorie decline is
statistically significant and corresponds to a 6 percent decrease, but it constitutes a small fraction
of daily calories.12
Wisdom, Downs, and Loewenstein (2010) designed a pair of field experiments where a
relatively small number of Subway customers were randomly assigned to different types of
menus.13 The context was one in which no restaurants operating in the market were required to
post nutrition information. Pooling their two studies, Wisdom et al.’s results suggest that calorie
information reduces calories by approximately 7 percent, although many of their point estimates
are imprecisely estimated. Their results also suggest that a different intervention that made
healthy choices more convenient (by making them a ‘featured option’) could reduce ordered
calories, depending on the format.
Other survey and receipt collection studies come to similar conclusions. Elbel et al.
(2009) collected receipts from guests outside of fast-food chain restaurants, before and after
calorie posting in New York City, using Newark NJ stores as controls. They could detect no
change in calories purchased.14 Finally, in a study design similar to ours, Finkelstein et al.
(2011) studied the effects of mandatory calorie posting in King County, WA using monthly sales
data from 28 TacoTime restaurants. Seven of these restaurants were near but not inside King
For more detail on the Nutricate receipt and its possible advantages for restaurants, see
http://receipt.com/nutrition_solutions.php
11
There is also a small literature that studies the effect of packaged food labeling under the NLEA. For an example
and review, see Variyam and Cawley (2006). Using National Health Interview Survey data, they study the effects
of packaged food labeling by comparing the change before and after the implementation of NLEA in body weight
among those who use labels when food shopping to that among those who do not use labels. They report a relative
decrease in body weight among the label-users relative to non-users.
12
Bollinger et al.’s regression tables do not indicate whether their standard errors are clustered or whether other
adjustments were made for within-group error correlations. In footnote 27, they report that their results are robust
when they account for serial correlation by aggregating all transaction data before calorie posting and all transaction
data after calorie posting, then testing for a before-after difference in calories per transaction. Assuming the
aggregation was done by store, these tests would then require the 316 store-level pre-post differences in their data to
be statistically independent across stores. Most of our estimated standard errors do not rely on this assumption.
13
The inducement to participate was a free meal; according to the authors “more than half” of the customers who
were approached agreed to participate.
14
Dumanovsky et al. (2011) conduct a similar study, but using data from New York restaurants only; they found
modest reductions in calories purchased in some specifications, but interpretation of these differences as causal is
problematic due to the absence of a control group. Bassett et al. (2008) show that Subway consumers who reported
seeing posted calorie information purchased few calories than other Subway consumers; inferring causality is
difficult here as well.
10

5

County, and served as controls. Their econometric approach does not appear to include store
fixed effects, or to adjust standard errors and optimize the control group in the ways we do here.
They find no effect of menu labeling on calories purchased.
To our knowledge, ours is the only study to estimate the effect of receipt-based
interventions on restaurant food purchases. In its general form, the Nutricate receipt consists of
three components: information, motivation and recommendations. The information component
displays each item’s relevant nutritional data, as ordered. Thus, if a consumer asked to "hold the
mayo," on her order, the nutritional information provided on the receipt will reflect this. Receipts
can also contain motivational statements, aimed to remind consumers of the benefits of a
healthier diet, such as “A diet low in total fat may reduce the risk of heart disease.” Finally, and
of greatest interest to us in this study, are customized recommendations for how a customer can
improve his/her nutrition, by making small changes to the items the customer just ordered. For
example, one message used at Burgerville says, “Did you know if you held the mayonnaise on a
burger you would cut your fat intake by 57%, or 15 grams?” In our analysis, we pay special
attention to the effects of these recommendations, both because they are unique to receipt-based
interventions and because they might offer an additional policy tool in improving customers’
food choices. Appendix A shows an example receipt from a Burgerville restaurant.

3. Data and Descriptive Statistics
Our data consist of weekly purchase information for all 39 restaurants operated by
Burgerville for the 125-week period running from January 2008 to mid-May 2010. Beginning
on June 4, 2009, the receipts at a single store (henceforth the “treatment” store) were changed
from a conventional sales receipt to the Nutricate receipt. During our study period, no form of
mandatory calorie posting was required in any jurisdiction containing a Burgerville store.15
Overall, we therefore have a difference-in-differences, or “comparative case study” design with
pre- and post-treatment information on one treated store and 38 potential control stores.
In the Burgerville implementation, aside from promoting healthier choices more
generally, the recommendations in the Nutricate receipts focused on encouraging nine main
changes in ordering patterns. These were, (1) to substitute to a side salad for any adult-size
fries16; (2) to substitute grilled chicken for fried chicken in sandwiches; (3) to substitute apples
for fries in kids’ meals; (4) to substitute milk for soda or juice in kids’ meals; (5) to substitute
frozen yogurt for ice cream; (6) to substitute any other kind of breakfast sandwich (ham, bacon,
cheese, or egg only) for the breakfast sandwich with sausage; (7) and (8) to ‘hold the sauce’ or
‘hold the cheese’ on any sandwich; and (9) to substitute a meal-sized (entrée) salad for other
main dishes. These changes were motivated by the notion that the proposed replacement item
was both a reasonable substitute for the purchased item and significantly lower in calories and

15

Burgerville has stores in Washington State, but none in King County, which mandated fast-food calorie posting
during our study period.
16
Throughout this paper “fries” includes both french fries and onion rings. Onion rings are only available
seasonally; when they are introduced purchases of fries fall precipitously but the total of fries plus rings remains
essentially unchanged. The opposite occurs when onion rings are removed from the menu.

6

fat.17 While most customers likely know that salads are healthier than fries, some of the
information provided by these suggestions (e.g. the fact that bacon—or at least the amount of
bacon in a Burgerville breakfast sandwich—has less fat and calories than sausage, or that frozen
yogurt has many fewer calories than ice cream) could be news to some customers. Clearly, the
estimated effects of messages in our study will incorporate the effects of new information of this
nature in addition to their role in mitigating the cognitive challenges associated with menu
choice.
Throughout this paper, we report results for three types of outcomes. First, following the
existing literature, we focus on the total nutritional content --specifically calories and fat-- of a
typical transaction at Burgerville. Next, to shed some light on the effects of targeted suggestions,
we study the share of transactions that included an item that was (a) encouraged, or (b)
discouraged in the above messages. Finally, with the same goal in mind we focus on specific
item classes (e.g. frozen desserts or breakfast sandwiches) within which the messages
encouraged consumers to substitute one item for another and ask whether those substitutions
occurred.
Table 1 reports summary statistics for nutrition per transaction in the treatment store,
separately for the pre- and post-intervention periods (January 2008 through June 3, 2009, and
June 4 2009 through mid-May 2010 respectively). Also reported is the equally weighted average
across control stores for the same periods. In order to protect confidential aspects of Burgerville
transaction data, all data in the paper are normalized by the mean for the treatment store in the
pre-treatment period. The one exception is column 1 in Table 1, which reports some pretreatment means to provide context. All summary measures are based on weekly sales data.18
The average transaction at the treatment store in the pre-treatment period included 1657 calories
and 80 grams of fat.19 In comparison, the non-treated stores sold 3.7 (4.4) percent more calories
(fat) per transaction. In the post-treatment period, average calories and fat fell by about 2 percent
in both treatment and control stores. According to the simple difference-in-difference estimates
in column 6 (which simply compare the change in the treated and untreated stores), the treatment
seems to have had essentially no effect on calories or total fat per transaction, though it appears
to be associated with a 2.7 percent reduction in cholesterol per transaction. If anything, the
treatment is associated with a small increase in store revenue.20
In Table 2 we turn our attention to the menu items that were encouraged or discouraged
in the intervention’s overall messaging strategy. Since the receipts contained a variety of
messages, Table 2 defines “discouraged” items as items that were systematically discouraged in
a number of messages, but were never encouraged in any message. Encouraged items are defined
17

Some of the item substitutions encouraged in the Burgerville messages change the cost of the consumer’s order;
for example substituting a side salad for fries costs 40 cents. Importantly, in any given week this price differential is
the same across all stores because Burgerville menus and pricing are set at the corporate level.
18
As both the Donald and Lang (2007) and Abadie, Diamond, and Hainmueller (2010) methods require a balanced
panel, we linearly interpolated a small number of missing data points.
19
Note that this is more than six times the pre-treatment average of 247 calories at Starbucks: Interventions at
traditional fast-food establishments have much more potential to affect daily calorie intake than at stores specializing
in coffee and other drinks.
20
Assessing whether the differences in differences in Tables 1-3 are statistically significant raises a number of issues
which we treat in detail in the following section. Accordingly we do not report significance levels here.

7

analogously; examples of messages corresponding to each of the discouraged and encouraged
items are provided in Appendix B.21 The numbers in Table 2 are the share of weekly
transactions that include the (encouraged or discouraged) item in question. Any apparent
treatment effects in Table 2 thus refer to the impact of the overall messaging strategy in the
Burgerville receipts on the share of transactions that include these encouraged or discouraged
items. As in Table 1 and in all subsequent tables, the numbers in Table 2 are normalized to equal
one in the treatment store in the pre-treatment period. While purchases of some discouraged
items (notably breakfasts including sausage) fell precipitously in the treatment store relative to
the control store, and some encouraged items (such as side salads, kids’ apples, and kids’ milk)
rose sharply.
Finally, in Table 3 we focus on substitution between encouraged and discouraged items
within six item classes: adult sides (which can be either fries or a side salad); chicken sandwiches
(which can be either grilled or fried); kids’ meals (which can be ordered with fries or apples, and
with soda/juice or milk); desserts (which can contain either ice cream or yogurt); breakfast
sandwiches (which can include sausage or not); and adult main dishes (which can include or
exclude cheese and sauce, and can be either a sandwich or a salad). In contrast to Tables 1 and 2,
here the difference-in difference estimates are all in the expected direction and generally
substantial in magnitude. For example, the share of salads in adult sides rose by 7.4 percent, with
similar increases in the share of kids’ meals that included apples and milk. The share of frozen
yogurt in desserts rose by 8.4 percent. Consumers also shifted away from sausage in their
breakfast sandwiches, and were more likely to choose main dishes without cheese or sauce. The
share of main dishes that were salads rose by eight percent.

4. Econometric Framework
As noted, our data consist of 125 weekly observations on 39 stores, one of which changes
treatment status during our sample period. A common way to estimate the effects of the
treatment in cases like this is to estimate the following fixed-effects regression on the full sample
of 125*39 = 4875 observations:
(1)

,

where Y is the outcome of interest, and φs and γw denote store and week fixed effects
respectively. T is a treatment indicator which equals one in the treatment store starting in week
76, and zero in all other store-week cells. Together, the fixed effects in this specification absorb
an arbitrary pattern of time-invariant store characteristics and an arbitrary pattern of time (and
season) effects that is common across stores. Following Bertrand, Duflo, and Mullainathan
(2004), it is standard practice to cluster the standard errors at the store level. We refer to
estimates of (1) with store-clustered errors as one-stage fixed-effects (FE) estimates, and use
them as a starting point for our analysis.

21

Some items were encouraged in some messages, but discouraged in others, as part of a ‘chain’ intended to move
consumers towards lower-calorie items in small steps. We do not study consumption of these items because it is
theoretically unclear whether aggregate consumption of these items should rise or fall as a result of the treatment.

8

a) Alternative standard errors
Donald and Lang (2007) argue that the above one-stage FE approach can seriously
underestimate standard errors when the number of groups is small. While superficially we have
39 stores, in another sense we have one treated entity and a single, imperfectly defined, control
group. To address this concern we use the two-stage approach suggested by Donald and Lang,
as applied in their paper to two well known studies (Card 1990, and Gruber and Poterba 1994).
Specifically, Card’s Mariel boatlift study has annual labor market outcome data from one
treatment city (Miami) and four control cities over a period of seven years. In that context, the
first step of Donald and Lang’s approach is simply to calculate seven cross-sectional differences
between the outcome (say, the unemployment rate) in Miami and the mean of the other four
cities. In the second stage, Donald and Lang then regress this difference on an indicator variable
for the post-treatment period. Under the assumption that the difference between the annual
unemployment rate in Miami and the comparison cities is subject to an iid shock, the
significance of the resulting coefficient can then be assessed using a t-statistic with four degrees
of freedom.22
Applying this procedure to our context, we first collapse the 38 control stores into a
single unweighted average, then calculate 125 weekly differences between the treatment store’s
outcome and the mean outcome in the control stores.23 Denoting these 125 differences by Dw,
the second stage of the DL procedure regresses them on a dummy variable for the 50 posttreatment weeks, Pw:
(2)

.

By construction, estimates of δ from (2) are numerically equivalent to those obtained
from estimating (1) on the full sample of 4875 observations; they therefore control for all the
same confounding influences (i.e. common store and week fixed effects). However in at least
one important sense the 125 observations in (2) reflect the true number of degrees of freedom in
the estimation more accurately. In particular, if unobserved shocks that are idiosyncratic to a
store are iid, then (with 125 observations) we can appeal to standard asymptotics in interpreting
the standard errors from this regression. In what follows, we refer to estimates and standard
errors computed this way as DL estimates.
It seems highly likely, however, that an individual store’s sales in one week may be
correlated with its own sales in recent weeks, for example due to local events and conditions that
last longer than a week. Thus treating the 125 differenced observations in (2) as iid is still likely
to underestimate our standard errors; indeed because we have weekly data the problem is likely
more severe than in Card’s or Gruber-Poterba’s annual data. To address this issue, we note that
the regression in (2) is just a single time series. Therefore, we can allow for unobserved storespecific shocks to have some persistence by calculating Newey-West (1987) autocorrelationconsistent standard errors for this time-series regression (we denote these by NW); this allows
22

Two degrees of freedom are used to estimate the constant and slope term in the regression, and the year in which
the boatlift occurred (1980) is excluded from the sample.
23
Equivalently, the first stage could be specified as a regression of the differenced outcome on a full set of week
effects.

9

unobserved local conditions that affect stores differently to last for more than one period. In all
of our DL-NW estimates, we allow for autocorrelation among observations up to five weeks
apart, though the standard errors are not highly sensitive to alternative values of the window
allowed. Of course, like the DL estimates described above, the regression coefficients from this
DL-NW approach are also numerically equivalent to the one-stage FE coefficients.
b) Constructing a control group
A common question affecting many non-experimental studies using a difference-indifference design is which of the untreated units should be used as controls. For example, while
Card and Krueger’s (1994) well known minimum-wage study used Pennsylvania as a control for
New Jersey, a number of subsequent studies (such as, for example, Dube et al 2010) have
attempted to construct more comparable control groups based on criteria such as geographical
distance. It has also become much more common to provide evidence that the treatment and
control groups have similar observables, and that their outcomes evolve similarly over time
during the pre-intervention period. Still, the question of how to select an appropriate or
convincing control group remains subject to considerable discretion. The most widely-used
approach uses plausible but arbitrary criteria such as geographical distance to select a set of
control sites, and uses an unweighted mean of the control sites to represent the counterfactual for
the treated site.
Recently, however, Abadie, Diamond, and Hainmueller (ADH, 2010) have proposed a
method for constructing an optimal control group in a comparative case study context when a
number of possible control groups are available. The technique seems especially useful in
situations such as ours where there is a long time series of pre-intervention data for a substantial
number of potential control groups. Essentially, the investigator specifies a set of preintervention characteristics he/she wishes to match between the treatment store and the synthetic
control; call this vector Xi. Xi can include non-time-varying characteristics of the store, as well
as time-varying store characteristics (values of a characteristic at two different pre-intervention
dates enter Xi as separate variables). In this way Xi can also include pre-treatment values of the
outcome variable Yit; the only restriction on Xi is that it cannot include any variable that might be
affected by the treatment. The optimal synthetic control is then defined by a vector of (non-timevarying) store weights w that minimizes the discrepancy between the treated store’s X and the
weighted mean X of the synthetic control.24 Typically (and in our application) the vector of
weights is restricted to be nonnegative and to sum to one.25 Informally, then, our synthetic
control store is constructed as a weighted average of potential control stores, with weights
chosen so that the resulting synthetic store best reproduces the values of a set of predictors of the
outcome of interest in the treated store before the implementation of the treatment.
24

The discrepancy between the treated group’s characteristics, X1, and the weighted mean characteristics of the
synthetic control, X0W, is specified as √
, where V is a positive semidefinite matrix.
While the technique can be implemented with any V, a natural criterion is to pick the V that minimizes the mean
squared prediction error of the outcome variable during the pre-intervention periods. In this paper we choose V to
be the positive definite, diagonal matrix with this property.
25
The ability to restrict the weights in this way is an attractive feature of the synthetic control method, because it
provides a built-in safeguard against unwittingly using linearity assumptions to extrapolate to conditions where
observed data are sparse or nonexistent..

10

In the baseline results reported here, X includes only the means of the outcome variable in
the pre-treatment period, grouped into fifteen five-week windows.26 Thus, a different synthetic
control is designed for each outcome we study. Finally, note that one can calculate DL and DLNW standard errors for any pair of treatment and control groups, including one constructed by
the ADH procedure. Thus, our preferred estimates in this paper –denoted ADH-DL-NW
estimates-- first construct an optimal synthetic control using the methods just described
separately for each outcome under consideration, then implement the DL-NW procedure on the
two resulting time series. Later in the paper, we illustrate the ability of our synthetic control
groups to track the pre-treatment outcomes in the treated store. Section 6 also explores the
effects of alternative ways to construct control groups, such as geographical distance.

5. Regression Results
The regression results reported in Tables 4-7 all follow the progression described in
Section 4. Row 1 shows the one-stage fixed effects estimates; row 2 uses the two-stage DonaldLang procedure to adjust standard errors, and row 3 implements the Newey-West
autocorrelation-consistent standard errors in the DL regressions. As noted, the reported estimates
allow for autocorrelation among observations up to five weeks apart, though the standard errors
are not very sensitive to alternative values of this window. Rows 4 and 5 repeat the above
exercises, replacing the simple mean of the outcome in all the non-treated stores by a weighted
mean, where these (non-time-varying) weights are derived using the ADH procedure detailed in
the last section.27 Finally, the bottom panel of the Table replicates these ADH-DL-NW
regressions, splitting the post-treatment period into two parts to assess the permanence of the
treatment effects.
a) Nutrition and sales:
Table 4 reports the aforementioned results for nutrition and sales. Columns 1-4 estimate
treatment effects on calories, fat, and cholesterol per transaction; columns 5 and 6 look at the
number of items and revenues per transaction. Columns 7-9 estimate treatment effects for three
measures of total sales volume at a store. Comparing point estimates and standard errors across
rows 1-3 reveals the effects of aggressively adjusting the standard errors. To illustrate, consider
the effects on calories per transaction. Using the standard one-stage FE approach, we estimate a
0.56 percent decrease in calories per transaction as a result of the treatment; this appears to be
statistically significant at the 1 percent level. But using the DL difference approach more than
doubles the standard error, and further adjusting for first-order autocorrelation using DL-NW
increases the standard error to over three times its original level. In consequence, we cannot
conclude that the treatment reduced calories per transaction at any conventional level of
statistical significance. Similar patterns across specifications are found for all outcomes:
26

We chose five-week windows in order to match longer-term trends rather than week-to-week within-store
variation (which is substantial); the theoretical motivation is that treatment effects should take a few weeks to appear
(since the messages can only work on a repeat visit). Results from shorter and longer windows are reported in
Section 6. We can think of no theoretical reason to match stores on other pre-treatment observables. Also,
matching only on the outcome variable eliminates discretion in choosing which observables (store size, location,
mix of items sold, etc.) to match on.
27
Since there is no obvious counterpart to the FE approach with the synthetic control group, we only present DL and
DL-NW results here.

11

standard errors increase substantially as we move from the conventional FE approach to DL, and
again when we move on to DL-NW. Importantly, these adjustments do not reduce all the
coefficients to insignificance. In Table 4, only a 2.7 percent decline in cholesterol survives both
adjustments, remaining significant at one percent. In subsequent tables, adjusting standard errors
in this way plays an important role in distinguishing what are likely genuine effects of the
Nutricate receipt from chance patterns.
Rows 4 and 5 show that the ADH optimal synthetic cohort approach leads to some
changes in the point estimates, though not for the one outcome (cholesterol) that was robustly
significant in rows 1-3. Standard errors on the other hand tend to fall slightly relative to the
comparable specification in rows 2 and 3. Overall, based on the point estimates reported in Row
5, the introduction of the Nutricate receipt reduced cholesterol per transaction by 2.1 percent and
had no significant discernible impact on any other outcome. Notably, only one of our measures
of sales (items per transaction) was significantly affected by the treatment, and this effect was
(small and) positive. Thus, it does not appear that introducing the Nutricate receipt had
detrimental effects on the treatment store’s business.28
The effects of constructing a synthetic control group on the control group’s ability to
track the treatment store before treatment is introduced and to isolate divergences thereafter is
illustrated in Figures 1 and 2, which compare time trends in the treatment store to an average of
all other stores (Figure 1) or to our synthetic control groups (Figure 2) for the four nutritional
outcomes in Table 4.29 Clearly, the synthetic controls in Figure 2 track the treatment store much
more accurately during the pretreatment period, and illustrate a divergence in total fat and
cholesterol that seems to emerge after the treatment, consistent with Table 4’s estimates. The
temporary nature of the total fat effect is also evident. These effects are less visually evident in
Figure 1.
Finally, rows 6 and 7 of Table 4 break the post-treatment period into two parts to
distinguish the short- and longer-term effects of the Nutricate receipt treatment. Interestingly, if
we restrict our attention to effects that occur within the first 25 weeks after the introduction of
Nutricate receipts, we see statistically significant reductions in both cholesterol and total fat per
transaction, with little change in the remaining results. Also, the reduction in cholesterol appears
to be relatively permanent. A statistically significant positive effect on revenue per transaction
emerges, but only 25 weeks after treatment begins.
b) Purchases of Discouraged and Encouraged Items:
We now turn our attention to the impact of the nutritional messages printed on the
Nutricate receipt. In particular, Tables 5 and 6 report the impact of Nutricate receipt introduction
for consistently “discouraged” and “encouraged” items, respectively. Beginning with the
28

In additional analysis available from the authors, we also asked whether the five stores located closest to the
treatment store experienced any changes in business when Nutricate receipts were introduced at the treatment store,
since the receipts could conceivably attract or alienate customers and change where they eat. No effect was found.
29
Since high-frequency (week-to-week) noise makes it hard to visually discern longer-term trends, all our time
series graphs in the paper, including Figures 1 and 2, show five-week moving averages (the current week plus four
lags). This smoothing is applied only to the graphs; all our statistical analysis is performed on the raw, unsmoothed
data.

12

discouraged items in Table 5 and focusing on the synthetic control estimates reported in Row 5,
the only precisely estimated effect is a 13.2 percent decline in sausage breakfast sandwiches.
Looking at the timing of these effects in more detail reveals that this effect is relatively longlasting (i.e. up to 50 weeks). According to row 7, a significant reduction in ice cream sales
emerges 25 weeks after the treatment, as does a small and marginally significant increase in fried
chicken sandwiches. As we show below these and other similar results may be artifacts of
demand shocks to narrower item categories, such as dessert items or kids’ meals as a group.
Finally, to measure the extent to which the treatment was associated with a broad-based decline
in discouraged item consumption, column (6) of Table 5 reports results for an index that
combines all five items. To construct this index, we normalized each store’s purchases of the
item in question to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one, then added the five
normalized items together. Thus, column (6) shows some evidence of a broad-based decline in
discouraged item purchases, though only in the first twenty-five weeks after treatment
commenced.30
Table 6 reports the companion results for encouraged items. Again, focusing on the
synthetic-control estimates (row 5) that are statistically significant at conventional levels, the
introduction of the Nutricate receipt increased requests for grilled chicken sandwiches by 6.3
percent, for ‘no sauce’ by 7.0 percent, raised side salad purchases by 13.8 percent, kids’ milk by
9.5 percent, but (contrary to expectations) reduced non-sausage breakfast sandwiches by 11.7
percent. Combining all the estimated effects in column 10’s index reveals a positive,
insignificant overall effect.
Looking at the persistence of effects on individual items in rows 6 and 7 reveals a variety
of patterns. Some effects (main and side salads) either fall in magnitude or disappear after the
first 25 weeks, while others (grilled chicken, no sauce, no cheese, and kids’ milk) seem to
strengthen over time (recall that this is not implausible--for the receipt to have an effect,
customers need first to be exposed to it on one visit, then act on it in a repeat visit). The frozen
yogurt effect actually reverses sign after 25 weeks. Row 7 also reveals that the unexpected
negative treatment effect on non-sausage breakfast sandwiches only emerges 25 weeks after
treatment; also, combining all the encouraged items into an index reveals a highly significant
overall increase in encouraged item purchases during the first 25 weeks after the treatment was
introduced. As in Table 5, some of these unexpected patterns could be artifacts of categoryspecific demand shocks, which we address in Table 7 below.
c) Within-category Item Substitutions:
One possible concern with the previous section’s items-per-transaction estimates is that
they do not purge the effects of unobserved shocks that are common to items in a category. For
example, a store may be affected by a demand shock (such as road construction or the end of the
school year) that temporarily reduces breakfast traffic, or a weather shock that raises the demand

30

In terms of magnitudes, the coefficient indicates that purchases of a ‘typical’ item fell by .65/5 = .13 standard
deviations, since the index is a sum of five items.

13

for frozen desserts.31 If this shock is, by accident, correlated with the introduction of our
treatment, an items-per-transaction approach would mistakenly conclude that (consistent with the
messaging strategy) the treatment reduced the consumption of breakfast sausage when in fact it
reduced the consumption of all breakfast items.
To address the possible contaminating effect of category-specific shocks such as these,
and to provide more precise tests of whether customers actually made the substitutions
recommended in the messages, Table 7 estimates the effects of the treatment on the share of
encouraged items within more narrowly-defined item categories. Table 7 considers withincategory substitutions towards the nine encouraged items in Table 6. For four of these items
(side salads, grilled chicken sandwiches, frozen yogurt, non-sausage breakfast sandwiches) the
relevant category includes only that item and the associated discouraged item in Table 5. In the
remaining cases data constraints require us to use somewhat broader categories. For example,
children’s apples and milk are both measured as a share of children’s meals, and main course
salads, as well as orders with ‘no cheese’ and ‘no sauce’ and are modeled as a share of adult
main items.
Focusing again on the synthetic control results with Newey-West standard errors in Row
5 of Table 7, the point estimates now all have the expected sign, and all but one are statistically
significant. This suggests that some of the unexpected results in Tables 5 and 6 may be driven
by unobserved category-specific shocks that are correlated with our treatment. Estimated effect
sizes range from a 3.8 percent increase in the share of breakfast sandwiches without sausage to a
14.5 percent increase in the share of adult side dishes that are salads.32 Column 10 confirms the
impression of a broad-based shift from discouraged to encouraged items, with the withincategory share of a ‘typical’ encouraged item rising by 1.74/9 = about 0.19 standard deviations
after the treatment is introduced.
Breaking the post-treatment period in half in the last two rows of Table 7 reveals
heterogeneous patterns in the duration of these effects, though the dominant pattern seems to be a
reduction in the magnitude of the coefficient, in several cases leading to a loss of statistical
significance. Indeed, only four of the nine encouraged items exhibit statistically significant
increases more than 25 weeks after the treatment: side salads, kids’ apples, non-sausage
breakfast sandwiches and ‘no sauce’ requests. Reflecting this, the index of encouraged items
shows no evidence of a treatment effect after 25 weeks.
The results of Table 7 are illustrated visually in Figure 3, which shows time trends for the
treatment store versus synthetic controls for all ten outcomes studied in the Table. Consistent
with row 6 of the Table, the treatment store’s sales of side salad, grilled chicken, kid’s milk,
frozen yogurt, non-sausage bagels, meal salads, and ‘no sauce’ requests all show a short-term
rise relative to the controls in the 25 weeks after the treatment. Also consistent with Table 7, a
number of the above effects either vanish or significantly attenuate after 25 weeks—specifically,
31

Note also that, for example, shocks to non-breakfast business can also affect estimates for breakfast items in the
items-per-transaction approach: a rise in afternoon and evening business would reduce breakfast sausage per
transaction without implying a treatment effect of the receipt.
32
Note that the latter increase is from a small base, since –as in most hamburger chains-- the vast majority of adult
sides are fries.

14

those for grilled chicken, kid’s milk, frozen yogurt, non-sausage bagels and meal salads.
Altogether, Table 3 and Figure 7 together provide strong evidence that consumers initially tried
out the substitution suggestions in the Nutricate receipts, but evidence of longer-term changes in
consumption patterns is more mixed.

6. Robustness Checks
a) Alternative Control Stores
So far, we have presented estimates using all non-treated stores as the control group, and
estimates for a synthetic control group, selected to match the entire pre-treatment evolution of
the outcome variable as well as possible. In Table 8 we explore the effects of using other
definitions of the control group, focusing on the results for within-category shares in Table 7.
Rows 1-3 explore the effects of different constructions of the synthetic control group, by
matching on 3- and 7-week averages of the pre-treatment outcome instead of a 5-week average.
For the most part, this has very little effect on the estimated coefficients, though the levels of
statistical significance are highest in our baseline case of five-week averages.
Rows 4-6 of Table 8 show the effects of two alternatives to the approach of using a
simple average of all the nontreated stores as a control group. Row 5 just uses the five stores
closest in size (measured by total revenues) to the treatment store, while Row 6 uses the more
common criterion of geographical distance, selecting the five closest stores. (Row 4 reproduces
our baseline estimates from row 3 of Table 7, for comparison.) The coefficient estimates using
these alternative control groups are very similar in both magnitude and significance to the
baseline case.
b) Other Item Substitutions
It is also possible that the Nutricate receipt treatment led customers to make item
substitutions other than the nine within-category substitutions that were repeatedly suggested in
the printed messages. One possible cause of such an effect is the calorie counts and other
quantitative nutritional information printed on the receipts: if this information was new to
consumers (or simply provided some extra salience) customers may have made other caloriesaving item substitutions that were not explicitly recommended. Relatedly, the introduction of
the new receipts may have created an overall atmosphere of nutrition-consciousness that
encouraged healthy substitutions beyond those that were recommended. In both these cases,
customers would make other item substitutions that reinforce the calorie-reducing effects of the
Nutricate receipt messages. An alternative possibility is that customers made other substitutions
that cancelled out the calorie-saving impact of the recommended substitutions. For example, on
learning that she could save a significant number of calories from substituting bacon for sausage
on a breakfast sandwich, a consumer with a target breakfast calorie count might add hash browns
to her breakfast order.
To check for these types of effects, we tried to identify possible item substitutions that (a)
would result in a significant change in fat or calories, (b) involved items that were purchased

15

frequently enough to allow an effect to be detected if one existed, and (c) were not explicitly
encouraged in the Nutricate receipt messages as implemented at Burgerville. We came up with
three possibilities: forgoing hash browns with a breakfast sandwich, avoiding the large size of
fries, and picking a main item that was under 500 calories. The effects of introducing the
Nutricate receipt treatment on the incidence of these three choices (as shares of their respective
item categories) are shown in Table 9. The regression and control group specifications are
identical to those in Table 7.
The dependent variable in column one of Table 9 is the share of breakfast sandwich
orders that did not include hash browns.33 Interestingly, the results in this column are consistent
with the canceling-out scenario above: the introduction of the Nutricate receipt system is
associated with a 3.8 percent decline in the share of breakfast sandwich orders that ‘held the hash
browns’. A similar effect appears to hold for the share of main items that contained under 500
calories, though here the effect is both smaller and magnitude and borderline in statistical
significance.34 In contrast, however, customers seem to have downsized their fries by a small but
statistically significant amount when Nutricate receipt was introduced, even though this change
was never suggested in the receipts.35 As noted, possible explanations for this include either a
positive ‘atmosphere’ effect or a direct effect of the quantitative nutrition information in the
receipts. Another possibility is that customers reacted to the suggestion to substitute a side salad
for fries by downsizing their fries instead.
c) Placebo Tests and Spillovers
If the estimated effects in Tables 7 and 8 are genuine causal effects of the Nutricate
receipt and not artifacts of our statistical approach, then applying our approach to policy
interventions that did not occur should yield estimates of a zero effect. Rows 1-3 of Table 10
address this question by estimating the effects of placebo treatments that occurred at different
dates than the actual treatment. Specifically, rows 2 and 3 of Table 10 estimate the effects of
placebo treatments that occurred 25 and 50 weeks after the start of our data, respectively. In
both cases, the sample is restricted to the 75-week-long actual pre-treatment period. In all cases
the specification is identical to row 5 of Table 7, which is reproduced in row 1 for comparison.
Of the eighteen estimated coefficients in rows 2 and 3, none are statistically significant at 10
percent or better. Thus our statistical approach does not estimate a treatment effect at times
when no treatment occurred.
A distinct type of placebo test asks how often our estimation approach generates a
statistically significant treatment effect in stores that were not treated. To answer this question,
we replicated the entire analysis in row 5 of Table 7 39 times: once for each store in our sample.
Each time, we designated the store in question as the treatment store and assumed treatment
33

As in many fast food restaurants, Burgerville customers can order breakfast items either individually (a la carte),
or bundled into a ‘basket’ consisting of the sandwich, drink and hash browns. Our measure of of breakfast
sandwiches without hash browns in column 1 of Table 9 is the share of breakfast sandwiches sold that were not part
of a basket.
34
Unlike the other two effects in Table 9, the effect on low-calorie mains also becomes insignificant after 25 weeks
of treatment (see rows 6 and 7).
35
The decline is only about half a percent, but is precisely measured because a very large share of Burgerville
transactions included an order of fries.

16

commenced in week 76. We then constructed an ADH control group from the remaining 38
stores using the same methods as before, then re-estimated columns 1-9 of Table 7. Table 11
then reports the number of item substitutions (out of a total of nine possible substitutions for each
placebo treatment store) for which this procedure estimates a statistically significant positive
coefficient. For example, in four such stores, none of the nine estimated coefficients were
positive and significant at the ten percent level; in 16 stores, one significant positive effect was
estimated. Thirty-two of the 39 stores yielded two or fewer positive, significant coefficients.
Overall, Table 11 strongly suggests there is something special about the true treatment store—it
is the only store that shows a consistent and significant pattern of item substitutions in the
direction encouraged by the Nutricate receipt messages.
A final robustness check concerns the possibility of spillovers in consumption patterns
between Burgerville stores. This could occur, for example, if customers read a Nutricate receipt
at the treatment store, then subsequently visited another Burgerville store. If this induces similar
within-category item substitutions at the subsequent stores, it will lead to attenuation bias in our
estimated coefficients, leading us to underestimate the effects of the Nutricate receipt
intervention. To assess this possibility, we ask whether customers at the five stores that are
closest (geographically) to the treated store made similar within-category item substitutions as
occurred at the treatment store after Nutricate receipts were introduced at the treatment store.
Specifically, in row 4 of Table 10 we exclude the treatment store from our sample, use the 5
nearest stores to it as our “treatment store”, and use the 5 stores furthest from the treatment store
as controls. Only one of the nine possible item-substitution effects is statistically significant, and
the encouraged share index shows no significant change either (though the estimated effect is
positive). We conclude that evidence of cross-store spillover effects of the Nutricate treatment is
weak at best.

7. Discussion
We have shown that the introduction of receipts containing customized ordering
suggestions designed to reduce fat and calories had a detectable effect on purchasing behavior at
a chain of fast-food restaurants. While we find no statistically significant effect on total calories
purchased, we do find some effects for fat intake. In particular, the combination of messages in
the Burgerville implementation of the Nutricate receipt induces a robust and long-lasting (at least
up to 50 weeks after treatment) two- percent reduction in cholesterol per transaction. Our
confidence that this behavioral change is causally linked to the new receipts is increased by the
fact that customers in the aggregate made most of the specific item substitutions that were
promoted by the receipts, such as substituting grilled chicken for fried chicken in sandwiches,
frozen yogurt for ice cream, and non-sausage for sausage breakfast sandwiches. While these
specific substitutions vary in their permanence, the estimated substitutions are robust to the use
of different control groups, both in terms of whether and how a synthetic control is calculated
and which alternative criteria (geographical distance, similar store size, or all nontreated stores)
are used to construct a non-synthetic control group. We also find no evidence that introducing
the Nutricate receipt was harmful to our treated store for any measure of total sales.
How do we reconcile our relatively strong findings about item substitutions with the
relatively muted overall effects of this intervention on nutrition and calories? One possible

17

explanation is that customers made other item substitutions that counteract the substitutions
detected in Table 7. Indeed, Table 9 presents evidence of at least two such changes: an increase
in hash browns, and in main dishes containing more than 500 calories. Second, several of the
encouraged items (whose consumption rose substantially in percentage terms when Nutricate
receipts were introduced) constitute a very small share of fast-food purchases. Examples include
side salads, kids’ apples and grilled chicken sandwiches.36 Even large substitutions towards
items like these will have only minimal effects on total fat and calories purchased. And as in all
studies of restaurant consumption, we caution that our estimates refer only to purchases at a
particular restaurant; thus it is possible that nutritional improvements we detect may be cancelled
out by changes in food consumption at home and at other restaurants. On the other hand, our
estimates may understate the potential of restaurant-based interventions because the treatment
store in our study could not change its menu offerings in response to the treatment. Anecdotal
evidence suggests that several well known chains reworked their menus in response to actual and
anticipated calorie labeling requirements (Bernstein 2011).
Overall, we think that our results send a qualified but positive message about the healthimproving potential of interventions like the Nutricate receipt, which has three key features that
distinguish it from existing nutritional interventions: (1) this intervention is receipt-based (not
menu-based); (2) it is personalized (in the sense that the message is triggered by the customer’s
current purchase) and (3) it goes beyond the provision of information (and beyond reminding
consumers of consequences they already know) by suggesting specific changes in behavior. In
addition to providing a vehicle for customized recommendations, a receipt-based approach may
be useful as a convenient and unobtrusive substitute for menu-based interventions in cases where
those interventions are too costly, intrusive, uninformative, or simply avoided by restaurants.
Receipt-based approaches can, of course, also be used together with menu-based ones with
possibly complementary effects.
The Nutricate receipt’s novel approach of making personalized recommendations for
future purchases mirrors rapidly-spreading practices by Internet retailers like Amazon and
Netflix that recommend items a customer might like based on his or her recent purchase history.
As such, it is worth noting that the particular system we tested at Burgerville is a relatively early
implementation of a concept that may have significant potential to improve nutritional choices in
the future. Suppose that a customer’s favorite restaurant has developed a healthier version of a
sandwich he orders frequently—why not inform him of this option in a personalized way? (He
might not even look at the menu any more.) Future systems might remember that a customer
always prefers ‘no sauce’ on her burger or salad instead of fries, and could make this her default
choice for future orders. Although we focus on an early example of this type of technology, our
study suggests that personalized ordering suggestions may have the potential to facilitate
healthier food choices by serving restaurant customers better.
We conclude by highlighting a number methodological lessons that emerge from our
analysis. The first concerns standard errors. Our results suggest that a failure to make aggressive
adjustments to standard errors in difference-in-difference research designs (in our case
implementing both Donald and Lang-style differencing and applying Newey-West standard
36

Our agreement with Burgerville prohibits us from reporting these means directly, but we can say,for example, that
side salads and apples are less than 10 percent of adult and child side dishes respectively.

18

errors to the resulting time series) could lead to a large number of false positives. In other words,
clustering by group is not enough, and Donald-Lang differencing alone may not be enough
because it does not allow for persistent group-specific shocks. A second methodological note is
the overriding importance in these studies of choosing or constructing appropriate control
groups, or of showing that one’s key results are robust to the choice of control groups. In our
case, we show that our results are robust to several methods of constructing control groups,
including the Abadie, Diamond, and Hainmueller (2010) procedure to construct ‘optimal’ control
groups.
A third methodological point addresses the challenge of detecting the effects of
marketing interventions like the Nutricate receipt’s ordering suggestions. In this regard, our
paper illustrates the importance of focusing on substitutions within detailed item categories, such
as desserts, chicken sandwiches, or kids’ meals in our case. Both because of the confounding
role of category-specific demand shocks (affecting, for example, all breakfast or dessert items
together) and because of the wide range of other substitutions consumers can make, detecting the
effects of these types of interventions difficult unless one conditions on these detailed
categories.37
Finally, our results underscore the fact that simply providing nutritional information, or
repeatedly reminding people that, say, fries are unhealthy may not be the most effective ways to
improve nutritional choices. While lack of information and willpower may both be important
determinants of choices, our results suggest that other cognitive constraints, such as information
processing costs when choosing from long lists, may also play a role. To that extent, the
literature on health behaviors can perhaps take a lesson from the recent literature on financial
literacy, where simplifying complex choices by reducing the number of options and suggesting
specific behaviors (for example, as a default option) have been shown to have beneficial
effects.38

37

Incidentally, these analytical challenges illustrate the tremendous difficulty in designing effective interventions to
improve diet, compared for example to anti-smoking interventions: compared to tobacco (a fairly unique product
with no close substitutes) there are thousands of possible food choices even within the same restaurant, and reducing
the consumption of any one unhealthy item does not translate easily into an overall improvement in nutrition.
38
See for example Bertrand et al., 2010.

19

References
Abadie, Alberto , Alexis Diamond, and Jens Hainmueller. 2010. Synthetic Control Methods for
Comparative Case Studies: Estimating the Effect of California's Tobacco Control Program
Journal of the American Statistical Association 105(490): 493 -505.
Anderson, Michael L. and David A. Matsa. 2011. Are Restaurants Really Supersizing America?
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3:1, 152-188.
Bassett, Mary T., Tamara Dumanovsky, Christina Huang, Lynn D. Silver, Candace Young, Cathy Nonas,
Thomas D. Matte, Sekai Chideya, and Thomas R. Frieden. 2008. Purchasing Behavior and
Calorie Information at Fast-Food Chains in New York City, 2007. American Journal of Public
Health, 98(8): 1457–59.
Bernstein, Sharon. Making Every Calorie Count: Upcoming FDA disclosure rules prompt many chains to
overhaul their offerings Los Angeles Times, Weds. June 11, 2011, pp.B1 and B4.
Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004. How Much Should We Trust
Differences-in- Differences Estimates? The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 119, No. 1
(Feb), pp. 249-275.
Bertrand, Marianne, Dean Karlin, Sendhil Mullainathan, Eldar Shafir, and Jonathan Zinman. 2010.
What’s Advertising Content Worth? Evidence from a Consumer Credit Marketing Field
Experiment.Quarterly Journal of Economics. vol. 125, no. 1, (February): 263-306.
Bleich, Sara, David Cutler, Christopher Murray, and Alyce Adams. 2008. Why Is the Developed World
Obese? Annual Review of Public Health, 29: 273–95.
Bollinger, B., P. Leslie and A. Sorensen. 2011. Calorie Posting in Chain Restaurants, American Economic
Journal: Economic Policy, 3 (1), 91‐128.
Card, David. 1990. The Impact of the Mariel Boatlift on the Miami Labor Market, Industrial and Labor
Relations Review 43 (January 1990), 245–257.
Card, D. and A. Krueger. 1994. Minimum Wages and Employment: A Case Study of the Fast-Food
Industry in New Jersey and Pennsylvania, American Economic Review 84 (Sept): 772-793.
Center for Disease Control. 2011. Obesity Halting the Epidemic by making Health Easier, At A Glance
http://www.cdc.gov/chronicdisease/resources/publications/aag/pdf/2011/Obesity_AAG_WEB_50
8.pdf, Accessed on January 17, 2011.
Currie, Janet, Stefano DellaVigna, Enrico Moretti, and Vikram Pathania. 2010. The Effect of Fast Food
Restaurants on Obesity and Weight Gain. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2(3):
32–63.
Cutler, David M., Edward L. Glaeser, and Jesse M. Shapiro. 2003. Why Have Americans Become More
Obese? Journal of Economic Perspectives, 17(3): 93–118.

20
Davis, Brennan, and Christopher Carpenter. 2009. Proximity of Fast-Food Restaurants to Schools and
Adolescent Obesity. American Journal of Public Health, 99(3): 505–10.
DellaVigna, Stefano. 2009. Psychology and Economics:Evidence from the Field Journal of Economic
Literature 2009, 47:2, 315–372
Donald, Stephen G. and Kevin Lang. 2007. Inference with Differences-in-Differences and other Panel
Data. The Review of Economics and Statistics 89(2) (May): 221–233.
Downs, Julie S., George Loewenstein, and Jessica Wisdom. 2009. Strategies for Promoting Healthier
Food Choices. American Economic Review 99(2): 159–64.
Dube, Arindrajit, T. William Lester, and Michael Reich. 2010. Minimum Wage Effects across State
Borders: Estimates Using Contiguous Counties Review of Economics and Statistics 92(4)
(November): 945-64
Dumanovsky, Tamara, Christina H. Yuang, Cathy A. Nonas, Thomas D. Matte, Mary To. Bassett, and
Lynn D. Silver. 2011. Changes in energy content of lunchtime purchases from fast food
restaurants after introduction of calorie labeling: cross sectional customer surveys. British
Medical Journal 343: d4464. Published online July 26. doi: 10.1136/bmj.d4464
Elbel, B., Kersh, R., Brescoll, V.L., Dixon, L.B. 2009. Calorie labeling and food choices: A first look at
the effects on low-income people in New York City, Health Affairs, 28(6), 1110-21
Finkelstein, E.A., K.L. Strombotne, N.L. Chan and J. Krieger. 2011. The Impact of Mandatory Menu
Labeling In One Fast Food Chain in King County, Washington. American Journal of Preventive
Medicine 40(2) (Feb): 122-127.
Flegal, Katherine M., Margaret D. Carroll, Cynthia L. Ogden, and Lester R. Curtin. 2010. Prevalence and
Trends in Obesity Among US Adults, 1999-2008, Journal of the American Medical Association,
303(3): 235-241.
Gruber, Jonathan, and James Poterba, Tax Incentives and the Decision to Purchase Health Insurance:
Evidence from the Self-Employed, Quarterly Journal of Economics 109 (August 1994), 701–734.
Hirshleifer, David, Sonya Seongyeon Lim, and Siew Hong Teoh. 2009. Driven to Distraction: Extraneous
Events and Underreaction to Earnings News. Journal of Finance 64(5) (October): 2289-2325
Iyengar, Sheena S. and Mark R. Lepper. 2000. When Choice is Demotivating: Can One Desire Too Much
of a Good Thing? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 2000, Vol. 79, No. 6, 995-1006.
Lakdawalla, Darius, and Tomas Philipson. 2002. The Growth of Obesity and Technological Change: A
Theoretical and Empirical Examination. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
8946.
Lakdawalla, Darius, Tomas Philipson, and Jay Bhattacharya. 2005. Welfare-Enhancing Technological
Change and the Growth of Obesity. American Economic Review, 95(2): 253–57.
Newey, Whitney K, and Kenneth D. West. 1987. A Simple, Positive Semi-definite, Heteroskedasticity
and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix Econometrica 55(3) (May):703-08

21
Rubinstein, Ariel and Yuval Salant. 2006. A model of choice from lists Theoretical Economics 1: 3–17
Vadiveloo, Maya K, L Beth Dixon and Brian Elbel. 2011. Consumer purchasing patterns in response to
calorie labeling legislation in New York City International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and
Physical Activity, 8:51
Variyam, Jayachandran N and John Cawley. 2006. Nutrition Labels and Obesity National Bureau of
Economic Research working paper no. 11956.
Wisdom, Jessica , Julie S. Downs and George Loewenstein. 2010. Promoting Healthy Choices:
Information vs. Convenience American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2:164-178

22

Appendix A: Sample Receipt

23

Appendix B: Sample Messages

Discouraged Items with an Encouraged Substitution:
Fries to Side Salad: “Our side salad with fresh greens, Tillamook cheddar cheese, carrots, red cabbage, grape
tomatoes topped with Bleu Cheese dressing contains 160 fewer calories than a regular fry.”
Kids’ Fries to Apples: “If you're looking for a refreshing complement to your kids meal, try ordering apples
instead of fries and save 165 calories and 8g of fat.”
Fried to Grilled Chicken Sandwich: “If you're trying to live a healthier lifestyle, consider our Low Fat Grilled
Chicken Sandwich instead of the Crispy Chicken Sandwich and save 90 calories and 7g of fat.”
Ice Cream to Yogurt: “Trying to eat healthier? Try our <strong>YoCream Frozen Yogurt Caramel
Sundae</strong> with 32% fewer calories and 93% fewer grams of fat than our Caramel Ice Cream Sundae. See
if you can taste the difference.”
Sausage to Other Breakfast Sandwich: “For the same great taste but fewer calories, next time try a bagel with
egg and bacon (instead of sausage) and save approximately 150 calories!”

Other Encouraged Choices:
“Hold the sauce”: “If you're looking to eat healthier, ask us to hold the Burgerville Spread and save about 70
calories and 8g of fat.”
“Hold the cheese: “While cheese is a good source of calcium, if you are watching your calorie or fat intake, next
time consider skipping the cheese to save up to 110 calories and 9g of fat.”
Kid’s milk: “Sized for smaller appetites and featuring the same exceptional quality, Kids' Meals offer a variety of
healthful choices, like apple slices and local, hormone-free milk.”
Main salad: “Our entre [sic] salads feature fresh greens and sustainable, local ingredients, such as smoked
salmon and Oregon hazelnuts.” Or, “Salmon is rich in omega-3 fatty acids, which are good for heart health and
brain function.”

24

Figure 1. Weekly Nutrition for Treatment and Control Stores

1
.8

.8

1

1.2

Total Fat

1.2

Calories

0

25

50

75

100

125

0

25

50

Week

75

100

125

Week

Treatment

Control

Treatment

Cholesterol

.8

.8

1

1

1.21.4

1.2

Saturated Fat

Control

0

25

50

75

100

125

0

25

50

Week

75

100

125

Week

Treatment

Control

Treatment

Control

Control is the unweighted average of all non-treatment stores

Note: All figures show five-week moving averages.

Figure 2. Weekly Nutrition for Treatment and Control Stores

1
.8

.8

1

1.2

Total Fat

1.2

Calories

0

25

50

75

100

125

0

25

50

Week

75

100

125

Week

Treatment

Control

Treatment

Cholesterol

.8

.6

1

1

1.4

1.2

Saturated Fat

Control

0

25

50

75

100

Week
Treatment

Control is the synthetic control store

125

0

25

50

75

100

Week
Control

Treatment

Control

125

25

Figure 3a. Category Shares for Treatment and Control Stores
Grilled Chicken

.6

.6

1

1

1.41.8

1.4

Side Salad

0

25

50

75

100

125

0

25

50

Week

75

100

125

Week

Treatment

Control

Treatment

1
.6

.6

1

1.4

Kids' Milk

1.4

Kids' Apples

Control

0

25

50

75

100

125

0

25

50

Week

75

100

125

Week

Treatment

Control

Treatment

Control

Control is the synthetic control store

Note: All figures show five-week moving averages.

Figure 3b. Category Shares for Treatment and Control Stores
Non-Sausage Bagel

.8

.6

1

1

1.2

1.4 1.8

Frozen Yogurt

0

25

50

75

100

125

Week
Control

1

1.2
.8

50

50

75

Treatment

No Cheese

25

25

100

Week

Treatment

0

0

75

100

Week
Treatment

Control is the synthetic control store

Control

125

Control

125

26

Figure 3c. Category Shares for Treatment and Control Stores
Meal Salad

.6

.8

1

1

1.4 1.8

1.2

No Sauce

0

25

50

75

100

125

Week
Control

0 2 4 6
-4 -2

50

50

75

Treatment

Encouraged Share Index

25

25

100

Week

Treatment

0

0

75

100

125

Week
Treatment

Control

Control is the synthetic control store

Note: All figures show five-week moving averages

Control

125

27

Table 1: Nutrition per Transaction and Sales, By Store and Period
Treatment Store

All Other Stores

Difference-in-Difference

Baseline
Means
(1)

Period 1
(2)

Period 2
(3)

Period 1
(4)

Period 2
(5)

[(3)-(2)] - [(5)-(4)]

1657
80
23
153

1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000

0.977
0.975
0.919
0.956

1.037
1.044
1.017
1.014

1.019
1.027
0.947
0.996

-0.006
-0.008
-0.010
-0.027

Revenue per transaction

--

1.000

1.044

1.024

1.066

0.003

Total transactions
Total revenue

---

1.000
1.000

0.976
1.022

0.577
0.594

0.543
0.584

0.010
0.032

Nutrition per transaction
Calories
Total fat (grams)
Saturated fat (grams)
Cholesterol
Sales

Treatment begins at the treatment store starting in week 76. Period 1 includes weeks 1-75 and period 2includes weeks 76-125. The overall sample is 4875 store*week cells.

28

Table 2: Purchases of Selected Items per Transaction, By Store and Period
Treatment Store
Period 1
(1)

Period 2
(2)

All Other Stores
Period 1
(3)

Period 2
(4)

Difference-in-Difference
[(2)-(1)] - [(4)-(3)]

Discouraged Items:
Fries (adult)
Fries (kids)
Fried chicken sandwich
Ice cream
Breakfast sandwich w. Sausage

1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000

0.985
1.045
1.012
0.783
0.867

1.011
1.123
0.844
1.444
0.970

0.993
1.125
0.848
1.239
0.985

0.002
0.043
0.007
-0.012
-0.148

1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000

1.226
0.836
1.053
0.975
1.143
1.007
1.224
1.307
1.005

0.841
0.938
0.853
1.138
0.778
0.841
0.956
1.187
0.999

1.012
0.702
0.846
1.103
0.849
0.950
1.070
1.365
1.057

0.056
0.071
0.059
0.010
0.072
-0.102
0.110
0.129
-0.052

Encouraged Items:
Main salad
Grilled chicken sandwich
No sauce
No cheese
Side salad
Frozen Yogurt
Kids’ apples
Kids’ milk
All other breakfast sandwiches

Treatment begins at the treatment store starting in week 76. Period 1 includes weeks 1-75 and period 2includes weeks 76-125. The overall sample is 4875
store*week cells.

29

Table 3: Shares of Encouraged Items within Selected Item Categories, by Store and Period
Treatment Store
Period 1
(1)

Period 2
(2)

All Other Stores
Period 1
(3)

Period 2
(4)

Difference-in-Difference
[(2)-(1)] - [(4)-(3)]

Share of Adult Sides:
Salad

1.000

1.155

0.776

0.857

0.074

Share of Chicken Sandwiches:
Grilled

1.000

0.918

1.037

0.911

0.044

1.000
1.000

1.141
1.223

0.855
1.063

0.931
1.205

0.065
0.081

1.000

1.222

0.627

0.765

0.084

1.000

1.061

1.017

1.035

0.043

1.000
1.000
1.000

0.978
1.053
1.230

1.023
0.770
0.760

0.991
0.763
0.910

0.010
0.060
0.080

Share of Kids’ Meals:
With Apples
With Milk
Share of Desserts:
Frozen Yogurt
Share of Breakfast Sandwiches:
Without Sausage
Share of Mains:
With No Cheese
With No Sauce
With Main Salad

Treatment begins at the treatment store starting in week 76. Period 1 includes weeks 1-75 and period 2includes weeks 76-125. The overall sample is 4875
store*week cells.

30
Table 4: Estimated Treatment Effects for Nutrition and Sales per Transaction
Nutrition
Calories
(1)

Sales

Total Fat
(2)

Saturated
Fat
(3)

Cholesterol
(4)

Items per Revenue per
Transaction Transaction
(5)
(6)

Total
Items
(7)

Total
Transactions
(8)

Total
Revenue
(9)

-0.0082***
(0.0020)
-0.0082*
(0.0047)
-0.0082
(0.0076)

-0.0102***
(0.0022)
-0.0102
(0.0071)
-0.0102
(0.0110)

-0.0267***
(0.0025)
-0.0267***
(0.0048)
-0.0267***
(0.0067)

0.0031
(0.0026)
0.0031
(0.0040)
0.0031
(0.0052)

0.0028
(0.0021)
0.0028
(0.0045)
0.0028
(0.0077)

0.0273***
(0.0053)
0.0273
(0.0228)
0.0273
(0.0310)

0.0097**
(0.0037)
0.0097
(0.0222)
0.0097
(0.0298)

0.0316***
(0.0047)
0.0316
(0.0237)
0.0316
(0.0329)

-0.0066
(0.0040)
-0.0066
(0.0050)

-0.0042
(0.0055)
-0.0042
(0.0055)

-0.0213***
(0.0044)
-0.0213***
(0.0054)

0.0099***
(0.0037)
0.0099***
(0.0036)

0.0024
(0.0040)
0.0024
(0.0062)

-0.0074
(0.0239)
-0.0074
(0.0364)

-0.0164
(0.0221)
-0.0164
(0.0323)

-0.0028
(0.0250)
-0.0028
(0.0391)

-0.0129**
(0.0058)
-0.0003
(0.0053)

-0.0054
(0.0086)
-0.0029
(0.0063)

-0.0248***
(0.0054)
-0.0179**
(0.0072)

0.0094***
(0.0034)
0.0103*
(0.0054)

-0.0071
(0.0073)
0.0118**
(0.0058)

-0.0084
(0.0391)
-0.0065
(0.0447)

-0.0111
(0.0327)
-0.0217
(0.0408)

-0.011
(0.0427)
0.0054
(0.0472)

All other stores as controls
One-stage FE
DL
DL-NW

-0.0056***
(0.0020)
-0.0056
(0.0045)
-0.0056
(0.0073)

Synthetic control group
ADH-DL
ADH-DL-NW

0.0005
(0.0041)
0.0005
(0.0055)

Synthetic control group (ADH-DL-NW)
Weeks 76-100
Weeks 101-125

-0.0071
(0.0064)
0.008
(0.0057)

Notes
*, **, and *** denote p<0.10, p<0.05, and p<0.01, respectively.
One-stage FE: The dependent variable is the level of the outcome in the store*week cell. Treatment equals one in treatment store starting in week 76, zero otherwise. Sample size is 4875 store*week cells.
Regression includes a full set of 125 week and 39 store fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by store.
ADH-DL: The dependent variable is the difference between the outcome in treatment store and the mean for all other stores, by week. Sample size is 125 weeks. Estimation is by OLS.
ADH-DL-NW: The dependent variable is the difference between the outcome in treatement store and the mean for all other stores, by week. Sample size is 125 weeks. The standard errors adjusted for first-order
autocorrelation via the Newey-West method, with maximum lag set at 5 weeks.
Synthetic control group: The dependent variable is the difference between the outcome at the treatment store and the outcome for the synthetic control group, by week. Synthetic controls are constructed
separately for each outcome. Stores are matched using five week averages in the pre-treatment period.

31
Table 5: Estimated Treatment Effects for Purchases of Discouraged Items, per Transaction
Fries
(adult)
(1)

Fries
(child)
(2)

Fried Chicken
Sandwich
(3)

Ice
Cream
(4)

Sausage Breakfast
Sandwich
(5)

Discouraged
Index
(6)

0.0022
(0.0026)
0.0022
(0.0060)
0.0022
(0.0099)

0.0426***
(0.0088)
0.0426**
(0.0186)
0.0426*
(0.0251)

0.0074
(0.0055)
0.0074
(0.0163)
0.0074
(0.0214)

-0.0116
(0.0165)
-0.0116
(0.0552)
-0.0116
(0.1125)

-0.1477***
(0.0171)
-0.1477***
(0.0264)
-0.1477***
(0.0268)

-0.6439***
(0.1207)
-0.6439**
(0.2759)
-0.6439*
(0.3593)

-0.0036
(0.0055)
-0.0036
(0.0071)

-0.0007
(0.0181)
-0.0007
(0.0195)

0.0146
(0.0171)
0.0146
(0.0205)

-0.0580**
(0.0242)
-0.0580
(0.0403)

-0.1320***
(0.0266)
-0.1320***
(0.0239)

-0.3212
(0.2664)
-0.3212
(0.3532)

-0.024
(0.0221)
0.0226
(0.0226)

-0.0162
(0.0166)
0.0454*
(0.0266)

0.0199
(0.0314)
-0.1359***
(0.0467)

-0.1312***
(0.0342)
-0.1327***
(0.0292)

-0.6506***
(0.2442)
0.0081
(0.5950)

All other stores as controls
One-stage FE
DL
DL-NW
Synthetic control group
ADH-DL
ADH-DL-NW

Synthetic control group (ADH-DL-NW)
Weeks 76-100
Weeks 101-125

-0.0124
(0.0084)
0.0052
(0.0084)

Notes
*, **, and *** denote p<0.10, p<0.05, and p<0.01, respectively.
One-stage FE: The dependent variable is the level of the outcome in the store*week cell. Treatment equals one in treatment store starting in week 76, zero otherwise. Sample size is 4875 store*week cells.
Regression includes a full set of 125 week and 39 store fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by store.
ADH-DL: The dependent variable is the difference between the outcome in treatment store and the mean for all other stores, by week. Sample size is 125 weeks. Estimation is by OLS.
ADH-DL-NW: The dependent variable is the difference between the outcome in treatement store and the mean for all other stores, by week. Sample size is 125 weeks. The standard errors adjusted for
first-order autocorrelation via the Newey-West method, with maximum lag set at 5 weeks.
Synthetic control group: The dependent variable is the difference between the outcome at the treatment store and the outcome for the synthetic control group, by week. Synthetic controls are
constructed separately for each outcome. Stores are matched using five week averages in the pre-treatment period.

32

Table 6: Estimated Treatment Effects for Purchases of Encouraged Items, per Transaction
Main
Salad
(1)

Grilled
Chicken
Sandwich
(2)

No
Sauce

No
Cheese

Side
Salad

Frozen
Yogurt

Kids'
Apples

Kids'
Milk

Non-Sausage Encouraged
Breakfast
Index
Sandwiches
(9)
(10)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.0715***
(0.0103)
0.0715**
(0.0322)
0.0715*
(0.0388)

0.0590***
(0.0055)
0.0590***
(0.0127)
0.0590***
(0.0207)

0.0100***
(0.0033)
0.01
(0.0075)
0.01
(0.0116)

0.0722***
(0.0112)
0.0722***
(0.0249)
0.0722**
(0.0286)

-0.1020***
(0.0362)
-0.102
(0.0622)
-0.102
(0.1178)

0.1104***
(0.0132)
0.1104**
(0.0440)
0.1104**
(0.0515)

0.1295***
(0.0145)
0.1295***
(0.0292)
0.1295***
(0.0352)

-0.0522***
(0.0175)
-0.0522*
(0.0288)
-0.0522
(0.0375)

1.7566***
(0.1646)
1.7566***
(0.3865)
1.7566***
(0.3215)

0.0626**
(0.0274)
0.0626**
(0.0252)

0.0700***
(0.0122)
0.0700***
(0.0142)

0.0157**
(0.0077)
0.0157
(0.0096)

0.1377***
(0.0258)
0.1377***
(0.0313)

0.0141
(0.0616)
0.0141
(0.1028)

0.0523
(0.0435)
0.0523
(0.0467)

0.0954***
(0.0306)
0.0954**
(0.0378)

-0.1172***
(0.0304)
-0.1172***
(0.0412)

0.5484
(0.4463)
0.5484
(0.5003)

0.0592***
(0.0213)
0.0807***
(0.0161)

0.0127
(0.0156)
0.0188*
(0.0100)

0.1784***
(0.0310)
0.0970**
(0.0444)

0.2420***
(0.0880)
-0.2139***
(0.0763)

-0.0085
(0.0423)
0.1131
(0.0685)

0.0605
(0.0392)
0.1304**
(0.0571)

-0.0774
(0.0486)
-0.1571***
(0.0531)

1.6567***
(0.3279)
-0.5599
(0.5185)

All other stores as controls
One-stage FE
DL
DL-NW

0.0556***
(0.0100)
0.0556**
(0.0278)
0.0556
(0.0354)

Synthetic control group
ADH-DL
ADH-DL-NW

0.0357
(0.0303)
0.0357
(0.0390)

Synthetic control group (ADH-DL-NW)
Weeks 76-100
Weeks 101-125

0.1235***
(0.0259)
-0.0521
(0.0386)

0.0467**
(0.0215)
0.0785**
(0.0375)

Notes
*, **, and *** denote p<0.10, p<0.05, and p<0.01, respectively.
One-stage FE: The dependent variable is the level of the outcome in the store*week cell. Treatment equals one in treatment store starting in week 76, zero otherwise. Sample size is 4875 store*week cells.
Regression includes a full set of 125 week and 39 store fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by store.
ADH-DL: The dependent variable is the difference between the outcome in treatment store and the mean for all other stores, by week. Sample size is 125 weeks. Estimation is by OLS.
ADH-DL-NW: The dependent variable is the difference between the outcome in treatement store and the mean for all other stores, by week. Sample size is 125 weeks. The standard errors adjusted for first-order
autocorrelation via the Newey-West method, with maximum lag set at 5 weeks.
Synthetic control group: The dependent variable is the difference between the outcome at the treatment store and the outcome for the synthetic control group, by week. Synthetic controls are constructed
separately for each outcome. Stores are matched using five week averages in the pre-treatment period.

33

Table 7: Estimated Treatment Effects for Purchases of Encouraged Items, as a Share of Category
Side Salads
as a Share of
Adult Sides
(1)

Grilled
as a Share of
Chicken
Sandwiches
(2)

Apples as a
as a Share of
Child Meals

Milk as a
as a Share of
Child Meals

Frozen Yogurt
as a Share of
Desserts

No Cheese
as a Share of
Adult Mains

No Sauce
as a Share of
Adult Mains

Main Salad
as a Share of
Adult Mains

Encouraged
Share
Index

(5)

Non-Sausage
as a Share of
Breakfast
Sandwiches
(6)

(3)

(4)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

0.0437***
(0.0080)
0.0437*
(0.0229)
0.0437*
(0.0258)

0.0650***
(0.0105)
0.0650*
(0.0333)
0.0650*
(0.0329)

0.0811***
(0.0096)
0.0811***
(0.0275)
0.0811***
(0.0305)

0.0841***
(0.0276)
0.0841
(0.0605)
0.0841
(0.0930)

0.0433***
(0.0064)
0.0433***
(0.0127)
0.0433***
(0.0113)

0.0098***
(0.0025)
0.0098
(0.0077)
0.0098
(0.0126)

0.0598***
(0.0050)
0.0598***
(0.0108)
0.0598***
(0.0157)

0.0800***
(0.0082)
0.0800**
(0.0310)
0.0800*
(0.0437)

3.1391***
(0.1609)
3.1391***
(0.4560)
3.1391***
(0.4824)

0.0422*
(0.0227)
0.0422*
(0.0222)

0.0697*
(0.0361)
0.0697**
(0.0319)

0.0654**
(0.0292)
0.0654**
(0.0284)

0.1266**
(0.0607)
0.1266*
(0.0751)

0.0382***
(0.0134)
0.0382***
(0.0109)

0.0032
(0.0073)
0.0032
(0.0112)

0.0677***
(0.0106)
0.0677***
(0.0105)

0.0803**
(0.0323)
0.0803**
(0.0400)

1.7425***
(0.4912)
1.7425***
(0.5598)

0.0918**
(0.0415)
0.039
(0.0280)

0.2647***
(0.0871)
-0.0115
(0.0627)

0.0550***
(0.0130)
0.0215**
(0.0108)

0.0071
(0.0147)
-0.0007
(0.0152)

0.0712***
(0.0146)
0.0642***
(0.0124)

0.1618***
(0.0337)
-0.0012
(0.0412)

2.9804***
(0.5484)
0.5046
(0.4216)

All other stores as controls
One-stage FE
DL
DL-NW

0.0741***
(0.0115)
0.0741***
(0.0263)
0.0741**
(0.0308)

Synthetic control group
ADH-DL
ADH-DL-NW

0.1453***
(0.0278)
0.1453***
(0.0335)

Two-Time Periods: Synthetic control group (ADH-DL-NW)
Weeks 76-100
Weeks 101-125

0.1904***
(0.0358)
0.1002**
(0.0450)

0.0574**
(0.0228)
0.0271
(0.0293)

0.0447
(0.0272)
0.0948*
(0.0499)

Notes
*, **, and *** denote p<0.10, p<0.05, and p<0.01, respectively.
One-stage FE: The dependent variable is the level of the outcome in the store*week cell. Treatment equals one in treatment store starting in week 76, zero otherwise. Sample size is 4875 store*week cells. Regression includes a full set of 125 week and
39 store fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by store.
ADH-DL: The dependent variable is the difference between the outcome in treatment store and the mean for all other stores, by week. Sample size is 125 weeks. Estimation is by OLS.
ADH-DL-NW: The dependent variable is the difference between the outcome in treatement store and the mean for all other stores, by week. Sample size is 125 weeks. The standard errors adjusted for first-order autocorrelation via the Newey-West
method, with maximum lag set at 5 weeks.
Synthetic control group: The dependent variable is the difference between the outcome at the treatment store and the outcome for the synthetic control group, by week. Synthetic controls are constructed separately for each outcome. Stores are
matched using five week averages in the pre-treatment period.

34

Table 8: Estimated Treatment Effects for Purchases of Encouraged Items, as a Share of Category - Alternate Control Groups
Side Salads
Grilled
as a Share of as a Share of
Adult Sides
Chicken
Sandwiches
(1)
(2)
Sandwiches

Apples as a
as a Share of
Child Meals
(3)

Milk as a
Frozen Yogurt Non-Sausage
as a Share of as a Share of as a Share of
Child Meals
Desserts
Breakfast
Sandwiches
(4)
(5)
(6)
Sandwiches

No Cheese
as a Share of
Adult Mains

No Sauce
as a Share of
Adult Mains

Main Salad
as a Share of
Adult Mains

Encouraged
Share
Index

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

Synthetic control group (ADH-DL-NW)
3-week
5-week (Baseline)
7-week averages

0.1651***
(0.0341)
0.1453***
(0.0335)
0.1439***
(0.0323)

0.0425**
(0.0213)
0.0422*
(0.0222)
0.0289
(0.0225)

0.0790***
(0.0300)
0.0697**
(0.0319)
0.0787**
(0.0341)

0.0695**
(0.0327)
0.0654**
(0.0284)
0.0762**
(0.0309)

0.1058
(0.0740)
0.1266*
(0.0751)
0.0787
(0.0817)

0.0519***
(0.0122)
0.0382***
(0.0109)
0.0323**
(0.0142)

0.0045
(0.0106)
0.0032
(0.0112)
0.0065
(0.0107)

0.0791***
(0.0116)
0.0677***
(0.0105)
0.0753***
(0.0115)

0.0599
(0.0369)
0.0803**
(0.0400)
0.0681*
(0.0380)

1.6935***
(0.5640)
1.7425***
(0.5598)
1.7321***
(0.5533)

0.0741**
(0.0308)
0.0810**
(0.0330)
0.0747**
(0.0338)

0.0437*
(0.0258)
0.0711***
(0.0252)
0.0642**
(0.0247)

0.0650*
(0.0329)
0.0627*
(0.0361)
0.1064***
(0.0360)

0.0811***
(0.0305)
0.1029***
(0.0251)
0.0727**
(0.0318)

0.0841
(0.0930)
0.0668
(0.0905)
0.1075
(0.1004)

0.0433***
(0.0113)
0.0539***
(0.0135)
0.0621***
(0.0122)

0.0098
(0.0126)
0.0088
(0.0117)
0.0143
(0.012)

0.0598***
(0.0157)
0.0726***
(0.0132)
0.0585***
(0.013)

0.0800*
(0.0437)
0.0795*
(0.0414)
0.0718*
(0.041)

3.1391***
(0.4824)
3.2703***
(0.5083)
3.5972***
(0.543)

Other control groups
DL-NW (Baseline)
5 most similar sized stores
5 closest stores
Notes
*, **, and *** denote p<0.10, p<0.05, and p<0.01, respectively.
ADH-DL-NW: The dependent variable is the difference between the outcome in treatement store and the mean for all other stores, by week. Sample size is 125 weeks. The standard errors adjusted for first-order autocorrelation via the Newey-West
method, with maximum lag set at 5 weeks.
Synthetic control group: The dependent variable is the difference between the outcome at the treatment store and the outcome for the synthetic control group, by week. Synthetic controls are constructed separately for each outcome. Stores are
matched using five week averages in the pre-treatment period.
Other control groups: As defined in each column. Estimation is ADH-DL-NW.

35
Table 9: Estimated Treatment Effects for Purchases of Encouraged Items, as a Share of Category - Non-Messaged Items
Breakfast Sandwich Only
as a Share of All Sandwiches
(not in a basket)
(1)

Small or Regular Fries
as a Share of All Fries

Mains 500 or Fewer Calories
as a Share of All Mains

(2)

(3)

-0.0344***
(0.0063)
-0.0344***
(0.0130)
-0.0344**
(0.0144)

0.0031***
(0.0007)
0.0031**
(0.0014)
0.0031
(0.0022)

-0.0226***
(0.0026)
-0.0226***
(0.0052)
-0.0226***
(0.0078)

-0.0388***
(0.0136)
-0.0388***
(0.0139)

0.0050***
(0.0013)
0.0050***
(0.0017)

-0.0113**
(0.0051)
-0.0113*
(0.0067)

-0.0359**
(0.0154)
-0.0418*
(0.0220)

0.0063***
(0.0023)
0.0036*
(0.0020)

-0.0135*
(0.0081)
-0.0092
(0.0091)

All other stores as controls
One-stage FE
DL
DL-NW
Synthetic control group
ADH-DL
ADH-DL-NW
Synthetic control group (ADH-DL-NW)
Weeks 76-100
Weeks 101-125

Notes
*, **, and *** denote p<0.10, p<0.05, and p<0.01, respectively.
One-stage FE: The dependent variable is the level of the outcome in the store*week cell. Treatment equals one in treatment store starting in week 76, zero otherwise. Sample size is
4875 store*week cells. Regression includes a full set of 125 week and 39 store fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by store.
ADH-DL: The dependent variable is the difference between the outcome in treatment store and the mean for all other stores, by week. Sample size is 125 weeks. Estimation is by OLS.
ADH-DL-NW: The dependent variable is the difference between the outcome in treatement store and the mean for all other stores, by week. Sample size is 125 weeks. The standard
errors adjusted for first-order autocorrelation via the Newey-West method, with maximum lag set at 5 weeks.
Synthetic control group: The dependent variable is the difference between the outcome at the treatment store and the outcome for the synthetic control group, by week. Synthetic
controls are constructed separately for each outcome. Stores are matched using five week averages in the pre-treatment period.

36

Table 10: Estimated Treatment Effects for Purchases of Encouraged Items, as a Share of Category - Placebo Dates and Spillovers
Side Salads
as a Share of
Adult Sides
(1)

Grilled
as a Share of
Chicken
Sandwiches
(2)

Apples as a
as a Share of
Child Meals

Milk as a
as a Share of
Child Meals

Frozen Yogurt
as a Share of
Desserts

No Cheese
as a Share of
Adult Mains

No Sauce
as a Share of
Adult Mains

Main Salad
as a Share of
Adult Mains

Encouraged
Share
Index

(5)

Non-Sausage
as a Share of
Breakfast
Sandwiches
(6)

(3)

(4)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

0.0422*
(0.0222)

0.0697**
(0.0319)

0.0654**
(0.0284)

0.1266*
(0.0751)

0.0382***
(0.0109)

0.0032
(0.0112)

0.0677***
(0.0105)

0.0803**
(0.0400)

1.7425***
(0.5598)

0.0136
(0.0212)
-0.0054
(0.0268)

-0.0222
(0.0373)
-0.0151
(0.0393)

0.0153
(0.0278)
0.003
(0.0336)

0.0491
(0.0569)
0.0439
(0.0723)

0.0027
(0.0113)
0.0054
(0.0130)

-0.0006
(0.0075)
0.01
(0.0107)

0.0053
(0.0145)
-0.0068
(0.0129)

-0.003
(0.0311)
-0.0135
(0.0365)

-0.1724
(0.5824)
-0.2521
(0.5246)

-0.0211
(0.0158)

-0.0148
(0.0288)

0.0065
(0.0177)

-0.102
(0.0680)

0.0042
(0.0115)

-0.0009
(0.0074)

0.0199
(0.0204)

0.0053
(0.0209)

5.2417
(3.7108)

Synthetic control group (ADH-DL-NW)
Baseline

0.1453***
(0.0335)

Placebo Treatment Dates
Treat date = week 25
0.0124
(0.0272)
Treat date = week 50
-0.0186
(0.0271)
Spillovers
Neighboring Stores

0.0612***
(0.0168)

Notes
*, **, and *** denote p<0.10, p<0.05, and p<0.01, respectively.
ADH-DL-NW: The dependent variable is the difference between the outcome in treatement store and the mean for all other stores, by week. Sample size is 125 weeks. The standard errors adjusted for first-order autocorrelation via the Newey-West
method, with maximum lag set at 5 weeks.
Synthetic control group: The dependent variable is the difference between the outcome at the treatment store and the outcome for the synthetic control group, by week. Synthetic controls are constructed separately for each outcome. Stores are
matched using five week averages in the pre-treatment period.
Placebo Treatment Dates: Estimation is ADH-DL-NW. Sample includes all stores and all weeks.
Spillovers: Estimation is ADH-DL-NW. Sample is restricted to stores more than 15 miles from the center of Portland (controls stores) and a single weighted average of the five closest stores ("treatment store").

37

Table 11: Placebo Stores: Number of Positive Statistically
Significant Encouraged Share Coefficients (Max 9)
Zero
One
Two
Three
Four
Five
Six
Seven
Eight
Nine

Store Count
4
16
12
2
3
1
0
0
1 (Treatment Store)
0

Notes
Count of statistically significant (at the 10% level or better) coefficients for the first nine
columns of Table 7 regressions.
Synthetic control group: The dependent variable is the difference between the outcome
at the treatment store and the outcome for the synthetic control group, by week.
Synthetic controls are constructed separately for each outcome. Stores are matched
using five week averages in the pre-treatment period.

