NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DISTILLING THE MACROECONOMIC NEWS FLOW
Alessandro Beber
Michael W. Brandt
Maurizio Luisi
Working Paper 19650
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19650
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2013

We thank Daryl Caldwell, Robert Darwin, Fabio Fornari, Amit Goyal, Ana-Maria Tenekedjieva, and
seminar participants at BlackRock, City University, the 2012 Asset Pricing Retreat at Cass Business
School, the Fall 2012 Inquire UK Conference in Bath, the Imperial College Hedge Fund Conference,
the Stockholm School of Economics, and the University of York, for their comments and suggestions.
We are indebted to Inquire UK for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Alessandro Beber, Michael W. Brandt, and Maurizio Luisi. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Distilling the Macroeconomic News Flow
Alessandro Beber, Michael W. Brandt, and Maurizio Luisi
NBER Working Paper No. 19650
November 2013
JEL No. E0,E17,E27,E32,E37,E44,G0
ABSTRACT
We propose a simple cross-sectional technique to extract daily factors from economic news released
at different times and frequencies. Our approach can effectively handle the large number of different
announcements that are relevant for tracking current economic conditions. We apply the technique
to extract real-time measures of inflation, output, employment, and macroeconomic sentiment, as well
as corresponding measures of disagreement among economists about these indices. We find that our
procedure provides more timely and accurate forecasts of future changes in economic conditions
than other real-time forecasting approaches.
Alessandro Beber
Cass Business School
City University London
106 Bunhill Row
London, EC1Y 8TZ
Alessandro.Beber.1@city.ac.uk
Michael W. Brandt
Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
100 Fuqua Drive
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
mbrandt@duke.edu

Maurizio Luisi
London UK
maurizio.luisi@quantinvestmentsolutions.com

1

Introduction

Timely measurement of the state of the economy relies traditionally on low-frequency observations
of a few economic aggregates referring to previous weeks, months, or even quarters. A prominent
example is the advance estimate of GDP released quarterly about a month after the end of the
quarter. The low frequency and delayed observation of any such economic aggregate considered in
isolation stands in sharp contrast with the rich macroeconomic news flow that market participants
observe almost daily. This news flow contains information that agents use to learn about the
economy in the absence of private information. In particular, the finance literature has identified a
large cross-section of dozens of different news releases that have significant and immediate effects
on financial markets (e.g., Andersen et al., 2003).
We distill the economic news flow observed by market participants into a small set of indicators
describing four distinct aspects of the economy: inflation, output, employment, and macroeconomic
sentiment. Specifically, we propose a simple cross-sectional technique to extract daily principal
components from economic news releases associated with a given information type and observed
at different times and frequencies. Our approach is simple, robust (no numerical optimization
is required), and can effectively handle the large number of announcements that are relevant for
tracking the evolution of economic conditions in real-time. At the same time, our empirical analysis
shows that the output of our approach is more timely and informative than more sophisticated but
also more difficult to implement statistical techniques. Intuitively, the potential disadvantage of
a simpler modeling approach is more than compensated for by the sheer quantity of data our
approach can effectively incorporate.
Our paper relates to the literature on measuring the state of the economy in a time-series
setting based only on fundamental economic data (see Banbura et al., 2012, for a survey), commonly
referred to as “nowcasting.” There are two general approaches to this problem. The first approach is
to use a balanced panel regression, along the lines of the seminal paper of Stock and Watson (1989).
The purpose of this first approach is to construct a coincident index of economic activity using
factor models on a large set of macroeconomic releases, which basically amounts to constructing
a weighted average of several monthly or quarterly indicators. The advantage of this technique
is that the resulting index is based on many macroeconomic variables. However, this advantage
also results in a relatively low measurement frequency, because the econometrician has to wait for
the panel to be complete before the index can be constructed. A second general approach is to
model macroeconomic data using a state-space model (e.g., Evans, 2005). The advantage of this
second approach is to produce an indicator at a higher frequency, since a state-space model can
effectively handle the sparse and delayed reporting of economic data and missing information on
non-release days. However, this technique is impractical for large cross-sections of macroeconomic
releases. For example, Evans (2005) only considers the set of different (preliminary, advance,

1

and final) GDP releases. Arouba et al. (2009) propose a business condition index, called the
ADS index, constructed using four indicators at different frequencies, including a continuously
observable financial markets variable, . Finally, Giannone et al. (2008) combine the two approaches
by modeling factors extracted from a balanced panel of monthly releases in a state-space setting.
Our goal is to measure the state of the economy with a methodology that broadly retains the
advantages of both approaches without their respective limitations. Specifically, we consider a large
universe of macroeconomic announcements. This is a crucial aspect of our methodology, given the
evidence of many influential releases from the macroeconomic announcement literature. At the
same time, our approach can handle data released at different frequencies and missing observations
to produce a real-time high-frequency measurement of the state of the economy.
Our methodology has several other differentiating features relative to the literature. First, we do
not aim to estimate a real-time series of GDP, for example, but we rather leave the macroeconomic
factor(s) truly latent and unspecified. In this sense, we do not impose any structure on the
estimation and thus do not take a stand on what is the appropriate metric of the state of the
economy. We simply let the data speak for itself. Second, our focus on a large cross-section of
economic news releases allows us to extract factors from four subsets of macroeconomic news (e.g.,
inflation, output, employment, and macroeconomic sentiment). We use these subset indicators to
learn about the relations between different driving forces of the economy. Third, we utilize news
flow data that is truly real-time and unrestated, as opposed to approximately dated historical data
that is often restated (e.g., Koening et al., 2003; see also Ghysels et al., 2012, for an illustration of
the issues arising from restated macroeconomic data). Fourth, we refrain from using any financial
market based data, as our aim is to objectively measure the macroeconomic news flow absent any
market’s interpretation of the same. Finally, we also apply our methodology to the dispersion of
economic forecasts as a new way to obtain a high-frequency measure of macroeconomic uncertainty
based on the disagreement of a cross-section of economic experts.
We find that an economic activity factor (which combines output and employment information,
as they are highly correlated) as well as a macroeconomic sentiment factor, both extracted from the
large cross-section of macroeconomic news, have sensible dynamics. The greatest dips in both series
are well aligned with the ex-post defined NBER recession periods. The macroeconomic sentiment
factor, obtained from consumer and business confidence releases, is highly correlated with economic
activity, but appears to lead fundamentals especially around important turning points. Finally, our
inflation factor exhibits dynamics that seem only weakly correlated with growth, with much more
erratic variation, and has an unclear pattern in expansions versus recessions.
Our empirical proxy of economic uncertainty based on economic expert disagreement is
interesting for at least two reasons. First, it shows little correlation with the estimates of the
latent economic activity, macroeconomic sentiment, and inflation factors, suggesting that they are

2

likely to contain different information. Second, and more importantly, macroeconomic uncertainty
exhibits intriguing asymmetric dynamics. The peaks of disagreement correspond to the final stages
of recession periods, while uncertainty is relatively subdued at the end of economic expansions. This
evidence suggests that economists tend to disagree mostly on recoveries from prior contractions,
whereas everyone seems to see the end of an economic expansion coming.
We formally relate a real-time factor of economic growth (which further aggregates the
information relative to economic activity by combining information relating to output, employment
and macroeconomic sentiment) to vintages of the Chicago Fed National Activity Index (CFNAI),
constructed by the Chicago Federal Reserve Board based on Stock and Watson (1989), on CFNAI
release dates at the monthly frequency and to the vintage version of the ADS index of Arouba et al.
(2009) at the weekly frequency. We find that our latent growth factor is strongly correlated to both
of these alternative approaches. However, since our factor is constructed using information from
either a larger cross-section of news or in a more timely manner, it turns out to have significant
forecasting power for both CFNAI and the ADS index beyond their own lags. We also find that
our growth factor has predictive power for future actual GDP releases and is highly correlated
with the quarterly GDP expectations in the Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF). This is a
remarkable feature given that, unlike the ADS index, our growth factor is not optimally weighted
to forecast GDP. The large correlation with the quarterly releases of the SPF offers an intuitive
interpretation of our growth factor as the high-frequency daily reading of economist expectations
about macroeconomic fundamentals.
We extend this empirical analysis to the real-time inflation factor extracted from inflationrelated announcements. This is a novel aspect of our analysis, as the extant approaches generally
ignore these releases to optimally forecast GDP and growth.1

Our real-time inflation factor

generally seems to lead the pattern of CPI actual releases and the inflation forecast contained in the
SPF, albeit in a relatively noisy fashion. More specifically, we find that our inflation factor observed
on quarterly SPF release dates has predictive power for the upcoming actual CPI announcement,
beyond CPI own lags and the median SPF inflation forecast.
Another intriguing finding is that our latent factors obtained exclusively from macroeconomic
information are highly correlated with financial indicators, such as the default spread and the
implied stock return volatility index VIX. More specifically, we find that the combination of our
latent growth factor and its dispersion can explain almost one third of VIX levels. This is an
important finding in light of the documented difficulties for macroeconomic quantities to explain
financial market volatility (see, for example, the seminal paper of Schwert, 1989).
Finally, we combine the information of the growth indicator and its dispersion extracted from
economist disagreement, and document very strong predictability for future growth, from 5 days and
1

For example, the 85 macroeconomic indicators used to construct the CFNAI are drawn from production,
employment, consumption, and sales categories, but none of them is drawn from a nominal inflation-related category.

3

up to six months ahead. Given the illustrated relation of our macroeconomic indicator with financial
variables and its extremely timely nature, this result suggests that our quantitative measure of the
news flow could have predictive power for future financial market dynamics.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we describe the macroeconomic
news and we carry out some preliminary analysis on macroeconomic announcements. Section 3
explains our methodology for estimating in real-time the state of the economy and its uncertainty.
We present our empirical results in Section 4. Section 5 concludes with a summary of our findings.

2

Data and Preliminaries

2.1

Macroeconomic news and forecasts

We obtain data on the dates, release times, and actual released figures for 43 distinct U.S. macroeconomic announcements covering the period from January 1997 through December 2011, for a
total of more than 8,000 announcements over about 3,800 business days. This data is obtained
from Bloomberg through the Economic Calendar screen, which provides precisely time-stamped
and unrestated announcement data.2,3 We also collect data on economist forecasts for each
announcement.

Bloomberg surveys economists during the weeks prior to the release of each

indicator to obtain a consensus estimate. We work with the individual economist level forecasts,
rather than the aggregated consensus forecasts, in order to construct cross-sectional measures of
disagreement for each news release.
Bloomberg contains data for many of our series prior to 1997, but those data are stored in
historical fields which (a) are not associated with clear announcement dates and times (rather they
are dated according to the period they reference) and (b) are restated over time.4 We collect this
more problematic data for January 1985 through 1996 for two reasons. First, we use this historical
data to construct an initial correlation matrix estimate, which is required by our methodology
(see Section 3). Second, we use this data for a robustness check with a longer sample period (see
Section 4.5). In order to date the releases prior to 1997, we compute for each news series the
median time between the reference period and the announcement. For example, the employment
report is traditionally released four days after the end of the month to which the report refers. We
2

We emphasize the fact that we work with distinct announcements because there are a lot more than 43 statistics
if we included multiple versions of essentially the same data released in the same economic report. For example, the
CFNAI uses 13 industrial production statistics, resulting in 20 percent of the index being determined by a single
release. In contrast, we include in our analysis only the headline month-over-month figure.
3
The importance of using real-time versus final data in macroeconomic forecasting has been discussed extensively
in the literature (e.g., Koenig et al., 2003).
4
For example, there are monthly releases of quarterly GDP labeled “advance,” “preliminary” and “final” all
referring to the same quarter. Bloomberg’s historical field for GDP is dated according to the referenced quarter,
so that the advance release gets overwritten by the preliminary release, which in turn gets overwritten by the final
release. Historically only the final releases are stored.

4

then apply this median reporting lag to the reference period of the older data in order to obtain
an approximate announcement date.
Since economist-level forecasts are not available prior to 1997, we instead collect data from the
Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF). The SPF is the oldest quarterly survey of macroeconomic
forecasts in the United States. The survey began in 1968 and was conducted by the American
Statistical Association and the National Bureau of Economic Research. The Federal Reserve Bank
of Philadelphia took over the survey in 1990. The SPF’s web page offers the actual releases,
documentation, mean and median forecasts of all the respondents as well as the individual responses
from each economist. The individual responses are kept confidential by using identification numbers.
Most macroeconomic indicators are released on different days and at different frequencies,
making it difficult to process the flow of information in a systematic and consistent way. Figure 1
shows that actual news releases occur with a variety of different lags with respect to the month they
are referencing. Furthermore, news on different indicators are frequently released simultaneously.5
For example, the employment report traditionally announced on the first Friday of the month
contains four different indicators: nonfarm payrolls, nonfarm payrolls in the manufacturing sector,
the unemployment rate, and average weekly hours. Finally, the release frequency varies across
different economic aggregates. Data releases of different economic indicators are usually observed
at different frequency; e.g., GDP data are sampled quarterly, the nonfarm payrolls are released
monthly, initial jobless claims are sampled weekly, etc. These features of our large cross-section of
macroeconomic news releases generate a sparse matrix of data that our methodology will have to
take up. The Appendix describes in detail the set of macroeconomic news in our sample, including
their frequency, source, and units of measurement.

2.2

Categorizing the macroeconomic news flow

Our aim is to extract a set of factors describing the state of the economy. Rather than relying on a
statistical procedure to obtain orthogonalized factors that are increasingly difficult to interpret with
the order of the factor, we impose a specific economically motivated structure on the macroeconomic
news flow. Based on both empirical evidence and economic rationale, we first separate the aggregate
economy into two broad dimensions: the nominal and the real side.6 In practice, we split the set of
announcements into nominal inflation-related announcements and news that relates to real growth.
Growth data, in turn, come in two flavors – objective realizations of past economic activity and

5

On approximately 80 percent of days, there was at least one data release. Multiple data releases occurred much
less frequently, on approximately 60 percent of the days in the sample.
6
The economy is often separated into nominal and real sides because shocks to the two should be treated differently
from a policy perspective. For example, many argue, from the perspective of monetary policy, that nominal shocks
should be minimized, whereas real shocks should not be intervened upon. Other studies also suggest that a nominal
and a real factor can jointly account for much of the observed variation in major economic aggregates.

5

subjective often forward-looking views derived from surveys which we label “macro sentiment.”7
Finally, economic activity can be split one last time into information relating to output versus
employment.
Through this structure, we obtain two (inflation and growth), three (inflation, economic activity,
and macro sentiment), or four (inflation, output, employment, and macro sentiment) factors:
• Inflation
(

Output

 Economic Activity
• Growth
Employment


Macro Sentiment
where, for example, the economic activity factor is obtained from the combined information relating
to output and employment. In that sense, the information is nested from right to left.
More specifically, the inflation factor is extracted from the news flow of nine inflation-related
releases: consumer price index, CPI ex food and energy, employment cost index, GDP price index,
import price index, nonfarm productivity, personal consumption expenditure core price index,
producer price index, and PPI ex food and energy. For the output factor, we utilize information
from both the supply and demand side of the economy in the form of news about advance retail sales,
business inventories, capacity utilization, consumer credit, domestic vehicle sales, durable goods
orders, durables ex-transportation, factory orders, GDP, industrial production, ISM manufacturing,
ISM non-manufacturing composite, personal consumption, personal income, personal spending,
retail sales less autos, and wholesale inventories. Employment news is captured by releases of ADP
payrolls, manufacturing payrolls, non-farm payrolls, continuing claims, initial jobless claims, and
the unemployment rate. Finally, we extract the macro sentiment factor from the information in
10 macroeconomic surveys: ABC consumer confidence, Chicago purchasing manager, consumer
confidence, Dallas Fed manufacturing activity, Empire manufacturing survey, leading indicators
index, NAPM-Milwaukee, Philadelphia Fed business outlook survey, Richmond Fed manufacturing
index, and the University of Michigan confidence index. The Appendix summarizes the assignment
of announcements to the four categories: inflation, output, employment, and macro sentiment.
It is worth reiterating at this point that we do not include any market-based data (such as
stock prices, interest rates, credit spreads, or VIX) in our analysis, unlike, for example, Arouba
et al. (2009) and Giannone et al. (2008). While such data are very timely and undoubtedly
informative about the state of the economy, they represent already the market’s interpretation of the
macroeconomic news flow. Our aim is to objectively summarize and describe the macroeconomic
news flow itself.
7
The behavioral finance and economics literature tends to associate the term sentiment with emotions that in
a rational framework should not affect decisions. We take a broader perspective and use the term sentiment to
encompass agents subjective forward-looking interpretation of the data as revealed through surveys.

6

2.3

Transformation and temporal alignment

We examine the stationarity of each data series in two ways. First, we conduct a Dickey-Fuller test
on each series. Second, we read the definition and description of each statistic to determine from an
economic perspective whether it is a non-stationary index or a stationary quarterly growth rate, for
example. In a few cases where the conclusions from the two approaches differ, usually because the
available data is too short to examining statistically, we rely more on the description to determine
whether the series is stationary. All series that are deemed non-stationary are first-differenced in
news release time. The Appendix contains more details.
The final data management task is to align the data temporally by moving from announcement
time to calendar time. We do this by populating the news releases in a T × N matrix where T
denotes the total number of week days in our sample and N refers to the 43 announcement types.
The data at this stage looks like the top panel of Figure 2.
There are two important aspects of the data to discuss. First, there are a vast number of
missing values, as we can think of each news series as a continuously evolving statistic that is
observed only once per month or quarter. Second, not all announcements have a complete history.
Some announcements are initiated in the middle of the sample and/or are terminated before the
end of the sample. To solve the missing data problem, we simply forward fill the last observed
release until the next announcement. Forward filling can be rationalized as replacing missing
values with expected values under a simple independent random walk assumption for each news
series. Of course, both independence in the cross-section and random walk dynamics through
time are simplifying assumptions that are rejected by the data (in fact, the motivation for our
methodology described below is the cross-sectional correlation structure within news category). A
more sophisticated approach for filling in missing data would be to compute the expectation of
the missing values given the full cross-section of previous releases as well as the cross-sectional and
intertemporal correlation structure of the data. An optimal solution would also allow for sampling
error, which is the case in Kalman filter or Bayesian data augmentation algorithms. However, there
is a clear trade-off between statistical complexity and ability to process a large cross-section of news
series. Since the goal of our approach is to utilize the entire cross-section of news, we choose a very
simple statistical model for filling in missing observations. After forward filling, the data looks like
the bottom plot of Figure 2.
Note that the second data issue, the fact that some series do not span the entire sample
period, cannot be solved with missing values imputation. It is instead explicitly addressed in
our methodology below.

7

3

Methodology

3.1

Subset principal component analysis

Our goal is to extract from the cross-section of macroeconomic news releases a set of factors that
capture in real-time the state of inflation, output, employment, and macro sentiment, as well as
the two more overarching factors measuring economic activity and growth. The most obvious ways
of accomplishing this, full data principal components analysis (PCA) and forecasting regressions,
do not appeal to us. First, with full data PCA we obtain factors that are mechanically orthogonal,
whereas the dimensions of the economic news flow we want to capture are likely correlated (e.g.,
output and employment are both high at the peak and low at the trough of an economic cycle).
This orthogonalization makes is practically impossible to assign an economic meaning to higher
order factors. Second, trying to identify the factors through predictive regressions on a candidate
variables in each category, such as final GDP for output, would require us being able to identify
a single series that represents each category. While this is a common approach in the nowcasting
literature, it relies on ex-ante knowledge of the key statistic to track and assumes that there is only
one such statistic that does not change over time (see also Stock and Watson, 1989).
Instead, we rely on our ex-ante categorization of the news and, within each category subset,
let the data speak for itself by extracting the first principal component of that subset of data.
Specifically, on each day of our sample t, we obtain for each news category i the first principal
component from the correlation matrix Ωt,i of the stationary news series in category i. We work
with the correlation matrix to abstract from arbitrary scaling of data. Moreover, in order to obtain
a real-time measure, we use a telescoping (with a common historical start date and rolling end
dates) correlation matrix starting in 1980.8 We denote the Ni × 1 principal component weights
by ct,i , where Ni is the number of news series in category i. Consistent with extracting principal
components from a telescoping correlation matrix, we standardize the news series using telescoping
estimates of their means and standard deviations.

3.2

Economic new series correlation matrix

The key inputs to our methodology are the within news category correlation matrices Ωt,i .
Specifically, we need to calculate from historical data up through date t the correlation of all
news series of category i that are “active” on that date, where active means that the news series
was previously initiated and has not yet been terminated. There are two issues that need to be
addressed in computing these correlation matrices. First, the data is in the form of an unbalanced
panel due to some of the series being initiated after the start date of the estimation window (e.g.,
series j = 5 in Figure 2). Second, the data is naturally persistent, partly due to autocorrelation
8

We also experimented with fixed window size rolling correlation matrices for 5, 10, 15, and 20 years. The results
are qualitatively similar, particularly for the longer data windows.

8

of the data in announcement time, partly due to the cross-sectional misalignment of the news in
calendar time, and largely due to the forward filling of missing data.
We address the first unbalanced panel issue by using a correlation matrix estimator along the
lines of Stambaugh (1997), who shows how to adjust first and second moments estimates for unequal
sample lengths. The intuition of his approach is to use the observed data on the longer series, along
with a projection of the shorter series onto the longer ones estimated when both are observed, to
adjust the moments of the shorter time series.
To correct for the persistence, we could use the standard approach of Newey-West (1987), where
due to the nature of the data we would account for up to one quarter of autocorrelation and crossautocorrelation. Unfortunately, the kind of persistence in our data is not ideally captured by the
non-parametric Newey-West approach for two reasons. First, we have daily data, so adjusting for
up to a quarter of autocorrelation would involve approximately 60 cross-autocorrelation matrices.
Second, the (cross-) autocorrelations are not exponentially decaying as a typical ARMA model
might predict. Instead, the data is locally constant, due to the forward filling, and over longer
intervals only moderately (cross-) autocorrelated due to the statistical nature of the news series.
This peculiar correlation structure of economic news forward filled onto a daily calendar is
actually identical to that found in high-frequency asset prices, where asynchronous and infrequent
trading creates a misaligned and locally constant panel of observations. In that literature, AitSahalia, Mykland, and Zhang (2005) propose a “two-scales realized volatility” estimator to handle
this specific structure of short-term constancy versus long-horizon weak dependence. Specifically,
their estimator subsamples the data at a sufficiently low frequency that overcomes the local
constancy and then averages over the set of all possible estimators that start the subsampling
schemes at different times.
We adopt exactly the same approach, except of course our application is very different.
Specifically, at date t we subsample the forward filled news series backward at a monthly frequency
and then compute a Newey-West estimate of the correlation matrix using four lags. We repeat the
same for monthly sampling starting at dates {t − 1, t − 2, ..., t − d + 1} (assuming d days per month)
and then average the resulting d correlation matrix estimates.

3.3

Level versus disagreement factors

Given the vector of principal component weights ct,i obtained with our methodology, we then
construct for each news category two times-series. First, we sum at each date the product of the
weights multiplied by the most recent releases to obtain our real-time level factors. Second, we sum
the product of the same weights multiplied this time by the cross-sectional standard deviations of
the economist forecasts for the most recent releases to obtain our real-time disagreement factors.
Throughout our sample not every news series has economist level forecasts data available. We
9

therefore construct the disagreement factor using the available data, re-normalizing first the
principal component weights to account for the proportion of missing data.

4

Results

We first describe empirically the dynamics of the real-time macroeconomic factors. To get a sense
for how our methodology compares to other approaches, we then relate our growth factor to the
vintage releases of the CFNAI and ADS index. We analyze whether our real-time growth factor
actually predicts subsequent GDP releases, comparing it to the predictability by the corresponding
SPF forecasts. Along the same lines, we examine our real-time inflation factor and analyze whether
it predicts subsequent CPI releases relative to the SPF forecasts. We then examine the relation
between the growth factor and its dispersion with volatility in financial markets. This latter analysis
is motivated by the apparent lack of a strong relation between real activity and financial market
volatility (e.g., Schwert, 1989). Finally, we examine the joint dynamics of our real-time growth
index, growth dispersion, inflation index, and inflation dispersion, and we also extend the sample
backward using a pseudo real-time approach as a robustness check.

4.1

Preliminaries

In panel A of Table 1, we present correlations between the seven real-time macroeconomic
indices and their respective economist forecast dispersions, which we interpret as proxies for
macroeconomic uncertainty. There are a number of interesting observations. First, inflation is
relatively uncorrelated with the other macroeconomic indices. Its highest correlation is 0.36 with
output. In contrast, output, employment, and sentiment are highly correlated with each other
(correlations ranging from 0.75 to 0.84) and are each even more highly correlated with the composite
indices for economic activity and growth. The correlations with the growth index, in particular,
range from 0.92 to 0.95. We conclude from these high correlations that the growth index contains
most of the information revealed by output, employment, and sentiment, and we therefore focus
on examining the aggregated growth index and its dispersion going forward.
Second, the correlations between macroeconomic uncertainty mimics the general patterns we
observe in the indices, but at somewhat lower levels, particularly for sentiment. For example,
the correlations between output dispersion, employment dispersion, and sentiment dispersion with
growth dispersion are 0.96, 0.68, and 0.54, respectively.
Finally, we observe an interesting negative correlation between the levels and dispersions of
our real-time macroeconomic factors. The correlations are generally small in magnitude, except
for inflation uncertainty, which is -0.5 and more highly correlated with the level of growth and its
components (output, employment, and macro sentiment). This suggests that at times of strong

10

(weak) growth, the uncertainty about inflation is low (high). In contrast, the state of inflation
seems irrelevant for the uncertainty about the other real-time macroeconomic indices.
In panel B, we compute contemporaneous correlations between excess stock market returns,
the growth factor, the dispersion of growth forecasts, and a number of financial market variables
associated in the literature with the state of the economy or macroeconomic uncertainty.9 There
is no meaningful contemporaneous correlation between our real-time macroeconomic factor and
stock market returns. In contrast, there are significant contemporaneous correlations between the
growth factor and a number of financial variables, most notably the correlation with VIX (-0.51),
the dividend yield (-0.71), and the default premium (-0.84). Growth dispersion has a weaker
relation with the financial variables, but it still retains a significant correlation with VIX (0.25)
and with the price-earnings ratio (0.19). These descriptive results foreshadow the link between our
real-time growth factor and financial market volatility, proxied here by VIX, that we investigate
more thoroughly in Section 4.3.10
Figures 3, 4, 5, and 6 provide graphical descriptions of our real-time macroeconomic indices.
Figure 3 starts by plotting the estimated real-time output and employment factors. The gray
areas in the plots represent NBER recessions. Output seems to anticipate employment somewhat,
especially around business cycle turns, but the two factors are very highly correlated. While it
might be worthwhile to tease apart the marginal information contained in these two series, for
the purposes of this paper we collapse them into a single factor, labeled economic activity. In the
upper plot of Figure 4, we relate this aggregated economic activity index to our macroeconomic
sentiment factor. As in the previous figure, we observe a large correlation between the two series,
with macro sentiment clearly anticipating economic activity around turning points. Following
the same reasoning as above, we therefore further aggregate the information into a single growth
factor (comprised now of the information contained in output, employment, and macro sentiment).
Finally, in the lower panel of Figure 4, we compare this aggregate growth factor with our realtime inflation index. While these two series are also somewhat positively correlated, the strength of
correlation is far weaker, with the inflation series behaving much more erratically. For the remainder
of the paper we therefore keep the real-time growth factor separate from the inflation factor.
We conclude this preliminary analysis with two figures showing growth and inflation factors
and economist disagreement. Specifically, in Figure 5 we plot the real-time growth factor in the
top chart and the economist disagreement about growth in the bottom chart. Not surprisingly,
the growth index dips through the recession periods of 2001 and 2008-2009. More interestingly,
9

We obtain daily data on S&P 500 returns, the VIX index, the dividend yield, the price earning ratio, the default
premium (as the difference between Moody’s BAA and AAA rated bond yields), and the term premium (as the
difference between 10-year and 3-mo Treasury yields) from Bloomberg and Datastream.
10
Our inflation index is only significantly correlated with VIX (-0.30). Inflation dispersion is related to VIX (0.26),
the dividend yield (0.61), and the price-earnings ratio (-0.33). These results, which we report for completeness but
do not return to in later analyses, are not tabulated to preserve space.

11

though, the forecast dispersion appears relatively low at the beginning and extremely high toward
the end of recessions, suggesting that economists tend to agree on downturns but cannot foresee
recoveries as clearly. Note that the dispersion of growth forecasts is also relatively large and
noisy at the beginning of our sample. While there might have been indeed a higher degree of
macroeconomic uncertainty at that time, it is more likely that this pattern is due to the small
number of macroeconomic news releases for which economist forecasts were available in the first
year of our sample. Out of the 34 variables used to construct the growth index, only 11 had
forecasts reported on Bloomberg in 1997 and for those releases only an average of four economists
were providing their forecasts.
In Figure 6 we show the real-time inflation factor in the top plot and the economist disagreement
about inflation in the bottom plot. The inflation index is more erratic than the growth index, but
it still dips through the recession periods, especially in 2008-2009. The inflation forecast dispersion
is extremely volatile and the only pattern to stand out is the very large disagreement characterizing
the end of the last recession.

4.1.1

Comparison with the CFNAI

The CFNAI published monthly by the Chicago Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago is a commonly
used real-time indicator of economic conditions in the finance and economics literature (e.g., Beber
et al., 2011). The index, which evolved from the Stock and Watson (1989) coincident indicator,
is generally preferred to NBER expansion and recession dates because it is timely (though at a
monthly frequency) and continuous, as opposed to the discrete peak and trough NBER dates.
Given its popularity, as well as because it utilizes a broad cross-section of economic indicators like
our approach, the CFNAI is an obvious first benchmark for evaluating the performance of our
approach. Before we dive into the quantitative comparison, though, it is worthwhile highlighting
the differences between the CFNAI and our approach. First, the CFNAI is a weighted average
of currently 85 monthly indicators that is formed monthly once about two-third of the indicators
have been updated (the remaining one-third are projected). Second, the weights are determined
by PCA using a simple unadjusted monthly correlation matrix. In contrast, our index is formed
daily, based on the most recent observations of only a subset of growth-related data series, and the
weights are determined by PCA using an auto-correlation adjusted daily correlation matrix.
There are two important details in setting up a fair comparison between our approach and the
CFNAI. First, at any release date, the CFNAI is constructed for the whole history given the most
recent PCA weights, restated figures, and subsequently realized (for the one-third projected series)
economic data, as opposed to keeping track of a sequence of point-in-time measures. We therefore
obtain a panel of CFNAI vintages from the Chicago Fed’s website. This allows us to construct a
point in time version of the CFNAI that reflects not only unrestated or unobservable data, but also

12

the relative weighting based on changing correlation structure. The second detail is the timing of
the monthly releases. The CFNAI is normally released toward the end of each calendar month.
Based on the last available publication dates, the data is on average released on the 23rd day of
the month. We thus match each monthly CFNAI release with our real-time growth index on either
the actual release dates, when available, or estimated release dates based on this average timing.
Figure 7 plots the monthly CFNAI with matching monthly observations of our real-time growth
factor. To ease the comparison over the subsample for which both series are available, we restandardize them to have mean zero and standard deviation one in-sample. As is immediately
apparent, the two series are very similar with a correlation of 0.94. More importantly, though,
notice that the real-time growth index seems to anticipate the turning points of the CFNAI.
The high correlation between the two indices is not surprising given the similarities in
methodology. The second observation, that our real-time growth index seems to lead the CFNAI,
however, deserves closer inspection. For this, we set up a vector auto-regression (VAR) model for
the CFNAI, the real-time growth factor, and their respective previous month’s lags. In panel A
of Table 2 the model is constrained to be diagonal, whereas in panel B it is unconstrained. The
real-time growth index has significant predictive power for the CFNAI, beyond the lagged CFNAI.
However, the opposite is not true, as the CFNAI is not a significant predictor of the real-time growth
index beyond its own lag. In other words, there is fairly strong evidence of Granger causality from
our Growth index to the CFNAI (with a t-statistic of 4.25), but not in the opposite direction.

4.1.2

Comparison with the ADS index

The CFNAI is an obvious benchmark because like our approach it utilizes a large cross-section
of data series. The ADS index, developed by Arouba et al. (2009) and now published by the
Philadelphia Fed, is an equally worthy candidate for comparison because, being based on a statespace model, it can be updated daily like our approach (though in practice the ADS index is updated
weekly). For the ADS index it is even more critical to use vintage data, as for a given release the
index time-series is full-sample smoothed, using the Kalman filter algorithm, and therefore contains
forward looking information (in addition to using restated or subsequently released data like the
CFNAI does). Only the end-point of the index series is therefore a valid point-in-time measure.
Weekly vintage releases of the ADS business conditions index are available starting at the end of
2008, resulting in a relatively short sample of 283 observations. We match each weekly release with
our daily real-time growth factor observed on the release date.
Figure 8 plots the ADS index and our growth factor, where again we re-standardize both for
this subsample. The two series are also very similar with a correlation of 0.91. This observation is
a little more surprising. On one hand, the ADS index is based on only six indicators as opposed to
our 34, which likely explains why the ADS index is considerably more noisy. On the other hand,
13

through the state-space model used to construct the ADS index, the weighting of data is optimized
to forecast GDP. The weights of our real-time growth index are instead optimized to explain the
correlation structure of the cross-section of news releases. The figure suggests that the principal
component of growth-related news is highly correlated with the best predictor for future GDP
formed from a subset of the data series. We will return to the question of how well our real-time
growth factor forecasts future growth in the next section.
Table 3 repeats the Granger causality analysis for the ADS index and our real-time growth
factor. In panel A the VAR model is constrained and in panel B it is unconstrained. Similar to our
findings for the CFNAI, we find a statistically significant Granger causal relation from our growth
factor to the ADS index, meaning that the growth factor predicts future realizations of the ADS
index beyond the lagged ADS index (with a t-statistic of 4.9). The opposite causal relation, from
the ADS index to our growth factor is insignificant, and of the wrong sign.

4.2

Forecasting future GDP and CPI releases

The last two subsections showed that our methodology of extracting daily factors from economic
news released at different times and frequencies delivers a real-time growth factor that is highly
correlated with existing nowcasting indices, but provides potentially more timely and certainly
more frequent information. We specifically found a high correlation with the ADS index for which
the data is weighted to best forecast future GDP growth. This finding begs the question of how
well our real-time factors, which are not explicitly constructed to forecast, can nevertheless be used
for forecasting future fundamentals (both growth and inflation).
Since the CFNAI and ADS index focus exclusively on growth and their vintage histories are
limited, especially for the more forecasting oriented ADS index, we instead use as forecasting
benchmarks the much longer histories of quarterly growth and inflation forecasts from the Survey
of Professional Forecasters (SPF) carried out by the Philadelphia Fed. More specifically, we use
the average forecasts of the annualized nominal GDP growth rate for the next quarter as well as
of the annualized percent change in the CPI over the next year. The survey results are released
around the end of the second month of the quarter, and we match the timing of our real-time
growth and inflation factors to the survey release dates. For the actual statistics to be forecasted,
we use advance GDP growth, which is announced about one month after the end of the quarter,
and headline CPI change, which is typically released two weeks after the end of the quarter. For
example, we forecast the 1997 first quarter GDP and CPI using the SPF mean forecasts of 4.90
percent and 3.01 percent, respectively, released on February 26, 1997 and the real-time growth and
inflation factors of 0.79 and -0.45, respectively, obtained on the same day. The actual release of
CPI came out about three weeks later on March 19, 1997 at 3.00 percent and GDP was announced
two months after the survey on April 30, 1997 at 5.60 percent.

14

Table 4 shows the results for growth forecasting. We find that the mean forecasts of the SPF
and our real-time growth factor contain about equally useful information for predicting subsequent
GDP releases beyond lagged GDP. The model R2 are large at 45 and 41 percent and the more
informative marginal R2 (measuring the incremental forecasting ability of the additional regressor
relative to a simpler autoregressive model) are 20 and 15 percent, respectively. Furthermore, the
correlation between the real-time growth factor and quarterly SPF forecasts is very high at 0.89.
This suggests that the real-time growth index can be interpreted as a higher frequency reading
of economic growth expectations with the same properties as the lower frequency SPF forecasts.
Alternatively, perhaps the professional forecasters deploy nowcasting models, either explicitly or,
more likely for the historical data, implicitly. This observation is consistent with Liebermann (2010),
who finds that (a different approach to) nowcasting is comparable to the SPF at the date of release
but superior prior (when no SPF is available) and shortly after, as it updates.
Figure 9 illustrates these points graphically. The high correlation between our growth factor,
SPF consensus, and subsequent GDP releases, is immediately apparent from the plot. This is
particularly the case around the shaded NBER recession periods.
Table 5 shows the results for inflation forecasting. Again we find that both the mean forecasts
of the SPF and the real-time inflation factor contain about equally useful information to predict
the subsequent CPI releases, beyond lagged CPI. The model R2 are even higher at 70 and 69
percent, respectively, but a larger fraction of this predictability comes simply from the higher
persistence of inflation. The marginal R2 relative to the autoregressive benchmark model is ten
percent for the SPF forecasts and eight percent for the real-time inflation factor. By that metric,
the forecasting ability of both predictors is weaker compared to GDP forecasting. Moreover, the
correlation between the predictors is also significantly weaker at only 0.21. It appears from these
results that it is relatively more difficult to predict inflation from the intra-quarter news flow, which
may partly be attributed to the fact that there is less inflation relevant news (only nine distinct
releases on seven days).
Figure 10 presents these results graphically. Although our real-time inflation factor and the SPF
consensus forecasts are clearly correlated and seem to anticipate actual CPI releases, particularly
around the NBER recession periods, the real-time inflation factor exhibits a more erratic behavior.
This reflects again the relatively sparse inflation news flow.
The results in tables 4 and 5 demonstrate not only the ability of our real-time factors to predict
subsequent realizations of economic fundamentals but, equally interestingly, how similar these
factors are to the SPF consensus forecasts. This is consistent with the findings of Liebermann (2010)
and by no means diminishes the relevance of our real-time factors, since they have the distinct
advantage of being available daily for weeks before and incorporating new information daily for
months after the quarterly SPF is released. To complete the comparison of our real-time factors

15

with the SPF, however, we can also relate their respective second moments. Specifically, we compare
our measures of uncertainty surrounding growth and inflation, which capture the disagreement of
economists about the various components that make up our real-time factors, with the dispersions of
SPF forecasts, which capture the disagreement among economists about future growth and inflation
directly. It is reasonable to expect that when economists disagree on recent economic data, the same
or similar economists will also disagree about the future path of the economy. Consistent with this
intuition, we find that our measure of uncertainty about growth and the dispersion of SPF growth
forecasts has a correlation of 0.55. The corresponding correlation for inflation is 0.39. Although
these correlations for the second moments are not as strong as for the first, we still conclude that
our proxies for macroeconomic uncertainty capture, at a daily frequency, similar uncertainty as
that reflected in the dispersion of SPF forecasts.

4.3

Macroeconomic conditions and financial market volatility

One of the differentiating aspects of our methodology is that it produces a daily reading of the state
of the economy that does not rely on information from financial markets, unlike the approaches of
Giannone et al. (2008) and Aruoba et al. (2009), for example. We can therefore use our real-time
factors to investigate the link between macroeconomic conditions and financial market dynamics,
particularly stock market volatility. We focus on stock market volatility for two reasons. First,
volatility is easier to measure than expected returns. Second, but related, the apparent disconnect
between stock market volatility, which is easily measured, and economic fundamentals, the improved
measurement of which is the purpose of our methodology, is one of the longest standing puzzles
in finance. In a seminal paper, Schwert (1989) finds that the standard deviations of a host of
macroeconomic variables and a recession dummy explain only a small fraction of stock market
volatility. More recently, Engle and Rangel (2008) refer to the relation between the macro economy
and stock market volatility as the central unsolved problem of 25 years of volatility research.
We measure stock market volatility using the forward looking option implied volatility index
VIX, rather than a measure of backward looking realized volatility. Realized volatility could
be mechanically correlated with our real-time factors because large economic surprises invoke
large stock market responses. The empirical question is not whether the stock market responds
contemporaneously to economic data, there is plenty of evidence it does (e.g., Flannery and
Protopapadakis, 2002), but rather whether business cycle related changes in economic conditions
lead to persistent changes in future stock market volatility.
We first provide some graphical evidence of the relation between the VIX index, our real-time
growth factor, and growth dispersion. Specifically, we plot the VIX index along with the growth
factor in Figure 11, where we invert the axis for the growth factor to highlight the strong negative
correlation (-0.51 from Table 1) between the two series. We plot the VIX index along with growth

16

dispersion in Figure 12. The correlation between these two series is lower (0.25 from Table 1), but
increases somewhat to 0.31 when we start the sample in 2000 when growth dispersion is less noisy
(recall the discussion surrounding Figure 5).
We extend this bivariate analysis in Table 6, where we regress the VIX index contemporaneously
on our real-time growth factor and/or growth dispersion. Panel A shows the results for the full
sample, and Panel B is for the less noisy 2000 onward subsample. We will focus the discussion
on panel B. In the first two model specifications both regressors are by themselves strongly
statistically significant. Our real-time growth factor explains 41 percent of the variation in the
VIX index, and growth dispersion explains about ten percent stand-alone. Combined, in the
third model specification, the adjusted R2 increases to 42 percent with the growth factor being
highly significant and growth dispersion being borderline significant. Beyond statistical significance,
though, the economic effects implied by the coefficient estimates are large. A one standard deviation
deterioration in growth results in more than a five percentage point increase in the VIX index, which
is about a quarter increase relative to a base level of 23 percent. A one standard deviation increase
in growth dispersion is associated with a four percent point increase in VIX.
In summary, contrary to Schwert (1989) and much of the subsequent literature, we present
evidence of a strong link between macroeconomic conditions and stock market volatility. We find
that the level of growth, i.e., business cycles, are more important than the uncertainty about growth,
though the latter still plays a significant role, both statistically and economically in magnitude.
This suggests that better real-time measurement of economic fundamentals may help resolve the
long-standard disconnect between the macro economy and financial stock market volatility.

4.4

Real-time growth and inflation dynamics

Table 7 describes the joint dynamics of the real-time growth index, growth dispersion, the real-time
inflation index, and inflation dispersion. We estimate three first-order vector autoregression (VAR)
models with one-period lag lengths of five, 20, or 60 business days, respectively. The estimates are
based on the sample starting in 2000 (when dispersion measures are less noisy), using overlapping
daily observations, and the standard errors used to compute the t-statistics are autocorrelation
adjusted. Since the results are fairly consistent across specifications, we mainly focus our discussion
on the intermediate 20 day horizon.
All four series are persistent, especially at shorter horizons, as evidenced by the magnitude
and statistical significance of the own lag terms, as well as by the differences between the R2 and
the marginal R2 that exclude the impact of the own lag terms. Growth is highly persistent at all
three horizons, whereas the autocorrelation of the other three series drops sharply as the lag length
increases. This finding is visually consistent with the behavior of the series in figures 5 and 6.
We also observe an interesting lead-lag interaction between the growth index and growth
17

dispersion. Higher growth dispersion is associated with higher future growth whereas, in the
opposite direction, higher growth is associated with subsequently lower growth dispersion. Figure 13
illustrates graphically the first cross-autocorrelation, from growth dispersion to the growth level. It
shows the median change in growth at different horizons unconditionally and following realizations
of growth dispersion above or below median and in the top or bottom quartile. Periods of high
dispersion, and especially those in the top quartile, are clearly followed by acceleration in growth
over the subsequent weeks and months. The second cross-autocorrelation, from the growth level to
growth dispersion, is even stronger both in magnitude (recall the data is standardized so coefficients
can be directly interpreted) and statistical significance (t-statistics around six and marginal R2 of
almost 20 percent). This result is consistent with our prior observation that economists seem to
agree on the end of an economic expansion (following high growth, dispersion is low), but not on
the end of an economic contraction (following low growth, dispersion is high).
The cross-autocorrelations between the inflation index and inflation uncertainty are largely small
and insignificant. However, higher growth seems to lead lower uncertainty about inflation, with
strongest results at longer horizons. This finding is consistent with Figure 6, where the uncertainty
about inflation appears relatively larger at the end of the recessions in our sample.

4.5

Extending the sample backwards

Our sample is limited by the availability of precisely dated and unrestated economic news releases.
In this section, we extend our sample backward to the beginning of 1985 using the median reporting
lag for each release type and inferring the release date.11 While the use of potentially misdated
and restated data weakens the real-time interpretation of our macroeconomic indices, the longer
sample period that spans one more business cycle serves as a useful robustness check.
In Figure 14 we plot our “real-time” growth index together with NBER ex-post determined
recession dates and the expectations for current quarter GDP growth in the SPF. The growth
index behaves the same during the 1990-1991 recession as it does for the other two recessions that
are covered by our original sample. We observe the sudden drop in the growth index and the
subsequent gradual recovery. Moreover, in the new 1985 to 1997 period, the growth index tracks
the low-frequency growth expectations of the SPF even more closely, suggesting again that our
approach captures the same information but at a daily frequency.
For our measure of macroeconomic uncertainty, the sample cannot be extended back because
the panel of economist forecasts we use to construct the disagreement about growth measure are not
available before 1997. Nevertheless, to see what a longer growth dispersion series might look like,
11

To get a sense for the accuracy of our procedure of dating the announcements based on reporting lags, we
partially cross-check our inferred release dates with a database of Reuters news. More specifically, for a subsample
of 15 announcements on the total of 43 considered news items and for a shorter sample period going back to 1990,
we find that 91 percent of the estimated release days are less than two days off from the actual release days.

18

we apply our methodology to the five disagreement measures about growth that can be obtained
from the SPF (namely disagreement about GDP, corporate profits, employment, unemployment,
and productivity growth) . Figure 15 shows the results. We first notice a large correlation between
our daily measure of macroeconomic uncertainty and the quarterly measure of disagreement from
the SPF over the original sample period. More interestingly, the backdated SPF based measure of
uncertainty corroborates our earlier observation that uncertainty peaks toward the end of recessions
and is more subdued at the end of expansions.

5

Conclusions

We proposed a simple cross-sectional technique to extract daily factors from economic news released
at different times and frequencies.

Our approach can effectively handle the large number of

different announcements that are relevant for tracking current economic conditions. We applied
the technique to extract real-time measures of inflation, output, employment, and macroeconomic
sentiment, as well as corresponding measures of disagreement among economists about these
indices. Our procedure provides more timely and accurate forecasts of future changes in economic
conditions than other real-time forecasting approaches. At the same time, both the level and
dispersion measures are highly correlated with corresponding statistics from the SPF, suggesting
they capture the same information except our approach does so at a daily instead of quarterly
frequency. Finally, in contrast to much of the extant literature, our real-time growth factor and
corresponding disagreement measure, both constructed entirely from macroeconomic data, explain
a remarkable fraction of financial volatility dynamics.

19

A

Macroeconomic News

The following table summarizes the main features of the macroeconomic news releases we work with.
The news Category is either inflation (Inf), employment (Emp), output (Out), or sentiment (Sen).
If the sample series is stationary in our sample, we make no adjustment (Adj=0), otherwise we use
first differences with respect to the previous period (Adj=1). We also indicate Units, Frequency
(M for monthly, W for weekly, Q for quarterly), and the Source of the release.
Category
Inf
Inf
Inf
Inf
Inf
Inf
Inf
Inf
Inf
Emp
Emp
Emp
Emp
Emp
Emp
Emp
Out
Out
Out
Out
Out
Out
Out
Out
Out
Out
Out
Out
Out
Out
Out
Out
Out
Sen
Sen
Sen
Sen
Sen
Sen
Sen
Sen
Sen
Sen

Release Name
US Import Price Index by End Use All MoM
US PPI Finished Goods Total MoM
US PPI Finished Goods Except Foods Energy
US CPI Urban Consumers MoM
US CPI Urban Consumers Less Food Energy
BLS Employment Cost Civilian Workers QoQ
US GDP Price Index QoQ SAAR
US Personal Cons. Expenditure Core Price Index MoM
US Output Per Hour Nonfarm Business Sector QoQ
ADP National Employment Report Private Nonfarm Change
US Initial Jobless Claims
US Continuing Jobless Claims
US Employees on Nonfarm Payrolls Total Net Change
US Employees on Nonfarm Payrolls Manufact Net Change
US Unemployment Rate Total in Labor Force
US Average Weekly Hours All Total Private
ISM Manufacturing PMI
US Manufacturers New Orders Total MoM
US Auto Sales Domestic Vehicles
ISM Non-Manufacturing NMI NSA
Federal Reserve Consumer Credit Net Change
Merchant Wholesalers Inventories Change
Adjusted Retail Food Services Sales Change
Adjusted Retail Sales Less Autos Change
US Industrial Production MoM 2007=100 SA
US Capacity Utilization of Total Capacity
US Manufacturing Trade Inventories Total
US Durable Goods New Orders Industries
US Durable Goods New Orders Ex Transp.
GDP US Chained 2005 Dollars QoQ SAAR
GDP US Personal Consumption Chained Change
US Personal Income MoM
US Personal Consumption Expend. Nominal Dollars
Bloomberg US Weekly Consumer Comfort Index
University Michigan Survey Consumer Confidence
Empire State Manufact. Survey Business Conditions
Conference Board US Leading Index MoM
Philadelphia Fed Business Outlook General Conditions
Conference Board Consumer Confidence SA 1985=100
Richmond Fed Reserve Manufacturing Survey
US Chicago Purchasing Managers Index SA
ISM Milwaukee Purchasers Manufacturing Index
Dallas Fed Manufact. Outlook Business Activity

20

Adj
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
1
1

Units
Rate
Rate
Rate
Rate
Rate
Rate
Rate
Rate
Rate
Volume
Volume
Volume
Value
Value
Rate
Volume
Value
Rate
Volume
Value
Value
Rate
Rate
Rate
Rate
Rate
Rate
Rate
Rate
Rate
Rate
Rate
Rate
Price
Price
Value
Rate
Price
Rate
Rate
Price
Rate
Rate

Freq
M
M
M
M
M
Q
Q
M
Q
M
W
W
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
Q
Q
M
M
W
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M

Source
Bureau Labor Statistics
Bureau Labor Statistics
Bureau Labor Statistics
Bureau Labor Statistics
Bureau Labor Statistics
Bureau Labor Statistics
Bureau Economic Analysis
Bureau Economic Analysis
Bureau Labor Statistics
Automatic Data Processing
Department of Labor
Department of Labor
Bureau Labor Statistics
Bureau Labor Statistics
Bureau Labor Statistics
Bureau Labor Statistics
Institute Supply Management
U.S. Census Bureau
Bloomberg
Institute Supply Management
Federal Reserve
U.S. Census Bureau
U.S. Census Bureau
U.S. Census Bureau
Federal Reserve
Federal Reserve
U.S. Census Bureau
U.S. Census Bureau
U.S. Census Bureau
Bureau Economic Analysis
Bureau Economic Analysis
Bureau Economic Analysis
Bureau Economic Analysis
Bloomberg
U. of Michigan Survey Research
Federal Reserve
Conference Board
Philadelphia Fed
Conference Board
Richmond Fed
Kingsbury Intern.
NAPM - Milwaukee
Dallas Fed

Table 1: Summary Statistics
Panel A shows correlations between daily observations of six real-times macroeconomic indices and their
respective economist forecast dispersions. Panel B reports additional summary statistics and correlations
between the growth index, growth dispersion, and a set of financial variables. Specifically, Rmt − Rf t denotes
the log return on the S&P 500 index in excess of the 3-month Treasury-bill rate, VIX is the CBOE option
implied volatility index, ln(P/E) and ln(D/P ) are the log price-earning ratio and log dividend yield, Def
is the default spread (Moody’s BAA minus AAA corporate bond yields), Term is the term spread (10-year
minus 3-month Treasury yields). The sample period is January 1997 to December 2011.

Panel A:

21

Employment

Sentiment

Economic
Activity

Growth

0.25
0.96
0.96
0.82
1.00

Output

Economic
Activity

Sentiment

Employment

Output

1.00 0.36 0.13 0.14
1.00 0.84 0.82
1.00 0.75
1.00

Inflation

Inflation
Output
Employment
Sentiment
Econonmic Activity
Growth

Dispersion

Growth

Index

Inflation
Output
Employment
Sentiment
Economic Activity
Growth

Dispersion

Inflation

Index

0.22
0.95
0.92
0.93
0.97
1.00

-0.08
-0.53
-0.53
-0.50
-0.55
-0.56

-0.18
-0.22
-0.12
0.07
-0.18
-0.10

-0.16
-0.34
-0.30
-0.05
-0.34
-0.25

-0.18
-0.19
-0.15
-0.07
-0.18
-0.15

-0.19
-0.26
-0.16
0.06
-0.23
-0.13

-0.20
-0.26
-0.16
0.05
-0.23
-0.14

1.00 0.26 0.15 0.14
1.00 0.52 0.40
1.00 0.35
1.00

0.25
0.98
0.68
0.42
1.00

0.25
0.96
0.68
0.54
0.99
1.00

Correlation Matrix

Summary
Statistics

Panel B:

Mean
Std Deviation
Skewness
Kurtosis
Rmt − Rf t
Growth Index
Growth Dispersion
VIX
ln(P/E)
ln(D/P )
Def
Term

Rmt − Rf t
0.63
21.42
-0.20
9.77
1.00

Growth Growth
Index Dispersion VIX
-0.04
-0.00
0.23
1.15
0.99
0.09
-1.30
1.40
1.78
4.97
4.19
8.85
0.01
1.00

0.01
-0.14
1.00

22

P
ln( E
)
2.98
0.23
0.05
2.19

-0.13 0.04
-0.51 0.55
0.25 0.19
1.00 -0.14
1.00

ln( D
P)
0.55
0.25
0.48
3.56

Def
1.03
0.48
2.82
12.25

Term
1.68
1.30
-0.06
1.66

-0.03 -0.01 0.01
-0.71 -0.84 -0.51
0.09 0.14 0.02
0.31 0.63 0.22
-0.85 -0.52 -0.28
1.00 0.69 0.42
1.00 0.40
1.00

Table 2: CFNAI versus Growth Index
This table shows estimates of the following vector auto-regression:
"

Yt
Xt

#

"
=A+B

Yt−1
Xt−1

#
+ t ,

where Yt is the CFNAI and Xt is the real-time growth index. We use the value of the real-time growth index
observed on the day of the monthly release of the CFNAI. The sample is monthly observations from February
2001 (first available vintage value of the CFNAI) to December 2011. In panel A the model is constrained
to be diagonal, whereas in panel B it is unconstrained. The R2 statistic is adjusted and in parentheses are
robust Newey-West t-statistics.
Independent
Dependent

Constant

CFNAIt−1

Growtht−1

R2 (%)

Panel A: Constrained
CFNAIt
Growtht

-0.03
(1.89)
-0.01
(-0.74)

0.91
(17.30)

83.56
0.96
(24.79)

91.77

Panel B: Unconstrained
CFNAIt
Growtht

-0.08
(-2.08)
-0.01
(-0.48)

0.41
(3.68)
0.05
(0.52)

23

0.39
(4.25)
0.93
(13.31)

86.86
91.72

Table 3: ADS Index versus Growth Index
This table shows estimates of the following vector auto-regression:
"

Yt
Xt

#

"
=A+B

Yt−1
Xt−1

#
+ t ,

where Yt is the ADS index and Xt is the real-time growth index. We use the value of the real-time growth
index observed on the day of the weekly release of the ADS index. The sample is weekly observations from
December 2008 (first available vintage value of the ADS index) through December 2011. In panel A the
model is constrained to be diagonal whereas in panel B it is unconstrained. The R2 statistic is adjusted and
in parentheses are robust Newey-West t-statistics.
Independent
Dependent

Constant

ADSt−1

Growtht−1

R2 (%)

Panel A: Constrained
ADSt
Growtht

-0.02
(-1.78)
0.01
(0.41)

0.95
(52.98)

91.43
0.99
(165.45)

99.61

Panel B: Unconstrained
ADSt
Growtht

0.04
(2.11)
0.01
(0.78)

0.76
(21.98)
-0.02
(-1.18)

24

0.12
(4.90)
1.01
(68.46)

92.18
99.61

Table 4: Predicting Quarterly GDP Releases
This table shows estimates of the following predictive regression:
GDPt = α + β1 GDPt−1Q + β2 Xt−2M + t ,
where GDPt is a quarterly GDP release, GDPt−1Q is the previous quarter’s GDP release, and Xt−2M is
the average forecast of quarterly GDP by the Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF) and/or our real-time
growth index, both observed on the same day about two months before the GDP release (when the SPF
is released). The sample is quarterly observations from the beginning of 1997 to the end of 2011. The R2
statistic is adjusted and in parentheses are robust Newey-West t-statistics.
Model Specification
Constant
GDPt−1Q

1
-0.61
(-2.75)
0.22
(4.14)

SPFt−2M

2
-0.15
(-0.99)
0.06
(1.10)
0.57
(3.25)

44.60

0.58
(2.73)
41.18

4
-0.08
(-0.53)
0.03
(0.57)
0.44
(1.68)
0.20
(0.75)
44.25

20.54

15.63

20.04

Growtht−2M
R2 (%)
Maginal R2 (%)
of Xt−2M

30.28

25

3
-0.11
(-0.60)
0.04
(0.68)

Table 5: Predicting Monthly CPI Releases
This table shows estimates of the following predictive regression:
CPIt = α + β1 CPIt−1M + β2 Xt−1M + t ,
where CPIt is the monthly CPI release, CPIt−1M is the previous month’s CPI release, and Xt−1M is the
average forecast of year-on-year CPI by the Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF) and/or our real-time
inflation index, both observed quarterly on the same day about one month before the CPI release (when
the SPF is released in the second month of each quarter). The sample is quarterly observations from the
beginning of 1997 to the end of 2011. The R2 statistic is adjusted and in parentheses are robust Newey-West
t-statistics.
Model Specification
Constant
CPIt−1M

1
0.57
(3.54)
0.77
(11.11)

SPFt−1M

2
-0.04
(-0.18)
0.48
(3.03)
0.54
(2.55)

69.84

0.21
(1.69)
69.04

4
0.08
(0.47)
0.50
(3.98)
0.47
(3.12)
0.17
(1.96)
71.48

10.02

7.64

14.92

Inflationt−1M
R2 (%)
Maginal R2 (%)
of Xt−1M

66.48

26

3
0.63
(3.90)
0.75
(10.45)

Table 6: Explaining Financial Market Volatility
This table shows estimates of the following contemporaneous regression:
VIXt = α + βXt + t ,
where Xt is our real time growth index and/or dispersion of economist forecasts about growth news. The
sample is daily observations from January 1997 through December 2011 in Panel A and January 2000 through
December 2011 in Panel B. Robust Newey-West t-statistics are reported in parentheses.

Model Specification
1

2

3

0.23
(39.45)

0.23
(40.79)
-0.0368
(-5.42)
0.0159
(3.40)
28.85

Panel A: 1997-2011
Constant

0.23
(34.46)
-0.0387
(-5.79)

Growth Index
Growth Dispersion
R2 (%)

25.70

0.0217
(3.50)
5.98

Panel B: 2000-2011
Constant
Growth Index

0.23
(27.41)
-0.0534
(-7.37)

Growth Dispersion
R2 (%)

40.83

27

0.21
(34.64)

0.0402
(3.84)
9.68

0.20
(30.26)
-0.0622
(-6.04)
-0.0212
(-1.93)
42.41

Table 7: Growth and Inflation Dynamics
This table shows estimates of the following vector auto-regression:
Yt = A + BYt−L + t−L ,
where Yt is a vector containing our real-time growth index, growth dispersion, inflation index, and inflation
dispersion. L represents the lag in the VAR. The sample is daily observations from January 2000 to December
2011. The R2 statistic is adjusted, and in parentheses are robust Newey-West t-statistics. The marginal R2
represents the proportion of variance explained beyond the first lag of the dependent variable.
Independent Yt−L
Dependent Yt
Growth Factor
L=5
L = 20
L = 60
Growth Dispersion
L=5
L = 20
L = 60
Inflation Factor
L=5
L = 20
L = 60
Inflation Dispersion
L=5
L = 20
L = 60

Growth
Index

Growth
Dispersion

Inflation
Index

Inflation
Dispersion

R2 (%)

Marginal R2 (%)

1.0033
(169.46)
1.0006
(46.40)
0.9198
(14.12)

0.0348
(3.68)
0.1269
(3.95)
0.2349
(2.47)

0.0193
(2.32)
0.0563
(1.69)
0.1001
(0.96)

-0.0089
(-2.13)
-0.0233
(-1.38)
-0.0309
(-0.53)

98.75

2.80

93.42

6.38

74.48

5.91

-0.0475
(-5.10)
-0.2149
(-6.10)
-0.4366
(-6.05)

0.8949
(55.11)
0.5270
(9.43)
-0.0005
(-0.01)

0.0315
(1.95)
0.1268
(2.16)
0.1208
(1.31)

0.0066
(0.77)
0.0143
(0.50)
0.0258
(0.61)

91.10

4.33

67.16

18.97

51.82

37.79

-0.0182
(-1.79)
-0.0677
(-2.13)
-0.0990
(-2.24)

-0.0026
(-0.17)
0.0481
(1.07)
0.0696
(1.12)

0.8459
(38.40)
0.3232
(5.75)
0.0949
(1.41)

-0.0001
(-0.00)
-0.0497
(-1.98)
-0.0489
(-1.16)

73.02

0.61

15.66

3.25

8.94

6.79

-0.0477
(-3.05)
-0.2501
(-4.73)
-0.6148
(-4.74)

0.0559
(2.00)
0.0813
(0.90)
-0.3779
(-2.32)

0.0167
(0.51)
0.0940
(0.90)
0.0507
(0.33)

0.8656
(37.98)
0.4555
(9.29)
0.0835
(0.86)

84.87

2.70

48.38

11.28

33.26

26.44

28

References
Ait-Sahalia, Yacine, Mykland, Per A., and Zhang, Lan, 2005, How often to sample a continuoustime process in the presence of market microstructure noise, Review of Financial Studies 18,
351–416.
Andersen, Torben G., Tim Bollerslev, Francis X. Diebold, and Clara Vega, 2003, Micro effects
of macro announcements: Real-time price discovery in foreign exchange, American Economic
Review 93, 38–62.
Aruoba, S.B., Diebold, F.X. and Scotti, C., 2009, Real-Time Measurement of Business Conditions,
Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 27, 417–427.
Banbura, Marta, Giannone, Domenico, Modugno, Michele and, Lucrezia Reichlin, 2012, Nowcasting and the real-time data flow, CEPR Discussion Papers 9112.
Beber, Alessandro, Michael W. Brandt, and Kenneth A. Kavajecz, 2011, What Does Equity Sector
Orderflow Tell Us about the Economy?, Review of Financial Studies 24, 2011, 3688-3730.
Engle, Robert F., and Jose Gonzalo Rangel, 2008, The Spline-GARCH Model for Low-Frequency
Volatility and Its Global Macroeconomic Causes, Review of Financial Studies 21, 1187–1222.
Evans, Martin, 2005, Where Are We Now?: Real-Time Estimates of the Macro Economy, The
International Journal of Central Banking1 , 127–175
Flannery, Mark J., and Aris A. Protopapadakis, 2002, Macroeconomic Factors Do Influence
Aggregate Stock Returns, Review of Financial Studies 15, 751–782.
Ghysels, Eric, Casidhe Horan, and Emanuel Moench, 2012, Forecasting through the Rear-View
Mirror: Data Revisions and Bond Return Predictability, Working Paper, University of NorthCarolina.
Giannone, Domenico, Reichlin, Lucrezia, and David, Small, 2008, Nowcasting: the real time
informational content of macroeconomic data releases, Journal of Monetary Economics 55, 665–
676.
Koenig, E., S. Dolmas, and J. Piger, 2003, The use and abuse of real-time data in economic
forecasting, Review of Economics and Statistics 85, 618–628.
Liebermann, J., 2010, Real-Time Nowcasting of GDP: Factor Model versus Professional Forecasters,
Working Paper, Central Bank of Ireland.
Newey, Whitney K.; West, Kenneth D., 1987, A simple, positive semi-definite, heteroskedasticity
and autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix, Econometrica 55, 703–708.
Stock, J.H. and M.W. Watson, 1989, New Indexes of Coincident and Leading Economic Indicators,
in O.J. Blanchard and S. Fischer (eds.), NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 352–394.
Schwert, G William, 1989, Why Does Stock Market Volatility Change over Time?, Journal of
Finance 44, 1115–1153.

29

Stambaugh, Robert F., 1997, Analyzing investments whose histories differ in length, Journal of
Financial Economics 45, 285–331.

30

Conference Board Consumer Confidence
Chicago Purchasing Managers Index
Inflation
University Michigan Consumer Survey
Employment
ADP National Employment Report
Output
ISM Manufacturing PMI
Macro Sentiment
Nonfarm Payrolls Total,Manufacturing + Unemployment Rate + Average Weekly Hours
ISM Non-Manufacturing PMI
Retail Sales + Retail Sales Less Auto
Import Price Index
PPI + PPI Core
Industrial Production + Capacity Utilization
Empire State Manufacturing Survey
Manufacturing Trade Inventories
CPI + CPI Core
Durable Goods Orders
Conference Board Leading Index
GDP + GDP Price Index
Personal Income + Pers. Consum. Exp. + PCE Price Index
Manufacturers New Orders
24 26 28 30
reference
month M

2

4

6

8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30
month M+1

1

3

5

7

9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23
month M+2

Figure 1: This figure shows the typical reporting structure for a large cross-section of U.S.
macroeconomic announcements. On the horizontal axis, we represent the days of the reference
month M and the subsequent two months. On the vertical axis, we list the macroeconomic
releases in order of reporting, highlighting in bold the typical reporting period. The macroeconomic
announcements are color-coded in the four aggregates of inflation news, employment news, output
news, and macro-sentiment news.

31

j=1

j=2

…

j=5

j=6

…

j=N

1

...

...

...

missing

...

...

...

…

...

...

...

missing

...

...

...

…

...

...

...

missing

...

...

...

t-22

At-22,1

not released

...

missing

not released

...

...

t-21

not released

At-21,2

...

missing

At-21,6

...

...

…

not released

not released

...

missing

not released

...

...

t

At,1

not released

...

At,5

not released

...

...

t+1

not released

At+1,2

...

not released

At+1,6

...

...

…

not released

not released

...

not released

discontinued

...

...

…

...

...

...

...

discontinued

...

...

T

...

...

...

...

discontinued

...

...

j=1

j=2

…

j=5

j=6

…

j=N

1

...

...

...

missing

...

...

...

…

...

...

...

missing

...

...

...

…

...

...

...

missing

...

...

...

t-22

At-22,1

E[At-22,2]=At-43,2

...

missing

E[At-22,6]=At-43,6

...

...

t-21

E[At-21,1]=At-22,1

At-21,2

...

missing

At-21,6

...

...

E[A...,2]=At-21,2

...

missing

E[A...,2]=At-21,6

...

...

E[A

E[A

…

E[A

...,1]=At-22,1

t

At,1

t+1

E[At+1,1]=At,1

…

E[A ...,1]=At,1

…

...

T

...

E[A

t,2]=At-21,2

...

At,5

t,2]=At-21,6

...

...

At+1,2

...

E[At+1,5]=At,5

At+1,6

...

...

...,2]=At+1,2

...

E[A ...,5]=At,5

discontinued

...

...

...

...

...

discontinued

...

...

...

...

...

discontinued

...

...

Figure 2: This figure shows a stylized example of the actual macroeconomic announcement data,
for N announcement types over a daily sample period between 1 and T . The releases j = 1 and
j = 2 are monthly indicators released on two different days of the month. The macroeconomic
indicator j = 5 is a news release that did not exist at the beginning of the sample, but was included
in the sample from day t onwards. The macroeconomic indicator j = 6 did exist at the beginning of
the sample, but was subsequently discontinued. The top panel represents the matrix of the actual
macroeconomic releases in real-time as it is constructed from the data. The bottom panel shows
how our simple forward filling algorithm is used to fill in the expectation of the indicator when it
is not released.

32

Output and Employment
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4
-5
1997

1999

2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

2011

Figure 3: The graph shows the real-time output (blue line) and employment factor (red line). Grey
areas denote NBER recessions.

33

Economic Activity and Macro Sentiment
2

1

0

-1

-2

-3

-4
1997

1999

2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

2011

2009

2011

Growth and Inflation
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4
-5
1997

1999

2001

2003

2005

2007

Figure 4: The upper panel shows the real-time economic activity (blue line) and macro sentiment
(red line) factors. The lower panel plots the real-time growth (blue line) and inflation (red line)
factors. Grey areas denote NBER recessions.

34

Growth Index
2

1

0

-1

-2

-3

-4
1997

1999

2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

2011

2007

2009

2011

Dispersion
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
-0.5
-1
-1.5
-2
1997

1999

2001

2003

2005

Figure 5: The upper panel shows the real-time growth factor. The lower panel is the dispersion of
economist forecasts about upcoming growth news releases. Grey areas denote NBER recessions.

35

Inflation Index
2

1

0

-1

-2

-3

-4
1997

1999

2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

2011

2007

2009

2011

Inflation Dispersion
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
-0.5
-1
-1.5
-2
1997

1999

2001

2003

2005

Figure 6: The upper panel shows the real-time inflation factor. The lower panel is the dispersion of
economist forecasts about upcoming inflation news releases. Grey areas denote NBER recessions.

36

CFNAI and Growth Index
2

CFNAI
Growth

1

0

-1

-2

-3

-4
2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

2011

Figure 7: This figure shows the real-time growth factor and the CFNAI, both observed at the
monthly frequency on the same day during the sample period Feb-2001 to Dec-2011.

37

ADS and Growth Index
2

ADS
Growth

1.5
1
0.5
0
-0.5
-1
-1.5
-2
-2.5
-3
2008.12

2009.6

2009.12

2010.6

2010.12

2011.6

2011.12

Figure 8: This figure shows the real-time growth factor and the corresponding vintages of the ADS
index during the sample period Dec-2008 to Dec-2011.

38

GDP, SPF, and Real-Time Growth Index
3

GDP
SPF median
Growth Index

2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4
1997

1999

2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

2011

Figure 9: This figure shows the real-time growth factor, the median projection of nominal GDP
growth rate from the Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF) on the same dates, and the actual
GDP release for the same quarter, at quarterly frequency during the sample Jan-1997 to Dec-2011.

39

CPI, SPF, and Real-Time Inflation Index
4
3

CPI
Inflation Index
SPF Median

2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4
-5
-6
1997

1999

2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

2011

Figure 10: This figure shows the real-time inflation factor, the median projection of CPI from the
Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF) on the same dates, and the actual CPI release of the
following month, at quarterly frequency during the sample Jan-1997 to Dec-2011.

40

0.65
-2
0.5

VIX

Growth Index (inverted scale)

-4

0.35
0
0.2

2
1997

1999

2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

2011

0.05

Figure 11: This figure shows the real-time growth factor (inverted left-scale) and VIX (right-scale)
during our sample period.

41

Growth Dispersion

1

0.5

0

0.35

-1

0.2

-2
1997

1999

2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

2011

VIX

0.65

2

0.05

Figure 12: This figure shows the dispersion of economist forecasts about growth news (left-scale)
and VIX (right-scale) during our sample period.

42

0.4

Change in Growth Index

0.3

Top quartile
Above median
Below median
Bottom quartile
Unconditional

0.2
0.1
0
-0.1
-0.2
-0.3
0

10

20

30

40
50
Horizon (days)

60

70

80

90

Figure 13: This figure shows the median first difference in the growth index for different horizons
(in days), unconditionally and conditionally on current dispersion about growth news being above
(below) the sample median and in the top (bottom) quartile.

43

Growth (1985-2011)
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4
-5
1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011

Figure 14: This figure shows our real-time growth index constructed from economic releases
backfilled to January 1985. The red line indicates the quarterly expectation of GDP growth for
the current quarter contained in the Survey of Professional Forecasters. Grey areas denote NBER
recessions.

44

Dispersion and SPF Disagreement (1985-2011)
4

3

2

1

0

-1

-2
1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011

Figure 15: This figure shows our daily factor for the dispersion of economist forecasts about growth
news (in red) and the disagreement measure in the quarterly Survey of Professional Forecasters
(SPF) (in blue). Grey areas denote NBER recessions.

45

