                                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




TOWARD AN UNDERSTANDING OF WHY SUGGESTIONS WORK IN CHARITABLE FUNDRAISING:
           THEORY AND EVIDENCE FROM A NATURAL FIELD EXPERIMENT

                                               James T. Edwards
                                                 John A. List

                                             Working Paper 19665
                                     http://www.nber.org/papers/w19665


                           NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                                         November 2013




    The authors thank the John Templeton Foundation for their financial support. The views expressed
    herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
    Research.

    NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
    reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
    NBER publications.

    © 2013 by James T. Edwards and John A. List. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
    two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
    is given to the source.
Toward an Understanding of why Suggestions Work in Charitable Fundraising: Theory and
Evidence from a Natural Field Experiment
James T. Edwards and John A. List
NBER Working Paper No. 19665
November 2013
JEL No. C9,C93,H41

                                             ABSTRACT

People respond to those who ask. Within the charitable fundraising community, the power of the ask
represents the backbone of most fundraising strategies. Despite this, the optimal design of communication
strategies has received less formal attention. For their part, economists have recently explored how
communication affects empathy, altruism, and giving rates to charities. Our study takes a step back
from this literature to examine how suggestions–a direct ask for a certain amount of money–affect
giving rates. We find that our suggestion amounts affect both the intensive and extensive margins:
more people give and they tend to give the suggested amount. Resulting insights help us understand
why people give, why messages work, and deepen practitioners’ understanding of how to use messages
to leverage more giving.


James T. Edwards
The University of Chicago
5757 Woodlawn
Chicago, IL 60422
jedwards@uchicago.edu

John A. List
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
jlist@uchicago.edu
1    Introduction
    With private donations to charitable organizations at roughly 2% of GDP, a growing eco-
nomic literature has begun to analyze the mechanisms of individual charitable giving. Naturally-
occurring data and field experimentation has shown that giving can be substantially affected by
changing the effective price of giving (Randolph, 1985; Karlan and List, 2007), the method of so-
licitation (Landry et.al, 2008), various signaling devices (List and Lucking-Reilly, 2002; Spencer
et.al, 2009; Potters et.al, 2007; Bracha et.al, 2011), the revealing of donor’s identities (Soetevent,
2005), and the communication of social information (Frey and Meier, 2004; Croson and Shang,
2008; Shang and Croson, 2009).
    This study contributes to the literature by exploring how giving is affected by simply suggest-
ing a specific donation during solicitation. Importantly, and in contrast to previous work, we run
a natural field experiment that offers a direct comparison between a suggestion treatment and a
no suggestion control, and allows the effect on giving to be measured both on the intensive and
extensive margins. The experiment is accompanied by a theoretical framework that augments
the seminal impure altruism model of Andreoni (1988; 1989; 1990) to offer several channels
through which direct amount suggestions have the potential to affect giving patterns. In addition,
this framework develops a general formal structure to gain insights on recent empirical results on
information in the ask (e.g., Frey and Meier, 2004; Croson and Shang, 2008; Shang and Croson,
2009) and optimal communication strategies in general.
    With our theory as a backdrop, we designed a natural field experiment in partnership with
the University of Wisconsin-Stevens Point’s (UWSP) development office. As part of an alumni
fundraising phonathon for UWSP, potential donors were contacted using a script that was standard
for the university. We randomly varied the message content to either include a direct suggestion
for a donation amount ($20), or no such prompting. The suggestion amount was also varied
to analyze if a more “personalized” amount had greater power to affect donation patterns (for
example, those who graduated in 2003 were asked to donate $20.03). Finally, a factorial design
was used to observe whether the treatment effect was influenced by offering a 1-to-1 match.
    We find some interesting insights. On the extensive margin, we document a large and eco-
nomically significant increase in the number of subjects donating in response to the direct sug-

                                                  2
gestion. Beyond a test of theory, this result is particularly important in a practical sense since it
aids fundraisers on one of their most important tasks: finding new individuals to build a donor
pyramid which can be tapped on for years to come. On the intensive margin, we find a strong
treatment effect of moving observed donations towards the suggestion amount. Most notably,
the percentage of donations above the suggestion amount is substantially reduced relative to the
control. The observed effect on donation amounts is in the same direction, though larger, than
those reported in Shang and Croson (2009).
   The overall pattern of the treatment effects implies that the marginal utility of donating the
suggested amount is increased, but also that there is decreased marginal utility associated with
exceeding this amount. Because our ask amount was below the mean of the no-suggestion control,
we observe only marginally significant changes in average revenue per contacted donor. The
specific changes in donation patterns we find imply, however, that an optimal suggestion amount
can be used to increase revenues in any environment. This method can be particularly fruitful in
terms of revenue enhancement should the fundraiser have an ability to characterize individuals
by predicted pre-suggestion contributions and provide different suggestions as a function of this
amount.
   Second, while there is evidence that the personalized ask raised giving rates compared to the
generic ask, the effects are not significant at conventional levels. When taking into account those
who reneged on their initial pledges, however, the personalized ask outperforms a numerically
similar generic ask. This result highlights that personalized messages can increase actual giving
rates, but the channel in which they work is noteworthy: the personalized ask does not work
immediately, but it causes people to stick to their pledge promises. Finally, we find that the match
works to enhance giving, but the data are too noisy to make strong inference.
   The remainder of our study is constructed as follows. The next section discusses how our
work fits within the broader literature. Section 3 presents our theoretical framework. Section
4 summarizes the experimental design. Section 5 discusses the empirical results. Section 6
interprets our results through the lens of our theoretical model. Section 7 concludes.




                                                 3
2        Relationship to Existing Literature
        While asking for specific donation amounts is a tactic employed by many charitable fundrais-
ers, there is scant empirical research on the effect of suggestions on contributions. Warwick
(2003) reported the results of a number of direct-mail experiments which varied the donation
amount suggested in the request letter. Although presented without comment, in their totality
they intimate that lower suggestion amounts increase donation rates compared to higher amounts,
but insignificantly affect the level of donations. Importantly, none of his experiments compare
suggestions to a no suggestion control. Weyant and Smith (1987), also in a direct mail setting,
vary the donation options listed on their request letters ($5-$10-$25 vs. $50-$100-$250) and also
include a no option control. Low response rates, however, greatly decreased the power of their
experiment. While they found a significant increase in donation incidence for the low sugges-
tions compared to high suggestions, their results were unable to provide conclusive inference in
comparison of giving rates between these treatments and the no suggestion control. In terms
of donation amounts, no conclusions could be drawn, again from a lack of power. Another set
of papers related to our analysis is on the “every penny helps” effect (Cialdini and Schroeder,
1976; Reingen, 1978; Weyant, 1984). By telling potential donors that “every penny helps”, these
experiments were able to increase donation rates by around 20%.1
        In the more recent field experimental literature on the effect of information on giving, our
study is closely related to the research of Shang and Croson (2009) and Frey and Meier (2004).
The Shang and Croson field experiment announced the donation of another donor to individu-
als who had contacted a local radio station for the purpose of contributing. They were able to
increase mean donation amounts with high announced donations, and also decrease mean dona-
tion amounts with low announced donations (in the companion paper Croson and Shang 2008).
The results were significant both statistically and economically, particularly in their most suc-
cessful treatment levels (contribution level means were increased 12% relative to the control for
announcements in the 90% percentile of observed contributions). Frey and Meier announced to
contributors the percentage of a population that had donated (46% or 64%), and found a some-
    1
    Relatedly, Dale and Morgan (2010) present results from a laboratory experiment that shows moderate suggested
donations produce some positive effects.



                                                       4
what smaller effect on the percentage of individuals donating (positive but non-significant for the
population, and significant for a subpopulation of individuals deemed most likely affected by the
treatment).
       Both pairs of researchers interpreted their results as suggesting that the announcement affected
individuals’ donation behavior by changing their perception of what constituted a “normal” be-
havior from the population as a whole. The fact that donation patterns moved in the direction of
the signaled societal norm indicated that the individuals had a strong desire to conform to that
norm. The basis behind this oft-observed pattern of individual conformity to group behavior was
formalized by Bernheim (1994), who argued that agents will conform to a single behavior despite
heterogeneous preferences if social status makes up a sufficient portion of intrinsic utility. When
these behaviors are visible to other agents, this effect is related to the prestige donation model of
Harbaugh (1998), which has been used to explain increases in giving when donor’s identities are
revealed (Soetevent 2005) or when amount categories of donors are published (Li and Riyanto
2009). While such an effect would seem to be dulled when behavior is apparently not visible to
other agents, movement of donations to a perceived norm may still occur if the norm is a signal
of the charity’s quality (Vesterlund 2003), an indication of the marginal effect on the public good,
or if the agent receives intrinsic utility from conforming to a norm behavior.2 A companion paper
to Shang and Croson (2009), Shang et. al (2008), supports the conclusion that there is a social
effect occurring by finding a stronger effect when the announced donor was the same gender as
the individual compared to when they were the opposite gender.
       If potential donors’ decisions are indeed affected by information on other agents norms, then
an important market agent (and one to which the individual’s decision is by definition visible) is
the fundraiser themselves. The fundraiser’s information set in regards to the public good also
greatly exceeds that of other agents. She presumably has a knowledge of all agent’s donation
decisions, as well as information on the production function of the public good (with the cor-
responding knowledge of how much marginal effect or “difference” a specific donation amount
would make on that good).          Since the fundraiser obviously does not face the same donation
decision as other agents, her “norms” are not a behavior, but the underlying attitudes that were
   2
    This could result from some psychic cost such as the idea of paying one’s fair share (Vesterlund 2003), or if
conforming to the norm is a learned action as part of a larger behavioral strategy.


                                                       5
expressed in other agent’s decisions and, as discussed above, made information on other agent’s
norms valuable to each donor.
    Whether potential donors are concerned about the fundraiser’s own norms, or at least treat
information received from the fundraiser as a credible signal of societal norms, is an inherently
empirical question.    The studies above imply that the fundraiser has at least some ability to
credibly convey information to the donor. The exact mechanism through which this information
transfer occurs, however, has not been definitively shown in the literature. For example, the treat-
ment effect in Shang and Croson was interpreted as the fundraiser credibly conveying a societal
norm to the donor, which the donor used in their own decision. A large part of the effect, how-
ever, could be that by singling out a specific donation, the fundraiser conveyed their own norm on
what was appropriate to give, and the donor was affected by a wish to appear appropriate to the
fundraiser.
    Our study seeks to contribute to the literature primarily in a practical sense: by examining the
effect of suggestion amounts on giving patterns, and determining if their use can be exploited to
increase fundraising returns. The theoretical framework we build seeks to explore the possible
mechanisms through which an effect on giving could take place. Although we do not claim that
our experimental design offers clean inference between these competing explanations, we see
both the framework and our experiment as part of the broader literature on the effect of social
information on giving, and how this information potentially affects giving patterns.



3    Theoretical Framework
    To more formally examine the possible avenues through which the suggestion of a donation
amount could have an effect on the donation distribution, let there be n = 1, ..., N non-symmetric
potential contributors to the public good being produced by the charity. Let the donation amount
of each individual be given by Gn , the amount of consumption of a numeraire outside good be
given by Yn , and the total income of the individual be In . Let each individual have a utility
function:
                                                    P
                                    Un (Yn , Gn ,    Gn , An , θn )
                                                    n




                                                    6
    where An ∈ A is a quality perception variable that affects the individual’s marginal utility of
the provision of the public good, and θn ∈ θ is a vector of generic parameters that affect utility.
We include some uncertainty on behalf of the agent regarding the provision of the public good by
                                                                       P
other agents, making the agent’s utility based on the expectation En [   Gn0 ]. Furthermore, we
                                                                                               n0 6=n
assume that the utility function has three additively separable components:


Un (Yn , Gn , En [
                      P                          en (Yn , Gn , En [ P Gn0 ], , An )+fnW G (Gn )+fnN ORM (Gn , En [G], θn )
                              Gn0 ], An , θn ) = U
                     n0 6=n                                            n0 6=n



                                       P
                                En [         Gn0 ]
                                       n0 6=n
     where En [G] =                      N
                                                     is the expected mean of other individual’s donations. The first
function U
         fn corresponds to the “altruistic” component of giving: the individual gains utility from
                                                                       P
greater provision of the public good, and the provision of the good Gn is treated as a con-
                                                                                                 n
sumption good that is weighed against consumption of the numeraire good Yn . We assume U
                                                                                       en
                                                               2f
is increasing and concave in Yn , and that the cross partial P∂ Un                                   ≥ 0, ∀n, meaning that
                                                                                  ∂       Gn ∂An
                                                                                      n
the higher the quality perception variable, the weakly higher the marginal utility of provision of
the public good. It is usually assumed that altruistic utility U
                                                               en is also increasing and concave
   P
in Gn . More recent work on coordination in giving has suggested that in some cases a fixed
    n
amount of donations must be reached for the public good to have a altruistic return, implying a
fixed cost in production and non-concavity of Uen in PGn . Since this could be important in some
                                                     n
                                                                   P
scenarios, we initially only assume that Un is weakly increasing in Gn .
                                         e
                                                                                           n
    The function fnW G denotes utility gained from the act of donation itself rather than the increase
in provision of the public good. This is traditionally denoted as the “warm-glow effect”, and
connotates satisfaction gained merely from the benevolent action of giving. We assume fnW G is
increasing and concave in Gn .
                                     e and f W G to model contributor behavior have been com-
        The combination of functions U      n

monly employed in the literature as an impure altruism model, dating to Andreoni (1989,1990).
The third function, fnN ORM , we label a “social norms utility”. This connotates utility gained
(or lost) in correspondence to the attitude or actions of other agents in the society regarding the



                                                                   7
contribution.3 This could include other contributors, the general public, or the fundraiser them-
selves. As discussed above, the idea that social norms can directly affect contributions has been
discussed and implicated often in the theoretical and experimental literature. It has to the best of
our knowledge, however, never been formalized as above.
       The above specification can also be seen as a generalization of the prestige model of Har-
baugh (1998). In our notation Harbaugh modeled donor utility as Un (Yn , Gn , P (Gn )), where the
function P is the prestige associated with a donation, and Un is increasing and concave in all
arguments. While in Harbaugh’s model the prestige function P was a fixed societal return based
on the size of the gift, the fnN ORM utility in our model allows for the more general mechanisms
behind the utility gained from other individual’s attitudes or actions, discussed further below. The
function thus becomes explicitly affected by equilibrium agent behavior, or at least the expecta-
tion of it. Additionally, any justification of an assumption that fnN ORM is strictly increasing and
concave in giving, as Harbaugh rightly assumes for prestige utility, seems unconvincing. This
leads to some different results and implications for optimal fundraising design in our model.

                                                                                             ∂fnN ORM
       We initially only assume the function fnN ORM is weakly increasing in Gn :               ∂Gn
                                                                                                        ≥ 0, ∀n.
This merely states that a higher donation is never less valuable in the eyes of other agents, mean-
ing it can never lower an individual’s social norm utility to donate a higher amount. What this
excludes is the idea that a donation can be ostentatiously too high and thus frowned upon. The
average donation of other potential donors, G, indicates societal norms and thus may potentially
affect the utility of giving. The θ in this function are additional parameters denoting the percep-
tions of the potential contributor regarding these norms.
       In the Nash equilibrium for this game each potential contributor n = 1, ..., N will, taking
other agents expected contributions En [Gn0 ] as given, solve:

                                                             P
                                   max Un (Yn , Gn , En [        Gn0 ], An , θn )
                                  Yn ,Gn                    n0 6=n


                                             s.t. Yn + Gn ≤ In
   3
     In fact, the warm-glow function fW G could be considered part of this function. We keep them separate here to
follow the standard in the prevailing literature.



                                                        8
   The optimality condition is given as:

                                ∂U
                                 fn   ∂fnW G ∂fnN ORM   ∂U
                                                         fn
                                    +       +         =
                                ∂Gn    ∂Gn     ∂Gn      ∂Yn


   Under basic assumptions of continuity and differentiability, this serves as a necessary but not
sufficient condition for all agents n, given that no assumptions have been made above the partial
derivatives of fnN ORM or U
                          en . For the suggestion of a donation amount to shift the observed
                                                                             ∂ Un
equilibrium, the suggestion must affect one of these terms. In this setup, ∂G     and ∂∂YUnn are
                                                                                        f          f
                                                                                n
                                                      N ORM
                                        Gn0 ], and ∂fn∂Gn is potentially a function of θn and
                                      P
potentially a function of An and En [
                                            n0 6=n
En [G], or:

       ∂U
        fn                          ∂f W G ∂f N ORM                 ∂U
                                                                     fn
                            Gn0 ]) + n + n
                      P                                                             P
           (An , En [                               (θn , En [G]) =     (An , En [        Gn0 ])
       ∂Gn           n0 6=n          ∂Gn     ∂Gn                    ∂Yn            n0 6=n




   What can therefore explain a shift in personal contribution utility caused by a donation sugges-
tion S ∈ S? First, as is common in such settings, purely psychological concepts such as anchoring
and framing (for discussion, see Tversky and Kahneman 1974,1981) cannot be completely ruled
out. Next, a suggestion amount could directly affect an individual’s quality perceptions An , or
                                                                     ∂U
S × A → ∆(A) , affecting the marginal altruistic utility of donation P   . Although it is un-
                                                                      fn
                                                                           ∂       Gn
                                                                               n
clear why such a shift in quality perception would occur from a generic suggestion amount, it is
conceivable that merely the fact that suggestion has been used in solicitation, regardless of what
amount it is, changes the individual’s view of the charity quality. This would cause all donations
to weakly shift up or down based on the shift in An . In our experiment, we consider this even
more unlikely since, as recent alumni from the fundraising school, subjects should have good
knowledge of the quality of the good.
   The suggestion may also affect giving by directly altering the individual’s expectation of other
                       P
agent’s donations En [   Gn0 ]. This could be the case if agents infer the suggestion as coming
                       n0 6=n
from a moment of other’s giving, or derived from the marginal effect of donation on the public
                                 P
good due to the current level of    Gn0 (that is, fundraisers ask for an amount that would be
                                   n0 6=n



                                                     9
“valuable” in an absolute sense). As discussed above and in further detail in Shang and Croson,
shifts in giving based on perceptions of other’s giving may occur through several pathways. First,
even if the utility component fnN ORM does not exist, for U
                                                          fn concave in Gn an increase (decrease)
                                   P
of expected giving of others En [     Gn0 ] will decrease (increase) the marginal altruistic utility
                                          n0 6=n
              ∂U
of giving         .    If this was the only effect, then fundraising would be maximized by convincing
               fn
              ∂Gn

donors that others were giving the lowest possible amount.4 If, however, there is a fixed cost or
some other convexity in the provision of the public good, then the assumption that Ufn is concave
                          ∂U
                                                               P
in Gn does not hold, and ∂G    could increase for higher E   [   Gn0 ]. This would be an example
                           fn
                             n
                                                           n
                                                                         n0 6=n
where a suggestion amount might secure coordination in the public good by convincing donors
that others are donating a sufficient amount to make the public good valuable. If this was the
                                                                                                 ∂U
only effect, then the optimal suggestion S depends on the shape of the function                        and is likely
                                                                                                  fn
                                                                                                 ∂Gn

finite. It should be noted that in our experiment we do not expect donors to worry about such a
coordination problem existing for a university they recently graduated from, and it can be safely
assumed that U
             fn is concave in Gn .
                                                                 P
       Beyond the direct effect, a high expectation En [             Gn0 ] may also increase the perception of
                                                                n0 6=n
quality An , if donors feel other’s donation indicate their better knowledge of the public good.
This would offer a competing effect to the above two that may cause donations to be maximized
by convincing donors others were giving the highest possible amount.
                           P
   Of course, a shift En [   Gn0 ] also affects En [G], and thus may affect giving utility as a func-
                                n0 6=n
tion of social norms, embodied by fnN ORM . For the remainder of the analysis, we will treat En [G]
as one of the parameters of the perception of social norms in the eyes of the potential contribu-
tor θn . This allows us to analyze all possible shocks on social norms in the same framework. It
                                                                                          P
should be noted that any shift in S× θ → ∆(θ), even those not directly instigated by En [        Gn0 ],
                                                                                         n 0 6=n
                 P
may affect En [     Gn0 ] if donors assume other agents will receive the same suggestion and thus
                      n0 6=n
change their giving patterns. This interrelation of giving may increase or decrease the strength
of a shifting effect, but will not reverse any of the effects originating in the function fnN ORM
   4
       If there is a fixed cost or some other convexity in the provision of the public good, then the assumption that
∂U                                     ∂U                                  P
  n
        is concave does not hold, and ∂G  n
                                            could increase for higher En [    Gn0 ]. This would be an example where
 f                                       f
∂Gn                                       n
                                                                         n0 6=n
coordination of giving is important (see, e.g., Van Huyck et al. (1992) on how suggestion amounts can be viewed as
a coordination game).


                                                          10
discussed below. Indeed, given the critical mass element of any shift to a new equilibrium, a
proportionally large “first mover” shift in agent’s θn must occur to precipitate any observed shift
in contributions.
       As mentioned above, the social norms can indicate the values of other contributors, the general
public, or the fundraiser themselves. It is conceivable that the suggested amount merely acts as
a signal of a societal norm.         Although we find it more plausible that the suggestion amount
results in a change in the individual’s perception regarding the fundraiser’s personal norms, our
experimental design can not cleanly infer that this is indeed what is taking place.
       It might at first seem odd that a potential donor should be motivated by the norms of the
fundraiser soliciting a contribution. In truth, we already take one ability of the fundraiser to
affect behavior for granted: as noted by Andreoni (1998), the only rationale for a non-profit
to fundraise at all is if there is a “power of the ask”, i.e. an increase in contribution revenues
resulting from specifically asking donors to give. While the reason behind this effect is not as
clean as our treatment and can be explained in many ways, the fact fundraising is extant and
in truth commonplace serves to show that fundraiser actions clearly have some scope to affect
behavior.5      Though donors receiving utility directly by placating the norms of the fundraiser
would be an interesting and practically important result in many scenarios, the analysis below is
unchanged whether the effect is based on the perception of fundraiser norms or societal norms.
       Consider the following scenarios to explain an effect of norms on behavior. Let a potential
contributor n have an original utility Un (Gn ) over all possible contributions. Subsequently, a
fundraiser suggests a donation of, for example, $20. The utility associated with donating $100
may now be greatly increased, being as it now seems immensely generous and benevolent to give
an amount so far exceeding what was suggested. The utility associated with $10 may be similarly
reduced, as it now appears cheap to give less than what was suggested by the fundraiser. This
would indicate that the suggestion acts to rotate the function fnN ORM around the suggestion point,
increasing the utility of donating above the suggestion, and decreasing it below.
       Alternatively, the suggestion could be considered a signal of the fundraiser’s (or society’s)
   5
     List and Price (2010) and Meer (2011), for example, found that characteristic similarity between solicitor and
potential donor increased donations, while Landry, et. al (2006) found a large increase based on the physical at-
tractiveness of the fundraiser. These studies, along with Meer and Rosen (2011), who found the act of personal
solicitation increased giving, suggest that individual donations can be affected by the fundraiser themselves.

                                                        11
subjective valuation of the marginal effect of a donation amount on the public good. In this
scenario, the potential donor has an initial expectation of this valuation embodied in the function
fnN ORM . The signal affects this expectation, shifting the amount of satisfaction or utility gained
from each prospective donation. This would suggest a horizontal shift in the function fnN ORM due
to the suggestion, with the shape of the function remaining constant.
       A third scenario is the idea that contributors receive a fixed negative utility if the amount
they donate is inappropriately low in relation to the norms of the fundraiser or society, thus ap-
pearing stingy in front of the solicitor (or symmetrically, a positive fixed utility for reaching an
appropriate amount). If the agent is uncertain of the exact range of inappropriate amounts (or
alternatively, the degree of inappropriateness of each amount), they will attach an expected disu-
tility to each prospective donation amount. By suggesting a donation amount, the solicitor is in
effect announcing the complete appropriateness of the suggestion, thus setting the expected disu-
tility to zero and creating a step function that jumps at the suggestion amount by the disutility
amount of being inappropriately low.6 This would fall in line with the explanation of of the “ev-
ery penny helps” argued by Cialdini and Schroeder (1976): that the comment helped legitimize
smaller contributions.
       Though it is interesting to parse these alternatives in a behavioral sense, of greater practical
importance is the implication of the effect of suggestion on revenue maximizing fundraising de-
           ∂ 2 fnN ORM
sign. If       ∂G∂S
                         < 0, ∀n and the effect of S originates in fnN ORM , then revenue would be max-
imized by suggesting the lowest possible amount. This would be justified by the first scenario
             ∂ 2 fnN ORM
above. If        ∂G∂S
                           > 0, ∀n, then revenue would be maximized by suggesting the highest possible
amount. This would be justified by the second scenario for some functional forms of fnN ORM
               ∂ 2 fnN ORM
(namely if          ∂G2
                             < 0 ). Lastly, revenue could also be maximized by some finite suggestion
amount relative to the prior state of the individual. This will mainly occur when there is some
convexity in the function fnN ORM : this obviously occurs based on the fixed utility achieved by
reaching a threshold in the third scenario, and also in the second scenario for some non-concave
forms of fnN ORM .
       Our theory can also lend insights into how a ‘personal’ ask can influence contributions. To see
   6
     This is in many ways similar to the choice under regret explanation given by Irons and Hepburn (2005) to explain
the phenomenon of choice overload (eg. Bertand et.al (2005), Iyengar and Lepper (2000)).


                                                        12
how relaying the idea that a suggestion is personal to the individual can increase the size of the
above effect, let there be M types of individuals. Suppose the fundraiser has different attitudes
on what constitutes an appropriate donation amount for each of the M types, based perhaps on
observables such as income, social status, age, etc. If the fundraiser has no information on the
type of each individual, they are forced to only offer a single suggestion S to all potential donors.
If, in the eyes of a contributor, there is a positive possibility that this has occurred, the relation
that a suggestion is personal to them should increase the strength of any effect. This is because
it contains more information on the fundraiser’s attitude of what is appropriate for the specific
individual than a generic suggestion. If this mechanism does exist, one would find subjects further
from group mean characteristics more affected by a personalized request that singled them out.
Our treatment, unfortunately, does not allow the variation to test this conjecture. Note that it
is again impossible to rule out that increased effects of personalization could also be explained
through purely psychological effects. This includes increased salience of the suggestion when
personalization is included, or a greater connection to the fundraiser once it is relayed that the
solicitor knows personal information about the potential donor.



4    Experimental Design
    In September 2009, recent graduates were contacted as part of the UW Steven’s Point’s An-
nual Campaign for the Point. Our sample consists of 9,487 alumni who had all graduated between
the years 2000 and 2008. Importantly, potential donors should therefore have little uncertainty
about the quality of the public good being provided. Potential donors were contacted by paid cur-
rent students, who were given a standard script with which to ask for donations. This solicitation
script, shown in Figure 1, differed only in regards to the language specific to each treatment.
    As shown in Table 1, the experimental design is a 4x2 factorial design with a roughly equal
percentage of subjects assigned in each cell. The treatment groups were assigned by random-
ized blocking on observables, and each variable passed the propensity score balancing test of
Rosenbaum and Rubin (1985) for each treatment. In the control group, subjects were given no
suggestion of the donation amount. In the first treatment group, subjects were given a generic
suggestion of $20. In the second treatment group, subjects were given a more “personalized”

                                                 13
suggested donation, equivalent to their graduation year in dollars and cents. For instance, if a
subject graduated in 2003, the solicitor suggested a donation of $20.03. Subjects in this group
were explicitly told that the donation amount that had been suggested was directly linked to their
graduation year.
    There is a concern that because personalized suggestions ranging from $20.00 to $20.08
changed two potentially important features from the control (personalization and the fact such
numbers represented “weird” or “odd” ask levels), they might not yield the true treatment effect
of this particular personalization. Therefore, in the third treatment group subjects were randomly
suggested values of $20.01, $20.04, $20.07, and $20.08. The “Unusual Ask” treatment group’s
suggestions may or may not have corresponded to their year of graduation, and they were given
no explanation why such an atypical amount was being suggested.
    In the four groups above, half the subjects were randomly offered a 1-to-1 match for each
dollar that they donated, pledged by a local business. The other half of the subjects were not
offered any match. As the script in Figure 1 shows, the solicitor asked for a specific donation
amount, and then subsequently added that for every dollar of that donation a local business would
match a dollar. We feel that this makes it fairly clear when we ask (for example) for $20, we are
suggesting a donation of $20 (and thus a total value of $40), and not $10 (and thus a total value of
$20). Our results support the fact that subjects also interpreted the suggestion in this manner. If
one feels that this wasn’t clearly induced by the script, then it is of interest that subjects interpreted
the suggestion as being for the donation and not the total value of the gift.
    Recall that in the literature, the theoretical rationale for an effect of matching donations is
twofold: there is clearly a price effect resulting from the fact that the marginal effect of dona-
                                           P
tion on the quantity of the public good ∂ Gn has doubled, but also a possible shift in quality
                                              n
perception An associated with the presence of a backer to match donations (see Karlan and List
(2007) for a more patient discussion). The price effect in this case positively shifts the distribu-
tion of pre-suggestion donations. As noted above, given our sampled population, we expect that
the quality channel will be muted since these solicitees know a great deal about the public good
(UWSP).
    Including the match is useful on several levels. First, it offers an experimental comparison


                                                   14
of the size of the suggestion effect with that of an effect already documented in the literature.
Second, it allows some ability to check the robustness of our results: the presence of a large
interaction effect between matching and suggestion may indicate a large role of either the specific
suggestion amount or the quality perception of the charity on the ability of a fundraiser to affect
donation.



5    Experimental Results
    Summary statistics for each treatment group, as well as pooled statistics for all suggestion
treatments and for match and no match subjects, are given in Table 2 (“No Ask” in this and
all subsequent tables denotes the control treatment where we did not use a suggestion). In the
analysis that follows, we are interested in three major dimensions of the results: the percentage
of potential donors contributing, the average donation of the contributors, and the revenue per
potential donor (a combination of the previous two). Also of note is the absolute difference
between the suggestion amounts and the donation amounts, in comparison to the non-suggestion
control. In all regressions, we control for the age of the subjects, whether they reside in state or
out of state, and include dummies for graduation years and the matching treatment. We also report
specifications that remove outlier donations, defined as being more than three standard deviations
from the mean of the total sample of donations (for all summary statistics and regression results
with outliers removed, see the appendix).
    One might be concerned that for 6,163 (or 64.9%) of our subjects the solicitor was not able
to completely read the script, and therefore never received a direct pledge or refusal from the
potential donor. The reasons for this range from the obviously exogenous (no answer on the
line, a busy signal), to the potentially endogenous (claiming a wrong number, disconnecting half
way through the script). As Table 2 shows, the positive correlation between the percentage of
“contacted” subjects and the percentage of those contacted subjects who donated supports the idea
of some endogeneity. As such, in our analysis of the percentage of potential donors contributing
we offer statistics for both extremes: the entire sample (Intent to Treat) and those actually fully
contacted (Treatment on the Treated). This turns out to have little effect on the conclusions.



                                                15
5.1       Generic Suggestion Results
       The first important comparison is between the no suggestion control group and our baseline
generic treatment: the $20 suggestion treatment group. For policy reasons, we consider this the
most applicable to an average fundraising campaign, and thus analyze it separately from the other
two suggestion treatments (although as Table 2 shows, the results are still strong with all the ask
treatments pooled into one group). Table 2 shows that of all solicitees, a considerably greater
number in the $20 ask give compared to the control (4.47% vs. 3.01%). Further, of those actually
contacted, 12.6% gave in the $20 ask compared to 9.55% in the control. On the intensive margin,
the ask reduces the average donation amount ($19.35 versus $23.92), and as Table 3 shows, the
distribution of gifts is more centered on $20.
       To provide a sense of the average treatment effects, we provide Tables 4 and 5, which report
results of regression specifications concerning giving rates. Column 1 in Table 4 shows how the
average pledge amount changes with introduction of the $20 ask: the $20 suggestion treatment
shows significantly lower mean donation amounts at the p < .05 level (t-stat). To complement
this result, Column 1 in Table 5 models the probability of giving a positive amount. What we
learn from this model is that a significantly higher percentage (nearly 50% more, t-stat, p < .05)
of potential donors contribute in the $20 ask.7 Column 3 of Table 4 shows that the ask treat-
ment collapsed the donation distribution around the suggestion amount: the absolute difference
between the donation amount and $20 is reduced by an estimate of $6.08 (t-stat, p < .01). This
result remains strongly significant (t-stat, p < .01), though smaller ($5.45), when outliers are
omitted.8 The overall results of the $20 treatment indicate a strong and economically significant
effect of the direct amount solicitation.
       Changes in the average donation could result solely from an effect of causing counterfactual
non-donors to donate, with no effect on counterfactual donors. There is strong evidence that
this was the not the case. As noted earlier, the number of donations at each amount reported in
Table 3 gives some idea of how the donation distribution was affected by the $20 suggestion.
   7
      The estimated average marginal effect of the ask treatment on the probability of donation was an increase of
0.0148 over a baseline of 0.0301 for ITT (Table 5, Column 1) and an increase of 0.0324 over a baseline of 0.0949
for TOT (Table 5, Column 2).
    8
      For all summary statistics and regression specifications with outliers removed, see the appendix.



                                                       16
As Table 6 shows by range, the percentage of donors donating $20 is significantly higher in
the $20 suggestion group, while the percentage of donors donating above $20 is significantly
higher in the no suggestion group (Fisher’s exact test, p < .01 for both ranges, whether as a
percentage of donors, contacted subjects, or all subjects). The percentage donating less than $20
is similar across groups. The expected heterogeneous treatment effects limit what can be said
about how suggestion affected original non-donors, low donors, and high donors. Certainly, the
total effect of suggestion appears to occur from a combination of increasing the percentage of
subjects contributing, moving many subjects to the suggestion amount, and sharply decreasing
the amount of subjects donating above the suggestion amount.
   The donation revenue per subject for each treatment is given in Table 2. Revenues under both
population specifications were directionally larger in the $20 suggestion group compared to the
no suggestion control. The difference is insignificant for the entire population, but is marginally
significantly higher (on a 10% level) than the no suggestion treatment with outliers removed.
Given that the effects of suggestion were to increase participation and move contributions towards
the suggestion amount (which was lower than the average gift in the baseline), our finding that
revenues across treatments are comparable is to be expected. It is notable, however, that the
increased participation overcame the decreased contribution mean in our results.
   The individual results of the match treatment are in line directionally with the results in Karlan
and List (2007): more subjects give and revenues are increased when a match is in place. None
of these effects, however, is significant at conventional levels. Furthermore, Table 2 shows that
the effect of the ask treatment was directionally but insignificantly larger than that of the match
treatment when compared to the no ask, no match control. The effect of the ask treatment is
also very similar whether a match was offered or not. Tables 4 and 5 report regressions with an
added interaction term for the match treatment. In terms of donation amounts and the amount
of donors contributing, the fact a match was or was not offered did not significantly change the
size of the suggestion effect. Our preferred interpretation of this set of match results is that since
our experimental population fully understood the quality of the public good (UWSP), there was
not as large of a scope to increase quality perception, and therefore donations, as in Karlan and
List. This would be an important result in terms of understanding the basis behind the effect of


                                                 17
matching on giving patterns.
   Further insights on the effect of suggestion can be gleaned from the fact that subjects had
the option to pay their pledge immediately by credit card, or later by mailing in a check. As
Table 9 shows, this option to delay led to a significant portion of pledges not actually being
paid by would-be donors. The $20 ask had lower percentages of non-payment than the no ask
control, although this difference was insignificant by a Fisher’s exact test. This difference was a
combination of more people in the control pledging by check, and more check-payers reneging
on their pledge (both insignificantly). As a percentage of the total subject population, the amount
of individuals giving an unfulfilled pledge is very similar between the top treatment groups. The
percentages of pledges rescinded by pledge amount are given in Table 10. The most noteworthy
difference between the groups in this regard was the fact that not a single person donating above
the suggestion amount in the $20 ask treatment failed to pay, as opposed to 28.6% of the same
range of pledges in the no ask group. This difference is significantly different (Fisher’s exact test,
p < .05).


5.2    Personalized Suggestion Results

   The effect of a “personalized” suggestion compared to a generic suggestion can be thought of
in several different ways, depending on assumptions. The most basic is to compare the results of
the $20 suggestion treatment and the class year treatment. As Table 2 shows, the percentage of
subjects donating is nearly identical in each treatment, and the average donation amounts are not
significantly different (and nearly identical when outliers are removed). The absolute difference
between the ask amount and the donation amount is insignificantly different with outliers (see
Table 7), but donation amounts are significantly closer to the suggestion amount in the class year
treatment when outliers are removed (t-stat, p < .05).
   Using this comparison as a measure of the effect of personalization assumes that an ask
amount of $20 is numerically and psychologically similar to an ask amount of $20.XX. If this is
not the case, a better comparison is between the class year treatment and the unusual suggestion
treatment. Figure 2 provides a graphical summary of our results based on the fraction of givers.


                                                 18
What is evident is that across every dollar bucket, the personalized ask outperforms the unusual
ask. This suggests that personalization matters in terms of whether the person gives. As seen in
Table 8, however, when pooling across these buckets the percentage of subjects donating in the
unusual suggestion treatment is only marginally significant at conventional levels (t-stat, p < .10
for ITT, p < .05 for TOT). Further, there is no significant difference in the average donation with
or without controls. Since some of the class year subjects graduated in the year 2000, they were
given an ask amount of $20, allowing a test of whether a $20 versus $20.XX effect exists. The
year 2000 graduates had very similar giving patterns as the rest of the years, consistent with there
being a small effect of this kind.
   One could also claim that the unusual suggestion treatment differed from the other two in that,
by asking for an amount that was “strange” compared to $20 or an explained class year amount,
the effect of suggestion was psychologically different. Other possibly confounding effects include
individuals who happened to receive a suggestion corresponding to their graduation year inferring
that such a personalization had taken place, or those that received slightly different amounts than
their grad year thinking that the fundraiser had wrong information about them, which might have
reduced their willingness to give.
   Since 255 (or 11.0%) of our subjects in the unusual ask randomly received their graduation
year amount, we can check this conjecture. The giving percentages were very similar between
the groups (3.40% of those who got their class year, 3.52% of those who did not), and none of the
other statistics on gift amounts approach significance at conventional levels (although this is to be
expected with only 9 gifts from those who got their class year). If any one of these confounding
effects exist and the numerical effect does not, the comparison of the $20 suggestion to the class
year suggestion is preferred. If both effects exist, then the personalization results are in general
confounded.
   The donation revenue per subject in Table 2 shows revenues under both population specifica-
tions were similar in the class year suggestion group and the $20 suggestion group. The Class
Year suggestion group revenues are directionally larger than both the no suggestion control and
unusual suggestion groups. Again, the differences are insignificant for the entire population, but
the class year treatment is marginally higher (t-test, p < .10) compared to the no suggestion


                                                 19
treatment with outliers removed. The difference between the class year treatment and the unusual
suggestion treatment is marginally significant (t-test, p < .10). The difference between the class
year treatment and the no ask control was insignificant for the entire population, but the class year
is marginally higher (t-test, p < .10) with outliers removed.
    In terms of reneged pledges, the class year treatment has very similar percentages of non-
payment compared to the $20 ask. Non-payment in the class year treatment is lower than the
no ask and unusual ask treatments, although this difference is insignificant by a Fisher’s exact
test. Again, this results from a combination of more pledgers by check and more reneging check
pledgers. As a percentage of the total subject population, the amount of individuals giving an
unfulfilled pledge is virtually identical across all treatments. As Table 10 shows, the class year
treatment also did not have a single person pledge above the suggestion amount and subsequently
fail to pay. This is only significantly different from the no ask control, however, if it is pooled
with the $20 treatment (Fisher’s exact test, p < .05).
    Interestingly, we do observe larger effects on the class year ask versus the unusual ask. For
instance, whereas only 29 of 107 pledges (27.1%) went unfulfilled in the class year ask, 29 of 84
(34.1%) went unfulfilled in the unusual ask. In Table 10, directionally lower rescinding rates are
observed at all donation levels in the class year ask, with the largest differences being found in the
small donations bin. Much of this difference can be explained by more subjects pledging by check
in the unusual suggestion treatment. While these differences are insignificant in themselves, this
level of reneging leads to the true revenues per contact to be considerably higher in the class
year ask compared to the unusual ask ($0.755 versus $0.491), a difference that is significant at
conventional levels (t-test, p < .05). The remainder of the above analysis obtains similar results
when received donations are considered instead of pledged donations. In addition, since once
donors give they are more likely to give in the future, this finding on personalization is likely a
lower bound on the total effect of the personalization.



6    Discussion of Results
    One major result of our experiment is a practical one: we found a large response to the treat-
ment of a direct amount suggestion to potential donors. This occurred both on the extensive

                                                 20
margin, with an economically significant increase in the percentage of subjects who donated, and
on the intensive margin, with the donation distribution moving sharply to the suggestion amount.
These sizable observed effects show the promise of suggestion amounts, and highlight the import
of the ask amount when designing an optimal fundraising strategy. In our case, our suggestion
turned out to be below the mean of donations in the control, but the increased donation rate over-
came lower average donations to (insignificantly) increase revenue. If the same effects occurred
for higher suggestion amounts, revenue increases based on suggestion could be particularly lu-
crative. An important question, therefore, is not only if our results generalize to other fundraising
organizations, but also to higher ask levels.
       The results on the extensive margin are surprisingly large. The increase in donation rates
(31.9% TOT, 48.5% ITT) also exceeds that of the “every penny helps” effect. The stronger effect
of smaller suggestion amounts on donation incidence may well be related to the “every penny
helps” effect, in that it increases the valuation of smaller gifts, thus inciting more overall donation
(discussed further below). Taking this into account, along with the results of Warwick (2003) and
Weyant and Smith (1987) that participation rates were reduced with higher suggestion amounts,
there is some reason to believe that the increase in donor participation may be tempered by higher
suggestion amounts.
       On the intensive margin, the ability of the treatment to affect the donation distribution is
more pronounced than the announcement of another individual’s donation by Shang and Croson
(2009).9 We expect our subject population to be more responsive to treatment than theirs, being
as our subjects were cold-called, and theirs were contacting a fundraiser with a donation amount
presumably already in mind. Our subject pool also contained counterfactual non-donors while
theirs did not. Nonetheless, if one wishes to interpret our treatment as a shift in the perception of
fundraiser norms and theirs of fellow donor’s norms, it is interesting that our results are at least
as strong or stronger than theirs. In terms of the extrapolation of our results to higher suggestion
amounts, Shang and Croson also found their treatment to become less effective as announced do-
nations became very high (although their most successful treatment in terms of increase revenue
   9
    Our most successful treatment increased the percent of donations at the suggestion amount from 28.5% to 70.4%,
compared to an increase of 12.3% to 24.0% in their most successful treatment. The effect on donation amount was
19.1% of the control mean donation in our most successful treatment, compared to 12.2%.



                                                       21
was above the control mean, at the 90 percentile of the observed control distribution).
    What can our theory inform us about extrapolation to different suggestion amounts, and in
light of the above results, what forces may be at play? Again, the main results of the treatment
were to sharply increase the amount of donors donating at the suggestion amount (including
many donors who would have counterfactually not donated), and sharply decrease the amount of
individuals donating above the suggestion amount. This implies several things about the marginal
          ∂Un
utility   ∂Gn
                after the suggestion. First, for such a large concentration of individuals to be moved
                                                ∂Un
to the suggestion amount, it must be that       ∂Gn
                                                      at the suggestion amount is very high in relation
to the marginal utility above or below the suggestion amount. Considering the fact that there is
individual heterogeneity in income and utility function parameters that should cause variance in
donations, there is a necessity for an even greater proportionate rise in marginal utility at this
suggestion point to account for so much movement to the suggestion.
    Second, the fact that we see a large reduction in donations above the suggestion amount indi-
                                  ∂Un
cates that the marginal utility   ∂Gn
                                        above the suggestion amount is small. This causes individuals
to sharply substitute away from donations to personal consumption until their donation amounts
are reduced to the suggestion amount.
    Both these facts are consistent with the idea that the function U after the suggestion is not
only strongly convex in Gn , but at least resembles a step function, with the step or steep portion
centered on the suggestion amount S. Individuals gain utility from complying with the suggestion
S, but little more utility from going beyond that amount. From an optimal suggestion standpoint,
this rules out the idea of offering very low suggestions to individuals, as it would be likely to
move their donations down to that low point. Likewise, it would also rule out offering very high
suggestions. To see this, note that reaching the step of the function fnN ORM is very valuable
utility-wise for an individual, but it obviously comes at a cost in personal consumption Y . If the
step is reached only at a very high donation level, it is not worth increasing donations enough to
reach the step, and thus the suggestion is unsuccessful at moving a potential donor to that point.
    The results instead suggest that revenue will be optimized through a suggestion that is a certain
amount greater than the counterfactual donation, but not too far away from that amount. This
makes information that offers predictive power on the counterfactual no-suggestion contribution


                                                      22
very valuable for the prospective fundraiser. Without this information, only a single suggestion
can be made to all potential donors. This risks the result that occurred in our experiment: many
people chose to donate when they otherwise would not have, but many counterfactually high
donors reduced their donations to be more in line with the suggestion amount. The result was
an only marginal increase in overall revenue. Suggestions may also fail to increase revenue, it
appears, if they are too high to incite a change in behavior.
   Reconciling these results in the framework above without the function fnN ORM is difficult.
                                                                                      P
The possible effects occurring without this function (resulting from a change in En [    Gn0 ]
                                                                                              n0 6=n
and/or An ) would seem to predict the distribution of giving shifting up or down rather than col-
lapsing on the suggestion point. With asymmetric individuals and treatment effects one could
                                   P
surely find a distribution of En [   Gn0 ] and An over the subjects to render the results we see in
                                   n0 6=n
our experiment, but such a distribution would seem purely coincidental.
   Furthermore, because the function fnW G is assumed to be concave, if Un is indeed convex after
                                                                 fn or fnN ORM . As discussed, U
the suggestion it would require strong convexity in the function U                             fn

only is plausibly convex if there is a large fixed cost to the public good, rendering coordination an
important issue. This would not seem to be the case for a large university where the prospective
donors had recently graduated.
   If, therefore, the source of the convexity is purely in fnN ORM , the results are consistent with
there being a fixed “norm” utility of reaching the suggestion amount that would cause a discon-
tinuity in fnN ORM . Several of our behavioral justifications we discussed in Section 2 fit such a
result. The first is the idea that the individual has an original function fnN ORM based on their per-
ceptions of social norms and the signal of the fundraiser’s (or society’s) norms simply shifts the
function fnN ORM horizontally in Gn . If this were the case, the function fnN ORM would obviously
have the same form before and after the suggestion treatment. Assume that θ consists of only a
single scalar parameter and fnN ORM = {0 for Gn < θn ; λn for Gn > θn }, where λn > 0 is large
                     ∂Un
enough relative to   ∂Gn
                           at other points than θn such that the majority of individuals donate at θn .
Without a suggestion amount being made, θn is a random draw from some unknown distribution
F (θ). When a suggestion is made, θn becomes S. This would also explain why so many indi-
viduals chose to donate $20 when they counterfactually would not have donated: their θn was too


                                                   23
high, making it too expensive in terms of lost personal consumption to reach the fixed utility λn ,
but when it was reduced to $20, it became viable.
   Another justification is that of uncertain disutility from donating an inappropriately low amount
or uncertain positive utility for reaching an appropriately high amount. In either case, the orig-
inal function fnN ORM would have a form that accounts for the expected disutility/utility at each
donation point, conditional on the individual’s information set. Once the suggestion is made, the
“appropriate” threshold is known with certainty, and fnN ORM becomes a step function, with lower
utility below the suggestion point and higher above. It should be noted that if this were the case,
we would expect to see fewer positive donations below the suggestion amount in the treatment
than the control, which was not observed. Both the above explanations would be consistent with
the “every penny helps” effect, as small donations becoming more valuable would increase the
percentage of subjects donating.
   A major difference in our results to Warwick (and to a lesser extent, Weyant and Smith) is
that we found suggestions greatly affecting the intensive margin of giving, whereas they did not.
Part of this may lie in the fact that our experimental solicitation was in the form of a phone
call, whereas their solicitation was by direct mail. This would fit into the social pressure of
fundraisers on givers argued by Meer (2011) and Meer and Rosen (2011). The pattern of non-
payment of pledges offers further insight into the utility function associated with giving. The
non-trivial percentage of individuals which ended up not following through with their pledges
(29.8% of the total sample) is suggestive that there was disutility associated with turning down
the solicitor on the phone, even if one did not plan to actually donate (see Della Vigna et al.,
2012, for face-to face social pressure of this sort). Directional differences in reneging between
treatments seemingly included immediate plans to renege. This could be seen by more people
promising to later mail a check instead of paying immediately, as opposed to differences simply
confined to differences in the reneging of check pledgers. Importantly, even though there was no
evidence that suggesting a donation amount caused the disutility of reneging to increase, or led
to greater amounts of spurious pledging, it was the case that fewer people in the personalized ask
reneged on their pledge (compared to the numerically similar unusual ask). This might indicate
that the disutility of actually reneging on a pledge was enhanced by making the ask personal.


                                                24
This type of effect deserves more careful scrutiny because we view it as novel to the literature,
but only suggestive here due to our sample size limitations.
    What is also true is that spurious pledgers seemed more readily moved to the suggestion
amount than those who followed through with their gift. It is intuitive that individuals who were
pledging solely to appease the fundraiser would be more likely to respond to a signal of the desires
or the norms of the solicitor. The resulting significant difference between followed-up pledging
of individuals donating above $20 in the no ask and the two successful ask treatments fits nicely
into the shifting fnN ORM step-function interpretation above: heterogeneous subjects had differing
expectations of the norms of the fundraiser, thus causing some spurious pledgers to pledge a high
amount in the no-ask treatment. This group was moved to the suggestion amount by the solicitor’s
signal, thus leaving only those with utility of donation not driven by societal or fundraiser norms
remaining at amounts above the suggestion.
    Our personalization treatment was somewhat better at moving individuals to the mean than the
generic $20 treatment, although the amount of individuals donating was nearly identical. It was
better than the “unusual” identical suggestion amounts in inciting donation, but similar in moving
to the suggestion amount, resulting in increased revenues that became more strongly significant
when spurious pledges were removed. Considering that there was a great deal of homogeneity in
the group in general (all young alumni from the same school), in the theoretical framework above
personalization should not be expected to have a great effect.



7    Conclusion
    Understanding the demand side of fundraising has become an emerging literature. In this
study we combine theory with a natural field experiment to explore the effect of suggestion
amounts. Our results show a surprisingly large and economically significant effect of suggest-
ing a donation amount to potential donors.      On the extensive margin, we find a nearly 50%
increase in the percentage of individuals donating after receiving a generic suggestion. In light
of the fact that perhaps the most important job of the fundraiser is building a donor pyramid for
future contributions, this result has immediate practical significance. On the intensive margin,
we find observed donations collapse strongly to the suggestion amount.

                                                25
    One interpretation of our results viewed through the lens of our model is that after a suggestion
amount is made, individuals receive a fixed amount of utility from donating at least as much as the
suggestion, but little utility from exceeding it. This result suggests that even though altruism is
often claimed to be an important driver of donor behavior, in this case our data are more consistent
with a model of impure altruism. In terms of optimal fundraising design, this implies that optimal
suggestions should be made at an amount greater than the counterfactual donation, but not at an
infinitely high amount. The optimal spread is not a question that can be answered by this study
and requires more research.
    Our empirical results also corroborate an idea that the previous literature has hinted: an in-
dividual’s utility resulting from donation, far from being set in stone, is highly malleable and
responsive to even seemingly simple techniques. For fundraising practitioners, this necessitates
a greater understanding of the nature of contribution utility functions in order to take advantage
of this malleability to increase fundraising revenues. Treatments such as ours are able to offer
greater insight on the nature of these utility functions. We trust the literature will continue to use
the scientific method to shed light on important philanthropic issues.



8    References
    Andreoni, James, 1988, “Privately Provided Public Goods in a Large Economy: The Limits
of Altruism,” Journal of Public Economics, 35: 57-73.
    Andreoni, James, 1989, “Giving with Impure Altruism: Applications to Charity and Ricardian
Equivalence,” Journal of Political Economy, 97(6): 1447-58.
    Andreoni, James, 1990, “Impure Altruism, and Donations to Public Goods: A Theory of
Warm-Glow Giving,” Economic Journal, 100: 464-477.
    Andreoni, James, 1998, “Toward a Theory of Charitable Fund-Raising,” Journal of Political
Economy, 106(6): 1186-1213.
    Bernheim, B. Douglas, 1994, “A Theory of Conformity,” Journal of Political Economy, 102(5),
841-877.
    Bertand, Marianne, Dean Karlan, Sendhil Mullainathan, Eldar Shafir and Jonathan Zinmanm,
2010, “What’s Advertising Content Worth? Evidence from a Consumer Credit Marketing Field

                                                 26
Experiment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(1): 1-45.
   Bracha, Anat, Michael Menietti, and Lise Vesterlund, 2011, “Seeds to succeed?: Sequential
giving to public projects,” Journal of Public Economics, 95(5): 416-427.
   Cialdini, Robert B. and David A. Schroeder, 1976,“Increasing Compliance by Legitimizing
Paltry Contributions: When Even a Penny Helps,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
34: 599-604.
   Croson, Rachel and Jen Shang, 2008, “The impact of downward social information on contri-
bution decisions,” Experimental Economics, 11(3): 221-233.
   Della Vigna, Stefano, John A. List, and Ulrike Malmendier, 2012, “Testing for Altruism and
Social Pressure in Charitable Giving,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(1): 1-56.
   Frey, Bruno S. and Stephan Meier, 2004, “Social Comparisons and Pro-social Behavior: Test-
ing “Conditional Cooperation” in a Field Experiment,” American Economic Review, 94(5): 1717-
1722.
   Harbaugh, William T., 1998, “What do donations buy?: A model of philanthropy based on
prestige and warm glow,” Journal of Public Economics, 67(2): 269-284.
   Irons, Ben and Cameron Hepburn, 2007, “Regret Theory and the Tyranny of Choice,” The
Economic Record, 83(261): 191-203.
   Iyengar, S. S., and Lepper, M., 2000, “When Choice is Demotivating: Can One Desire Too
Much of a Good Thing?” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 79: 995-1006.
   Karlan, Dean and John A. List., 2007, “Does Price Matter in Charitable Giving? Evidence
from a Large-Scale Natural Field Experiment,” American Economic Review, 97(5): 1774-1793.
   Landry, Craig, Andreas Lange, John A. List, Michael K. Price, and Nicholas Rupp, 2006,
“Toward an Understanding of the Economics of Charity: Evidence from a Field Experiment,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(2): 747-782.
   Li, Jingping and Riyanto, Yohanes E., 2009, “Category Reporting in Charitable Giving: An
Experimental Analysis,” MPRA Paper 18414, University Library of Munich, Germany.
   List, John A. and Lucking-Reiley, David 2002, “The Effects of Seed Money and Refunds
on Charitable Giving: Experimental Evidence from a University Capital Campaign,” Journal of
Political Economy, 110(1): 215-233.


                                              27
   List, John A. and Price, Michael K., 2009. “The role of social connections in charitable
fundraising: Evidence from a natural field experiment,” Journal of Economic Behavior and Or-
ganization, 69(2): 160-169.
   List, John A., 2011, “The Market for Charitable Giving,” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
2011, 25(2): 157-180.
   Meer, Jonathan, 2011, “Brother, can you spare a dime? Peer pressure in charitable solicita-
tion,” Journal of Public Economics, 95(7): 926-941.
   Meer, Jonathan and Harvey S. Rosen, 2011, “The ABCs of charitable solicitation,” Journal of
Public Economics, 95(5): 363-371.
   Morgan, John and Donald J. Dale, 2012, “Silence is Golden. Suggested Donations in Volun-
tary Contribution Games,” Personal Working Paper.
   Potters, Jan, Martin Sefton, and Lise Vesterlund, 2007, “Leading-by-example and signaling
in voluntary contribution games: an experimental study,” Economic Theory, 33(1): 169-182.
   Randolph, William C., 1985, “Dynamic Income, Progressive Taxes, and the Timing of Chari-
table Contributions,” Journal of Political Economy, 103(4): 709-738.
   Reingen, Peter H., 1978, “On the Social Psychology of Giving: Door-In-The-Face and When
Even a Penny Helps,” Advances in Consumer Research 5: 1-4.
   Rosenbaum, P.R. and D.B. Rubin, 1985, “Constructing a Control Group Using Multivariate
Matched Sampling Methods that Incorporate the Propensity Score,” The American Statistician,
39(1): 33-38.
   Shang, Jen, Americus Reed, and Rachel Croson, 2008, “Identity Congruency Effects on Do-
nations,” Journal of Marketing Research, 45: 351-361.
   Shang, Jen and Rachel Croson, 2009, “A Field Experiment in Charitable Contribution: The
Impact of Social Information on the Voluntary Provision of Public Goods,” Economic Jour-
nal,119(540): 1422-1439.
   Soetevent, Adriaan, 2005, “Anonymity in giving in a natural context- a field experiment in 30
churches,” Journal of Public Economics, 89: 2301-2323.
   Spencer, A. M., A. K. Swallow, J. K. Shogren, and J. A. List, 2009, “Rebate Rules in Thresh-
old Public Good Provision,” Journal of Public Economics, 93: 798-806.


                                              28
   Tversky, A. and D. Kahneman, 1974, “Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases,”
Science, 185(4157): 1124-1131.
   Tversky, A. and D. Kahneman, 1981, “The framing of decisions and the psychology of
choice,” Science 211 (4481): 453-458.
   Van Huyck, John B., Ann B. Gillette, and Raymond C. Battalio, 1992, “Credible Assignments
in Coordination Games,” Games and Economic Behavior, 4(4): 606-626.
   Vesterlund, Lise, (2003), “The Informational Value of Sequential Fundraising,” Journal of
Public Economics, 87: 627-657.
   Warwick, Mal, (2003), Testing, Testing, 1, 2, 3. San Francisco, CA, Jossey-Bass.
   Weyant, James M., 1984, “Applying Social Psychology to Induce Charitable Donations,”
Journal of Applied Social Psychology 14(5): 441-447.
   Weyant, James M. and Stephen L. Smith, 1987, “Getting more by asking for less: The effects
of request size on donations to charity,” Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 17: 392-400.




                                               29
9    Tables and Figures
    TABLE 1: Experimental Design and Treatment Subject Totals

                                                                                                                              Match       No Match

     No Ask: Subjects were asked to donate but not suggested a specific donation amount.                                       1,178         1,140



     $20 Ask: Subjects were suggested a donation amount of $20                                                                 1,217         1,196

     Class Year Ask: Subjects were suggested an amount corresponding
     to their grad year (ex: $20.03 if they graduated in 2003, years 2000-2008). The caller                                    1,160         1,201
     explained the relation between the amount and the grad year.
     Unusual Ask: Subjects were suggested one of the amounts
     $20.01, $20.04, $20.07, or $20.08. They were given no explanation why this                                                1,179         1,216
     amount was being suggested.
     Note: Match subjects were offered a match of 1:1 by a local business for every dollar they donated.




    TABLE 2: Summary Statistics

     Treatment Group Subjects             Contacted      % of total      % of contacts      Mean Positive          Revenue/Contact (SD)
                                                         donating          donating         Donation (SD)           Total      Contacted
     No Ask                    2,318          733         0.0301            0.0955          23.92 (16.28)        0.722 (4.96) 2.285 (8.63)
     Pooled Ask                7,169         2,591        0.0417            0.1154          19.99 (9.06)         0.836 (4.41) 2.315 (7.10)
     $20 Ask                   2,413          857         0.0447            0.1260          19.35 (7.36)         0.866 (4.29) 2.439 (6.93)
     Class Yr Ask              2,361          852         0.0453            0.1256          20.17 (9.04)         0.914 (4.61) 2.534 (7.41)
     Unusual Ask               2,395          882         0.0351            0.0952          20.82 (10.74)        0.730 (4.32) 1.983 (6.95)

     No Match                  4,753         1,627         0.0368            0.0543         21.55 (11.92)        0.798 (4.66) 2.331 (7.75)
     No Ask                    1,140          364          0.0271            0.0421         24.06 (13.10)        0.675 (4.53) 2.115 (7.82)
     Ask                       3,614         1,263         0.0398            0.0580         20.99 (11.61)        0.837 (4.71) 2.394 (7.74)

     Match                     4,734         1,697         0.0409            0.0596         19.89 (9.90)         0.819 (4.43) 2.286 (7.17)
     No Ask                    1,178          369          0.0331            0.0530         23.21 (18.87)        0.768 (5.36) 2.452 (9.37)
     Ask                       3,556         1,328         0.0436            0.0615         19.07 (5.66)         0.836 (4.08) 2.240 (6.44)
     Note: Contacted subjects are characterized as those who were read the entire script, followed by a direct pledge or refusal by the subject.
     The Pooled Ask is the combination of all treatments where a suggestion was made.




                                                                    30
FIGURE 1: Script Read by Callers to Subjects



      Hello, this is ______ calling from UW Steven’s Point for The Annual Campaign for Point.


      FOR NO ASK TREATMENT:
               This year we’re again hoping to raise a half million dollars to support UWSP students and

      programs and increasing the number of donors is a major goal of this year’s campaign. To reach our

      goal, we’re asking for a gift from you today.

      FOR $20 ASK TREATMENT:
               This year we’re again hoping to raise a half million dollars to support UWSP students and

      programs and increasing the number of donors is a major goal of this year’s campaign. To reach our
      goal, we’re asking for a gift of $20.00 from you today.

      FOR CLASS YEAR TREATMENT:
               This year we’re again hoping to raise a half million dollars to support UWSP students and
      programs and increasing the number of donors is a major goal of this year’s campaign. To reach our

      goal, we’re asking for a gift of class year in dollars and cents from you today, since you graduated in

      the year class year.

      FOR UNUSUAL ASK TREATMENT:

               This year we’re again hoping to raise a half million dollars to support UWSP students and
      programs and increasing the number of donors is a major goal of this year’s campaign. To reach our
      goal, we’re asking for a gift of [$20.01, OR $20.04, OR $20.07, OR $20.08] from you today.

      IN ADDITION, FOR ALL MATCHING TREATMENTS:

               In addition, for each $1 you donate this year, [the matching local business] will match your
      donation with funds going directly to support student scholarships!



      For your convenience, we take all major credit cards.
      [After they decide whether or not to give, and how much, continue below]

      If I can just quickly verify your address [verify address]

      And you are currently at [verify employer, title]?

      And we don’t seem to have an email address listed for you, do you have an email address? [ask for email

      address if they simply answer ‘yes’].

      [Confirm amount and where it will go]

      Thank you so much, we are extremely grateful for your support. Have a good evening!




                                                      31
TABLE 3: Pledges by Amount and Treatment


 Pledge Amount ($)      No Ask      $20 Ask     Class Year   Unusual Ask   Total
          5                1            0            1            0         2
         10               18           21           10           11         60
         15                2            1            0            0         3
         20               20           76           14            3        113
       20.01               0            0            7           17         24
       20.02               0            0            9            0         9
       20.03               1            0            5            0         6
       20.04               0            0           12           16         28
       20.05               0            1           12            0         13
       20.06               0            0           10            0         10
       20.07               0            0           11           13         24
       20.08               0            0           11           14         25
       20.09               0            0            0            1         1
         21                0            0            0            1         1
         25               15           5             2            4         26
         30                3            0            1            0         4
         35                0            0            0            1         1
         50                8            4            1            2         15
         75                1            0            0            0         1
        100                1            0            1            1         3
        All               70          108          107           84        369
 Note: Both Match and Non-Match Subjects included.




                                      32
FIGURE 2: Percent Pledging by Amount for Class Year Treatments


                                    Full Sample                                                    Contacted Subjects




                                                                           .15
            .05
            .04




                                                                                   .1
     Percent Donating




                                                                   Percent Donating
    .02        .03




                                                                           .05
            .01
            0




                                                                           0




                        20.01       20.04    20.07      20.08                                20.01       20.04   20.07      20.08

                                Class Yr.            Unusual Ask                                     Class Yr.           Unusual Ask



     Note: Both Match and Non-Match Subjects included.



TABLE 4: $20 Ask and No Ask Subjects Donation Amounts

                                       (1)             (2)                            (3)
                                Pledge Amount    Absolute Diff.                  Absolute Diff.
                                     (OLS)      from $20 (OLS)                  from $20 (OLS)
  Ask Dummy                        -4.215∗∗        -6.080∗∗∗                        -3.904∗
                                    (2.065)         (1.671)                         (2.346)

  Match Dummy                      -1.841            -0.916                               1.682
                                   (1.902)           (1.539)                             (2.498)

  Lives Instate                    -1.046             0.389                              0.0707
                                   (2.684)           (2.172)                             (2.180)

  Age                              0.189∗            0.203∗∗                             0.207∗∗
                                   (0.110)           (0.0891)                            (0.0890)

  Ask * Match                                                                             -4.331
                                                                                         (3.286)

  Constant                         20.49∗            -0.927                               -2.883
                                   (10.79)           (8.727)                             (8.830)
  Observations                       178               178                                 178
  R2                                0.222             0.333                               0.342
  Standard errors in parentheses
  ∗
    p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
  Note: Graduation Year Dummies and Caller Dummies included in each specification.




                                                                                        33
TABLE 5: $20 Ask and No Ask Subjects Donation Probability

                                         (1)                     (2)                          (3)
                                      Pledged                  Pledged                      Pledged
                                    (Probit, ITT)           (Probit, TOT)                (Probit, TOT)
                                    β          Mfx           β         Mfx               β            Mfx
  Ask Dummy                     0.193∗∗∗ 0.014∗∗∗       0.183∗∗      0.032∗∗         0.183∗∗        0.032∗∗
                                 (0.072)                 (0.090)                     (0.090)
  Match Dummy                     0.048      0.003        0.031      0.005             0.031        0.005
                                 (0.071)                 (0.088)                     (0.088)
  Lives Instate                   0.020      0.001        -0.107     -0.019           -0.107        -0.019
                                 (0.095)                 (0.122)                     (0.122)
  Age                           0.030∗∗∗ 0.002∗∗∗       0.032∗∗∗ 0.005∗∗∗           0.032∗∗∗        0.005∗∗∗
                                 (0.005)                 (0.006)                     (0.006)
  Ask * Match                                                                         -0.135        -0.024
                                                                                     (0.177)
  Constant                      -2.617∗∗∗              -2.132∗∗∗                    -2.132∗∗∗
                                 (0.222)                (0.268)                      (0.268)
  Observations                    4717                   1585                          1585
  Mean Predicted Probability      0.041                  0.117                         0.117
  β=estimated coefficient, Mfx=marginal effect at sample mean. Standard errors in parentheses.
  ∗
    p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
  Note: Graduation Year Dummies and Caller Dummies included in each specification.
  ITT includes all subjects, TOT includes only contacted subjects.




TABLE 6: Percentage of Donations by Range

 Range and Treatment     Pledges   % of Pledgers    % of Total     % of Contacted
 Under 20.00
 No Ask                    21          0.3000         0.0091          0.0286
 $20 Ask                   22          0.2037         0.0091          0.0257
 Class Year Ask            11          0.1028         0.0047          0.0129
 Unusual Ask               11          0.1310         0.0046          0.0125

 20.00-20.08
  No Ask                   21          0.3000         0.0091          0.0286
  $20 Ask                  77          0.7130         0.0319          0.0898
  Class Year Ask           98          0.9159         0.0415          0.1150
  Unusual Ask              63          0.7500         0.0263          0.0714

 Over 20.08
 No Ask                    28          0.4000         0.0121          0.0382
 $20 Ask                    9          0.0833         0.0037          0.0105
 Class Year Ask             5          0.0467         0.0021          0.0059
 Unusual Ask               10          0.1190         0.0042          0.0113
 Note: Percentages are given as those of each treatment group.
 Both Match and Non-Match Subjects included.




                                                                 34
TABLE 7: $20 Ask and Class Year Subjects

                                      (1)                  (2)                      (3)
                                Absolute Diff.          Pledged                   Pledged
                               from Ask (OLS)         (Probit, ITT)            (Probit, TOT)
                                       β              β        Mfx              β         Mfx
  $20 Ask Treatment                 -1.513          0.017      0.001         0.010      0.002
                                   (1.115)         (0.066)                  (0.081)
  Match Dummy                      -2.093∗          0.007      0.001         -0.028     -0.005
                                   (1.114)         (0.066)                  (0.081)
  Lives Instate                     -2.125          0.037      0.003         -0.059     -0.011
                                   (1.689)         (0.092)                  (0.117)
  Age                               -0.023        0.027∗∗∗ 0.002∗∗∗        0.026∗∗∗ 0.005∗∗∗
                                   (0.061)         (0.004)                  (0.005)
  Constant                           5.066        -2.251∗∗∗               -1.636∗∗∗
                                   (5.395)         (0.195)                  (0.232)
  Observations                        215           4762                      1704
  R2                                 0.213
  Mean Predicted Probability                        0.045                   0.124
  β=estimated coefficient, Mfx=marginal effect at sample mean. Standard errors in parentheses.
  ∗
    p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
  Note: Graduation Year Dummies and Caller Dummies included in each specification.
  ITT includes all subjects, TOT includes only contacted subjects.



TABLE 8: Class Year and Unusual Ask Subjects

                                       (1)                 (2)                      (3)
                                Absolute Diff.          Pledged                   Pledged
                               from Ask (OLS)         (Probit, ITT)            (Probit, TOT)
                                        β             β          Mfx            β         Mfx
  Unexplained Treatment              -0.259        -0.121∗     -0.009∗     -0.174∗∗ -0.030∗∗
                                    (1.475)        (0.069)                  (0.084)
  Match Dummy                       -0.641          0.065      0.005         0.029      0.005
                                    (1.466)        (0.068)                  (0.083)
  Lives Instate                   -6.325∗∗∗         0.121      0.009         -0.002     -0.000
                                    (2.321)        (0.101)                  (0.129)
  Age                               -0.030        0.024∗∗∗ 0.002∗∗∗        0.022∗∗∗ 0.004∗∗∗
                                    (0.078)        (0.004)                  (0.005)
  Constant                           9.093        -2.496∗∗∗               -1.877∗∗∗
                                   (10.109)        (0.217)                  (0.259)
  Observations                        190           4746                      1731
  R2                                 0.227
  Mean Predicted Probability                        0.043                   0.117
  β=estimated coefficient, Mfx=marginal effect at sample mean. Standard errors in parentheses.
  ∗
    p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
  Note: Graduation Year Dummies and Caller Dummies included in each specification.
  ITT includes all subjects, TOT includes only contacted subjects.




                                                            35
TABLE 9: Rescinded Pledges Summary Statistics

                                                                                                                  True Rev./Contact (SD)
 Treatment Group    Pledges   Paid   Unpaid     % Paid     % Unpaid    % Unpaid     % Unpaid    Mean Positive      Total       Contacted
                                               by check    (Check)     (Pledges)     (Total)    Donation (SD)
 No Ask               70       46       24      0.6714      0.5106      0.3429       0.0104     26.08 (17.70)    0.574 (4.62)   1.746 (7.89)
 Pooled Ask           299      213      86      0.6656      0.4322      0.2876       0.0119     21.31 (11.32)    0.660 (4.19)   1.757 (6.55)
 $20 Ask              108       80      28      0.6389      0.4058      0.2593       0.0116     21.38 (10.60)    0.736 (4.36)   1.931 (6.54)
 Class Yr Ask         107       78      29      0.6356      0.4265      0.2710       0.0122     21.22 (11.47)    0.755 (4.48)   2.021 (7.08)
 Unusual Ask          84       55       29      0.7380      0.4678      0.3452       0.0121     21.36 (12.32)    0.491 (3.69)   1.332 (6.00)

 No Match             175      123      52      0.6686      0.4444       0.2971      0.0109      22.14(12.86)    0.628(4.35)    1.76(7.08)
 No Ask               31       17       14      0.7419      0.6087       0.4516      0.0123      24.71(11.25)    0.522(4.22)    1.50(6.89)
 Ask                  144      106      38      0.6528      0.4043       0.2639      0.0105      21.72(13.11)    0.661(4.39)    1.84(7.13)

 Match                194     136      58       0.6650     0.4497        0.2990       0.0123      20.69(10.98)   0.650(4.26)    1.74(6.67)
 No Ask               39       29      10       0.6154     0.4167        0.2564       0.0084      23.62(19.95)   0.624(5.00)    1.99(8.78)
 Ask                  155     107      48       0.6774     0.4571        0.3097       0.0135       19.89(6.75)   0.659(3.99)    1.67(5.95)
 Note: Rescinded pledges occured when subjects pledged to mail a check, but such a check was never received.
 Both Match and Non-Match Subjects included.




TABLE 10: Rescinded Pledges by Pledge Amount

  Treatment Group         Under $20.00            $20.00-$20.08               Over $20.08
                     Pledges % Rescinded Pledges % Rescinded Pledges % Rescinded
 No Ask                21         0.4286        21         0.3333          28         0.2857
 Pooled Ask            44         0.2727       231         0.3060          24         0.1304
 $20 Ask               22         0.3182        77         0.2727           9            0
 Class Yr Ask          11         0.0909        91         0.3077           5            0
 Unusual Ask           11         0.3636        63         0.3437          10         0.3333
 Note: Rescinded pledges occured when subjects pledged to mail a check, but such a check
 was never received. Both Match and Non-Match Subjects included.




                                                                           36
10         Appendix
     TABLE 2A: Summary Statistics Including Dropped Outliers

                                                                                               FULL SAMPLE                                OUTLIERS (3SD) DROPPED
      Treatment Group     Subjects    Contacted    % of total   % of contacts    Mean Positive     Revenue/Contact (SD)           Mean Positive    Revenue/Contact (SD)
                                                   donating       donating       Donation (SD)      Total      Contacted          Donation (SD)     Total      Contacted
      No Ask                2,318        733        0.0301         0.0955        23.92 (16.28)   0.722 (4.96) 2.285 (8.63)        22.06 (12.01) 0.647 (4.24) 2.052 (7.37)
      Pooled Ask            7,169       2591        0.0417         0.1154        19.99 (9.06)    0.836 (4.41) 2.315 (7.10)        19.52 (6.17)  0.809 (4.09) 2.239 (6.56)
      $20 Ask               2,413        857        0.0447         0.1260        19.35 (7.36)    0.866 (4.29) 2.439 (6.93)        19.35 (7.36)  0.866 (4.29) 2.439 (6.93)
      Class Yr Ask          2,361        852        0.0453         0.1256        20.17 (9.04)    0.914 (4.61) 2.534 (7.41)        19.42 (4.62   0.872 (4.13) 2.419 (6.62)
      Unusual Ask           2,395        882        0.0351         0.0952        20.82 (10.74)   0.730 (4.32) 1.983 (6.95)        19.86 (6.27)  0.689 (3.81) 1.872 (6.11)

      No Match              4,753       1627         0.0368         0.0543       21.55 (11.92)     0.798 (4.66)    2.331 (7.75)   20.77 (8.35)      0.756 (4.20)   2.211 (6.96)
      No Ask                1,140        364         0.0271         0.0421       24.06 (13.10)     0.675 (4.53)    2.115 (7.82)   24.84 (12.54)     0.675 (4.52)   2.115 (7.82)
      Ask                   3,614       1263         0.0398         0.0580       20.99 (11.61)     0.837 (4.71)    2.394 (7.74)   19.88 (6.86)      0.782 (4.10)   2.239 (6.69)

      Match                4,734        1697        0.0409       0.0596        19.89 (9.90)       0.819 (4.43) 2.286 (7.17) 19.29 (6.90)            0.782 (4.05)   2.185 (6.54)
      No Ask               1,178         369        0.0331       0.0530        23.21 (18.87)      0.768 (5.36) 2.452 (9.37) 19.72 (11.2)            0.621 (3.96)   1.989 (6.904)
      Ask                  3,556        1328        0.0436       0.0615        19.07 (5.66)       0.836 (4.08) 2.240 (6.44) 19.19 (5.46)            0.836 (4.08)   2.240 (6.44)
      Note: Contacted subjects are characterized as those who were read the entire script, followed by a direct pledge or refusal by the subject.




     TABLE 4A: $20 Ask and No Ask Subjects with Outliers Dropped

                                          (1)                                    (2)                                            (3)
                                 Pledge Amount (OLS)               Absolute Diff. from $20 (OLS)                  Absolute Diff. from $20 (OLS)
        Ask Dummy                      -3.374∗∗                              -5.455∗∗∗                                      -5.182∗∗∗
                                        (1.682)                               (1.296)                                        (1.833)

        Match Dummy                        -2.582∗                                  -1.510                                        -1.182
                                           (1.546)                                  (1.191)                                       (1.964)

        Lives Instate                       0.843                                    2.425                                         2.377
                                           (2.237)                                  (1.724)                                       (1.745)

        Age                                0.101                                    0.138∗                                         0.139∗
                                          (0.0911)                                 (0.0702)                                       (0.0705)

        Ask * Match                                                                                                                -0.545
                                                                                                                                  (2.584)

        Constant                          24.19∗∗∗                                   1.404                                         1.155
                                           (8.824)                                  (6.799)                                       (6.924)
        Observations                         176                                      176                                           176
        R2                                  0.201                                    0.325                                         0.325
        Standard errors in parentheses
        ∗
          p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
        Note: Graduation Year Dummies and Caller Dummies included in each specification.




                                                                                            37
TABLE 7A: $20 Ask and Class Year Subjects with Outliers Dropped

                                                    (1)
                                      Absolute Diff. from Ask (OLS)
  $20 Ask Treatment                             -1.216∗∗
                                                 (0.573)

  Match Dummy                                    -0.0166
                                                 (0.581)

  Lives Instate                                    0.603
                                                  (0.872)

  Age                                             -0.0411
                                                 (0.0318)

  Constant                                         0.813
                                                  (2.618)
  Observations                                      209
  R2                                               0.154
  Standard errors in parentheses
  ∗
    p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
  Note: Graduation Year Dummies and Caller Dummies included in each specification.




TABLE 8A: Class Year and Unusual Ask Subjects with Outliers Dropped

                                               (1)
                                 Absolute Diff. from Ask (OLS)
  Unusual Treatment                        0.00585
                                            (0.577)

  Match Dummy                                 0.804
                                             (0.573)

  Lives Instate                               0.284
                                             (0.933)

  Age                                      -0.0643∗∗
                                            (0.0303)

  Constant                                    0.483
                                             (3.933)
  Observations                                 185
  R2                                          0.220
  Standard errors in parentheses
  ∗
    p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
  Note: Graduation Year and Caller Dummies included in each specification.




                                                             38
