NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TESTING THE THEORY OF MULTITASKING:
EVIDENCE FROM A NATURAL FIELD EXPERIMENT IN CHINESE FACTORIES
Fuhai Hong
Tanjim Hossain
John A. List
Migiwa Tanaka
Working Paper 19660
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19660

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2013

We thank Aureo de Paula, Florian Englmaier, Ying Fan, April Franco, Avi Goldfarb, Matthew Grennan,
Nicola Lacetera, Magne Mogstad, Justin Sydnor, and seminar participants at the Singapore Economic
Review Conference, University College London, University of Toronto, University of Konstanz, University
of Western Ontario, and Industrial Organization Society for helpful comments. We gratefully acknowledge
the financial support of SSHRC Grant No. 489160, and financial support from Shanghai University
of Finance and Economics. All correspondence should be directed to Tanjim Hossain (tanjim.hossain@utoronto.ca).
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Fuhai Hong, Tanjim Hossain, John A. List, and Migiwa Tanaka. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Testing the Theory of Multitasking: Evidence from a Natural Field Experiment in Chinese
Factories
Fuhai Hong, Tanjim Hossain, John A. List, and Migiwa Tanaka
NBER Working Paper No. 19660
November 2013
JEL No. C9,C90,C93,D01,D22
ABSTRACT
A well-recognized problem in the multitasking literature is that workers might substantially reduce
their effort on tasks that produce unobservable outputs as they seek the salient rewards to observable
outputs. Since the theory related to multitasking is decades ahead of the empirical evidence, the economic
costs of standard incentive schemes under multitasking contexts remain largely unknown. This study
provides empirical insights quantifying such effects using a field experiment in Chinese factories.
Using more than 2200 data points across 126 workers, we find sharp evidence that workers do trade
off the incented output (quantity) at the expense of the non-incented one (quality) as a result of a piece
rate bonus scheme. Consistent with our theoretical model, treatment effects are much stronger for
workers whose base salary structure is a flat wage compared to those under a piece rate base salary.
While the incentives result in a large increase in quantity and a sharp decrease in quality for workers
under a flat base salary, they result only in a small increase in quantity without affecting quality for
workers under a piece rate base salary.
Fuhai Hong
Division of Economics
Nanyang Technological University
fhhong@ntu.edu.sg
Tanjim Hossain
Rotman School of Management,
University of Toronto
tanjim.hossain@utoronto.ca

John A. List
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
jlist@uchicago.edu
Migiwa Tanaka
Department of Economics
University of Toronto
migiwa.tanaka@utoronto.ca

I.

Introduction
One ubiquitous feature of modern economies is the importance of principal-agent

relations. Be it at home, at school, in the board room, or in the doctor’s office, each contains
significant components of the principal-agent relationship. The general structure of the problem
is that the agent has better information about her actions than the principal and, without proper
incentives, inefficient outcomes are obtained. For instance, a worker in a firm usually knows
more about how hard he is working and how such effort maps into productivity than does the
owner. A particularly important and relatively complex problem arises when output has multiple
dimensions that vary in their quantifiability.
The core principle of the multitasking theory initiated by Holmstrom and Milgrom (1991)
is that agents will focus their effort on measurable and rewarded tasks at the expense of other
tasks (when higher effort on one task raises the marginal cost of effort on other tasks), potentially
adversely influencing the principal’s benefits. Therefore, it is desirable for the principal to keep
a balance between incentives across tasks to avoid this form of “task arbitrage” by the agent.
Ever since the seminal work of Holmstrom and Milgrom (1991), theorists have made important
advances related to the multitasking problem and its relation to contract theory (see, Prendergast
(1999) for an excellent review).
Multitasking is a major component of a recent policy debate concerning pay for
performance to doctors in New York City public hospitals (see Hartocolis, 2013 and Keller,
2013). While doctors will receive raises based on some quality measures, such as patients’
ratings of doctors’ communication effort, promptness in operation room, and the speed of service,
many other quality aspects of health care will not be measured.

If predictions from the

multitasking theory bear out in practice, qualities of the rewarded measures are likely to increase
as a result of the pay for performance scheme, but that may have adverse effect on the
unmeasured quality dimensions. Such concerns will affect how optimal contracts should be
written between hospitals and physicians.
Understanding how given incentive contracts affect agents’ effort choice in observed and
unobserved dimensions is a necessary first step in the study of contract design under multitasking.
While the import of the topic is hard to understate, what is clear is that empirical work is decades
behind the theory. Yet, there have been some recent novel efforts to rectify this situation. For
1

example, using observational data, Marschke (1996), Paarsch and Shearer (2004), Dumont et al.
(2008), Johnson, Reiley, and Munoz (2012), and Lu (2012) generally find support for the
received theory. Al-Ubaydli et al (2008) also find that worker responses are largely consonant
with theory in their natural field experiment. Although not aiming to test the multitasking theory
directly, field experiments of Shearer (2004), Bandiera, Barankay, and Rasul (2005), and
Hossain and List (2012) do not find that the quality of work is affected by the incentives in the
quantity of production. Similarly, Englmaier, Roider, and Sunde (2013) find that making the
piecewise wage rate more salient to the workers increase productivity but does not affect the
quality of production significantly. Alternatively, Hossain and Li (2013) find that workers
reciprocate to a high piece rate wage by increasing the quality of work even though their income
does not depend on the quality. There have been even fewer empirical or experimental studies
on how multitasking issues affect contracts. One notable exception is Slade (1996), who studies
how complementarity between different tasks affects incentive contracts in a vertical relationship.
In most of the above studies, while output levels in certain dimensions are not contracted
upon, the agents know that output levels in those dimensions can be observed by the principal.1
Moreover, the principal and the agents are engaged in long term contracts. As a result, workers
or the agents may incorporate that into their objective function even if those dimensions are not
incentivized in the contract and may not necessarily behave according to the predictions of
Milgrom and Holmstrom (1991). Such a repeated-game effect compounds the problem of testing
the multitasking theory, which is originally based on a one-shot interaction model.
In this study, we take the literature in a new direction by visiting Chinese factories. By
overlaying a field experiment in a natural setting, we can explore how regular factory workers
respond to incentives in a multitask environment and quantify the effect of such incentives on
output dimensions that are both contracted and not contracted. Specifically, we choose work
where the quality of the produced goods is lightly inspected. More importantly, the settings of
these inspections are such that the exact worker who produced the product is not identified
during the sample inspection.

During our experiment, we hired inspectors who secretly

inspected the quality of each produced unit while identifying who produced each product. Even

1

In Al-Ubaydli et al (2008), however, the temporary workers were not aware that the employer would observe the
quality of their work.
2

though we have perfect measure for the quality of production, from the workers’ points of view,
quality is unobservable to the principal. Reputation concerns arising from observability of
outputs and long-term interactions between the principal and the agent are unlikely to affect an
agent’s effort choice in the quality dimension. Thus, we created an ideal setting to test
predictions from the multitasking theory where production quality is not observable. 2
Our experimental testing ground is five firms located on the southern side of Fujian, a
southeastern coastal province of China with a high concentration of manufacturers of electronics
and clocks and watches. These five firms allowed us to introduce treatments to induce greater
production levels of GPS devices, alarm devices, and clocks.

Importantly, before our

intervention, the base salary structure of workers in some of the factories is a flat per hour wage,
whereas in some of the factories the workers are paid with piece rates. Our key experimental
treatment revolves around workers’ pay:

during the incentive treatment, workers received

monetary incentives based on their observed productivity in addition to their base salary,
whereas under the control they did not receive any additional monetary incentive. The monetary
incentives were approximately 40% of base salary. Using a data set with more than 2200
observations across 126 workers, we report several insights.
First, we find that our incentives worked: compared to their baseline productivity, the
workers increased their productivity by 25.6% on average, when they received monetary
incentives. There is, however, an important caveat to our first finding: incentives work, but it is
much stronger for workers who were not incented on the margin in their naturally-occurring jobs.
Those workers whose base salaries are paid with fixed hourly wages showed very large incentive
effects (50.1%) whereas those whose base salaries are paid by piece rates showed statistically
significant but smaller effects (4.9%). This result suggests that the workers who are incented on
the margin under their base salary produced near their individual production frontiers before the
experiment whereas those not incented on the margin were far from their personal frontiers. This
is also consistent with predictions from our simple theoretical model.

2

Jensen (2001) and Griffith and Neely (2009) investigate the profitability of paying incentives based on overall
performance measures. In this paper, we do not investigate the profitability of specific performance pay schemes,
which is more difficult to generalize. Rather, we ask the more general question of whether performance pay based
on observed effort dimensions leads to substitution of unobserved efforts.
3

Second, we also observe a difference in defect rates between treatments: although workers
increased productivity as a result of the monetary inducement, their quality of production
decreased, as predicted by standard theory. Specifically, we find that the workers increase their
defect rates by 61.3%, under the bonus scheme. Analyzing the relation between productivity and
the defect rate, we find that a 1% increase in the hourly productivity comes with a 1.87%
increase in the defect rate. This result means that workers in our field experiment did not
reciprocate to the generous bonus scheme that we provided by increasing the quality of
production. In fact, it was quite the opposite: even though workers knew that quality was
important, they shirked on that dimension to earn greater financial rewards. Interestingly, further
analysis of the data suggests that the quantity-quality trade-off is present only for workers under
a flat rate base salary. The bonus scheme is associated with a 97.2% increase in the defect rates
for workers under a flat rate base salary. However, the increase in the defect rate is not
statistically significant (with a much smaller coefficient) for workers under a piece rate base
salary.

Thus, while workers under a flat rate base salary clearly substituted effort in the

unobservable dimension with effort in the observable dimension, such effects seem much weaker
for workers under a piece rate base salary. An implication for researchers and policymakers is
that great care must be taken when generalizing results on introduction of incentives because the
extant economic environment can greatly influence observed treatment effects.
Finally, our data from the control groups show the importance of a Hawthorne effect.
Even though the actual Hawthorne data from the original experiments do not stand up to closer
scrutiny (see Levitt and List, 2011), the data from Chinese factories do: we find a robust and
economically significant Hawthorne effect in Chinese manufacturing plants. The measured
effect is large  around 9%  and is temporally resilient: it lasts for the entire experimental
session.
The remainder of our paper proceeds as follows. The next section outlines the theoretical
framework for our design. Sections III and IV describe the experimental design and the main
results, respectively. Section V discusses the extent of the Hawthorne effect in our data and
Section VI concludes.

4

II.

Theoretical Framework
In what follows, we outline a basic form of the multitasking theory based on Holmstrom

and Milgrom (1991) and Baker (1992). In this model, an agent chooses a level of effort e = (e1,
e2) to provide to a task given by a principal, where e is two-dimensional. Intuitively, we can
think that the first dimension of effort affects the quantity of output and the second dimension
affects the quality of output. The quantity and quality are, respectively, given by the production
functions f(e1) and d(e2), which are both strictly increasing.3 However, incentive contracts can
be based only on f(e1) as the principal only observes the quantity of production. Without loss of
generality, we assume that f(e1)=e1 and d(e2)=e2. To provide effort level of e, we assume that an
agent faces an effort cost of C(e). We impose a standard set of regularity conditions on C(e),
namely that:


C(e) is strictly convex and is continuously differentiable on its domain and



C12(e) is strictly positive on its domain. Here subscripts of 1 and 2 denote partial
derivatives with respect to e1 and e2, respectively.
As in Holmstrom and Milgrom (1991), C(e) attains an interior minimum at some finite,

strictly positive vector ̅

,

, representing the effort choice of the agent when neither

dimension of effort is incentivized. We assume that ̅ is strictly positive due to concerns for the
employer or the firm, disutility from boredom if the agent exerts no effort, etc. The assumption
that C12 is strictly positive implies that increasing effort in one dimension increases the marginal
cost in the other dimension of effort. Thus, increasing effort in one dimension leads to some
negative externality on the other dimension.
In this context, the principal offers the agent a wage of γ + α0e1 where γ is a fixed payment
and α0≥0 is piece rate payment on the observable component of effort. In this paper, we do not
investigate how the principal chooses such a contract. Rather, we focus solely on how the agent
responds to a given wage contract. Given the wage offer, the agent will choose her effort level e*
such that:
∗

max

.

From this model, we would predict that an agent who is offered a flat rate of pay, α0 = 0 (i.e. not
incented on the margin), would choose the interior minimum level of effort ̅ . In addition, since
3

Theory models solving for optimal contracts often assume that there are unobservable shocks in the production
functions. However, for our purpose of understanding agent behavior, deterministic production functions suffice.
5

we assumed that e1 and e2 are substitutes in the agent’s effort, we predict that when facing a
piece rate α0 > 0, the agent will increase effort on the observable component of effort while
reducing effort on the unobservable component of effort.

This follows from the fact that

reducing e2 reduces the marginal cost of increasing e1. These results are reported in Lemma 1.
Lemma 1 An agent facing a contract where α0 equals 0 will respond by choosing

∗

̅.

Moreover, the larger the value of α0 is, the larger will be the agent’s choice of e1 and the smaller
will be her choice of e2 when she maximizes her payoff.
0, then the agent will choose e* such that C1(e*) = C2(e*) = 0. However, that

Proof: If

implies that e* is the unique interior minimizer for the function C. In other words,
general, the agent solves the following maximization problem: max
conditions imply that at the optimal level of effort e*,

∗

0 because C is strictly convex. Hence,
Therefore, as

∗

0 . Total

0 and

0 . The second condition implies that
⇒

̅ . In

. First order
and

differentiation of these two conditions yields

condition, we get

∗

.

Inserting this in the first

. Now,

0 and

0. Moreover,

0.

increases, the chosen level of effort increases in the first dimension and

decreases in the second dimension.▪
Lemma 1 implies that compared to an agent receiving a flat wage rate, an agent under a
piece rate contract will put in more effort in the quantity dimension and exert less effort in the
quality dimension.4 We see the multitasking problem that the principal faces from this result.
On one hand, offering no incentive at the margin may lead the agent to choose effort level

∗

which is suboptimal for the principal. On the other hand, if the second component of effort is
sufficiently important, the principal may not be able to improve upon the agent’s choice of ̅ .
Now we analyze the impact of a piece rate bonus on top of the base salary of

.

Specifically, a worker who produces e1 units receives a bonus of α1(e1 – e1t) when she produces
4

We get the same theoretical prediction if we assume that the production functions f and d, instead of the cost
function C, depend on efforts in both dimensions. Specifically, suppose that fixing e1, increasing e2 reduces quantity
while increasing quality. On the other hand, if e2 is fixed, increasing e1 increases quantity and decreasing quality.
The agent’s strategic trade-offs in this model are fundamentally the same as those in our model above. In both cases,
agents strategically increase e1 and reduce e2 as a result of a quantity-based bonus when quality is unobserved.
6

for a set target level e1t0 with α1>0. That is, the agent producing e1 units will earn a
if
if

wage of w where

,
.

For workers with a flat rate base salary, α0=0 and for workers with a piece rate base salary, α0>0.
We use Lemma 1 to show the first prediction of the multitasking theory that we test. The
introduction of a piece rate bonus will (weakly) increase effort in the quantity dimension and
(weakly) decrease effort in the quality dimension under both flat rate and piece rate base salaries.
For the rest of this section, we assume that α1 is high enough and e1t is low enough such that the
agent chooses e1 larger than e1t when she is offered the bonus scheme. Of course, if this is not
true, the bonus will not have an effect on the agent’s effort choice and she will produce below e1t
with or without the bonus scheme.
Proposition 1 Suppose that α1 is high enough and e1t is low enough such that the agent chooses
e1 larger than e1t when she is offered the bonus scheme. Then, she will increase e1 and decrease
e2 under the bonus scheme.
Proof: Suppose that the agent chooses the effort vectors

and

under the base salary and the

bonus scheme, respectively. Since we assumed that the chosen level of e1 is larger than e1t under
,

the bonus scheme, the first order conditions are:

and

0. Here α0≥0 and α1>0. Thus, one can view the bonus scheme to be an incentive
and

scheme that offers a larger piece rate at the margin. Following Lemma 1,

.▪

We can further show that under suitable conditions, the increase in effort in the quantity
dimension will be smaller as α0 increases for a given α1. For this result, we make a number of
new assumptions on the marginal cost functions C1 and C2. First, the cross partial derivatives of
C1 and C2 equal zero; that is C112 = C221 = 0. Thus, C11 and C22 are independent of the value of
e2 and e1, respectively. Moreover, we assume that

0 and

0 and

for

all e. Thus, the marginal costs are convex and, in some sense, C1 is sufficiently more convex
than C2. These assumptions lead to the following proposition.

7

Proposition 2 For a given α1, the larger the value of α0 is, the smaller will be the magnitudes of the
increase in e1 and the decrease in e2 as a result of the bonus.
and

Proof: Suppose that the agent chooses the effort vectors

under the base salary and the
,

bonus scheme, respectively. The first order conditions are:
0. We need to show that

0 and

Lemma 1 implies that the larger α0 is, the larger will be
0 and

it is sufficient to show that

and
0. Recall that,

and the smaller will be

. Therefore,

0. The first order conditions imply that

. Using total differentiation and the fact that α1 is kept unchanged, we can
show that
0.

1

Total differentiations of the first order conditions on C2 gives us

for both

and

. Inserting these values in equation (1), we get

⇒

2 .

By strict convexity of C, both the numerator and denominator in the right side of Equation (2)
are positive. Then, showing that
showing that

will be sufficient for

1 and the increase in effort in dimension 1 due to the bonus scheme is
. Then,

decreasing in α0. Let us define
2

2

.

8

Note that the above uses our assumption that the third-order cross partial derivatives (e.g. C112,
⇒

C221, etc.) equal zero. Now, strict convexity of C implies that
. Therefore,

we assumed that
and

1⇒

To prove the part for

and

, this implies that

. Since

0.
, we substitute

into Equation (1), which yields
,

and therefore
.

Define

. Given our assumptions,

.
Our assumption
. As a result,

. Then, 0

implies that
1 and

since

0. This completes the proof of the proposition.▪

Our assumption that the marginal cost functions are convex implies that the increase in the
marginal cost resulting from a unit increase in the effort level along a dimension is greater when
the base effort level along that dimension is higher. Thus, for a given bonus piece rate α1 (which
denotes the change in the marginal cost in the quantity dimension), the associated change in the
effort level is smaller when we start from a higher base effort level along the quantity dimension.
As a result, for a given worker, the higher the piece rate component of her base salary is, the
smaller is the change in her effort level in the quantity dimension as a result of a given piece rate
bonus scheme. A corollary of this result is that, for a given bonus scheme, the increase in
production quantity will be greater when the base salary structure is flat rate.
9

III. Experimental Design
To provide empirical insights into the theory, we ran nine experimental sessions in five
Chinese firms between April 2009 and July 2012. All of the firms are located on the southern
side of Fujian, a southeastern coastal province of China. The five firms (Hengli, Jiali, Heyu,
Wanlida, and Shike) allowed us to introduce treatments pertaining to the production of GPS
devices, alarm devices, and clocks. Among the five firms, Hengli, Jiali, and Heyu are clock or
clock module manufacturers located in Zhangzhou prefecture. Wanlida is a large electronics
manufacturing company whose production center is located in Nanjing county.

Shike, a

relatively small electronics manufacturer located in Quanzhou city, mainly produces alarm
devices.
In our sample, the base salary structure of workers in some of the factories is flat rate—
workers receive a fixed hourly wage in Hengli, Wanlida, and Shike. In Jiali and Heyu, on the
other hand, workers are paid a piece rate salary possibly with a small flat component. In all
firms, within a factory, the base salary scheme of most non-administrative workers follows the
same formatflat rate or piece rate. A factory usually chooses a base salary format based on the
production process of the main products the factory manufactures.

For example, if the

production processes are team or product line based, the factories usually choose flat rate salary
schemes. If the main products are manufactured individually with stable demands for the
products, base salaries are likely to be piece rate. For our experiment, we chose works that are
not mainstays of the factories, rather supporting works such as packaging or simple maneuvering
that require relatively little training or human capital. Thus, it is unlikely that workers in our
experiments have sorted themselves out to a specific kind of base salary structure by their choice
of profession. We also note that the piece rate component of the base salary is the same for all
workers within a session with a piece rate base salary. Table 1 provides a summary of the nine
sessions including the description of the work place and the experimental design described below.
In total, 126 regular employees working in these firms were involved in our experiment.
These workers each completed individual tasks: either packaging products (clocks, alarm devices,
or attachments to GPS devices) or wedging components into clock modules, or twining metallic
threads for clock modules. Within each session, all subjects performed the same task and all
workers involved in that specific task were included as subjects in our experiment. For all of the
10

tasks, the usual way of quality control is sampling inspection. The sampling rates vary from firm
to firm, but none is more than 5%. Moreover, the factories do not record the exact mapping
between a sample product and the worker who produced it. Thus, from the perspective of a
worker, the extent of the effort she expends to control the quality of production is more or less
unobservable to the managers.
During our experimental sessions, the workers engaged in tasks within their natural work
environment unaware of that an experiment was taking place. Accordingly, we denote our
experiment as a natural field experiment, following the terminology of Harrison and List (2004).
One session typically lasted three days, or around 15 to 24 work hours. For each work hour, we
recorded the production and the non-work minutes (if any) for each worker. We then projected
the worker’s production to her hourly productivity by taking the non-work minutes within the
hour into account.
In our setting, a test of the multitasking theory requires the availability of the data on the
quality of the workers’ productions as well. However, if the workers know that the quality of
their production is to be observed, a compounding repeated-game effect would emerge. Our
experimental design resolves this dilemma. We chose works that were lightly inspected in the
usual production procedure, and hired inspectors to secretly inspect all of the workers’
productions and record the number of defects made by each worker for each hour.5 To achieve
confidentiality, inspection was conducted either in an isolated space away from the workers’
workplaces or when all the workers were off duty. Some of the inspections were done after the
experimental session was over. We ensured that the inspectors and all the managers involved
kept this secret. As noted above, the regular rate of sampling inspection is very low. The
workers were unaware of the heightened quality control measures or any change in the
inspection process during our experimental sessions.
Depending on the nature of the work, a worker may make more than one defect in a
produced unit. For example, each worker in our session at Shike Alarm System Electronic Co.
Ltd. was responsible for plugging a circuit wafer into a plastic shell, placing a label on the shell,
5

A brief comparison between our design and that of Al-Ubaydli et al (2008) may be worthwhile here. In AlUbaydli et al (2008), temporary workers did not know the inspection procedure conducted by the employer, as there
was no well-set procedure in their temporary work environment. By contrast, our experiment took place in the
natural workplace of regular factory workers who knew the usual production and inspection procedures very well.
11

brushing some items, folding the instruction sheet, and then putting all of these items together
into a paper box. Workers can potentially commit an error in any of these steps, and each
mistake is counted separately. We can calculate the maximum number of possible mistakes or
defects a worker can make in a given hour by multiplying the number of units she produces in
that hour by the maximum number of defects that can be made for each unit produced. We
define the defect rate to be ratio of the number of defects the worker made in that hour and the
maximum number of possible defects. Thus, the defect rate takes a value between 0 and 1.
A session is divided into three rounds: a pre-intervention baseline round was followed by
two rounds of interventions. The interventions include the bonus round and the control round.
Workers received monetary incentives conditional on their productivity during the bonus round.
During the control round, they did not receive any additional monetary incentive. The baseline
round lasted three to eight hours. The bonus and control rounds lasted six to eight hours each.
Each round typically corresponds to one day. After the baseline round, half of the workers were
randomly selected into the bonus group while the others were in the control group.

The

management notified the subjects of the bonus treatment via personal letters. At the beginning of
a round, each worker in the bonus group received a letter saying that she had been selected into a
short-term program which lasted for t work hours. For each of the hours, if her productivity
exceeded a target of y units, she would receive a bonus at the rate of RMB α1 per unit for each
unit she produced beyond the target of y units. Thus, if a worker’s productivity for a given hour
was x units then she would receive no bonus if x≤y and would receive a bonus of RMB α1(x – y)
otherwise. Bonuses, if any, were paid in addition to the workers’ base salary. Workers were told
that the non-work minutes would be taken into account when measuring hourly productivity to
calculate the bonus. Most workers in our experiments were familiar with such a bonus. In peak
seasons when they need workers to work harder, the factories sometimes provide piece rate or
flat rate bonuses if production exceeds a certain target. The targets, however, are usually based
on daily production, not hourly production.
We chose the target y and the piece rate α1 based on the baseline data of productivity.
Generally speaking, we wanted the target to be difficult to achieve for a worker with average
productivity, but she would have a reasonable chance to achieve it if she tried hard. We
followed the same formula to choose the parameters so that the target and the piece rate across
12

sessions are somewhat comparable. For a session, let M and SD, respectively, denote the mean
and standard deviation of the baseline productivity across all workers in the session. Generally,
we chose the target y, in consultation with the management in the factories, to be a round number
close to M + SD that could be considered as a natural target level.6 On average, the target was
24% higher than M and we observed about 12% of worker-period combinations in which a
worker met the target during a baseline round.
With respect to the setting of the piece rate α1, we chose a number that we thought was
attractive enough to effectively incentivize even workers with average productivity and would
provide almost twice the amount of their average base income as a bonus if they produced at a
very high rate, e.g., at two standard deviations above the target level y. For example, in session 8,
the salary for a worker-subject with average productivity was around RMB 60-65 per day (which
approximately equaled USD 10 at the exchange rate during the period of the experiment). Under
the bonus round, which lasted for one work day, a worker obtained a bonus of RMB 25, on
average, which is approximately 40% of her base salary. The highest bonus paid in this session
was RMB 111, almost double of the average daily salary.
In order to control for the potential effects of receiving a letter, we also sent each worker in
the control group a letter which only encouraged her to work hard.7 In the second round, we
switched the bonus to those subjects who were in the control group in the first round. Those who
received the bonus scheme in the first round were in the control group in the second round. The
reason for exposing each worker to both bonus and control was twofold. This allows us to
identify a worker’s effort choices under multitasking consideration using variations within that
particular worker. Moreover, as our incentive schemes potentially provided a substantial amount
of additional payments to workers, the factories required that we offer the bonus treatments to all
workers within a particular set of work. To control for the impact of the treatment sequence, we
offered the bonus first to half of the workers and control first to the rest.
A few other experimental particulars of interest are worth noting before we move to the
experimental results. First, the source of the bonus was intentionally kept vague. Second, the

6

We made slight adjustments to the target level in order to take outliers in terms of productivity in the baseline
hours, if any, into account.
7
The Appendix includes, as an example, English translation of the letters used in session 5.
13

letters clearly mentioned that this was a short-term incentive program and the workers were
likely to assume that the incentive schemes were one-shot opportunities. Third, during the
baseline round, the workers were unaware of the fact that they may receive bonus schemes in the
following days; during the first round of experiment, workers in the control group were unaware
that they would receive bonus schemes in the next day.
IV.

Experimental Results
In total, the nine experimental sessions included 126 workers. As we collected data on

productivity and defects every hour, we have an observation for each hour. We have a total of
2272 observations – 653, 812, and 807 observations under the baseline, bonus, and control
rounds, respectively. Table 2 presents summary statistics of hourly productivity, defect rate, and
the percentage of hours in which the worker reached the target for the baseline, control, and
bonus rounds, for all sessions and sessions with flat rate and piece rate base salary structures
separately. Recall that hourly productivity is calculated by projecting a worker’s production in a
work hour net of the non-work minutes within the hour. The hourly defect rate is defined as the
number of defects divided by the maximum possible number of defects for a given hour.
Percentage of periods meeting the target reports the ratio of observations in which the worker’s
productivity was at least as high as the target level set during the bonus round for the session.8
As the base productivity and defect rates and the number of hours under each round vary across
sessions, the summary statistics aggregating observation from all sessions are not extremely
informative. When we look at the sessions under the same base salary structures, the treatment
effects are somewhat clearer. Nevertheless, we need to control for session and individual specific
heterogeneity to truly identify the treatment effects.
Effect on Productivity
First, we analyze hourly productivity under the bonus and control rounds compared to the
baseline round graphically. Recall that the bonus and control rounds were between six to eight
hours long and we have baseline production data for all workers. For each worker, we calculated
the percentage deviation in productivity compared to her average productivity in the baseline
round for each hour during the bonus and control rounds. Figure 1 presents the percentage
8

Overall, 2.4% of workers met the target in all periods including the baseline round. Moreover, 28.6% did not meet
the target in any period. The results presented in this paper remain qualitatively unchanged if we exclude these
workers from the regressions in Tables 3 to 8.
14

deviation in productivity from the mean baseline productivity, averaged across all workers, in the
first six hours of the bonus and control rounds. Treatment effects vary between experimental
sessions.9 As a result, when we aggregate the deviation of productivity from the baseline round
productivity across workers, we need to ensure that the composition of workers is the same
between different hours to keep them comparable. Each of the bonus and control rounds was at
least six hours long. Hence, we restrict attention only to the first six hours within a bonus or
control round in Figure 1. The figure suggests that both control and bonus rounds increase
productivity with the increase being much greater under the bonus scheme. Moreover, the
treatment effects do not decrease over time. The figure does not change qualitatively if we
present the deviation from the productivity in the last hour the baseline round instead of the
deviation from average productivity in the baseline round.
Next, we analyze the data more closely exploiting panel structure of the data set as we have
observations over time for each worker. The base estimation model can be described as:
log(productivityit) =

bonusit

controlit



(3),

where productivityit denotes hourly productivity of worker i in hour t, bonusit and controlit are
dichotomous variables indicating the treatment worker i experienced in hour t; and Tit is a vector
of variables that control for time effects. The error term consists of time invariant individual
specific term ci which controls for heterogeneity among workers, and time variant idiosyncratic
individual specific error term it. We allow the term ci to be correlated with other independent
variables, in particular Tit. Therefore, we present estimates of this model under the fixed effects
framework. Nevertheless, we also estimated the model under the random effects framework in
the cases where ci is unlikely to be correlated with other independent variables. We assume that

it is independently but not necessarily identically distributed across i and t. Therefore, in all of
our regression specifications reported below, we use heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors.

9

For example, treatment effects depend critically on the base salary structure and a change in the composition of
sessions changes the average deviation of productivity from the mean considerably.
15

Moreover they are clustered at the worker level, addressing the concern that observations for a
worker are not independent across time.10
In Table 3, we report the results of this regression under the fixed effects specification.11
In column (1) of Table 3, we do not control for any time effect. The column shows that
compared to the baseline hours, the bonus scheme increased productivity by 25.6%.
Interestingly, the data also show that in the control round, when the workers received an
encouraging letter but no monetary incentive, productivity increased by 9.4% compared to the
baseline. Thus, the bonus increased productivity by 16.2% over the control.
Each of our experimental sessions were run over three days and the workers had already
experienced the production processes prior to our experiment. Thus, learning by doing should
not be important during our experimental sessions. Nevertheless, as the bonus scheme was new
to them, there may still be some learning about how fast they can produce and how to adjust
production to this incentive program. In addition, production of any worker may vary over time
due to fatigue within a day. As a round typically corresponds to one day, while the nth work hour
within a round may have a different impact on morale and fatigue from the n–1th work hour in
the same round, the impact should be similar to that in the nth work hour in another round 
effort costs are likely to be separable across days. To control for this, we create a variable that
counts the number of hours under a specific round. That is, this variable starts from one in the
baseline round and gets reset to one every time the worker enters a new round  bonus or
control. To allow for non-linear time effect within a round, we also create a dummy variable for
each work hour within a round. In equation (3), vector Tit contains these time variables. Column
(2) includes the time dummy variables as regressors.
Although this approach serves to reduce the coefficient sizes slightly, the bonus and
control rounds continue to increase productivity significantly: by 24.8% and 8.6%, respectively.
Importantly, these two coefficients are significantly different from each other with a p-value
10

Even though the variation in worker productivity over time across workers within a given session is likely to be
independent, for robustness, we also calculated standard errors while clustering at the session level. The main
results do not change qualitatively in that case.
11
The results did not significantly change either qualitatively and quantitatively from those presented in Table 3
when we estimated this model under the random effects specifications. Moreover, the heteroskedasticity and cluster
robust Hausman test described in Arellano (1993) rejects the null hypothesis that the random effects estimator is
consistent and efficient at significance levels less than 1%.
16

below 0.0001. Thus, we conclude that our high-powered incentive scheme had a very large
impact in increasing productivity. Specifically, compared to the control, the bonus scheme
increased productivity by 16.2%.12
These results are in line with the summary statistics of the proportion of periods in which a
worker reached the target, reported in Table 2. This proportion increased to 58.5% in the bonus
round and 36.9% in the control round from 11.8% in the baseline round. We also found that the
number of workers who met the target more frequently in the bonus round compared to the
baseline round is greater than comparable figures for the control round. Likewise, the percentage
of workers who always met the target throughout a round indicates a similar effect of treatments:
in the baseline round, 3.2% of workers met the target in all periods, while 46% and 23% of
workers did so in the bonus control rounds, respectively. Also, the percentage of workers who
never met the target in a round decreases: 73% of workers never met the target in the baseline
round while 31% and 44% of workers never met the target in the bonus and control rounds,
respectively.
Relationship between Productivity and Defect Rate
Next we analyze how the defect rate is affected by the increase in productivity as reported
above. In this way, we are permitted a test of Proposition 1 which is based on the theoretical
predictions of Holmstrom and Milgrom (1991) and Baker (1992). First, we test whether the
average defect rates in the bonus and control rounds are different from that in the baseline round.
Figure 2 presents the average defect rates across all sessions for baseline, control, and bonus
rounds: the mean defect rates are 0.009, 0.012, and 0.016, respectively. The difference in defect
rates between the control and baseline rounds is statistically significant at the 5% level, and that
between bonus and baseline rounds is statistically significant at the 1% level. Moreover, the
difference in defect rates under bonus and control rounds is significant at 10% level (the p-value
is 0.060). While the workers increased productivity as a result of the quantity-based bonus
scheme, they also reduced the quality of production, as the theory predicts.

12

We have also allowed different sessions to have different time effects, by including session specific time variables
but the results did not change significantly.
17

Table 4 confirms this result by presenting fixed effects panel regressions of log of the
defect rate on dummy variables for bonus and control rounds. The base estimation model is
described as:



log(defectrateit) = Γ′

(4),

where defectrateit denotes hourly defect rate of worker i at time t. 13 Moreover, Xit is either a
vector containing dummy variables indicating bonus and control rounds or is the log of hourly
productivity for worker i at time t, Tit is the time variable vector defined earlier, ci is time
invariant individual specific effect for worker i, and it is an idiosyncratic error term. The vector
 contains the coefficients associated with Xit.
Column (1) of the table shows that, relative to the baseline round, the bonus scheme
statistically significantly increased the defect rate by 61.3%. 14

Note that, however, the

coefficient for the dummy variable for control round is not statistically significant. Workers
increase productivity during control round, perhaps as a result of the encouraging letter they
receive, without increasing the defect rate as they have no additional incentive to shift some
effort from the quality dimension to the quantity dimension. On the other hand, the piece rate
bonus for productivity above the target level provides incentives for shifting effort to the quantity
dimension. This results in a greater increase in productivity (relative to the control round) and an
increase in the defect rate under the bonus scheme.
Another way of testing the theoretical prediction that workers reduce effort in terms of
quality while increasing effort in terms of quantity is to analyze whether the defect rate increases
when the worker produces more as is done in Bandiera, Barankay, and Rasul (2005) and Hossain
and List (2012). Column (2) of Table 4 presents fixed effects panel regressions of the hourly
defect rate on the log of productivity in that hour. A 1% increase in productivity increases the
defect rate by around 1.87%. One might worry about the endogeneity of productivity in this
model. However, we controlled for time invariant aspects of endogeneity, such as, for example,
highly productive workers inherently having higher or lower defect rates, by estimating it under
13

Since the defect rate for about 25% of the observations is zero, we added a small value (10-7) to all observations
before taking logarithm of defect rate. The results are robust to the magnitude of this adjustment.
14
We also estimated this specification using the random effects model. We obtained qualitatively same and
quantitatively similar results.
18

the fixed effects framework, which controls for time-invariant individual specific factor in an
error term that may be correlated with productivity. Note that we do not include treatment
dummies here, as they are strongly correlated with productivity and including those may
confound the effect of productivity on the defect rate. Nevertheless, including those dummies in
the regression in column (2) leaves the coefficient of log of productivity virtually unchanged
while the coefficients of the dummy variables are small and statistically insignificant.
Together, the two results presented so far are consistent with Proposition 1. In sum, our
data provide strong evidence that workers trade off quality for quantity when their income does
not depend on quality and they believe that quality is not carefully monitored.15 According to
the best of our knowledge, this is the first natural field experiment conducted in a regular
workplace to find such stark evidence of the most basic theoretical predictions of Holmstrom and
Milgrom (1991) and Baker (1992).

Varying the Treatment Effects Depending on the Base Salary Structure
The base salary structure is different for different sessions within our experiment. Workers
in sessions 1, 3, 4, 6, and 7 are paid by fixed hourly wage rates and workers in sessions 2, 5, 8,
and 9 are paid piece rate salaries by their employers. Such richness of our data allows us to
investigate whether the base salary structure of the worker has an impact on the treatment effects
on quantity and quality of production. With that goal, we run regressions similar to equations (3)
and (4), but decompose the treatment dummies by whether the base salary structure is flat rate or
piece rate.
Table 5 presents the regression results of log productivity on four dummy variables: bonus
and control dummies interacted with the base salary structure of flat rate and piece rate. We
present regressions with and without time variables under the fixed effects specification.
Column (1) of Table 5 suggests that while the bonus round increases productivity by 50.1% for
the sessions under a flat rate base salary, it increases productivity by only 4.9% for sessions
under a piece rate base salary. Moreover, the control round for sessions with a flat rate base
salary increases productivity by 21.1%.

Interestingly, the control round does not raise

15

Recall that the workers were completely unaware of the heightened inspection rate and, from their perspectives,
there was no change in the monitoring of quality.
19

productivity over that of the baseline round for the sessions under a piece rate base salary. All of
these coefficients are significantly different from each other at conventional significance levels.16
Column (2) includes time variables, as in Table 3. The results remain qualitatively the same as
those in column (1). Overall, these results are consistent with the prediction regarding the
observable effort dimension in Proposition 2. Even though we cannot compare their wage rates
directly as the sessions are for different kinds of tasks, the presence of sessions with flat rate and
piece rate base salaries allows us to test the predictions of Proposition 2 quite cleanly.
On Table 6, we report results from regressions similar to those in Table 4, but decompose
the treatment effects and log productivity based on the base salary structure. In column (1), we
find that while the bonus round has a significantly positive effect on the defect rate when the
base salary is flat rate, there is no treatment effect for workers under piece rate base salaries.
Column (2) suggests similar results in terms of the effect of productivity on the defect rate. For
sessions that have a piece rate base salary, there is no statistically significant impact of
productivity on the defect rate. For sessions where workers receive a flat rate base salary,
however, a 1% increase in productivity increases the defect rate by 1.70%. This effect is
statistically significant.
The above results lead us to qualify the results presented in Tables 3 and 4 by noting that
the quantity-quality trade-off occurs only when the workers are not, in the status quo, incented at
the margin. A speculative interpretation of these results is that the workers under piece rates
might have already been producing near their productivity frontiers, while there is a lot more
room for productivity increase under flat rates.

Hence, incentives succeed in increasing

productivity, but the magnitude is much greater for workers who are currently not incented on
the margin. An implication for the body of research that explores incentive effects is that great
care must be taken when generalizing empirical results because the extant economic environment
(in this case, status quo wage contracts) can greatly influence observed treatment effects.

16

When this specification is estimated under a random effects framework, we obtained both quantitatively and
qualitatively similar results but the coefficient for the dummy variable for the control round under a piece rate base
salary also becomes statistically significant at 1%. The heteroskedasticity and cluster robust Hausman test rejects
the null hypothesis that the random effects estimator is consistent and efficient at significance levels less than 1%.
20

V.

The Hawthorne Effect
Table 3 shows that productivity of workers increased by at least 8.6% during the control

round when subjects received no monetary incentive. While the Hawthorne effect has come to
take on a very broad definition (see Levitt and List, 2011), we consider the effect in the control
round to be consonant with a potential “Hawthorne type” of effect.17 However, the control round
came after the bonus round for half of the subjects and a strong inertia in productivity may lead
to such a result. As these subjects were exposed to a set target level already in the bonus round,
that may have also contributed to high productivity during the control round afterwards. To
investigate this possibility, we examine the treatment effect for workers who were in the bonus
group first and those who were in the control group first, separately. In column (1) of Table 7,
we decompose the two treatment dummy variables in terms of whether they received the bonus
first or second.
We find that both the workers who received the bonus first and also those who received the
control first had productivity increase during the control round: The former group’s productivity
increases by 8.2 % and the latter group’s productivity increases by 9.1 % in the control round
relative to the baseline round. Moreover, the differences in the productivity increase between the
two groups are not statistically significant. Hence, the productivity increase under the control
round cannot be attributed to positive inertia of the workers who received the bonus first.18 The
large productivity increase during the control round for workers receiving control first also
suggests that the Hawthorne effect did not merely arise from some positive time trend in
productivity.19
In Table 5, we found that the control round led to productivity increase only for workers
under the flat rate base salary structure. We present regressions with only the workers under flat
rate and piece rate base salaries in columns (2) and (3) of Table 7, respectively. The coefficient
for the control round dummies are statistically significant only in column (2): under the flat rate
base wage, a 16.4% productivity increase for workers who received bonus in the first round and
a 21.6% productivity increase for those who received control in the first round. Therefore, we
17

The workers under the control round received an encouraging letter that accords attention to them.
We ran similar regressions for the log defect rate. We did not find evidence to suggest that workers changed their
production quality statistically significantly during the control round relative to the baseline round for either the
workers who received bonus first or those who received control first.
19
This stays unchanged if we include a time variable that does not reset to 1 when a new round starts.
18

21

find a Hawthorne effect for workers under a flat rate base salary structure, but not for those under
a piece rate base salary structure. 20 Although close inspection of the original data suggests that
there was no Hawthorne effect in the Western Electric’s Hawthorne Plant in Cicero, IL, USA
(Levitt and List, 2011 and the cites therein), we find a strong Hawthorne effect among factory
workers under a flat rate base salary structure in Fujian, China. While Leonard (2008) and
Leonard and Masatu (2006 and 2010) find significant evidence of the Hawthorne effect in terms
of the quality of health service, as far as we know, our paper presents the first verified evidence
of a large Hawthorne effect among factory workers.
Persistence of the Hawthorne Effect
We use a conditional bonus scheme in this experiment. Unlike the experiments where the
incentive effect of an unconditional bonus is short lived (see, Gneezy and List, 2006, for
example), we expect the impact of our bonus to persist. We can test whether that is indeed the
case. One may also wonder whether the Hawthorne effect of productivity increase in the control
group is short lived, as the positive impact on productivity received from the encouraging letter
may die down quickly.
The first evidence of persistence of the Hawthorne effect is seen in Figure 1, where we do
not see any evidence of waning in the incentive effect or the Hawthorne effect over time. We
also devise an additional test taking advantage of the panel structure of our data set. We divide
the bonus and control rounds into two halves. For example, both bonus and control rounds for
session 1 were seven hours long. Then, the first 4 hours are considered to be in the first half and
the following three hours are considered to be in the second half. We look at the impact of the
bonus and control rounds dividing each of them into two halves in column (1) of Table 8. If any
of the treatment effects is short-lived then the coefficient for that treatment dummy will be much
smaller in the second half of that treatment. Our regressions find that not to be the case. The
productivity increase during the first half of bonus round relative to the baseline round is 25.1%,
while that during the second half is 26.2%. Also, the productivity increase in the first half of the
control round relative to the baseline round is 8.6% while that in the second half is 10.2%. Thus,
the coefficients for the second half is larger than that for the first half although the differences

20

This is likely to be related to the fact that the productivities of the workers under a flat rate base salary structure in
the baseline round seem to have been far below their production frontiers.
22

are not statistically significant, for both bonus and control rounds. We do not include any time
variable here because that will dilute any potential difference in treatment effects between the
two halves of a treatment. Hence, the Hawthorne effect in our experiment was persistent and not
short lived.
VI.

Conclusions
Principal-agent models have become the workhorse framework for modeling asymmetric

information settings. In the field, when the agent cannot be certain that a dimension of output is
closely monitored, the classic multitasking theory applies. This study provides empirical insights
into the multitasking problem by making use of a unique naturally-occurring setting: incentive
contracts for workers in China on the floor of various factories. Through our interactions with
managers at the plants, we were able to implement a natural field experiment in several plants to
explore basic questions within the classic principal-agent setting.
Our main results paint an intriguing picture. First, the first order predictions of the theory
are found in our data: as we incent workers on the margin, they move their effort to the incented
activity to the detriment of the non-incented one. But, there is an important caveat to this result:
we only find this result amongst workers who were previously working under a fixed wage
scheme. For those workers previously under a piece rate scheme, their output moves by a small
magnitude when we introduce a performance incentive. Our results suggest that, in structural
estimation of principal agent models, simplification of the model into a single task dimension
when the task is better described by multiple dimensions may yield biased estimates of structural
parameters.
Second, we report an interesting Hawthorne-type effect. We find that a simple reminder
letter to workers leads to a robust and economically significant increase in worker productivity.
In this way, the data are consonant with a Hawthorne effect in Chinese manufacturing plants.
Notably, while the actual Hawthorne data from the original experiments do not stand up to closer
scrutiny, data from the Chinese factories do. Finally, an overarching lesson learned from this
exercise is that one can gain enough control in a field environment to test important theories of
multitasking incentive schemes.

23

Reference
Al-Ubaydli, Omar, S. Anderson, Uri Gneezy and J.A. List (2008): “For Love or Money?
Comparing the Effects of Non-pecuniary and Pecuniary Incentive Schemes in the
Workplace,” working paper, University of Chicago.
Arellano, Manuel (1993): “On the Testing of Correlated Effects with Panel Data,” Journal of
Econometrics, 59, 87-93.
Baker, George P. (1992): “Incentive Contracts and Performance Measurement,” Journal of
Political Economy, 100 (3), 598-614.
Baker, George P., Michael C. Jensen, and Kevin J. Murphy (1988): “Compensation and
Incentives: Practice vs. Theory,” Journal of Finance, 43 (3), 593-616.
Bandiera, Oriana, Iwan Barankay, and Imran Rasul (2005): “Social Preferences and the
Response to Incentives: Evidence from Personnel Data,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
120 (3): 917-962.
Dumont Etienne, Bernard Fortin, Nicolas Jacquemet, and Bruce Shearer (2008): “Physician’s
Multitasking and Incentives: Empirical Evidence from a Natural Experiment,” Journal of
Health Economics, 27 (6), 1436-1450.
Englmaier, Florian, Andreas Roider, and Uwe Sunde (2013): “The Role of Salience in
Performance Schemes: Evidence from a Field Experiment,” working paper, LMU Munich.
Gneezy, Uri and John A. List (2006): “Putting Behavioral Economics to Work: Testing for Gift
Exchange in Labor Markets Using Field Experiments,” Econometrica, 74 (5), 1365-1384.
Griffith, Rachel, and Andrew Neely (2009): “Performance Pay and Mangerial Experience in
Multitask Teams: Evidence from within a Firm,” Journal of Labor Economics, 27 (1), 4982.
Harrison, Glenn W., and John A. List (2004): “Field experiments,” Journal of Economic
Literature, 42 (4), 1009-1055.
Hartocolis, Anemona (2013): “New York City Ties Doctor’s Income to Quality of Care,” The
New York Times, January 11, 2013.
Holmstrom, Bengt and Paul Milgrom (1991): “Multitask Principal-Agent Analyses: Incentive
Contracts, Asset Ownership and Job Design,” Journal of Law, Economics and
Organization, 7, 24-52.
Hossain, Tanjim and King King Li (2013): “Social Preference as an Incentive Device: Some
Hidden Costs,” forthcoming, Management Science.

24

Hossain, Tanjim and John A. List (2012): “The Behavioralist Visits the Factory: Increasing
Productivity Using Simple Framing Manipulations,” Management Science, 57 (12), 21512167.
Jensen, Michael (2001): “Value Maximization, Stakeholder Theory, and the Corporate Objective
Function,” Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, 14 (3), 8-21.
Johnson, Ryan M., David H. Reiley, and Juan Carlos Munoz (2012): “The War for the Fare:
How Driver Compensation Affects Bus System Performance,” working paper, University
of Arizona.
Keller, Bill (2013): “Carrots for Doctors,” The New York Times, January 27, 2013.
Leonard, Kenneth L. (2008): “Is Patient Satisfaction Sensitive to Changes in the Quality of Care?
An Exploitation of the Hawthorne Effect,” Journal of Health Economics, 27 (2), 444-459.
Leonard, K.L. and M.C. Masatu (2006): “Outpatient Process Quality Evaluation and the
Hawthorne Effect,” Social Science & Medicine, 63 (9), 2330-2340.
Leonard, K.L. and M.C. Masatu (2010): “Using the Hawthorne Effect to Examine the Gap
between a Doctor’s Best Possible Practice and Actual Practice,” Journal of Development
Economics, 93 (2), 226-243.
Levitt, Steve and John A. List (2011): “Was There Really a Hawthorne Effect at the Hawthorne
Plant? An Analysis of the Original Illumination Experiments,” American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics, 3 (1), 224-238.
Lu, Feng (2012): “Multitasking, Information Disclosure and Product Quality: Evidence from
Nursing Homes,” Journal of Economic and Management Strategy, 21 (3), 673-705
Marschke, J. (1996): “Incentives in a Government Bureaucracy,” mimeo, University of Chicago.
Paarsch, Harry and Bruce Shearer (2000): “Piece Rates, Fixed Wages and Incentives Effects:
Statistical Evidence from Payroll Records,” International Economic Review, 41 (1), 59-92.
Prendergast, Canice (1999): “The Provision of Incentives in Firms,” Journal of Economic
Literature, 37 (1), 7-63.
Shearer, Bruce (2004): “Piece Rates, Fixed Wages and Incentives: Evidence from a Field
Experiment,” Review of Economic Studies, 71 (2), 513-34.
Slade, Margaret (1996): “Multitask Agency and Contract Choice: An Empirical Exploration,”
International Economic Review, 37 (2), 465-486.

25

Appendix
Translation of Letters Sent to the Workers in Session 5
The letter used for the treatment group
Hello, Name of the worker.

Thanks for your unceasing hard work. We are glad to let you know that you have been chosen
into a short-term program. In the following 7 working hours today, for the current clock-wedging
job, we will count your production after each working hour. In any of the working hour, for the
part of your production exceeding 700 units, you will receive a reward at the rate of RMB 0.2 per
unit. We will take into account the non-work minutes when calculating your productivity. The
payment will be made in early June.

For example, during the hour of 9-10 am, you produce 720 units with 3 non-work minutes. Then
in this hour, you will obtain a reward payment for the following amount:
[720×60/(60–3) – 700]×0.2 = RMB 11.6
The reward for each working hour today will be calculated in the similar way. This reward
scheme only lasts for today.
Warm regards.

The letter used for the control group
Hello, Name of the worker.

Thanks for your unceasing hard work.

Warm regards.

26

0

10

Percentage Deviation
20
30
40

50

Figure 1: Percentage Deviation from Mean Baseline Productivity during Bonus and
Control Rounds

1

2

3

4

5

6

Hour
Bonus

Control

Figure 2: Average Defect Rates across All Sessions under Different Treatments
0.020
0.018
0.016
0.014
0.012
0.010

Mean Defect Rate

0.008
0.006
0.004
0.002
0.000
Baseline

Control

Bonus

27

Table 1: A Summary of Experimental Design

Session

Company

Task

1

Wanlida (Wanlida
Group Co.)

GPS
attachment
packaging

Base Salary Number of
Subjects
Structure

Baseline
Round
Duration
(Hours)

Bonus/Control
Mean
Round
SD Baseline
Baseline
Duration
Productivity
Productivity
(Hours)

Bonus Scheme
Target (y )

Piece Rate (α 1)
(RMB/unit)

Flat Rate

15

5

7

95.1

18.74

120

1.25

2

Jiali (Zhangzhou
Clock
Jiali Electronic Co., component
wedging
Ltd.)

Piece Rate

14

8

8

608

96.5

700

0.2

3

Shike (Shike Alarm
Alarm device
System Electronic
packaging
Co., Ltd.)

Flat Rate

10

4

6

24

6.9

33

1

4

Wanlida

GPS
attachment
packaging

Flat Rate

14

3

6

121.8

17.9

150

0.6

5

Jiali

Clock
component
wedging

Piece Rate

17

6

7

597

113

700

0.2

Hengli (Zhangzhou
Wall clock
Hengli Electronic
packaging
Co., Ltd.)

Flat Rate

10

6

7

30.6

7.7

40

0.8

6

7

Hengli

Wall clock
packaging

Flat Rate

15

4

6

62.1

10.9

85

0.5

8

Jiali

Clock
component
wedging

Piece Rate

21

6

6

503.4

98

620

0.3

9

Heyu (Zhangzhou
Heyu Electronic
Co., Ltd)

Twining
metallic
Piece Rate
threads in a
clock module

10

5

6

569

97

700

0.15

Table 2: Summary Statistics
All Sessions

Flat Rate Base Salary

Piece Rate Base Salary

Baseline

Control

Bonus

Baseline

Control

Bonus

Baseline

Control

Bonus

355.9

336.4

358.3

67.8

89.4

117.1

568.1

575.5

594.7

(262.5)

(257.5)

(253.3)

(37.7)

(51.0)

(61.8)

(110.6)

(107.7)

(101.4)

0.009

0.012

0.016

0.019

0.024

0.032

0.001

0.001

0.001

(0.018)

(0.033)

(0.051)

(0.024)

(0.045)

(0.069)

(0.002)

(0.002)

(0.002)

11.8%

36.9%

58.5%

7.9%

51.1%

87.1%

14.6%

23.2%

30.5%

126

126

126

64

64

64

62

62

62

653

807

812

277

397

402

376

410

410

Hourly Productivity

Hourly Defect Rate
Percentage of Periods
Meeting the Target
Number of Workers
Observations

Note: The top number in each cell denotes the mean and the bottom number, in parentheses, denotes standard deviation.

Table 3: Treatment Effect on Productivity
Dependent Variable: log of Hourly
Productivity
(1)

(2)
***

Bonus
Control

***

0.256

0.248

(0.025)

(0.024)

0.094

***

0.086***

(0.017)

(0.016)

Time Variables Included

No

Yes

Observations

2272

2272

0.271

0.285

2

R

Notes: This table presents fixed effects panel regressions of log hourly productivity on dummy
variables denoting bonus and control rounds. In column (2), dummy variables denoting the hour
within a round are included to control for time effects. Hetero-skedasticity robust standard
errors are presented inside parentheses. *, **, and *** represent significance at 10%, 5%, and
1% levels, respectively.

Table 4: Treatment Effect on the Defect Rate

Bonus
Control

Dependent Variable: log of Hourly Defect Rate
(1)
(2)
**
0.613
(0.299)

-0.111
(0.307)
1.870

log(Productivity)
Observations
2

R

***

(0.494)

2272

2272

0.008

0.0095

Notes: This table presents fixed effects panel regressions of the hourly defect rate on dummies
denoting bonus and control rounds or log of hourly productivity. Under both specifications, dummy
variables denoting the hour within a round are included to control for time effects. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are presented inside parentheses. *, **, and *** represent
significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

Table 5: Varying Treatment Effect According to the Base Salary Structure
Dependent Variable: log of Hourly Productivity
(1)
(2)
Bonus × The Base Salary is Flat
Rate
Control × The Base Salary is Flat
Rate

0.501

***

(0.028)

0.211

***

0.492***
(0.028)

0.202***

(0.027)

(0.027)

Bonus × The Base Salary is Piece
Rate

0.049***

0.047***

(0.013)

(0.013)

Control × The Base Salary is Piece
Rate

0.012

0.010

(0.011)

(0.011)

Time Variables Included
Observations
R2

No
2272
0.476

Yes
2272
0.482

Notes: This table presents fixed effects panel regressions of log hourly productivity on dummy variables
denoting bonus and control rounds interacted with dummy variables indicating the base salary structure. In
column (2), dummy variables denoting the hour within a round are included to control for time effects. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are presented inside parentheses. *, **, and *** represent significance at
10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

Table 6: Impact of Base Salary Structure on the Defect Rate

Bonus × The Base Salary is Flat
Rate
Control × The Base Salary is Flat
Rate
Bonus × The Base Salary is Piece
Rate
Control × The Base Salary is Piece
Rate
log(Productivity) × The Base Salary
is Flat Rate
log(Productivity) × The Base Salary
is Piece Rate
Observations
R2

Dependent Variable: log of Hourly Defect Rate
(1)
(2)
***
0.972
(0.359)

0.002
(0.444)

0.312
(0.450)

-0.173
(0.416)

1.696***
(0.485)

3.840
(2.369)

2272
0.009

2272
0.0103

Notes: This table presents fixed effects panel regressions of the hourly defect rate on bonus and control
dummies and log productivity decomposed with respect to the base salary structure. Under both
specifications, dummy variables denoting the hour within a round are included to control for time effects.
Hetero-skedasticity robust standard errors are presented inside parentheses. *, **, and *** represent
significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

Table 7: The Hawthorne Effect
Dependent Variable: log of Hourly Productivity
(2)

(1)
Bonus × The Worker Received Bonus
First
Control × The Worker Received Bonus
First
Bonus × The Worker Received Control
First

0.207

***

(0.023)

0.082

***

(0.023)

0.290

***

0.347

***

(0.022)

0.164

***

(0.039)

0.622

***

(3)
0.079***
(0.020)

0.015
(0.018)

0.021

(0.044)

(0.038)

(0.015)

Control × The Worker Received Control
First

0.091***

0.216***

0.010

(0.022)

(0.036)

(0.014)

Sessions Included

All

Flat rate Base Salary Only

Piece rate Base Salary Only

Observations
R

2

2272

1076

1196

0.295

0.574

0.117

Notes: This table presents fixed effects panel regressions of log hourly productivity on dummy variables denoting bonus and control rounds interacted with
dummies to indicate whether the bonus treatment was used first or second. Column (1) presents result with all sessions. Columns (2) and (3), respectively,
use sessions with flat rate and piece rate base salary only. Under all specifications, dummy variables denoting the hour within a round are included to
control for time effects. Hetero-skedasticity robust standard errors are presented inside parentheses. *, **, and *** represent significance at 10%, 5%, and
1% levels, respectively.

Table 8: Persistence of the Hawthorne Effect
Dependent Variable: log of
Hourly Productivity
First Half of Bonus
Second Half of Bonus
First Half of Control
Second Half of Control
p-value from F-test: Bonus in both halves
have the same coefficient
p-value from F-test: Control in both
halves have the same coefficient
Observations
2

R

0.251***
(0.025)

0.262

***

(0.027)

0.086

***

(0.017)

0.102

***

(0.018)

0.2956
0.1075
2272
0.272

Notes: This table presents fixed effects panel regressions of log hourly productivity
on dummies denoting bonus and control rounds and those dummies divided into two
halves. Hetero-skedasticity robust standard errors are presented inside parentheses.
*, **, and *** represent significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

