                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              STANDARD-ESSENTIAL PATENTS

                                             Josh Lerner
                                             Jean Tirole

                                        Working Paper 19664
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19664


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2013




The research leading to these results has received funding from the European Research Council under
the European Community’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) Grant Agreement
#249429,the National Science Foundation (NSF grant “Patent Pools and Biomedical Innovation”,
award #0830288)and from Harvard Business School’s Division of Research. Jean Tirole is a member
of IDEI, whose IP research program is funded by Microsoft, Orange and Qualcomm. We are grateful
to participants at the Berkeley Center for Law & Technology-IDEI’s conference on Standard Essential
Patents (Toulouse), to seminar participants at the University of Edinburgh, and to Di Pei, Patrick Rey,
and Olivier Wang for helpful comments and discussions.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Josh Lerner and Jean Tirole. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Standard-Essential Patents
Josh Lerner and Jean Tirole
NBER Working Paper No. 19664
November 2013
JEL No. D43,L24,L41,O34

                                              ABSTRACT

A major policy issue in standard setting is that patents that are ex-ante not that important may, by being
included into the standard, become standard-essential patents (SEPs). In an attempt to curb the monopoly
power that they create, most standard-setting organizations require the owners of patents covered by
the standard to make a loose commitment to grant licenses on reasonable terms. Such commitments
unsurprisingly are conducive to intense litigation activity. This paper builds a framework for the analysis
of SEPs, identi.es several types of inefficiencies attached to the lack of price commitment, shows how
structured price commitments restore competition, and analyzes whether price commitments are likely
to emerge in the marketplace.


Josh Lerner
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 214
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
jlerner@hbs.edu

Jean Tirole
Institut d'Economie Industrielle
Bureau MF529 - Bat. F
21 allees de Brienne
31000 Toulouse
FRANCE
jean.tirole@tse-fr.eu
1       Introduction
Standard-essential patents. Standards play a key role in many industries, including those
critical for future growth. Intellectual property (IP) owners vie to have their technologies
incorporated into standards, so as to collect royalty revenues (if their patents dominate
some of the functionalities embodied in the standard) or just to develop a competitive
edge through their familiarity with the technology.
    Standard setting organizations (SSOs) in essence perform three functions. The dis-
covery or engineering function consists of learning about, and certifying the value of,
various combinations of functionalities. The standardization function then steers market
expectations toward a particular technology; the SSO usually selects one of several op-
tions. Patents that are ex-ante dispensable to the extent that technology variants that
do not rely on them were competing with the selected one, may thereby become ex-post,
“standard-essential patents”.1
    SSOs’ third and controversial regulation function results from the second. In an
attempt to curb the monopoly power that they create, most SSOs require the own-
ers of patents covered by the standard to grant licenses on fair, reasonable and non-
discriminatory (FRAND) terms. Needless to say, such loose price commitments have
been conducive to intense litigation activity. As both the antitrust practice and the legal
literature2 emphasize, “fair and reasonable”must re‡ect the outcome of ex-ante technol-
ogy competition, not of the manufactured ex-post monopoly situation. As Judge Posner
recognized in Apple vs. Motorola, it is fallacious to take an ex-post perspective.3
    The informational di¢ culties faced by courts when assessing whether patents are es-
sential and whether royalties are “fair and reasonable” are familiar from the treatment
of patent pools. As has been repeatedly noted in the latter context, it is hard to know
    1
     Indirect evidence about essentialization is provided by Rysman-Simcoe (2008)’s study of citations of
patents that are disclosed to SSOs. They …nd that SSOs both identify promising solutions and play an
important role in promoting their adoption and di¤usion.
   2
     E.g. Lemley-Shapiro (2013), Schmalensee (2009) and Swanson-Baumol (2005).
   3
     “The proper method of computing a FRAND royalty starts with what the cost to the licensee would
have been of obtaining, just before the patented invention was declared essential to compliance with the
industry standard, a license for the function performed by the patent. That cost would be a measure of the
value of the patent. But once a patent becomes essential to a standard, the patentee’s bargaining power
surges because a prospective licensee has no alternative to licensing the patent; he is at the patentee’s
mercy.” (Apple, Inc. and Next Software Inc., v. Motorola, Inc. and Motorola Mobility, Inc., June 22,
2012, Case No. 1:11-cv-08540, page 18).



                                                    2
whether patents are complements or substitutes, i.e., how essential they are. Indeed, one
might say that “standards’cemeteries are full of essential patents”.4 To make things worse,
the complementary/substitutability pattern depends on licensing prices and changes over
time as technology and applications evolve. Finally, informational problems are com-
pounded in the case of standard-setting by the after-the-fact nature of the assessment.


Paper’s contribution. Despite their prominence in business and antitrust economics, the
essentialization and regulation functions have received scant theoretical attention. This
paper builds a framework in which they can start being analysed, provides a precise
identi…cation of the ine¢ ciencies attached to the lack of price commitment, and suggests
a policy reform that restores the ex-ante competition called for in the literature and the
policy debate.
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 develops the framework. There are two
groups of agents: IP holders and implementers/users. To re‡ect the fact that standards
do not specify patents, but rather functionalities, we posit that users choose a subset of
functionalities within a set of potential functionalities. The technology’s value to users is
determined by the set of selected functionalities. For each functionality, furthermore, one
or several patents read on the functionality. In other words, a functionality is characterized
by two attributes: how essential the functionality is relative to the overall technology, and
how intense is within-functionality competition. Finally, users are heterogeneous with
respect to their opportunity cost of implementing the technology.
    After developing the framework, Section 2 solves for the “competitive benchmark”
assuming a “putty environment”, in which an individual user’s choice among function-
alities is perfectly malleable and in particular is not constrained by the need to coordi-
nate his technological choice with those of the other users. The section studies existence
and uniqueness of the competitive equilibrium and shows that, when pools allow their
members to sell licenses independently, welfare-increasing patent pools are stable while
welfare-decreasing patent pools are unstable in the sense that independent licensing re-
stores competition.
    The rest of the paper by contrast is devoted to the study of the “putty-clay”version of
the same environment. In that version, strong network externalities require coordination
  4
      To paraphrase de Gaulle’s “The graveyards are full of indispensable men.”



                                                   3
among users on a standard. While the choice of functionalities is perfectly ‡exible before
the standard is set, it is no longer malleable ex post, and so individual users have to
comply with the selected standard.
    Section 3 …rst assumes that price discussions in standard setting are ruled out, as
is currently almost universally the case; it further presumes that FRAND requirements
have limited ability to regulate prices ex post. It demonstrates that if IP owners have
their say, standards will tend to be under-inclusive (malthusianist). The intuition is that,
as we noted, standards transform inessential patents into standard-essential ones. Most
important patents’ holders are not keen on creating additional technology gatekeepers,
even if a patent pool can be later formed in order to avoid multiple marginalization.
    Users’control of standard setting also creates problems. First, in the absence of ex-
ante price discussions, a monopoly price for the technology often obtains ex post, even
if decent alternatives were available ex ante. Second, users morph the technology into
one that di¤ers from the competitive benchmark. Intuitively, users prefer to include
functionalities on which several competing patents read rather than more essential, but
monopolized ones that will command high ex-post prices.
    Section 3 further shows that price discussions within the standard setting process run
the risk of expropriation of IP holders, as even balanced SSOs will “blackmail”IP owners
to accept low prices in exchange for their functionalities’being selected into the standard.
    Section 4 studies whether structured price commitments can undo the ine¢ ciencies
unveiled in Section 3. We propose that price discussions continue to be prohibited, but
that after a discovery phase, IP holders non-cooperately announce price caps on their
o¤erings, were their IP to be included into the standard. The relationship between the
outcome under this “structured price commitment process” and the ex-ante competitive
benchmark is a priori far from trivial. A patent holder may use his price cap to in‡uence
other patent holders’ prices or to pursue rent-seeking: jockeying (inducing the SSO to
abandon other functionalities so as to avoid having to share royalties with the owners of
patents reading on these functionalities) or achieving a stronger bargaining stance at the
pool-formation stage. Nonetheless, we show that structured price commitments achieve
the ex-ante competitive benchmark.
    Section 4 then shows that one should not expect structured price commitments to be
successful in the marketplace, except in speci…c circumstances. The ability to engage in
forum shopping enables IP owners to shun SSOs that force them to charge competitive

                                             4
prices. This suggests imposing mandatory structured price commitments on SSOs.
    Section 5 concludes with a discussion of avenues for future research.

Relationship to the literature.
    The paper is related to several strands of the literature. The …rst is the large legal
literature on standard essential patents. This literature …rst grew out of two cases that
triggered international litigation regarding the behavior of Rambus and Qualcomm. Of
particular relevance for this paper, Qualcomm’s rivals accused it of setting unreasonably
high royalty rates for technology covered by a FRAND commitment. These disputes—
as well as subsequent disputes over smartphone technology— spawned a large literature.
Notable among these works are analyses of the legal issues at work (e.g., Lemley 2002 and
Skitol 2005 among many others), proposals to relieve the ‡ow of litigation on these ideas
(e.g., Lemley and Shapiro (2013)’s proposal to require owners of standard-essential patents
to enter into binding “…nal o¤er”arbitration with any potential licensee to determine the
royalty rate; see also Lemley 2007); and careful case studies of the emergence of particular
standards (e.g., Nagaoka et al. 2009).
    Second, we have already noted the close links between standard setting and patent
pools. Both institutions face similar informational di¢ culties regarding essentiality. The
lack of data to measure the essentiality and the evolving nature of essentiality both make
it di¢ cult to form an opinion as to what speci…c patents are contributing to a technology.
There are therefore large bene…ts to …nding “information-free screens”. In the context
of patent pools, such a screen consists of regulatory requirements that do not hinder
the functioning of bene…cial (price-reducing) pools and restore competition in the case
of detrimental (price-augmenting) pools. In the absence of coordinated e¤ects (tacit
collusion), independent licensing, i.e., the ability for IP holders to keep ownership of
their patents and to market them independently of the pool, can perform this perfect-
screen function (Lerner-Tirole 2004). For n > 2, independent licensing in general makes
welfare-decreasing pools only weakly unstable (that is, the competitive equilibrium is
an equilibrium of the independent licensing game, but it may not be the only one).
Boutin (2013) shows that strong instability of welfare-decreasing pools can be otained
by appending the requirement that (in the symmetric case), the pool market individual
licenses at the bundle price divided by the number of patents in the pool.5
  5
      See also Rey-Tirole (2013) for a related insight on the e¤ects of unbundling.


                                                     5
    Coordinated e¤ects create more opportunities for gaming the competitive process and
require appending an extra instrument; indeed, independent licensing cum unbundling
(the pool’s price structure is super-additive and revenues are allocated according to li-
censes of individual patents through the pool) is a perfect screen (Rey-Tirole 2013). In-
terestingly, independent licensing is much less powerful in the context of a standard,
as non-essential patents are made essential through the standardization process. Thus,
further analysis is needed to understand patent pools in the context of standard setting.
    This paper takes a Coasian view that gains from trade are realized and so e¢ cient
pools form when they increase pro…t. Brenner (2009) and Llanes-Poblete (2012) analyze
the welfare implications of incomplete pools or explain how such incomplete pools may
emerge from an equal-sharing constraint. Quint (2012) studies the welfare impact of
various types of incomplete pools in a multi-product environment in which patents are all
essential for the production of either one or several products.
    A …nal body of related literature is the growing body of work on strategic behavior
in standard setting more generally. Examples include work on the choice of …rms to join
standardization bodies (e.g., Axelrod et al. 1995), the ground rules adopted by these
organizations, particularly in regard to the extent to which it is oriented to technology
developers or end users (Chiao et al. 2007), and the composition of standard-setting
working groups (Simcoe 2011).


2     Framework and the competitive benchmark
2.1    Framework
The framework extends that of Lerner-Tirole (2004) in three ways, with the latter two
inspired by the speci…cities of the standardization activity. First, it considers a general
value function V (S) for the set of functionalities instead of the more speci…c V (S) =
  ( i2S vi ). Second, it distinguishes between functionalities and patents; as we noted, this
distinction is descriptive to the extent that standards specify functionalities rather than
speci…c patents.
    Third, it distinguishes between ex-ante (pre-standard) and ex-post (post-standard)
essentiality. While the SSO has full ‡exibility in morphing, implementers must take the
standard as given once it has been set. Thus, the technology is putty-clay: fully malleable


                                             6
before the standard is set and rigid afterwards. The simplest interpretation is that strong
network externalities prevent implementers from proposing alternatives.6
    Demand. We distinguish between functionalities, i 2 I = f1; ; ng, and the patents
reading on these functionalities. A standard is a choice of a subset S I of functionalities,
yielding value V (S) to the users (with V (;) = 0: users derive no surplus in the absence
of any functionality). The latter are heterogenous with respect to their opportunity cost
  of implementing the technology. A user with cost adopts the technology if and only if
V (S)      + P (S), where P (S) is the total price to be paid to acquire the various licenses
needed to implement technology S. The parameter is distributed on R+ according to
density f ( ) and c.d.f. F ( ). The demand for the technology is

              D(P (S)      V (S))     Pr ( + P (S)       V (S)) = F (V (S)      P (S)):

We assume that F is twice continuously di¤erentiable, for all S and P 2 (0; V (S)) and
has a monotone hazard rate ((f =F )0 < 0 over the domain of de…nition); this assumption
guarantees the log-concavity of pro…t functions as well as standard properties of reaction
curves.
    We do not assume that V is increasing in the number of functionalities (that is, that
V (T )  V (S) if S     T ); for, a bulky standard may imply a higher cost of putting the
technology together and ensuring the absence of compatibility issues. Standard T is said
to be overinclusive if there exists a simpler standard S      T such that V (S) > V (T ).
Conversely, letting
                                   S 2 arg max fV (S)g;
                                                S

a standard S S will be said to be underinclusive. For expositional simplicity, assume
that V (S ) > V (S) for S 6= S .
Intellectual property and within-functionality competition index. The extent of compe-
tition to enable a functionality i is indexed by a maximum markup mi 0 that can be
levied by intellectual property owners. For example, if the best implementation of the
functionality is in the public domain or available under an open source license, mi = 0.
If instead this optimal implementation is covered by an intellectual property right while
   6
    Alternatively, the users are informed only of the value brought about by the standard, are igno-
rant and distrustful of other combinations of functionalities, and furthermore cannot rely on reputable
implementers to propose trustworthy alternatives.


                                                    7
alternative implementations, whether in the public domain or in the hands of competing
IP owners, imply an extra cost of implementation equal to mi , then the markup charged
by the dominant IP owner on functionality i can be as large as mi . The case mi V (S)
corresponds to a patent that is absolutely essential to implementing functionality i in-
cluded in standard S. For simplicity, we assume that each IP owner owns at most one
dominant patent.
    For the sake of this paper, we will use this interpretation of a dominant patent holder
on functionality i, or “patent holder i”for short. But oligopolistic interpretations are also
admissible. There may be multiple patents reading on functionality i; their owners may
be able to sustain a markup mi because imperfect competition obtains in the submarket
for functionality i.7
    Finally, note that there is no real distinction between within-functionality and across-
functionality substitution as long as the technology is fully malleable.8 The distinction
by contrast matters in the putty-clay environment of standard setting, in which within-
functionality substitution is not a¤ected by the standard, but across-functionality substi-
tution opportunities disappear once the standard is set.


2.2     Competitive benchmark
2.2.1    Nash equilibrium in a putty technology world

Consider the “putty technology”thought experiment of a licensing market in which there
are no network externalities. Because the model in particular considers general surplus
functions, all results in this section are new.
   The dominant IP owner in functionality i sets price pi mi . For any price vector, let
   7
      The case of di¤erentiated patents (as in, e.g., Layne-Farrar and Llobet 2012) can be accommodated
as well at the expense of further complexity. For example, in the absence of price commitment, the SSO
will or will not include functionality i depending on the impact of the inclusion of i on the gross surplus
of the average user and expected ex post price mi (assuming that mi is not too large so that a patent
holder would not want to reduce price below mi to boost demand for the overall technology).
    8
      Consider within-functionality substitution and assume that, as discussed above, to deliver function-
ality i, patent i o¤ers a cost-saving-equivalent bene…t mi over an alternative patent i0 . Equivalently, one
can assume that there is no scope for substitution within functionality i and add a new functionality i0
(also without scope for substitution). Let, for all subset S not containing i and i0 ,
                  V (S [ fig [ fi0 g) = V (S [ fig) and V (S [ fi0 g) = V (S [ fig) mi :




                                                     8
P (S) denote the total price of bundle S:

                                      P (S)       i2S   pi :

    We now derive the competitive benchmark. We impose that the prices of functionali-
ties which are not in equilibrium selected by users be pi = 0; this requirement is meant to
avoid coordination failure equilibria, in which the owners of two perfectly complementary
patents that otherwise should be selected by users each set very large prices, anticipating
that the owner of the other patent will do so and so the pair will not be selected. Under
this requirement, the competitive prices necessarily sustain bundle S : Suppose that they
sustain S; then P (S ) P (S) and so P (S ) V (S ) < P (S) V (S).

De…nition 1 (Nash prices). A vector of Nash prices fpi gi21; ;n sustains S and is
immune to the possibility of within-functionality and across-functionalities substitution;
that is, for all i, pi mi ; and V (S ) P (S )     max fV (S) P (S)g. It satis…es:
                                                          =
                                                      fSji2Sg


             (a) for i 2 S
                     pi = min fmi , ei , pbi g,
                        where
                        ei V (S )      P (S nfig)         max fV (S)   P (S)g,
                                                            =
                                                        fSji2Sg

                        and
                        pbi   arg max fpD(p + P (S nfig)          V (S ))g;
                                 p

               (b)   pi = 0 if i 2
                                 =S :

    In words, Nash prices must respect the competitive constraint within the functionality
(pi    mi ), lead users to select the e¢ cient bundle (and so pi = 0 if i 2
                                                                          = S ), and …nally
be such that within the e¢ cient bundle, prices be set so as to maximize pro…ts. When
within-functionality substitution is strong (mi is low):

                                          pi = mi :                                    (1)

   Provided that the within-functionality competitive constraint is not binding (pi < mi ),


                                              9
i’s Nash price can take one of two forms. First, if the dominant IP owner on functionality
i 2 S raises his price pi , functionality i may be dropped from the users’“consumption
basket”:

                                 V (S )      P (S ) = max fV (S)                P (S)g:                       (2)
                                                             =
                                                         fSji2Sg

We will discuss shortly whether the parameter ei measuring the essentiality of the func-
tionality is uniquely de…ned or depends on the prices charged by other IP owners (in
which case the notation fei g should be understood to be relative to the price vector un-
der consideration). Condition (2) more generally implies that S is the optimal basket for
users:9
                        V (S ) P (S ) = max fV (S) P (S)g:                            (2’)
                                                             S

   Second, the IP owner may refrain from raising his price not because this would lead
to an exclusion from the users’ selected bundle, but because this negatively impacts
demand:10
                    pi = arg max fpi D(pi + P (S nfig) V (S )g:                     (3)

Lemma 1 Two unconstrained Nash prices must be equal: If pi = pbi and pj = pbj , then
   9
    Suppose that users …nd that bundle S 6= S o¤ers a higher net value. Either S                      S and then
V (S ) V (S) and P (S) P (S ) imply

                                          V (S )    P (S )       V (S)   P (S);

a contradiction. Or there exists i 2 S such that i 2
                                                   = S. But then condition (2) implies that

                                          V (S )    P (S )       V (S)   P (S);

again a contradiction.
  10
     Note that condition (3) posits that users keep buying S when …rm i changes its price. To show that
this is justi…ed, note …rst that …rm i will not set a price p0i such that

                                          V (S )    P 0 (S ) < V (S)     P (S)

for some S such that i 2= S, where P 0 (S ) P (S ) + p0i pi . Otherwise …rm i would be ejected from
the users’basket. But could …rm i’s deviation in this range lead to the exclusion of (at least) some …rm
j from the users’basket? Suppose therefore that

                                         V (S )    P 0 (S ) < V (S 0 )   P 0 (S 0 )

        = S 0 , i 2 S 0 and P 0 (S 0 ) P (S 0 ) + p0i
where j 2                                               pi . This however is inconsistent with P 0 (S )   P (S ) =
P (S ) P (S 0 ) and condition (2) for …rm j.
 0  0




                                                          10
pi = p j

Proof. For each k 2 S , let P k       `2S nfkg p` denote the total price charged by other

patent holders in the e¢ cient consumption basket. Let r denote the reaction function:

                         r(P k )       arg max fpk D(pk + P                 k      V (S ))g                     (4)
                                            pk


with 1 < r0 < 0 from the log-concavity of F . Now, if patent holders i and j are both
unconstrained,
                          pi = r(P i ) and pj = r(P j ):

Because r0 >     1, this precludes pi + P             i   = pj + P   j   = P (S ) unless pi = pj .

Proposition 1 (existence). There exists a Nash price vector.

Proof. We …x prices pj = 0 for j 2
                                 = S , and consider the vector p                               fpi gi2S . Let

                           P       fp j 0        pi       V (S ) for all i 2 S g:

Consider the mapping p ! p; where

                                     pi = min fmi ; ei (p); pbi (p)g;


               ei (p)    max f0; V (S )               P (S nfig)          max fV (S)          P (S)gg
                                                                             =
                                                                         fSji2Sg

and
                        pbi (p) = arg max fpi D(pi + P (S nfig)                     V (S )g:

This mapping from compact convex set P into itself is continuous. From Brouwer’s
…xed-point theorem, it admits a …xed point.

2.2.2      Illustrations and uniqueness

Example 1: symmetric case. In the symmetric-patent case, all functionalities are inter-
changeable (V (S) depends only on the number of selected functionalities) and mi = m for



                                                           11
all i. Letting k denote the number of functionalities in S , a symmetric Nash per-patent
price is given by
                                   e = 0 if k < n

and
                            V (S )     ne = max fV (Sk )          keg if k = n;                 (5)
                                               k<n

where Sk the set of the …rst k patents, or for that matter any subset of k patents (due to
the symmetry); this latter case requires that e pb, where pb is de…ned as in (3) for the
symmetric case (bp = arg max fpD((n 1)b      p + p V (S ))g). It can be shown that e is
unique. The unique symmetric Nash price is thus given by p = min fm; e; pbg. Symmetry,
however, does not guarantee uniqueness of Nash prices, as there may exist asymmetric
equilibria.11

Proposition 2 (symmetric case). There exists a unique symmetric Nash price, equal
to min fm; e; pbg, where e is given by (5) and pb arg max fpD((n 1)b
                                                                   p + p V (S ))g.

Example 2: uniquely-determined essentiality. Suppose that the essentiality parameters ei
are uniquely de…ned, i.e., independently of the prices charged by other patent holders. A
trivial example is provided by V (S) = i2S ei . Another interesting class will be analyzed
in Example 3. Equilibrium uniqueness is derived in a broader context, and indeed we will
develop other applications of Proposition 3 later on.

Proposition 3 (unique equilibrium and comparative statics). Suppose that for all
i, …rm i must select its price pi only subject to the constraint pi eei for some known eei .
Then
(i) the Nash price vector is unique
(ii) if eei0     eei for all i, then P c 0 (S )      P c (S ).

Proof. (i) Consider a set of Nash prices, and split the functionalities into groups I1
(constrained price: pi = eei ) and I2 (unconstrained price: pi < eei ) (either group may be
empty). From the proof of Lemma 1, all prices in I2 are equal to some pb. Consider the
function r(b
           p) de…ned by:

               r(b
                 p)    arg max pD         fije      ei
                                             ei pbg e           ei > pb)
                                                         + (#(ije          1)b
                                                                             p+p   V (S )   :
  11
       See Proposition 4 in Lerner-Tirole (2004).

                                                          12
The function r is continuous (although not smooth) and (weakly) decreasing. It therefore
has a unique …xed point in [0; V (S )]. The Nash prices are pi = min f~
                                                                      ei , p^g.
         ~
(ii) Let E(S)  = i2S eei for an arbitrary S. The equilibrium price for given f~   ei gi2S is
                ~
equal either to E(S                       ~
                    ) if for all i, e~i r(E(S nfig)); or to [X(b
                                                               p)+[#S k(b p)]bp] otherwise,
        p) is the number of i such that eei pb , X(b
where k(b                                           p)   fi2S                     ei p^g e
                                                                                 j~      ~i   and pb is uniquely
de…ned by
                         pb = r(X(bp) + [#S     [k(b
                                                   p) 1]]b
                                                         p):

Simple computations show that in both cases

            d                                    1 + r0
              (X + [#S         k(b
                                 p)]b
                                    p) =                        > 0 since                 1 < r0 < 0:
           dX                              1   [#S      [k(b
                                                           p)]]

Therefore as the e~i are reduced, the total price (weakly) decreases.
    For the purpose of this section, we take e~i = min fmi , ei g, which is uniquely de…ned
if ei is.

Example 3: concave surplus. Next, suppose that functionalities’incremental contributions
to total value are decreasing: For any disjoint subsets S1 , S2 , S3 (with S2 and S3 non
empty),
                  V (S1 [ S2 [ S3 ) + V (S1 ) < V (S1 [ S2 ) + V (S1 [ S3 )           (6)

A special case of concave surplus is the technology (               i2S vi )   considered in Lerner-Tirole
(2004), provided that 00 < 0.
   If n = 2 and S = f1; 2g, then

                         ei = V (S )     P (S nfig)         max fV (S)         P (S)g
                                                         fSji2
                                                             = Sg

can be computed without references to prices charged by patent holder j: V (S ) P (S ) =
V (fjg) pj yields ei = V (S ) V (S nfig). If furthermore V (S ) > e1 + e2 , then (6) is
satis…ed.12

Proposition 4 (concave case). Suppose that the surplus function exhibits decreasing
incremental contributions (condition (6) is satis…ed); and that S = f1; ; ng. Then the
 12
      Take S1 = ; ; S2 = f1g , S3 = f2g in condition (6).


                                                    13
essentiality parameters are uniquely de…ned: for all i,

                                       ei = V (S )          V (S nfig):                                      (7)

The Nash price vector is therefore unique.

Proof. Consider functionality i 2 S :

                             V (S )           j2S   pj = V (Si )            k2Si    pk

for some Si such that i 2
                        = Si (and Si S since S = f1;                               ; ng).
    Because pj V (S ) V (S nfjg) for all j 2 S ,

          V (S )     j2S   pj       [V (S )         k2Si pk ]   [   j 2S
                                                                      = i   [V (S )         V (S nfjg)]] :

But decreasing incremental contributions imply that


                           j 2S
                             = i   [V (S )     V (S nfjg)]          V (S )          V (Si )

with strict inequality unless Si = S nfig. We thus obtain a contradiction unless Si =
S nfig.
   Finally, note that by the same reasoning V (S ) > i2S ei .
Example 4: Decreasing incremental contributions is a su¢ cient, but not necessary con-
dition for essentiality to be measured by the incremental contribution to the technology
(condition (7)). Consider n = 3, with a symmetric value function V (S) = (#S). Assume
that V (1) = V (0) = 0, and V (3) V (2) = e where 3e        V (3). The technology is not
concave and yet ei = e for all i.

2.2.3   Multiple Nash prices

The set of competitive prices need not be a singleton.
Example 5. First, individual prices may not be uniquely de…ned, for a reason that is
similar to that creating multiplicity in the Nash demand game: Suppose that there are
three patents, 1, 2 and 3, that S = f1; 2; 3g that V (f1; jg) = V (f1g) for j 6= 1, and that
V (f2; 3g) = 0. That is, patent 1 is essential, and patents 2 and 3 are perfect complements

                                                       14
to create an add-on to patent 1. Furthermore suppose that there is no within-functionality
substitution feasibility for any patent (mi V (S ) for all i). Then prices p2 and p3 must
satisfy
                           V (S ) (p1 + p2 + p3 ) = V (f1g) p1 ;

but the split between p2 and p3 is indeterminate. Note that e2 (and similarly e3 ) is not
uniquely de…ned; only e2 + p3 is, and so e2 depends on p3 .
Example 6. Second, and more substantially, the total Nash price itself may not be unique.
To see this, take the previous three-patent example with S = f1; 2; 3g and no within-
functionality switching opportunities, but assume now that

                V (S ) > V (f2g) = V (f3g) = V > 0 = V (S) for all other S:

Assuming that constraint (2) is the binding one (one can always choose the demand
function to guarantee this), prices must satisfy p1 + p2 = p1 + p3 = V (S ) V (here
e1 is not uniquely de…ned; only e1 + p2 = e1 + p3 is); and so p2 = p3 . Assuming that
V (S ) 2V , the total price p1 + p2 + p3 can take any value in [V (S ) V , V (S )].
Discussion: Thus one must in general consider the Nash equilibrium set rather than a
singleton. Two possible approaches can be taken in case of multiplicity. First, it would
be interesting to perform an exercise similar to that performed by Nash (1950) to select
among equilibria. Namely there could be some small uncertainty in the value function
(V (S) + "s ) and one could let the noises converge to 0.13 We leave this for future research.
    Second, one can operate a selection in the equilibrium set (for example, select the
symmetric equilibrium in the symmetric case in case there exist also asymmetric ones).
For simplicity, we will adopt the latter approach.

2.2.4    Competitive benchmark in the putty technology world

We index by a superscript “c”a vector of competitive (Nash) prices and make an equilib-
rium selection if the Nash price is not unique (see Section 2.2.3). Let P m (S) denote the
  13
    For example, suppose in Example 6 that V (S ) V = " where " s G( ). Then, there is a strictly
positive probability that the users’choice at the margin is between 2 and 3. Bertrand undercutting then
yields p2 = p3 = 0 and so p1 = V (S ) V .




                                                  15
monopoly price for an arbitrary bundle S:

                                 P m (S)     arg max fP D(P          V (S))g:
                                                 P


      We will repeatedly use the following lemma:

Lemma 2 The lowest monopoly net price P m (S)                    V (S) is obtained for S = S .

Proof. The net monopoly price P~ m (S) for combination S solves

                                           max [P~ + V (S)]D(P~ );

and so, by revealed preference, is minimized for the highest V (S).
   Note next that if there exists i such that pci is determined by (3), then14

                                             P c (S )    P m (S ):

But even if no competitive price is determined by (3), the technology’s price P c (S ) may
still exceed the monopoly price.
     We are thus led to consider two cases, depending on whether the competitive price
exceeds the monopoly level. When it does, the patent holders in S would want to form a
pool so as to o¤er their technology at the lower, monopoly price, thus maximizing industry
pro…t (and incidentally increasing user welfare).15 The hazard with pools is of course that
they can be set up so as to raise price to the monopoly level in the other con…guration.
We will therefore require, as American, European or Japanese authorities do, that pool
members keep ownership of their patents and thus be able to grant individual licenses;
the pool is then only a joint marketing alliance. That is, after the pool has set its price,
IP holders set prices pILi  for their individual licenses; users then choose their preferred
package (or none).
     Suppose thus that patent holders can form a pool before choosing their prices. As we
will later discuss, various potential commitment strategies imply that this pool formation
prior to individual price setting need not be equivalent to the situation in which a pool
is formed after out-of-pool price commitments have been made.
 14
      By a revealed preference argument.
 15
      Note also that condition (2) is a fortiori satis…ed if the bundle S is sold at a lower price.


                                                        16
    A “pool agreement” consists in a subset S of patent holders agreeing to market the
bundle of their patents at some bundle16 price P , to distribute the royalties stemming
from licensing the bundle according to some sharing rule, and to allow pool members to
grant individual licenses. We take a sanguine, Coasian view of patent pool formation by
assuming that gains from trade among IP owners are realized and so a pool forms if it
is pro…table (see Llanes-Poblete 2012 for a theoretical analysis of holdouts in patent pool
formation). The following proposition extends Proposition 13 in Lerner-Tirole (2004).17

Proposition 5 (pools are welfare enhancing).
(i) Suppose that P c (S ) > P m (S ), and consider a pool agreement that involves the
owners of dominant patents reading on functionalities in S and charges P m (S ) for
access to the bundle; there exists an equilibrium in which pool members do not to actively
grant individual licenses; furthermore, welfare is unique and the pool forms if either the
Nash outcome is unique or, if there are multiple Nash outcomes, the equilibrium selection
is consistent (a low net-price outcome is not selected just because a pool is set up).
(ii) Suppose that P c (S ) < P m (S ). Then for any welfare-decreasing pool, that is any
pool that delivers net value V (S) P (S) < V (S ) P c (S ), there exists an equilibrium
in which IP holders sell individual licenses and the outcome is the competitive outcome.

Proof
(i) Note that fS ; P m (S )g delivers the highest aggregate pro…t for the IP owners. De…ne
shares f i gi2S in the patent pool such that all patent holders gain from forming a pool:

                          m
                     iP       (S )D(P m (S )   V (S ))     pci D(P c (S )   V (S )):

    From the de…nition of monopoly pro…t, one can indeed …nd such i ’s such that
  i2S  i   1.
    Suppose that the pool with the functionalities in S is formed, with i satisfying
the condition above, and that the pool charges P m (S ). Suppose further that each pool
member charges pILi   = pci for individual licenses and so in equilibrium users buy the
  16
      Because users’payo¤ function is additive in V (S) and (minus) , there is no extra pro…t to be gained
from o¤ering menus.
   17
      As noted above, we add the distinction between functionalities and intellectual property, and we
allow general surplus functions.



                                                   17
bundle from the pool. By de…nition of the Nash prices, a deviation from this individual
license price cannot increase pro…t beyond pci D(P c (S ) V (S )) (assuming that users
opt for a bundle of independent licenses, which incidentally requires that pIL      i      pci
[P c (S ) P m (S )]), and so there is no pro…table deviation.
     We just described an equilibrium of the independent-licensing game. What about
uniqueness? Suppose that there exists another equilibrium with selection S and total
price P IL (S ) for independent licenses, such that P IL (S ) < P (S ) (by the now-standard
reasoning, pIL i = 0 for i not in the basket selected by users implies that users must select
S ). Then fpIL   i g must be Nash equilibrium prices, a contradiction if the Nash price is
unique or the selection consistent.
     To understand the need for a consistent selection in the case of multiple Nash prices,
consider Example 6 in Section 2.2.3, and focus on the socially most e¢ cient Nash equilib-
rium (p2 = p3 = 0; p1 = V (S ) V ; V (S ) P (S ) = V ) and the socially most ine¢ cient
one (p2 = p3 = V ; p1 = V (S ) 2V ; V (S ) P (S ) = 0). Choose the demand function
so that P m =arg max fP D(P V (S ))g 2 (V (S ) V , V (S )), and suppose that the
latter equilibrium prevails in the absence of a pool and that the former equilibrium is
selected when a pool is formed. This equilibrium switch implies that the pool is undercut
through individual licenses despite the fact that it lowers price, and that the …rms may
not want to form a welfare-increasing pool.
(ii) The condition P c (S ) < P m (S ) implies, as we have seen, that all prices pci are deter-
mined by either (1) or (2). Consider pool S = S charging a price P (S ) > P c (S ). Then
we claim that all members of the pool charging their competitive prices for their indepen-
dent licenses is an equilibrium. By de…nition of Nash prices, charging price pIL         c
                                                                                 i 6= pi does
not increase pro…t if users keep buying individual licenses instead of the bundle o¤ered
by the pool. Hence, the motive for deviating from this competitive price con…guration is
to make individual licenses as a whole less attractive and to thereby boost the demand
for the pool bundle and receive royalties from the pool. However, either pci = mi and then
if pi > pci , users can still secure V (S ) P c (S ) by substituting within the functionality;
or pci is given by (2) satis…ed with equality, and then if pi > pci , users can again secure
V (S ) P c (S ), this time by substituting among functionalities. This reasoning more
generally applies to any pool/bundle S such that V (S) P (S) < V (S ) P c (S ): as long
as all charge pi = pci , the users can guarantee themselves V (S ) P c (S ) even in case of
a unilateral deviation.

                                              18
Discussion (guaranteeing strong instability of welfare-decreasing pools). Part (ii) only
shows that when the pool aims at raising price, there exists an equilibrium in which
independent licensing restores competition. With more than two patents, though, there
may exist other equilibria in the independent licensing subgame. To avoid this and to
ensure strong instability, appending an unbundling requirement ensures strong instability
of welfare-decreasing pools in speci…c contexts. (Boutin 2013; see also Rey-Tirole (2013)’s
results for the case of very impatient …rms in a repeated game context). We here provide
a di¤erent, but related result for the case of uniquely de…ned essentiality.
    Suppose that the pool must o¤er a superadditive price structure: the pool must charge
individual prices pPi so that the cheapest option to acquiring licenses to functionalities in
S from the pool costs i2S pPi for all S. The e¤ective price for license i is then pi = min
fpIL    P            IL
   i ; pi g, where pi is the independent license price. Royalties from licenses are passed
through by the pool to their owners. Assume …nally that the essentiality parameters ei
are uniquely de…ned. The outcome is then always the competitive outcome. To see this,
let
                         e~0i min fmi ; ei ; pPi g e~i min fmi ; ei g:

Proposition 3 implies, …rst, that the continuation equilibrium in independent licensing
prices fpIL
         i g is unique, and second, that the total price cannot exceed its level in the
absence of pool.

De…nition 2 (competitive benchmark). In the competitive benchmark, implementers
use functionalities S and pay min fP c (S ); P m (S )g for access to these functionalities.



3    Standards: hold-ups, biased morphing and reverse
     hold-ups
Let us turn to the putty-clay environment of standards and …rst assume in Sections
3.1 through 3.3 that standard setting involves no price commitment at all. In practice
of course, participants in standard-setting processes usually commit to o¤er licenses on
FRAND terms. This section thus opts for expositional simplicity and depicts a most
pessimistic view of FRAND, in which the loose commitment does not constrain ex-post
market power. Note, though, that even if FRAND succeeds in constraining somewhat

                                             19
ex-post market power, the e¤ects described in this section will still be at play in a milder
form. In Section 3.4, we allow price discussions within the standard setting process.


3.1         Post-standard prices without and with a pool
Suppose that there is no pool and that prices are set after the choice of a standard S.
At that stage, cross-functionality substitutability is no longer an option. By contrast,
within-functionality substitutability is still feasible for the implementers who deliver the
…nal products to the end-users. Thus, the holder of the patent reading on functionality
i 2 S sets pi ex post so as to maximize pro…t,18 and so

       either pi = mi       8                                     9                   (1’)
                            <                                     =
       or       pi = arg max pi D( pj + pi                  V (S))                    (3’)
                        pi  :     j2S                             ;
                                       j6=i



Proposition 6 (ex-post pricing). Consider an arbitrary standard S and i 2 S. Ex-
post prices are unique: There exists a unique triple fI1 (S); I2 (S); pb(S)g such that I1 (S)
[ I2 (S) = S and unique ex-post equilibrium prices pi :
if i 2 I1 (S) , pi = mi pb;
if i 2 I2 (S) , pi = pb < mi , where

                   pb = arg max fpi D(           mj + [#I2 (S)          1]b
                                                                          p + pi   V (S))g:
                           pi            j2I 1 (S)


Proof For a given pb, let
                                       P i (b
                                            p)              min fmi ; pbg;
                                                     j2S
                                                     j6=i


a continuously weakly increasing function of pb. The equilibrium condition, obtained from
(3), is then pb = r(P i (b
                         p)) where the reaction function r is a continuously decreasing
function of P i and therefore a continuously weakly decreasing function of pb. The …xed
point is therefore unique.19
   Proposition 6 o¤ers a potential explanation for the puzzling fact that patents tend to be
weighted equally in the sharing of royalties from pools. Observers have wondered about
 18
      If i 2
           = S, then pi = 0.
 19
      Proposition 6 can be viewed as a special case of Proposition 3 with ei       V (S ) for all i.

                                                        20
the fact that patents with unequal importance are rewarded equally, creating perverse
incentives ex ante (choice of unambitious routes for innovation) and ex post (reluctance
of the owners of important patents to enter a standard-setting process). But except for
those patents that are constained by within-functionality substitution, all patents are
equal once they have been made essential by the standard setter.
   Proposition 7, which is strongly related to Proposition 3,20 con…rms the intuition that
standard-essential patents command a high price:

Proposition 7 (total ex-post price exceeds total competitive price). For all S,

                                                P (S)         P c (S):

Proof See Appendix.
   While we rule out ex-ante price commitments, we allow a pool to form ex post; once
the standard has been set, patent holders can form a pool, with ex-post pricing as the
threat point. The timing is summarized in Figure 1.




                     Figure 1: Timing in the absence of price discussions


   Recall that patent holders are still constrained by within-functionality substitution,
but cross-functionalities substitution is no longer feasible; thus, a pool that does not
admit multiple pieces of intellectual property covering the same functionality (as is usually
prohibited by antitrust authorities) can only be formed to lower price:

Proposition 8 (pools in the putty-clay framework)
Under the provision that a pool cannot include multiple patents reading on the same func-
  20
     Let e~0i = mi and e~i = min fmi ,ei g. Even if fei g is not unique, it is still the case that min fmi ,ei g   mi
for any selection of fei g.

                                                         21
tionality, an ex-post pool can only reduce total price even if members cannot individually
license their patents.

Proof Suppose standard S is selected. We therefore are only interested in the ex-post
prices of patents in S. Let pi denote the ex-post Nash prices in the absence of pool. If
pi < mi for some i, then P c (S) P m (S), and so a pool can only bene…t users. Suppose
therefore that pi = mi for all i 2 S. If i2S mi     P m (S), then again a pool can only
bene…t users. If i2S mi < P m (S), users can always recreate bundle S at cost i2S mi
and so the pool cannot raise price.
    We can compare the impact of a pool in the putty and putty-clay cases. In the putty
technology case, a pool with independent licensing is always bene…cial. It lowers total price
when the latter exceeds the monopoly price; and independent licensing restores competi-
tion when the pool attempts to raise price (see Section 2). In the putty-clay case without
price commitments, merger to monopoly through the elimination of cross-functionality
competition is ex post no longer a hazard since the standard makes all selected function-
alities essential anyway. Pool formation is again socially desirable, although independent
licensing loses its power to restore the ex-ante competitive price level.
    We make the following assumption, satis…ed by standard bargaining solutions:

Assumption 1 (monotonicity in ex-post pool formation). A pool can be formed
after the standard is set. We assume that pro…t sharing depends only on, and is monotonic
with respect to pre-pool formation pro…ts: Patent holder i’s share of the post-negotiation
pro…t is non-decreasing in his share of the pre-negotiation pro…t.

  Allowing for the formation of a pool if the ex-post competitive price exceeds the
monopoly price, let

         P (S)     min f       min fmi ; pb(S)g; P m (S)g = min f   i2S   mi , P m (S)g   (8)
                         i2S


3.2    Morphing by the users
Suppose, …rst, that the standard is set by the users. The latter have congruent interests
and solve:
                                 max fV (S) P (S)g:                                   (9)
                                     fSg



                                              22
   Will users choose the e¢ cient technology S maximizing V ( ), given that they have
an eye on how much the technology will fetch ex post? Morphing by the users leads to
two kinds of ine¢ ciency:

(a) Monopoly pricing.
   Ex-post price setting creates scope for opportunism by IP holders. Suppose that
the within-functionality-competition constraint is not binding (say, mi V (S )) and so
functionalities de facto coincide with patents.

Proposition 9 (ex post opportunism and choice of standard). Suppose that func-
tionalities de facto coincide with patents (mi large for all i). When users select the
standard and ex-post pricing prevail:
(i) users select the e¢ cient standard S ;
(ii) the price of the technology is P m (S ), and is therefore strictly higher than the com-
petitive price whenever P c (S ) < P m (S ).

Proof. Fix a standard S with k functionalities. Ex post, in the absence of a pool,
non-coordinated IP owners charge collectively Pb(S) > P m (S) where

               Pb(S)     p and pb = arg max fpD((k
                        kb                                   1)b
                                                               p+p   V (S))g;

and so a pool forms and charges P m (S) (independent licensing has lost all its power ex
post: all patents have become essential). Thus users choose S so as to solve

                                  max fV (S)     P m (S)g;
                                  fSg


and so, from Lemma 2, select S = S .
(b) Essentiality-competition tradeo¤
   In this framework, a functionality is characterized by two attributes: how essential
the functionality is relative to the overall technology, and how intense is the within-
functionality competition. This second element may distort users’ decisions in favor of
high-competition functionalities, a new and hidden cost of the lack of ex-ante price com-
mitment.



                                            23
    To characterize possible morphing biases, let us for the sake of the next two proposi-
tions assume that functionalities can be ranked by their importance, with functionality
1 being the most essential, functionality 2 the second most essential, etc. For a given
standard S, we will let k (S) denote the identity of the k th -ranked functionality in the
standard. By convention, k (S) = 1 if standard S has less than k functionalities. For
example if S = f1; 3; 4; 7g then 3 (S) = 4 and 5 (S) = 1.

De…nition 3 (essentiality ranking). Functionalities i = 1; ; n are ranked in decreas-
ing order of essentiality if for any two non-overinclusive standards S and T satisfying
 k (S)    k (T ) for all k,

                                       V (S) V (T ):

   Essentiality ranking implies that without loss of generality the e¢ cient standard S can
be chosen to be composed of the …rst k functionalities.21 Furthermore S is generically
unique. The following Proposition is proved in the Appendix:

Proposition 10 (ine¢ cient morphing). User choice of the standard
(i) never results in overinclusive standards and may result in underinclusive ones;
(ii) results in standards biased toward high within-functionality competition relative to
essentiality: If functionalities can be ranked by their essentiality and if i k < j and j,
but not i, belongs to S, then mj < mi .


3.3        Morphing by IP owners
Consider now the polar case in which IP owners set the standard. This situation is in
general more complex than the previous one because IP owners may not have congruent
preferences. Let us analyze the following simple case, though: Suppose that functionalities
and patents coincide (again, a su¢ cient condition for this is mi V (S )); and furthermore
that functionalities are ranked in importance as in De…nition 3, with functionality 1 the
most important and so on.
  21
       For example, in the case of a linear value function,

                                         n                     xi 1 if i 2 S
                               V (S) =   i=1 xi ei ,   where
                                                               xi = 0 if i 2
                                                                           = S;

with e1      e2         en , S = f1;     ; k g where k is such that ek > 0        ek   +1 .



                                                          24
    To analyze coalition formation, we de…ne a stability condition similar to that in Levin-
Tadelis (2005), who emphasize the e¤ect of pro…t sharing on the selection of employees by
a …rm. We posit that the partners in a coalition should not want to dismiss any current
partners or admit additional ones. Like in Levin-Tadelis, the stability condition implies
that a stable coalition is characterized by a threshold (the most important patents are
selected into the coalition), and this threshold achieves the maximum pro…t per partner.
    Thus, consider the standard S made of the …rst k patents/functionalities, where
                              (                                                          )
                                                                 P D(P       V (Sek ))
                   k    max k j k = arg max max                                              ;      (10)
                                              e
                                              k
                                                           P             e
                                                                         k

and
                                           Sk = f1;            ; kg

is the standard composed of the …rst k functionalities.
    This standard S yields the highest per-patent pro…t, and so no other standard can
bring more pro…t to any of its members. In this sense, the standard S is stable. It is in
the interest of the k IP owners to form a coalition and …nd a complascent SSO or SIG
that will select S:22
    We can compare S with the e¢ cient standard S , or, equivalently, k to k . Note that
k solves
                             max max fP D(P V (Sk ))g:
                                     k    P

Proposition 11 (malthusianism).When the within-functionality-competition
constraints do not bind, the patent holders covering the top k functionalities as given by
(10) form a coalition. Furthermore, the standard is never overinclusive:

                                                  k    k :

Proof. Suppose that k > k . Then V (Sk ) < V (Sk ) and reducing k both increases
overall pro…t and reduces the number of IP owners sharing this pro…t, contradicting (10).

  22
    “SIGs” are (largely captive) special interest groups that IP owners can use to obtain favorable stan-
dards (of course there is a trade o¤ between leniency by the standard setter and credibility vis-à-vis
the users). The sharing of pro…t within the subsequent pool depends on relative bargaining powers; the
prediction relates only to the choice of standard and user price.


                                                      25
    The malthusianism unveiled in Proposition 11 is reminiscent of the literature on labor-
managed …rms (see e.g. Ward (1958), Guesnerie and La¤ont (1984) and Levin and Tadelis
(2005)). Indeed, the outcome shares with that literature the a-priori counterintuitive
comparative statics of malthusianism; Guesnerie and La¤ont (1984) showed that, under
reasonable assumptions, an increase in the demand for the product makes the labor-
managed …rm accept a lower number of employees. Let us demonstrate that a similar
result holds in our environment.
    Suppose that demand for bundle S at price P is given by F (V (S) P + ), where
is a demand shifter and the hazard rate is monotone (f =F is decreasing). We have

Corollary 1 (shift in demand). An increase in demand (i.e., an increase in ) induces
more malthusianism (i.e., k decreases or remains the same).

Discussion: A coalition of IP holders as described in this subsection could in principle be
thwarted by a user-friendly SSO’s setting up a better standard including the patents, but
against the will of these IP holders. We are agnostic as to whether such hostile standards
– i.e., ones that incorporate non-willing participants IP – are doable. We have come
across no discussions of such “guerilla standardization”. The di¢ culties of doing so - the
di¢ culty of discerning relevant prior art owned by an uncooperative party (due to the
sheer number of outstanding patents and the complexity and ambiguity of patent claims),
the need for information about unpatented tacit knowledge in formulating the standards,
and the inability to know whether the uncooperative …rm would ultimately license the
relevant patents on FRAND terms- perhaps forestall SSOs from undertaking such e¤orts.


3.4    Price discussions within the standard setting process: The
       reverse holdup problem
The analysis of Sections 3.1 through 3.3 points at the inadequacy of ex-post price setting.
This section discusses one approach to introducing ex-ante price setting, consisting in
letting SSO members discuss prices and make commitments while they engage in standard
morphing. This approach creates scope for cartelization by implementers/users. Suppose
that, in reduced form, the SSO’s objective function is a convex combination of user surplus




                                            26
and IP owners’pro…t with relative weight                       1 for pro…ts relative to user surplus:
                                         R V (S)     P
                 W SSO (S; P )            0
                                                         [V (S) + (         1)P       ] dF ( )
                                         R V (S)     P
                                          0
                                                         [V (S)         ] dF ( )
                                         R V (S)
                                          0
                                                   [V (S)         ] dF ( ) = W SSO (S; 0)


since V (S)     for all such that V (S)      + P.
    Assume that the SSO has the bargaining power: The SSO can select a standard and
o¤er a price to each holder of a patent that reads on the standard, and threaten not to
enact any standard if the patent holder does not acquiesce (alternatively, it can threaten
not to incorporate functionalities covered by IP owners who do not accept the proposed
deal).

Proposition 12 (reverse holdup) Suppose that                                1. Then, under SSO bargaining
power,
(i) the SSO imposes P (S) = 0 for all S;
(ii) the SSO chooses the e¢ cient standard (S = S ).

Proof.
For an arbitrary standard S, consider the program:

                                        max          W SSO (S; P ) ;
                                      fP 2P(S)g


where P(S) is the set of feasible total prices for standard S, P(S) = [0;                        i2S mi ].   As we
saw, W SSO (S; P ) W SSO (S; 0) for      1. And so

                    max         W SSO (S; P )              () max W SSO (S; 0) :
                 fS, P 2P(S)g                                       fSg


Furthermore                                      Z     V (S)
                                SSO
                           W          (S; 0) =                 [V (S)      ] dF ( )
                                                   0

is maximized for S = S .
   In particular, a balanced SSO (putting equal weight on the two groups:                            = 1) and a

                                                         27
fortiori a user-friendly SSO (putting more weight on users: < 1) have an incentive to
choose S = S and impose technology price (arbitrarily close to) P = 0 so as to maximize
di¤usion. That is, the SSO can blackmail the owners of patents reading on the technology
and threaten not to incorporate the corresponding functionality into the standard unless
they commit to a low licensing price. IP owners then prefer to make a small pro…t to
making no pro…t at all.
    More generally, even SSOs that favor IP owners over users will push for low licensing
prices so as to ensure a large di¤usion of the technology.23 Only when the SSO is very
strongly biased in favor of IP owners will prices be non-expropriative.
    Furthermore, IP owners may …nd it di¢ cult to turn to an SSO that defends their
interests (a high     SSO). Such an SSO may not be trusted by the users to properly
ascertain the value of the technology; we here have in mind the kind of situation (studied
in our 2006 paper), in which SSOs certify the quality of the technology (say, the users’
opportunity cost of implementing the technology is           , where as earlier is user-
idiosyncratic, and is a common opportunity-cost-shifting or quality parameter that is
assessed by the SSO). There is a tension between the two objectives of securing decent
royalty rates and getting users on board. For, an SSO with a strong IP owner bias is
likely to accept technologies of mediocre value to users (low technologies).


4      Structured price commitments
4.1     Equilibrium under mandatory price commmitments
Under current practice, making individual or collective price commitments is di¢ cult,
regardless of one’s willingness to do so. IP owners do not know at the start exactly
which combinations of functionalities will work. Not only do individual IP owners not
commit prior to standard setting to caps on their royalty rates; they also collectively
do not form patent pools so as to directly in‡uence the morphing of standards. Out of
23 standard-pool pairs we informally reviewed for the purpose of this contribution, only
3 pools were formed prior to standard setting, and all 3 were closed (and royalty-free)
  23
    See Kovbasyuk (2013) for a detailed analysis of the interaction between credibility and price mod-
eration. In his model, the certi…er announces a recommendation, but unlike here does not set the …nal
price.



                                                 28
pools. By contrast, the other, post-standard-setting pools were typical royalty-charging
open pools.24
    To give a better chance to price commitments, suppose that the standard setting
process starts with a discovery phase, in which the various technology combinations are
considered. It identi…es the value propositions V (S) for all S.25 The SSO organizes a
recess just before …nalizing the standard. In this recess, …rms commit to prices.26 Then
the …nal choice is made. Let us make this “structured price commitments”approach more
formal. Following a value discovery phase,

   1. Price commitments: Holders of relevant patents non-cooperatively and simultane-
      ously commit to price caps pi on royalties, were the corresponding functionalities
      later incorporated into the standard.

   2. Standard morphing: The SSO is dominated by users. It is prohibited, as it currently
      is, from discussing prices: it only selects the standard.

   3. Ex-post pool formation: The owners of patents that read on the selected standard
  24
      Forming a pool involves transaction costs and therefore is more costly if performed before the standard
is set. There may be uncertainty as to what the SSO will choose; or there may be missing essential patents
that could hold up the pool ex post, and so delaying the formation of the pool increases the probability of
detecting such patents. This point was emphasized repeatedly in interviews we conducted with executives
who ran licensing organizations or participated in multiple standardization and patent pool e¤orts. They
emphasized that the scope of intellectual property to be included in the pool is not known ex-ante, and
consequently …rms are unwilling to commit until they know what they are promising to license.
   To cite one example, the MPEG Licensing Association has long struggled with this issue. When they
have attempted to establish pools before the standard was …nalized, such as was the case of the LTE
patent pool, getting commitments was exceedingly di¢ cult. Due to the extent of uncertainty, many
…rms did not want to choose their licensing policy until they acquired more information about how likely
the standard would be to succeed and how central their patent would be to the standard. Many …rms
wanted to keep individual licensing option on the table with an eye to higher …nancial returns and a
stronger bargaining position in potential cross-licensing discussions going forward. MPEG LA has tried
to overcome this resistance by creating “product license pools” which encompass technologies covered
by multiple standards, some of which may still be in progress. For instance, in September 2009, MPEG
LA and the Japanese patent pool administrator announced a pool in which a variety of patents will be
o¤ered to companies based in Japan that sell mobile TV handsets for Japan’s One-Seg mobile terrestrial
broadcasting service. Even in these pools, however, there has still signi…cant technological uncertainty,
making the nature of the patent commitments di¢ cult to predict ex-ante (e.g., as additional features are
added to the pool) and leading …rms to be reluctant to participate.
   25
      In practice, it would identify the main feasible ones (to reduce the complexity –but keeping compet-
itive threats of kicking out non-essential, but useful patents if their holders are too greedy).
   26
      “Not committing” henceforth will refer to committing to a price cap, say V (S ), that would attract
no demand for the licence.


                                                     29
      can, if they wish so, form a pool (allowing independent licensing) and set a price
      for the bundle.

   4. Independent licenses: The patent owners select prices pi = pIL
                                                                  i           pi for individual
      licenses.

   5. User selection: Users choose whether to adopt the technology, and if so acquire
      either individual licenses or the bundle from the pool (if relevant).


   We assume that if patent holders can increase their joint pro…t by forming a pool at
stage 3, they will do so, and that the sharing of the gains from trade obeys Assumption
1 (monotonicity in the ex-post pool formation)
   A corollary of monotonicity is the following observation:
Within-functionality substitution: A patent holder i whose functionality has been selected
into the standard receives the same dividend from the pool whether he has committed to
cap pi > mi or pi = mi at stage 1.

     Note that if functionality i is selected into the standard and patent holder i has set
price cap pi > mi , then in the absence of pool formation, patent holder i will reduce his
price to pi      mi so as not to be excluded from the implementation of functionality i;
furthermore the choice of pi within [mi ; 1) is irrelevant for that of pi ; it does not a¤ect
the pool value either. Thus it is natural to treat the choice of pi in that range as irrelevant,
as captured by the monotonicity requirement.
     If out-of-pool, individual price commitments are made prior to pool formation, nothing
guarantees a priori that patent holders will charge the Nash prices pci , since their price
commitments may a¤ect:
(i) other patent holders’ex post prices through “…rst-mover”e¤ects;
(ii) patent holders’bargaining power in pool formation; the patent holders may want to
lower other patent holders’status-quo pro…t so as to secure a bigger share of pool pro…ts
for themselves;
(iii) technology morphing (under standard setting, i.e., in a putty-clay environment); the
patent holders may choose their price with an eye on having their patent/functionality
included in the standard or other patents/ functionalities excluded.


                                              30
   At stage 2, a user-friendly SSO chooses S so as to solve user welfare:

                           max fV (S)     min fP (S); P m (S)gg ;
                             S


where P (S) is the equilibrium total price of standard S given price cap commitments fpi g
(if no pool forms). Proposition 13 is a central result of the paper:

Proposition 13 (structured price commitments). Under structured price commit-
ments,
(i) if P c (S ) < P m (S ), an equilibrium of the structured-price-commitment game involves
commitments to the competitive prices pi = pci for all i and the choice of e¢ cient standard
S (and then no pool is formed). And so the competitive outcome (S , P c (S )) prevails.
Futhermore, the competitive equilibrium is the only equilibrium if the fei g are uniquely
de…ned for all S.
(ii) if P c (S ) P m (S ), the competitive outcome (S , P m (S )) is achieved, although the
price commitments then in general di¤er from fpci g. It is an equilibrium for IP owners to
commit to ex-post prices pi = pi (given by Proposition 6).

Proof. (i) Assume that P c (S ) < P m (S ) and suppose …rst that all patent holders
commit to their competitive price pj = pcj = min fmj , ej g, where the ej are relative to
the competitive price vector. Let us show that the SSO chooses S Suppose thus that
the SSO chooses S 6= S . Consider the resulting ex-post equilibrium price vector f~  pi gi2S
  pi gi2S is the set of prices that prevail ex post when no pool is formed, with p~i pci for
(f~
all i).
    Either p~i = pci for all i 2 S, and then condition (2’) implies that V (S ) P c (S )
V (S) P c (S), and so users do not gain from switching to S if no pool forms; if by
contrast a pool forms, charging P m (S), the fact that V (S ) P c (S ) > V (S ) P m (S )
V (S) P m (S) implies that users do not bene…t from the choice of S rather than S .
    Or there exists i such that p~i < pi = pci = min fmi ,ei g mi and so necessarily
                                             n                  o
                         p~i = arg max pi D(pi + P~   i   V (S)) :
                               fpi jpi pci g

Then p~i +P~ i = P~ (S) P m (S), and so a pool forms, leading to price P m (S) for technology
S, and thus again no bene…t for the users. We conclude that the SSO chooses standard

                                             31
S if IP owners commit to their competitive prices.
    Let us next show that no patent owner bene…ts from deviating from the competitive
price. Consider i 2 S . Either pci = mi ; and then from Assumption 1 and the fact that
the ex-post equilibrium prices are still the competitive prices, committing to cap pi above
mi does not bring about any extra pro…t. Setting a cap below mi is not pro…table either:
Other patent owners j would then like to either keep pj constant or raise it, but they
cannot raise pj as they committed to cap pcj : To show this, recall that ej is no longer
relevant ex post and that pbj = arg max fpj D(pi + pj + k2S nfi;jg pck V (S ))g is higher
when pi is lower. And so fpcj gj2S nfig is still an ex-post equilibrium. Finally, note that at
pi < pci , i’s pro…t is increasing in pi . So patent owner i only reduces pro…t by lowering
price below mi .
    Or pci is given by (2): V (S ) P c (S ) = V (S) P c (S) for some S not including i.
This means that users can guarantee themselves net value V (S) P c (S) while if i raises
ex post its price to pi > pci (which i will do if pi > pci ), their ex-post utility is smaller
than the level that would prevail if they chose S or any other standard including i. And
so functionality i is excluded from the standard. And lowering the price pi below pci does
not a¤ect the prices charged by the other patent holders, by the same reasoning as in the
previous paragraph.
    To prove uniqueness when the fei g are uniquely de…ned for all S, let us show that,
for given price commitments fpi g, the SSO will never choose a standard S leading to user
price pk > ek (S) for some k in S. Let fpi g and fp0i g denote the (unique) price vectors when
S and S 0 = Snfkg are chosen, respectively. Under S and S 0 , respectively, the equilibrium
prices are unique (from Proposition 3) and equal to pi = min fmi , pi , p^i g and p0i = min
fmi , pi , p^0i g where

                     p^i = arg max fpi D(pi + P i (S 0 )     [V (S)     pk ]g

and
                  p^0i = arg max fpi D(pi + P 0 i (S 0 )   [V (S)     ek (S)])g:

It is easy to show that the total net price is strictly higher under S than under S 0 (the
proof mimics that of part (ii) of Proposition 3). Because pi = 0 for i 2
                                                                       = S, then users can
obtain net price for S at most equal to P (S) V (S ) < P (S) V (S). Hence S = S .
                                          c
And P (S )       i2S min fmi ei (S )g = P (S ).


                                               32
(ii) Regardless of price commitments, the SSO can always pick standard S . From
Proposition 3, in the absence of pool, the continuation game in individual license prices
has a unique equilibrium. After, possibly, the formation of a pool,27 the total price will
not exceed P m (S ). And so users can guarantee themselves net price P m (S ) V (S ).
    However, when P c (S ) > P m (S ), the competitive prices need not be equilibrium price
commitments. To see this, consider the symmetric, two-functionality case, with

                                           pm < e < min fm; p^g:

The competitive price is P c (S ) = 2e, and yields eD(2e V (2)) to each IP owner. Suppose
that the ex-ante competitive prices are the equilibrium price caps and that IP owner i = 1
raises his price commitment to pi = e + " for a small enough ". Let us …rst show that the
SSO still chooses standard S . After the formation of a pool, the net price for standard
S will be P m (2) V (2), where P m (2) = arg max P D(P V (2)). If the SSO selects
S = f2g instead, the price will be min fe; p~m g where

              p~m = arg max fpD(p              V (1))g = arg max fpD(p + e           V (2))g
                            p                                  p

                   = arg max f(P            e)D(P     V (2))g,
                           P


and so the net price is higher for S than for S :

                                     p~m     V (1) > P m (2)       V (2):

Similarly,
                                e   V (1) = 2e    V (2) > P m (2)           V (2):

Either way, the users prefer S . Finally, note that IP owner 1 raises his pre-pool-formation
pro…t:
                    d
                      [(e + ")D(2e + " V (2))] > 0        (since e < p^),
                   d"
  27
    If the ex post price exceeds P m (S ), …rms will guarantee themselves the monopoly pro…t by opting for
a pool with independent licensing and unbundling, with price p per patent such that fmi pg mi +[#fijp <
mi g]p = P m . The unique equilibrium is then pILi = mi if mi      p and pIL
                                                                           i = p (or   p) if p < mi . Side
transfers then take place, that depend on the respective bargaining powers.




                                                    33
and lowers IP owner 2’s pre-pool-formation pro…t.

                               d
                                  [eD(2e + "     V (2))] < 0,
                               d"

and so from Assumption 1, IP owner 1 increases his pro…t by raising his price above e.
    Finally, we show that in the general case it is an equilibrium for all …rms to commit
to ex-post prices pi = min fmi , p^g for i 2 S .
    (a) Suppose that S is indeed chosen as the standard. By de…nition of the optimal
ex-post price pi , …rm i cannot deviate and increase its pre-pool-formation pro…t. It could
reduce the others’ pre-pool-formation pro…ts by raising its price and thus decreasing
demand. However, pi > mi or pi > p^ is not credible, as i attracts no sales in the former
case and pi > p^ is not a best reaction to fpj g in the latter case. So pi > pi is ex post
modi…ed into pi if the pool does not form.
    (b) By choosing standard S , users obtain net price

         P m (S )   V (S )   P c (S )   V (S )    P c (S)   V (S)   P (S)   V (S)

for all S, where the last inequality derives from Proposition 7. Either P (S) P m (S) and
then the conclusion follows; or P (S) > P m (S) and renegotiation of prices post choice of
standard S leads to net price P m (S) V (S) P m (S ) V (S ).
Discussion (dispensing with FRAND?)
    In our framework, there is no need to impose FRAND. The price commitments de-
liver the ex-ante competitive benchmark and adding a promise of “‘fair prices”serves no
purpose. In practice, though, standard setting organizations may make mistakes; they
(and perhaps the IP holder himself) may fail to identify an important patent as relevant
to the standard. Ex post, this may result in a hold up of the standard. In our view,
therefore, structured price commitments and FRAND are complements rather than sub-
stitutes. Structured price commitments bear the brunt of the commitment and cover
identi…ed functionalities; the FRAND commitment somewhat makes up for the unavoid-
able shortcomings of the discovery process.




                                            34
4.2     Forum shopping and the (non-) emergence of structured
        price commitments in the marketplace
We now consider a context in which a user-oriented SSO adopts a mandatory-price-
commitment rule, while the IP owners can go to an alternative user-oriented SSO that
does not require such price commitments. Assuming that the Nash prices emerge under
standard setting by the SSO with a mandatory-price-commitment rule, do price commit-
ments emerge when the IP owners can engage in forum shopping?
    To answer this question, let us start with the symmetric technology/symmetric equi-
librium of Example 1 (with S = f1;             ; ng), as this guarantees that IP holders have
congruent interests when choosing an SSO. Price commitments are irrelevant if the com-
petitive price is the level m corresponding to within-functionality substitution.28 So let us
assume that within-functionality substitution is not binding (m large). If the competitive
per patent price pc is given by (2) (pc = e where V (S ) ne = max fV (S) f#S)eg),
                                                                        S
and npc < P m (S ), a mandated price commitment reduces per-patentholder pro…t and
therefore patent holders strictly prefer to be certi…ed by the SSO that does not require
such price commitments. If npc P m (S ), they are indi¤erent between the two SSOs.
    To study the asymmetric case, let us consider the two-functionality case (n = 2 and
S = f1; 2g), and compare the preferences of the two patentholders. As in the symmetric
case, price commitments are irrelevant for the users if the competitive price exceeds the
monopoly price (here pc1 + pc2        P m (S )) since the outcome will deliver the monopoly
pro…t in both cases. IP owners have antagonistic interests, though: If pc1 > pc2 and pc2 =
min (m2 ; e2 ) (otherwise pc1 = pc2 ), patent holder 1 prefers price commitments since he is
in a better bargaining position than patent holder 2 in the negotiation for a pool. By
contrast, patent holder 2 prefers the absence of price commitment, which makes the two
patents de facto equally important.
    Now assume that pc1 + pc2 < p•m (S ). Then price commitments reduce total pro…t.
  28
   Because by assumption m e, V (S ) nm V (S) km for any standard S with k functionalities.
And so the only purpose of selecting an underinclusive standard would be to induce at least one of the
owners of patents reading on standard S to lower his price below m. However (k 1)m V (S)
(n 1)m V (S ) and so

            arg max fpD(p + (k     1)m   V (S))g        arg max fpD(p + (n   1)m   V (S ))g
                                                        m

where the last inequality stems from the fact that m is the Nash price.


                                                   35
Patent holder 2 is always hurt when price commitments are mandated.29 By contrast,
patent holder 1 faces a trade-o¤ between a lower overall pro…t and a higher share of this
pro…t: He prefers the absence of price commitment if and only if

                                                     P m (S )
                       pc1 D (pc1 + pc2   V (S ))             D (P m (S )     V (S )) :                (11)
                                                        2

Thus for a given value V (S ) of the technology, patent holder 1 is more eager to avoid
price commitments, the less essential his patent (the lower min (m1 ; e1 ) is) and the more
essential the other patent (the higher min (m2 ; e2 ) is).

Proposition 14(market non-emergence of price commitments). When the
competitive price is smaller than the monopoly price,
(i) in the symmetric case patent holders prefer the absence of price commitment and so
choose to have their technology certi…ed by an SSO that does not require price
commitments;
(ii) in the asymmetric case and with n = 2, the owner of the less important patent
prefers not having a price commitment; the owner of the most important patent prefers
to avoid a price commitment if and only if P c (S ) < P m (S ) and (11) holds.

    Proposition 14 sheds light on a recent development. An ambitious response to the com-
mitment problem has been the e¤ort of the international trade association VITA, which
focuses on standards that govern modular embedded computer systems, to overcome op-
portunistic behaviour by owners of standard-essential patents. VITA mandated that each
member of a standards working group must indicate all patents or patent applications
that may become essential to the workings of a future standard, as well as the highest
royalty rates and the most restrictive terms under which they would license these patents.
This policy shift, as well as similar, less successful e¤orts by the Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers (IEEE) and the European Telecommunications Standards Institute
(ETSI), encountered sti¤ resistance from intellectual- property-owning …rms (see Masoudi
2007 for an interesting view from the antitrust authorities’side and Lerner-Tirole 2013
for a further policy discussion).
                                                                                        Pc
  29
       P m D(P m   V (S )) > P c D(P c     V (S )) implies that pm D(P m    V (S )) >      D(P c   V (S )) >
                                                                                        2
pc2 D(P c   V (S )).



                                                      36
   Forum shopping is an obstacle to the emergence of structured price commitments.
This analysis suggests that price commitments must be mandated, since they will not
necessarily come about spontaneously.


5     Concluding remarks
The paper constitutes a …rst pass at a formal analysis of standard-essential patents. Its
main insights were laid out in the introduction, so let us conclude with a few thoughts
about future work.
    First, one would want to extend the analysis to multidimensional price commitments.
A complication, which arises under structured price commitments as well as the FRAND
requirement or alternative regulations, is that IP holders may want to charge di¤erent
rates to, or use di¤erent units of measurement of license usage for, di¤erent classes of users
(while abiding by the non-discrimination requirement within a class). We conjecture that
multidimensional price commitments would not a¤ect the key insights of this paper. Price
competition then takes a Ramsey form, in which the IP owner competes through a vector
of prices that must overall deliver a positive surplus to users. If any, the di¢ culty may
relate more to the potential complexity of price structures. There will be in general a trade-
o¤ between the granularity of de…ned user classes and the complexity of the scheme. This
trade-o¤ is speci…c neither to structured price commitments nor to the standard setting
context more generally.
    Second, standards evolve; backward compatibility imperatives often imply that the
inclusion of one’s patents in a standard has a long-lasting impact on pro…tability. Con-
versely, SSOs must anticipate the likely (endogenous) evolution of available technologies
when selecting a standard. The study of dynamic morphing lies high in priority in the
research agenda.
    Third, one would want to account for the puzzling fact that patent pools sometimes
use patent counting (shares are related to the number of patents contributed to the pool).
While Section 3 has provided some explanation for why patent holders may (ine¢ ciently)
receive equal shares in a patent pool despite very asymmetric contributions to the technol-
ogy, it does not quite solve the patent counting puzzle: for, owning two essential patents
is in theory equivalent to owning a single one. Random bypass opportunities may o¤er



                                             37
some hint concerning the resolution of this puzzle.30
   Fourth, we could allow for coordinated e¤ects. Presumably unbundling might then
have additional bene…ts in terms of preventing pools from facilitating collusion, as in
Rey-Tirole, but this certainly requires a separate analysis.
   We leave these and the many other open topics on standard setting to future research.
  30
     An alternative explanation for patent counting was suggested to us by Andrey Malenko. The idea
is that the owner of (say,) two essential patents can threaten to spin o¤ one of them, thereby creating
an extra gatekeeper for the technology. Thus, the owner of multiple standard-essential patents has
substantially more bargaining power than the owner of a single standard-essential patent.




                                                  38
References
Axelrod, R., W. Mitchell, R. Thomas, D. Bennett, and E. Bruderer (1995) “Coalition-
formation in Standard-Setting Alliances,”Management Science 41(9): 1493–1508.

Boutin, A. (2013) “Screening for Good Pools: Consequences of Independent Licensing,”
mimeo, ECARES, ULB.

Brenner, S. (2009) “Optimal Formation Rules for Patent Pools,” Economic Theory,
40(3): 373–388.

Chiao, B., J. Lerner, and J. Tirole (2007) “The Rules of Standard-Setting Organizations:
An Empirical Analysis,”RAND Journal of Economics, 38 (4): 905–930.

Contreras, J. (2013), “Technical Standards and Ex-Ante Disclosure: Results and Analy-
sis of an Empirical Study,”Jurimetrics, 53(1): 163–211.

Department of Justice (2006) “Response to VMEbus International Trade Association
(VITA)’s Request for Business Review Letter,”T. Barnett, October 30.

Gallini, N. (2011) “Private Agreements for Coordinating Patent Rights: The Case of
Patent Pools,”Journal of Industrial and Business Economics, 38(3): 5–29.

Guesnerie, R., and J.J. La¤ont (1984) “A Complete Solution to a Class of Principal-
Agent Problems with an Application to the Control of a Self-managed Firm,” Journal
of Public Economics, 25(3): 329–369.

Kovbasyuk, S. (2013) “Optimal Certi…cation Design,”mimeo, EIEF.

Layne-Farrar, A. and G. Llobet (2012) “Moving beyond Simple Examples: Assessing the
Incremental Value Rule within Standards”, mimeo, Compass Lexecon and Cem….

Layne-Farrar, A., G. Llobet, and J. Padilla (2012) “Payments and Participation: The
Incentives to Join Cooperative Standard Setting E¤orts”, mimeo, Compass Lexecon and
Cem….

Lemley, M. (2002) “Intellectual Property Rights and Standard-Setting Organizations,”
California Law Review, 90(6): 1889–1981.


                                          39
Lemley, M. (2007) “Ten Things to Do About Patent Holdup of Standards (And One Not
To),”Boston College Law Review, 48(1): 149–168.

Lemley, M., and C. Shapiro (2013) “A Simple Approach to Setting Reasonable Royalties
for Standard-Essential Patents,”forthcoming, Berkeley Technology Law Journal.

Lerner, J., and J. Tirole (2004) “E¢ cient Patent Pools,” American Economic Review,
94(3): 691–711.

Lerner, J., and J. Tirole (2006) “A Model of Forum Shopping,” American Economic
Review, 96(4): 1091–1113.

Lerner, J., and J. Tirole (2013) “A Better Route to Standards,” mimeo, Harvard Uni-
versity and Toulouse School of Economics.

Lerner, J., M. Strojwas, and J. Tirole (2007) “The Design of Patent Pools: The Deter-
minants of Licensing Rules,”Rand Journal of Economics, 38(3): 610–625.

Levin, J., and S. Tadelis (2005) “Pro…t Sharing and the Role of Professional Partner-
ships,”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(1): 131–171.

Llanes, G., and J. Poblete (2012) “Ex-Ante Agreements in Standard Setting and Patent
Pool Formation”, forthcoming, Journal of Economics and Management Strategy.

Masoudi, G. (2007) “Antitrust Enforcement and Standard Setting: The VITA and IEEE
Letters and the “IP2”Report,”US Department of Justice.

Nagaoka, S., N. Tsukada, and T. Shimbo (2009) “The Structure and the Emergence
of Essential Patents for Standards: Lessons from Three IT Standards,” Schumpeterian
Perspectives on Innovation, Competition and Growth, 4: 435–450.

Nash, J. (1950). “The Bargaining Problem,”Econometrica 18(2): 155–162.

Quint, D. (2013) “Pooling with Essential and Nonessential Patents,”forthcoming, Amer-
ican Economic Journal: Microeconomics.

Regibeau, P., and K. Rockett (2010) “Assessment of Potential Anticompetitive Conduct
in the Field of Intellectual Property Rights and Assessment of the Interplay between


                                        40
Competition Policy and IPR Protection,”Competition Report 2010-16, European Com-
mission.

Rey, P., and J. Tirole (2013) “Cooperation vs. Collusion: How Essentiality Shapes Co-
opetition,”mimeo, Toulouse School of Economics.

Rysman, M. and T. Simcoe (2008) “Patents and the Performance of Voluntary Standard
Setting Organizations,”Management Science, 54(11): 1920–1934.

Schmalensee, R. (2009) “Standard-Setting, Innovation Specialists, and Competition Pol-
icy,”Journal of Industrial Economics, 57(3): 526–552.

Shapiro, C. (2003) “Antitrust Limits to Patent Settlements,” Rand Journal of Eco-
nomics, 34(2): 391–411.

Simcoe, T. (2012) “Standard Setting Committees: Consensus Governance for Shared
Technology Platforms,”American Economic Review 102(1): 305–336.

Skitol, R. (2005) “Concerted Buying Power: Its Potential for Addressing the Patent
Hold-up Problem in Standard Setting,”Antitrust Law Journal, 72(2): 727–744.

Swanson, D., and W. Baumol (2005) “Reasonable and Nondiscriminatory (RAND) Roy-
alties, Standards Selection, and Control of Market Power," Antitrust Law Journal, 73(1):
1–58.

Ward, B. (1958), “The Firm in Illyria: Market Syndicalism,” American Economic Re-
view, 48(4): 566–589.




                                          41
Appendix: Proof of Proposition 7
Proof. If I2 (S) (as de…ned in the proof of Proposition 6) is empty, then P (S) = i2S
mi P c (S ). So suppose I2 (S) is not empty and has k (^         p < mi g elements. We
                                                        p) = #fij^
know from Proposition 6 that

                             p^ = rS (X (^
                                         p) + (k (^
                                                  p)                 1)^
                                                                       p );

where rS denote the reaction curve corresponding to demand P (S) ! D(P (S) V (S))
(we know that 1 < rS0 < 0), and X (^     p) = fijmi p^g mi Similarly, letting k c (^
                                                                                   p) =
    p < min fmi , ei gg one can de…ne
#fij^

                     X c (^
                          p) =   fij min fmi ;ei g     p^g   minfmi ; ei g    X (^
                                                                                 p);

and p^c = rS (X c (^
                   p) + (#S k c (^
                                 p)) p^c ).
                                                  d                          1+r0
   Simple computations show that in both cases dX   (X + (#S k)^    p) = 1 (#S Sk)r0 > 0.
                                                                                   S
Finally, start at X = X (^ p) and reduce X; then p^ increases, but total price decreases.
And so P c (S) P (S).



Appendix: Proof of Proposition 10
Either P (S) = P m (S); because V (S ) P m (S ) V (S) P m (S) for all S, S cannot be
preferred to S . Or (from (8) ) P (S) = k2S mk . If S S , V (S)             k2S mk  V (S )
  k2S mk . So the standard cannot be overinclusive. Suppose next that i and j are like in

part (ii) of the proposition. If mi mj , users could substitute i for j and create standard
S 0 = S [fignfjg, creating value V (S 0 ) > V (S) at price P (S 0 ) = P (S) (mj mi ) P (S).
Proof. To illustrate the possibility of underinclusiveness, suppose that there are two
functionalities S = f1; 2g, that m1         V (S ) and m2 = 0, and …nally that V (S )
              m
V (f2g) < P (S ); then users prefer f2g to S . To illustrate the fact that functionality
ranks are not necessarily respected, suppose again that n = 2 and

                                 V (S)        (      i2S   ei )   c(#S)

where   is increasing and concave, c is the cost of including an extra functionality, e1 > e2 ,

                                                     42
and
                               (e2 )   c > 0 and    (e1 + e2 )      c < (e2 ):

So S = f1g. However if m2 = 0 and

                                  (e1 )   min fm1 , P m (S )g < (e2 );

then users select S = f2g.



Appendix: Proof of Corollary 1
Let

       k(   )   (k + 1) max fP F (V (Sk )        P + )g       k max fP F (V (Sk+1 )        P + g;
                           P                                        P


where, Sk denotes the set of the …rst k functionalities. It is easy to check that

       0                         f (V (Sk )   P m (Sk ) + )       f (V (Sk+1 )    P m (Sk+1 ) + )
       k(   )              /                                                                      :
                k(   )=0         F (V (Sk )   P m (Sk ) + )       F (V (Sk+1 )    P m (Sk+1 ) + )

Furthermore, Proposition 11 implies that for relevant values, k, k + 1                       k , and so
V (Sk+1 ) V (Sk ), implying

                           V (Sk+1 )      P m (Sk+1 )   V (Sk )      P m (Sk ):

The monotonicity of the hazard rate implies that 0k ( ) is non-negative whenever                 k(   )=
0; and so there exist k such that k is preferred to k + 1 if and only if     k.




                                                   43
