                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      HUMAN CAPITAL AND FERTILITY IN CHINESE CLANS BEFORE MODERN
                               GROWTH

                                          Carol H. Shiue

                                       Working Paper 19661
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w19661


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2013




Earlier versions of this paper was presented at the University of California-Davis, Fudan University,
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Mannheim, University
of Montreal, McGill, Northwestern, Oxford, Warwick, the Asian Historical Economics Conference,
the NBER Development of the American Economy, the NBER Economic Fluctuations and Growth,
and the Stanford SITE Conference. I thank Sascha Becker, Steve Broadberry, Raquel Fernandez, Avner
Greif, Bishnupriya Gupta, Murat Iyigun, Wolfgang Keller, Omer Moav, Tom Rawski, Ted Telford,
Michèle Tertilt, and Nathan Sussman for comments and discussions. T. Telford provided data used
in this paper. Generous support from the Russell Sage Foundation and the National Institute of Child
Health and Human Development (R03 HD042731-01) is gratefully acknowledged. The paper was
partly written while the author was National Fellow at the Hoover Institution, whose hospitality is
gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Carol H. Shiue. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Human Capital and Fertility in Chinese Clans Before Modern Growth
Carol H. Shiue
NBER Working Paper No. 19661
November 2013, Revised December 2013
JEL No. I25,J11,O15

                                              ABSTRACT

A stylized fact of modern growth is that as countries become richer, education levels rise while family
size decreases. This paper provides evidence that well before the onset of modern growth, changes
in the return to education affected household choice of children's quantity versus quality. The setting
is in Anhui Province, China over the 13th to 20th centuries. I show that the civil service examination
system underwent long-term changes affecting the return to education, providing a means to test whether
incentives for acquiring education affected fertility decisions. Employing an intergenerationally-linked
dataset drawn from over 43,000 individuals, I first show that as the state examination’s discretionary
practices had been largely eliminated by the 17th century, increasing the return to education, households
with a lower number of children had a higher chance that one of their sons would substantially invest
into human capital. Second, I demonstrate that this negative relationship between fertility and education
disappeared with a fall in the return to education due to the deterioration of the state examination system
in the 19th century. Taken together, my findings provide support for the hypothesis that fertility choices
respond to changes in the return to human capital. The implications of these findings for theories of
economic development are discussed.


Carol H. Shiue
University of Colorado
Department of Economics
Boulder, CO 80309
and Stanford University Hoover Institution
and also NBER
carol.shiue@colorado.edu
    1. Introduction

    The historical development of countries around the world shows that sustained
increases in per-capita income coincide with increasing skills and education per worker.
Human capital is seen as one the most important determinants of economic development
in the growth experience of the United States, Britain, as well as other countries (Crafts
1995; DeLong, Goldin, and Katz 2003; Galor and Weil 2000, Galor and Moav 2002).
Today, the World Bank, as the largest external supporter of education in developing
countries, manages a portfolio of $11.1 billion, spanning 71 countries.3 The implications
of this turn on the relationship between the number of children (fertility) and the
education of each child (human capital). Here I ask whether the child quantity-quality
relationship responds to economic incentives.4
    Specifically, I examine the extent to which families responded to incentives to invest
in human capital in a sample of families consisting of over 43,000 individuals in central
China between the years 1300 and 1900. A simple model predicts that the choice between
fertility and education depends on their relative returns. Empirically, the increase in the
return to education by the 17th century led to a robust negative relationship between
education and fertility, while the decline of the return to education was accompanied by
the disappearance of this negative relationship. This increase and subsequent decrease for
child quality supports the hypothesis that economic factors help to determine the
relationship between fertility and education in pre-industrial China.
    Incentives to invest in human capital were spurred by the national civil service
examinations, which the Qing state (1644 to 1911) used as an entry mechanism to
determine who could be allowed to hold office in government. The examination
consisted of a series of written tests that required a high level of literary skills and
sophisticated knowledge of an extensive curriculum, requiring many years of study in
order to master. Although civil service examinations were used already in the Song
dynasty (960-1127), over most dynasties the recruitment of officials did not rely


3
  World Bank (2014).
4
  Starting with the work of Gary Becker (1960) economists have pursued the idea that fertility is based on
rational choice; Becker (1981) discusses the implications of a rise in the demand for human capital on the
parental choice of the quality and quantity of offspring. On its broader importance for economic
development, see Galor (2011).


                                                         2
exclusively, or even predominately, on this route. For much of the history of the civil
service examination system, other channels of advancements co-existed with it. For
example, during the Ming (1368-1644) the purchase of offices and titles, and
discretionary appointments were very common channels of entering the elite group of
high-ranking officials.
    By the time of the reign of the first Qing emperor Shun-zhi (1644-1661) the civil
service examination system had become the predominate pathway to elite status, attaining
its final form which is today most typically associated with the institution. While certain
degrees were offered for purchase at one time or another, and especially during times of
revenue deficit, such as during the Taiping Rebellion (1850-64), these degrees were given
different names. The higher-rank degrees that would allow the holder to obtain
significant titled positions were much more exclusive than the purchased titles and
moreover indicated the holder had passed the national examinations (Ho 1962). One
reason why previous and more discretionary channels of entering officialdom became
less common for the Han Chinese may have been that the Qing emperors, who were
ethnically Manchu rulers, were concerned with establishing legitimacy of the new
dynasty and control over local elites. Thus, in the early Qing, the examination system was
the primary channel of gaining political influence and high social status.
    During the 19th century, the state examination system deteriorated rapidly.5 While it is
difficult to isolate all the factors responsible for this decline, the exam system became
more discretionary, and the increase in population relative to the number of official
positions meant that the competition in the exams increased (Ho 1962; Elman 2002;
Miyazaki 1976). This led to a decline in the expected return to education, most likely
reinforced by a decline in the state’s per-capita tax revenues that lowered the returns of
being a state official upon successfully passing the exam and obtaining a position.
    In this paper, I contribute to the literature by providing evidence that fertility
responded to economic incentives: namely, that incentives to acquire human capital, as
defined by whether a man participates in the examinations, produced a significant
negative relationship with the size of the family in which he was raised. Specifically,


5
 Yuchtman (2014) studies the transition from the declining state examination system to a Western
education system towards the end of the Qing dynasty (1911).


                                                        3
from the 17th to 18th centuries, among the elite families in which both the father and
grandfather were educated, an additional brother is associated with a 0.04 percentage
point decline in the probability of participating in the examinations. Evaluated at the
mean of the participation rate for this group, 0.34, this implies that an additional brother
contributes to a 12.2% decline in exam participation. The relationship is also negative
and significant for men who had neither an educated father nor grandfather, showing that
this quantity-quality relationship was not confined to elite groups but applied to a large
social spectrum. I also present support for a positive effect of reduced fertility on higher
education using instrumental-variables estimation for a smaller sample of men.
      This negative relationship between fertility and education during the 17th and 18th
century by itself does not imply that households chose the number of children in response
to education goals. Fertility differences could be determined by resource differences,
health shocks, or famines, for example, and given variation in the number of children a
negative quantity-quality relationship could be the result of a resource constraint—child
quantity crowds out quality. This concern is addressed in two ways. First, I use
information on a range of resource, health, demographic, and aggregate factors, showing
that the negative relationship between fertility and education remains present even after
plausible determinants of fertility variation other than parental choice have been
controlled for. Second, and arguably more importantly, I show that there was a decline in
the return to education after 1800 that led to the disappearance of the negative child
quantity-quality relationship in China.
      The implication is striking because demographic patterns in China have traditionally
stressed women’s early age at marriage, universal marriage for women, large families of
rich men, and son preference—all patterns which suggest that economic incentives matter
little for fertility, and certainly not for sons.6 Some of these conclusions have recently
been questioned, with some authors suggesting that there may have been deliberate
fertility control before the year 1970 (Zhao 1997) or even starting in the 18th century
(Campbell and Lee 1997).7 By shifting the focus from fertility as such to the link
between human capital and fertility, my work sheds new light on a mechanism central to


6
    Coale (1985); Lavely and Wong (1998); Lavely (2007); Wolf (2001).
7
    On this debate, see Wolf (2001), Zhao (2002), and Campbell, Feng, and Lee (2002).


                                                          4
economic development, and by analyzing several additional centuries I am able to show
not only that a negative child-quantity quality relationship existed but that it responded to
long-term changes in the economic incentive to become educated.
    Because aggregate-level data masks important heterogeneity determining historical
human capital-fertility relationships (Guinnane 2011), together with a recent but rapidly
expanding literature I employ more disaggregated data.8 Becker, Cinnirella, and
Woessmann (2010, 2012), in particular, use detailed county-level data to show that a
fertility-education trade-off existed in 19th century Prussia. I extend this literature by
exploiting variation across intergenerationally-linked households over a long sample
period, which is key to providing evidence on the fertility-education trade-off from long-
term changes in the return to education.
    Another contribution of this paper is to shift the focus from Europe to China, where
less is known on the timing and the cause of fertility declines. Generally, fertility decline
has often been depicted as arising after the onset of the era of modern growth around
1800, and has been linked to changes in child mortality, demand for children, women’s’
work, public schooling, child labor and other factors (Doepke 2004, Lee 2003, Easterlin
and Crimmins 1985). In counterpoint to Western developments, during the period studied
in this paper China was a pre-modern economy experiencing few of these changing social
and institutional developments that have been associated with fertility decline in the
Western experience.9 My findings for China emphasize that a relatively high demand for
human capital is critical for the quantity-quantity tradeoff to emerge, not modern
economic growth as such. Furthermore, the trend towards lower human capital and higher
fertility during the Late Qing might help to explain that China fell behind Western
Europe during the late 18th to 19th centuries.


8
  Fernihough (2011) shows that school enrollment declines with sibship size in early 20th century Ireland;
Klemp and Weisdorf (2012) document that marital fecundity, instrumented by time-until-first-child, is
associated with lower literacy of the offspring in reconstitution data for 18th and 19th century England;
Basso (2012) examines the effect of child education on parents’ fertility across early 20th Spanish provinces;
and Murphy (2015) shows that family size is negatively correlated with measures of education across late-
19th century French regions.
9
  For example, after Newcomen and Watt pioneered the steam engine in 18th century Britain, by the 1830s
the first railway lines were being constructed in Germany as well as the United States. Between 1825-1850,
markets in Europe were much more integrated than they were just 50 years earlier, suggesting that the roots
of modernization had taken hold (Shiue and Keller 2007). Also printing and the Enlightenment might have
affected the timing of growth in Europe (Mokyr 2012).


                                                          5
    Finally, this paper contributes to the literature employing Chinese genealogies as a
source of data (Liu 1978, 1980, 1992, Fei and Liu 1982, Telford 1986). While as I
discuss below genealogies have certain limitations compared to high-income country
census data (Harrell 1987, Telford 1990, Zhao 1994), the possibility of linking multiple
generations is a key advantage, especially on questions where long-run dynamics could
be important, such as the inter-generational transmission of human capital (discussed
below). Most of the existing work employing genealogies to date focuses on questions in
demography; by examining the relationship between fertility and education, this paper
sheds new light on the potential of using genealogies for studying key economic
questions.


        The organization of the paper is as follows: Section 2 provides historical
background on education from the Yuan (1271-1368), the Ming (1368-1644), and Qing
Dynasties (1644-1911), with emphasis on the costs and the potential returns to education.
Section 3 introduces a theoretical framework that guides the empirical analysis. Section
4 discusses the data and provides descriptive statistics on my sample from the Tongcheng
area, in Anhui Province. This section also discusses in greater depth the extent to which
the data compiled from genealogical evidence, and in particular the Tongcheng
genealogies, can be taken as representative of the population at large. I consider issues of
sample selection, recall bias, and survivor bias. To the extent that this is feasible, I
present evidence from other sources as a check of the external validity of the Tongcheng
genealogies, finding that the Tongcheng sample provides a valid characterization of key
dimensions of the population. The reader is also referred to additional tables in the
Appendix. The main empirical results are in section 5. Section 5.2 provides evidence on
a negative quantity-quality relationship during the early Qing period, defined as 1644-
1800. Section 5.3 shows that this negative relationship disappeared towards the end of the
Qing as the return to participating in the state examinations declined. Section 6 concludes
with a discussion of the implications of these findings.




                                                   6
     2. The Ming-Qing educational system and state sponsored civil-service
examinations

     This section provides information on China’s state sponsored civil-service
examinations. I begin by showing that the state examinations became the country’s
central element of human capital formation and path to upward mobility.

         Eligibility and scope: from discretion to rules
     The essence of the civil service examination system was that it required a high level
of education as a prerequisite for appointment to government office. It was an institution
that was shaped over a long period spanning several dynasties. The first step towards it
occurred during the Tang Dynasty (670-906 AD), when hereditary aristocracies were
largely eliminated.19 However, even though literacy and knowledge of the classic texts
were prerequisites for appointment, the examination process was a much simpler affair
that relied first and foremost on the discretionary recommendations of candidates near the
capital (Teng Ssu-yu 1967, pp. 25-49; Chaffee 1985, pp. 14-15, 182), and so the pool of
candidates was in effect highly constrained. In addition, up until the end of the Song
Dynasty, circa 1279, artisans and merchant families were not legally eligible from the
standpoint of sumptuary laws to participate in state examinations (Ho 1962, p. 41).
     For many centuries thereafter, examinations and discretionary appointment existed
side-by-side. Examinations were effectively used in conjunction with ad hoc
appointments of officials all the way to the Ming (1368-1644), because many men could
purchase degrees, rather than passing written examinations, as an equally valid channel to
high office. According to Ho Ping-ti (1962): “All the way down to the end of the Ming
period “chien-sheng” (holders of a purchased degree) were legally and institutionally
entitled to government office.” Between the years 1406 and 1574, Ho (1962) also gives
records of appointees that indicate more than half of the high level candidates that had
obtained their office from these unorthodox or irregular channels that involved purchases
of degrees.20

19
   For further discussions on social mobility in China during the late imperial era, see Greenhalgh (1988).
The use of a civil service examination for government service was also used in Western countries, but only
much later. England adopted a government service examination in 1870, and the U.S. in 1883 (Miyazaki
1976, 124).
20
   A series of decrees, starting in 1451 in the Ming dynasty, formally permitted men without academic


                                                         7
    Large gaps in the administration of examinations can be found in the Ming—in the
late 14th century, fourteen years lapsed between one exam and the next, providing
additional evidence that the state did not rely exclusively on exams as the means of
recruiting officials.21 Consistent with the general lax attitude of the state towards
examinations during this period, the number of people who could acquire a licensing
degree (the sheng-yuan degree and equivalents) was loosely controlled. Through the late
16th century, there were no limitations on the number of these degrees that could be
newly awarded each year in the larger counties (Ho 1962, p. 178). The overall effect was
one of sharply fluctuating numbers across different regions of new degrees, depending on
the discretion of the local education commissioner. There were also strong overall
increases in the early 17th century, in part due to the fact that counties were simply selling
the degrees outright (ibid p. 178).22 Under these circumstances of mixed incentives and
discretionary degree awards, one would not expect to find a consistent rational response
to investments in child education.
    It was not until the mid-17th century, when renewed efforts to overhaul the system
made the returns to education more predictable. The changes were not all made at once,
but the cumulative effect was such that by the end of the reign of the first Qing emperor,
in 1661, the civil service examination system was quite different from what it had been
up to that time in essentially important ways (Elman 1994). These changes were crucial
in raising the legitimacy of the civil service examinations, and turning it into the key
channel of entry into elite status.23
    Examinations were also regularly administered throughout the Qing Empire. The
discretionary fluctuations of the late Ming were stabilized in the 17th century when the
first Qing emperor Shun-zhi (1644-1661) issued a 1661 decree that reset quotas for each

degrees to purchase their way towards appointment to high level offices (Ho 1962, pp. 32-33).
21
   The first Ming national exam was given in 1371, wherein 119 degrees were given. The second exam was
given only 14 years later, with 485 degrees awarded (Elman 2000, 68; Ho 1962, 186).
22
   One estimate suggests that the actual number of these degrees increased by 20-fold nationally from the
late 1500s to 1600 (Ho 1962, 182).
23
   By about 1650, the only types of hereditary privileges and automatic status that remained belonged to the
imperial lineage where the throne was passed from the emperor to one of his sons and the families of the
Eight-Banner system. Indeed, whereas the provinces had provincial quotas, the Banner families had a
generous “Banner” quota. The latter was an exclusive hereditary institution that dominated military and
command functions, and men born into banner families held a caste-like elite position. Elliot (2001)
estimates the total banner population in the early 18th century was 3% of the population of China, most of
whom resided in Beijing and Manchuria.


                                                         8
prefectural city and county in so far as the number of new licensing degrees that could be
issued at each examination.24 Unlike the Ming state, the Qing government was much
more serious in enforcing the upper limits (in the form of quotas) of new degrees issued,
especially at the basic entry level, or the licensing level (the sheng-yuan degree).25 Since
only people with a licensing degree obtained through written exams could be considered
for the upper level examinations, the enforcement of lower level quotas thereby
reinforced education rather than discretion in the system (Ho1962, 182). Variations in
the number of sheng-yuan degrees during the first two centuries of the Qing period were
minor (Ho 1962, 179).26
     Crucially complementing this policy, other means for entering officialdom were
heavily closed off for the Han Chinese majority population, so that discretionary
appointments declined sharply and purchased appointments were vanity titles that did not
confer the same elite status as examination degrees. 27 The civil service examination
system became a much more predictable institution, with a higher expected return to
human capital, certainly relative to what had come before it. As I discuss below, this
would change again towards the end of the Qing.

         Costs and returns to education
         This section shows that both costs and returns to education in China were
substantial, and they were borne by private agents. There were major differences
between basic literacy training and investments in civil service. Anecdotal accounts of
teacher salaries suggest the costs of schooling to attain basic literacy during the Qing
24
   In 1661 maximal quotas for the numbers of eligible candidates per year were 20 for a large prefectural
city, 15 for a large and “cultured” county, and 4-5 for a small and “backward” county. Daqinghuidian shili
(1899 edition) Ch. 370.
25
   There were multiple levels of degrees that could be earned, with the lower level acting as a gateway into
entry into higher degrees. There were three major categories: the licentiate status (sheng-yuan)--a lower
level degree given to men who passed the initial exam at the local (prefectural or county) level. The degree
was necessary for further attempts to advance. An intermediate degree (at the provincial level), was known
as the ju-ren; it was significant from an official standpoint because it would allow the individual to be
appointed to a minor official office. It was necessary in turn for attainment of the jin-shi degree (the
national exam), which entitled the candidate to high-ranking positions in the bureaucracy.
26
   “In all likelihood the fluctuations in the total cumulative number of sheng-yuan in an average lifetime
during the first centuries of the Qing period were not very great…All in all, the Qing state succeeded in the
main in keeping a stable sheng-yuan quota system.” (Ho 1962, p. 197)
27
   The Qing also sold titles at various points, but only temporarily. The most notable episode of sales did
not occur until the revenue difficulties of the Taiping Rebellion of 1850’s and 1860’s. Also, the Qing
preserved a distinction between earned degrees and purchased titles. Purchasers of titles did not enjoy the
same privilege and power as high office through passing the exams.


                                                          9
period were modest. Parents of even moderate means could pool together tuition fees to
hire a local schoolmaster—drawn from the pool of men who tried but were unsuccessful
in the imperial exams—to teach village youngsters basic literacy in return for room and
board, meals, and a small allowance (Ebrey 1993, p. 72); other types of support might be
had from the lineage. At times teachers had to do other tasks because of their low pay
(Ho 1962, p. 140). It is estimated that around 30-45 percent of males and 2 percent of
females were literate in the late Qing (Rawski 1979, p. 23). Over three or four years,
children could learn approximately 1,000 characters, which was sufficient to be able to
read business contracts and vernacular text (Leung 1994, p. 393; Ebrey 1993, p. 348).
   Much more time and effort than for basic literacy was required to prepare for the
imperial examinations, which required memorization of vast tracts of literary and
historical material and the ability to write in a highly stylized fashion. The state
examinations took place in stages, much like a tournament. Literate men were nominated
at the county level for candidacy to the first level examinations. Those who succeeded in
this initial exam were licentiates (sheng-yuan), and were eligible to consider the next
stage of examinations, which would qualify the candidate for official appointments.
Candidates as young as 15 years were known to pass these licensing examinations, but
most were in their twenties (Elman 2000, 263). Estimates place the number of licentiates
in the nation in 1700 at 500,000 (perhaps 0.3% of the population).
   Evidence of the costs of higher education can be seen in the private academies
established in the 18th century, which allowed teaching and classical research to be
alternative careers to government appointment. Unlike teachers for youngsters, these
teachers may have been elites who held degrees themselves; some may have been retired
officials who had returned home after their civil service career.
   The fee for taking the metropolitan examinations during the 16th century is estimated
to be around 833 silver dollars, a large amount (Miyazaki 1976, p. 118). For comparison,
it is estimated that the literati (those who were literate in the classics and therefore could
enter teaching careers) had food, shelter, and an average annual income of 778 silver
dollars in the 19th century (Elman 2002, p. 403).
   While the state established the content and curriculum for the official examinations,
the decision of whether or not to groom a son for his preparation for civil service was a



                                                  10
private investment decision. Typically, this education had to start early, when the boy
was very young (Miyazaki 1976). Because of the large number of characters that had to
be memorized, it was a consuming effort. Mandatory education did not exist at any level
through the period under study. Although the imperial government issues decrees that
schools be set up in prefectures and counties, in practice, teachers and schools were
largely funded through private initiatives organized at the local level.28 Because
schooling was neither mandatory nor regulated, a wide variety of schools could be found,
with some kind of school present in most villages and urban centers (Rawski 1979, p. 17;
Leung 1994). Specialized schools, and officially subsidized schools, such as the schools
specializing in military education of medicine, or national schools that were open to
students preparing for state exams, could also be found. Private institutions also
flourished—academies such as those established by salt merchants of Guangzhou, for
example, may have allowed their sons to receive the best schooling of the empire (Elman
2002, pp. 403-06). In the Qing, although the government also set up prefectural schools,
these were stations for licentiates (those men who had already passed the qualifying exam)
for collecting subsidies, rather than places where learning took place (Elman 1991).29
     For the most part only those men with a fortunate family background could take
advantage of this system of entering officialdom. However, at least in principle, the
system was a meritocracy in which non-elites could not be barred from the examinations.
The old sumptuary laws that discriminated against artisans and merchants had long been
abolished by this time, and all men, regardless of their family background, could legally
take part in the examinations. Especially gifted boys could rise in a rags-to-riches way
through the ranks and there were men of legendary brilliance who did so (Elman 2000, p.
263). Generally, however, the sons of the upper class families had much better
opportunities and much greater resources to receive the schooling and tutoring that was
required for exam preparation. Although women were barred from state service, upper
class girls also received lessons and were literate. For elite boys, schooling likely began
earlier than for most, at the age of 5, often first with their mother and then with hired

28
   For instance in the year 1078, it was decreed that provinces and prefectures should appoint full-time
school teachers, but only 53 counties out of 1000 counties did so. (Ho 1962, p. 170). At the start of the
Ming (1368-1644) another decree to establish schools was issued, with more compliance (ibid, p. 179).
29
   Basic state support came in a 1382 decree, which entitled licentiates to tax exemptions for themselves
and two males in the family and a basic amount of rice (Ho 1962, p. 172).


                                                         11
tutors (Elman 1991, pp. 16-17).
     By the Qing, provincial exams were given in the provincial capital every three years,
and were scheduled over a period of nine days.30 Exam questions were based on the
moral and political thinking of classicism, and required candidates to compose poems and
essays. The exams were not exclusively humanist, however, and included also policy
questions on statecraft, fiscal policy, as well as military and political institutions at the
time.31 The question of the usefulness of the knowledge that was tested at the official
exams is a subject worthy of study in its own right. For the purposes of this paper the
content of the exams is not directly relevant. What is important is that there were
potentially large returns for investments in education, and that these investments were not
small.
     Those who passed these exams were already eligible for official appointments, but
they could also choose to take the next level examinations, the metropolitan examinations,
which took place in further rounds. At the conclusion of those exams a list of the
successful candidates was produced, in rank order. Graduates of these exams enjoyed an
extremely high reputation. For those who received official degrees, their subsequent
position as an official of the Qing state enabled them to amass a relatively high income
(Chang 1962, p. 3). This income, derived from both formal and informal sources,
enabled the government official to have a relatively high living standard, contribute to
local community projects, and make investments in landed property. It has been noted
that an official position in the government offered some of the most financially rewarding
careers available, and that the prestige and power that came with such positions was
unmatched (Elman 2000, p. 292). Merchants who had accumulated fortunes could on
occasion purchase minor titles and thus buy into some part of the governing elite, but
participation in the state exams was the direct route, and the only way to acquire higher-
level positions.
     Since the state did not interfere with decisions on household investment activities or
the number of children families should have, economic investments into education were

30
  Upwards of 4,000 persons appeared for provincial exams at the capital (Twitchett and Mote 1998, p. 36).
31
  For example, in the first metropolitan exam of the Qing dynasty in 1646, the regent asked how the
government could bring Manchu and Han officials and people together for a common purpose. This was
an important question for the Qing Manchu government that sought to rule over a Han Chinese population.
See Twitchett and Mote (1998), Ch 7, p. 361.


                                                       12
borne privately by the families of potential candidates. Education was thus costly, but it
was also rewarding. Although children could not directly inherit official positions and
titles, earned income could be passed on to descendants because of an economic
environment of generally secure property rights combined with low taxation during the
period under study.
     In the early Qing period, the return to education in the form of lifetime income from
official salaries and bonuses was significant and such individuals continued to enjoy
prestige and high status. The annual salary of the head of the province (the governor-
general) in the 18th century, plus the expected official bonuses, informal gifts, and grain
easily surpassed the value of 250,000 silver dollars. For the head administrator of the
county (the district magistrate), the sum of informal bonuses and gifts alone would have
amounted to about 45,500 silver dollars per year (Wakeman 1975, pp. 26-27).

         The incentives to acquire human capital over time
     As discussed above, during the 17th century the Qing state established, much more
successfully than any dynasty before it, a non-discretionary and merit-based state
examination system. In this section I show that subsequent changes in the system during
the period of 1800 and later (denoted as Late Qing) likely reduced the incentives to
acquire human capital. These incentives would have depended on the expected return to
human capital, net of the costs.32
     On the benefit side of human capital acquisition, I will begin by discussing the return
conditional on passing the state examinations. As noted above, passing the examinations
was the primary pathway to becoming state official, with the income that came with it.
There is information on the salary schedule of officials; in the 19th century, a first-ranked
official for example, which includes a Grand Secretary, would receive 180 taels per year,
whereas a second-ranked official, such as a Vice-President of one of the Boards, would
receive only 150 taels annually (Chang 1962, Tables 1, 16).33 The main reason why it is

32
   The introduction of the printing press might have affected the costs of human capital acquisition (Becker
and Woessmann 2009), in addition to diffusing knowledge relevant to merchants (Dittmar 2011). In China
the introduction of movable type printing facilities in the early 16th century had arguably limited effects. Ho
notes that printed books were still too expensive relative to the means of the large majority of the
population, to the point that the introduction of printing in fact increased the hold of high-status families on
passing the higher state examinations (1962, pp. 214-215).
33
   Officials also received a varying allowance in terms of rice, given in Chang (1962, p.12).


                                                           13
impossible to use information on the official salary schedule, which exists for all levels of
official position, to obtain a Mincerian return to education schedule is that far more
important than official salary was the extra income that came with the office, which while
generally considered legitimate was not systematically recorded. The extra income for a
Grand Secretary is estimated at annually 52,500 taels, e.g., and that of a Vice-President
of a Board at 30,000 taels (Chang 1962, Table 16). This means that the official portion of
the salary is about 0.3 and 0.5 percent, respectively, of the total income that these
officials commanded.
     In the absence of systematic data on the amount of the officials’ extra income, the
return to human capital can be estimated from information on the officials’ life style and
spending based on biographies, lineage genealogies, and local histories (gazetteers).34
The anecdotal evidence is consistent with a decline in the return to human capital during
the Qing. For example, in the 18th century a single retired official, Chiang Chi, spent
300,000 taels on constructing roads around his native place; Chiang Chi had the
resources to do so because he served for ten years as official on the Board of Punishment.
Comparably high sums during the 19th century are not recorded (see Chang 1962).

         Another part of the return to human capital came in terms of income from
teaching, especially for those men who passed the exam but did not obtain an official
position (students, sometimes for all their lives). The income of students clearly fell over
time. During the Ming dynasty, students received generous stipends in form of food (two
bushels of rice), cotton and silk cloth, embroidered silk cloth, as well as sets of clothing,
headgear, and boots, travel money to go home to visit family. They were also given
holiday money, grain to support their wives and children, money to pay for their
wedding, and in addition two sets of women clothing (Ho 1962). In contrast, during the
Qing students received only minimal grain stipend and tax exemptions from the state
(Cong 2007). Towards the end of the Qing, the income from teaching was so low that in
some cases teachers could not sustain themselves with it and instead died of hunger, such
as Ch’in Ta-chang of Nanyang or Liu Lien-chung of Lu-i (Chang 1962, pp. 252, 254).
Consistent with this, teachers’ real wages fell by 50% between the year 1700 and 1800,
34
   One important aspect of an official’s spending were expected donations to his clan, or lineage (the temple,
other buildings, or land). For example, in the 1880s the Huang lineage expected 1,000 taels per year from a
lineage member who was Governor, and 200 taels from someone who was Prefect; Chang (1962, Table 7).


                                                         14
and on average teachers’ real wages were lower in the Late Qing, defined as post-1800,
compared to the Early Qing period (see Rawski 1979, Figure 1).

     Additional evidence for the decline of the return to human capital comes from data on
private academies, which during the Qing were primarily concerned with preparing
students for the state examinations (Ho 1962, 200). While during the period of 1662 to
1795 about 20 academies per one million of Guangdong’s population were set up, during
the period 1796 to 1908 this fell to 8 academies per one million people, less than half the
earlier figure.35 To the extent that this decline in the expansion of preparatory schools for
the state examinations reflects a lower demand for human capital, it is consistent with a
decline in the return to human capital.
     Finally, for any given return to human capital conditional on passing the state
examination, the decision to invest into human capital was also affected by a candidate’s
chance to pass the examination. Given that the number of county seats, and thus
magisterial and prefectural positions in the imperial China changed little—it was 1,385 in
Ming and 1,360 in Qing—the number of official positions remained roughly constant. In
contrast, the size of China’s population had a strong upward trend. Estimates suggest the
rate of growth was somewhere between 0.5% - 1% per annum over the 14th to 19th
centuries (Ho 1959, pp. 263-64; Perkins 1969, Table 4.a; Durand 1977; McEvedy and
Jones 1978). Compounded over time, the absolute numbers reached 400-450 million by
the late Qing from 140-150 million in 1700. As a consequence, the ratio of official
positions relative to the size of population fell, and the resulting increase in the degree of
competition arguably decreased the expected return to human capital further.36
     Overall, the evidence supports the hypothesis that the return to human capital fell
towards the later part of the Qing era. To the extent that this decline leads to lower levels
of human capital in the population, this trend is evident in my sample. Between 1661 and
1700, more than 14% of the married men are educated, followed by 6.5% between 1700
and 1750, 5.1% between 1750 and 1800, and 3.9% after the year 1800.

35
   Based on data in Ho (1962, 201); my analysis includes both academies set up under official initiative and
those set up under private initiative. I take 9.8 million to be Guangdong’s average population for the 1662-
1795 period, and 28.2 million for the 1796-1908 period, using Ho’s population estimates (Ho 1962, p. 223).
36
   One might think that the return to office might rise with the increase to population size, although as
discussed above there is no evidence for this. For evidence that competition was intensifying over the Qing
across all regions of China, see Chang (1955), Ho (1962), Elman (2000, Table 3.4, 662).


                                                         15
      Having described the evolution of the state examination system, as well as the
implications for the changing returns for human capital, I now turn to a simple theoretical
framework in which to interpret these changes.


      3. Theoretical framework and testable implications

      The relationship between child quantity and quality is determined by the utility-
maximizing choice of households. Human capital formation will be affected by changes
in the costs and benefits of child quantity versus quality. Let there be a household that
derives utility u from consumption c, the number of (surviving) children n, as well as
from the quality (human capital) h of those children. As in Galor and Weil (2000), Galor
and Moav (2002), I assume that households maximize a log-linear utility function of the
following form:


(1)      𝑢 = 1 − 𝛾 ln 𝑐 + 𝛾 ln 𝑛 + 𝛽 ln ℎ ,


where γ, 0 < γ < 1, and β, β < 1, are constant parameters. Expenditure is divided between
the share spent on consumption goods, (1-γ), and the share spent on children, γ. The
parameter β gives the preference for child quality. The household cares about human
capital both because that may generate a revenue stream (in particular, if the child passes
the government exam and obtains an official position) and perhaps for intrinsic reasons.
         For each child, parents spend a fraction 𝜏 ! of their time budget (and a
corresponding share of their potential income) on raising children. Furthermore, a
fraction 𝜏 ! of parents’ time is required for each unit of education of each child. The costs
for raising one child with education e thus are 𝜏 ! + 𝜏 ! 𝑒 units of time. Assuming that the
potential income of the household working full-time is y, the household faces the
following budget constraint:


(2)      𝑦 𝜏 ! + 𝜏 ! 𝑒 𝑛 + 𝑐 ≤ 𝑦,




                                                  16
where the price of a child is the opportunity cost associated with raising it, 𝑦 𝜏 ! + 𝜏 ! 𝑒 .
Equation (2) confirms that both child quantity and child quality come at the expense of a
lower consumption of goods.
         Suppose that the level of human capital of each child, h, is an increasing, strictly
concave function of the parental time investment in the education of the child, e: h = h(e).
Optimization yields


(3)      𝑛∗ = 𝛾/ 𝜏 ! + 𝜏 ! 𝑒 ∗


and


(4)      𝑒 ∗ = 𝑒 𝛽, 𝜏 ! , 𝜏 ! ,


where 𝑛∗ and 𝑒 ∗ denote the optimal choice of child quantity and quality, respectively.
Equation (3) describes the trade-off between child quantity and quality.
      The return to education varies inversely with 𝜏 ! because parents who do not spend
time educating their offspring will produce with any w units of time w units of
consumption goods. Equation (4) shows that the quantity-quality trade-off is affected by
𝜏 ! ; in particular, the optimal level of child quality increases as 𝜏 ! falls, and vice versa.
This model yields the following predictions for my analysis: first, the cumulative changes
up to the 17th century made in the state examination system (as described above) can be
interpreted as an increase in the expected return to human capital accumulation (lower
𝜏 ! ). Second, the decline in the expected return to human capital accumulation from the
Early to the Late Qing (higher 𝜏 ! ), as discussed above, will decrease the optimal level of
human capital investment.
      This simple model can accommodate a number of extensions without changing the
key prediction. First, differences in the productivity of the education process can be
captured as follows. Let ln(h) = δt ln(e), 0 < δt < 1, where t indexes a certain era, t = early
or t = late.38 If δearly > δlate, a decline over time has the same qualitative implications as a

38
  I define the Early Qing to be the years 1644 to 1800, and Late Qing is post-1800. The sensitivity of the
results with respect to these definitions is examined below.


                                                         17
decline in the return to education: it reduces child quality.39 See also Moav (2005) who
discusses the case where individuals’ productivity as teachers increases with their own
human capital while their productivity in simply raising children is not affected by their
human capital levels. Second, the model assumes that all household investments in child
education are in terms of time. As noted above, mothers often spent time on educating
their sons. However, if households could also purchase education services at price pe (by
hiring tutors), this would provide a reason why richer households acquire more education
for their children. Nevertheless, as long as households need to spend some part of their
time on child education, such as the time needed for the selection and monitoring of
tutors, the model’s prediction remains qualitatively unchanged.
     In the following section I describe the data.


4. Data

        The data of this paper comes from genealogies of individuals and households who
lived in Tongcheng County of Anhui Province. Tongcheng County is approximately 30
miles by 60 miles, and is situated on the Yangzi River about 300 miles inland from the
coast of the East China Sea. The county is about 150 miles from Nanjing, the early Ming
Dynasty capital, and 650 miles from Beijing, the later Ming and Qing capital. Anhui
Province was representative of the more developed and densely settled regions of China,
with Tongcheng considered a centrally important economic region in the relatively
developed agricultural economies of the lower Yangzi. The region was mainly a rice-
producing area where the wealthiest families were typically landowning gentry (Beattie
1979, pp. 130-131). Over the Ming and Qing Dynasties, the region gained some fame for
having produced a number of the highest officials of the empire.

     The dataset is created from genealogies of seven lineages of Tongcheng County.40
Typically, genealogies start with the progenitor of the lineage from which all following
lineage members descend. In the Tongcheng genealogies, the lineages’ progenitor is
recorded typically in the 14th century, with the earliest date being the year 1298. The

39
  δ could also be stochastic due to idiosyncratic factors across individuals or over time.
40
  Instead of lineage, authors in the literature use terms such as clan, extended family, and common descent
group.


                                                        18
Tongcheng genealogies cover typically 18 consecutive generations, with a maximum of
21. The latest death recorded in my data set is 1925. Generally, the coverage of
genealogies at the turn to and into the 20th century becomes patchy (for example, see
Harrell’s 1987 analysis of Liu’s 1992 lineage data from Taiwan). Telford gives as the
coverage of the Tongcheng genealogies the years 1300 to 1880 (1990, p.124), which is
by the standards of most socio-economic data an extraordinarily long period.41 While my
sample covers part of the Yuan and the Ming dynasties the large majority of observations
are for the Qing, see Figure 1.
     The purpose of genealogies was to keep a record of the rituals of the family and a
record of the achievements of its members. One important achievement was the
acquisition of human capital for passing the state examinations. They were compiled and
updated by the literate members of the lineage to aid in the ritual of ancestral worship.
The genealogies were valued and kept in the hometown of the family in ancestral halls,
providing future generations with a record of the location of graves, texts relating to
grave worship, family rules of conduct, biographies of prominent members, a record of
lineage lands, and an overall history of the family.43



        4.1 Chinese Genealogies as source for research
        Given their purpose and method of collection, genealogies do not completely
match up to census data, official population registers, and other administrative data.
Census data typically record the observed population at a certain date, either at the time
of registration or in retrospect. One would need repeated observations throughout the
lifetime of the same individual in order to determine the highest lifetime achievement of
that person or household. By contrast, genealogical data presents one entry per person in
biographical format. When the birth and death dates are given, the achievement listed in
that individual’s record can be considered the highest position achievement over the
lifetime of the individual. In addition, the voluntary nature of data assembly of
genealogies may induce selection, the retroactive updating of the genealogy might lead to


41
   The Tongcheng genealogies are not unique in the length of the period covered; Fei and Liu (1982), for
example, examine ten lineages over the period of 1400 to 1900.
43
   Surveys of the content and scope of Chinese genealogies include Liu (1978, 1980) and Telford (1986).


                                                        19
recall bias, and there may also be survivor bias. I will consider these issues below.
Genealogies cover men (and boys) better than women (and girls), being organized
patrilineally--each male member of the lineage is a member. Furthermore, in terms of
vital statistics, genealogies cover birth better than death.

         Genealogies give a window to examine questions that are hard to address
otherwise, in China or elsewhere. This is particularly true in cases where
intergenerational linkages might play a role, as in the case of human capital accumulation.
Census data in the U.S., for example, becomes available in the 19th century; Long and
Ferrie (2013) studies occupational mobility based on two generations, in 1850 and
1880.44 Chinese genealogies as a source have high potential because linking three, five,
or even more generations would be straightforward.45 Registers that accurately record
total population developments in China, such as Lee and Campbell’s (1997) data from
Liaoning province, become available only in the mid-18th century, and they cannot be
used to answer certain questions because the data is by its very nature non-
representative.46 At the same time, major findings of genealogical research have been
supported by simulation analysis (see Zhao 1994, p. 425).

         The usefulness of genealogies for research depends on the questions asked. One
important distinction is whether or not the primary goal of the research is to assess the
entire population, with birth rates, death rates, and fertility rates derived from it. Along
the same lines, Harrell (1987, p.73) contrasts research interested in obtaining accurate
demographic measures from research seeking to make comparisons within the population
of the genealogy. Clearly, underreporting matters if the main goal is to estimate
population totals. My interest lies in examining how in this particular sample the
relationship between education and fertility evolved over time. The extent to which
certain limitations of genealogical data affect my estimate of the education-fertility
relationship will be discussed below.


44
   See Collins and Wannamaker (2015) on intergenerational mobility in the late 19th and early 20th century
U.S.,
45
   The present study works with a three-generation linked sample; see Shiue (2015) for an analysis of inter-
generational mobility using the Tongcheng genealogies.
46
   The Liaoning data is for the Han Army Eight Bannermen; they were a hereditary military elite
concentrated in Northern China.


                                                         20
         There is a wide consensus that the Tongcheng genealogies are an extraordinarily
strong source of this genre. This is the result of both the high-quality original material
and also of the work that researchers have done to improve the original source. For
example, in the original Tongcheng records, the year and month of the death for males is
missing in only 19% of the cases (Telford 1990, p.124) while the typical figure is around
50% (Harrell 1987, p.76). The Tongcheng genealogies surpass the typical standards in
other ways as well (see Telford 1986, 1990; Harrell 1987). Subsequently, the Tongcheng
data has been enhanced by the estimation of vital dates using life tables and other well-
known methods (see Telford 1990).47 I have taking another step at improving the Telford
data by eliminating a number of clerical and otherwise obvious errors.

         The following section introduces the data and provides summary statistics for the
estimation sample. I will also compare this Tongcheng data with other available
information on China during this time.



         4.2 Sources of information in the Tongcheng data
     Generally, genealogies provide information on male lineage members, their wives,
and their children. As is often the case, one can link the data across generations by
tracing sons as they reappear in the genealogies as adult men. In the following I
summarize the available information on the men, women, and children separately before
turning to the inter-generationally linked sample on which the estimation results are
based.
     The unit of observation in my analysis is the household, defined by the male head of
household. This nuclear household is often embedded in a broader family structure, at
times consisting of co-residing grandparents and invariably reflecting lineage ties.48




47
   Life table and related demographic approaches were originally developed under the auspices of the
United Nations. For applications on lineage populations, see Liu (1980), Harrell (1985); Telford (1990)
extends their approach in a number of ways.
48
   Co-residence among younger and older generations was common practice during the Ming-Qing era.
Tax census data for the late 18th century suggests the average size of the household was anywhere from 5 to
8 persons, typically with the grandparents sharing a household with their sons and grandchildren (Wang
1974).


                                                        21
The data gives information on a total of 9,787 men, all of who were over the age of 17.
Around the year 1790, Tongcheng County had a population of approximately 1.3 million,
suggesting that my sample covers about 1.5% of the Tongcheng population.49
     Table A provides summary statistics for the 9,787 married men in my sample. The
years of birth and death allows estimating life expectancy, which is 36 years for these
men on average. It is above the life expectancy for all males (about 30 years in the 17th
and 18th centuries) because all of these 9,787 men have survived childhood and have
married.50
     Table A also shows that for roughly seven percent of these men there is evidence of
substantial levels of human capital, which is coded as Education = 1 in the data. This
measure of human capital is based on information contained in the genealogies on the
level of education a man had achieved throughout his life. Since it required to acquire a
substantial amount of human capital, I code Education to equal one if the man has passed
one or more levels of official state examinations. Also official students (preparing for
licentiate status), licentiates (sheng-yuan; preparing for the higher level exams), as well
as men who prepared for (but failed) the examinations are coded with 1 for Education.51
Others are given a 0 for Education. The human capital coding is shown in Table 1;
further, in section 5.2 I examine different levels of human capital separately.
     Although licentiates, as well as those who prepared for the exams but failed, were not
eligible for office, these men and their families would certainly have already made
considerable investments in their education. The number of men in this group was large
and included the 1-2 million men who sat for the licensing examinations every other year
across the empire; we know they must have been educated, because they already had to
have passed a series of pre-qualifying tests in their districts. In addition, men who
prepared for but did not pass the exams should be considered as being educated because


49
   I observe about 3,600 men that would be alive in the year 1790 in my sample. These men had more than
4,200 wives, and the data records more than 7,500 sons and 4,100 daughters, for a total of just under 20,000
persons. Gazetteers were local histories about a certain place. Three county-level gazetteers about
Tongchong cover the period under analysis: Tongcheng xian zhi (1490), Tongcheng xian zhi (1696),
Tongcheng xuxiu xian zhi (1827).
50
   This life expectancy is comparable to life expectancies for largely agrarian economies. For example,
England in the 18th century (35-38 years), France in the late 18th century (28 years), and Anhui Province,
China from 14th to 19th centuries (28 years). See table 5.2 in Clark (2007).
51
   My education classification is based on Chang (1959, 1962), Ho (1962), and Telford (1995).


                                                         22
they invested in the education, and we are mainly interested in the household investment
aspect, and not just the outcome. Although success in the exams necessarily implies
investments, many households made investments without succeeding in the exams
because of the extremely low number of degrees awarded. Including only the men who
succeeded in passing the examinations at the highest levels would not adequately capture
the relationship between child quantity and quality.
     While men who obtained purchased degrees are given a value of 0 for Education in
the baseline analysis, given that they might have made substantial non-human capital
investments to purchase this degree, which might have implications for fertility, I analyze
those with purchased degrees below as well. The information on the men's education
levels is related to the highest status levels obtained during their lifetime, which is also
given in Table 1.52
     I am also interested in the human capital levels of the men’s’ fathers. More than 10%
of the men had fathers with significant human capital levels (Education equal to 1), as
reported in Table A. That father’s education is on average higher than son’s is due in part
to a decline in the fraction of the population that was able to attain a government position
over time. Table A also reports that these men had on average 1.17 wives; more than one
wife can be seen as a measure of wealth of these men.
         The average of 1.17 translates into the 11,378 women in my sample, for whom I
report certain characteristics in the lower part of Table A. Multiple marriages are mostly
due to the death of the spouse, occurring in about 12 percent of all marriages.53 The
sample has information on the birth years and months of all wives in the sample. While
the time of death is recorded less well than the time of birth,54 it is still available for the
large majority (78%) of all the wives. Based on the almost 60% of the wives for which
there is information on the human capital of their fathers, these fathers are educated in 8%
of the cases. The correlation between a man’s own level of education and the education
of his father-in-law is 0.37. While the education level of the wife is unknown, it is
reasonable to expect that the wife’s human capital is increasing in that of her father. To


52
   Status ranges from 0 (no status) to 22 (highest status).
53
   Polygynous unions occurred in less than 2 percent of the cases.
54
   In part due to the fact that some individuals were still alive at the time the last version of the genealogy
was published, in the early 20th century; I will explore the role this plays below.


                                                            23
the extent this is the case, my sample gives evidence on positive assortative matching in
China starting with the Yuan dynasty.


       The 11,378 wives correspond to an equal number of distinct couples in the sample,
and I now turn to their children. There is information on 31,327 children from the 11,378
marriages of the 9,787 men (see Table B). Of these children, 20,177 are sons and 11,151
are daughters (64% versus 36%); more complete reporting on male than female children
is typical of Chinese genealogies. The distribution of birth and death months suggests that
the Tongcheng genealogies have a relatively high quality. In particular, one would expect
that in large samples births and deaths are more or less uniformly spread out over the year,
and the Tongcheng data gives roughly 6.5 as the mean death and birth months.
Furthermore, looking at the parents from the children’s point of view, note that the
average age at death of the daughters’ mother is close to the average age at death of the
sons’ mother (55.9 versus 55.7 years). The corresponding values for father’s age at death
are in fact identical for daughters and sons (55.4 years). The father’s birth month of the
sons is on average 6.5, while it is 6.6 for the daughters. This shows that differential
completeness in the reporting of sons and daughters need not introduce biases.
   After summarizing information on men, women, and children, I now turn to the
estimation sample. Linking an additional generation leaves 8,893 men for whom I have
information on father and grandfather’s education. Of these, 7% of the men live during
Yuan and Ming times, just over 55% in early Qing (1644-1800), and 38% after the year
1800, see Table 2.


       About 6.3% of these men had significant levels of human capital (Education = 1),
and the average number of brothers was 3.3. Marital fertility rates depicting the average
number of male births per woman per year by age that go along with that are shown in
Figure 2. The fertility rates have the expected shape, dropping off with age and reaching
zero by age 45-49. While the date of marriage is unknown, the difference between the
birth year of the wife and the birth year of her first recorded child indicates a relatively
early marriage age for women in the sample. On average, the mother’s age at birth is
about 28 years. Both the relatively early marriage age and the age-specific fertility



                                                  24
patterns are broadly consistent with other sources (Lee and Campbell, 1997) and what we
would expect to be true biologically about fertility and age (Shryock and Siegal1973).55
The number of total siblings, boys and girls, is about 4.85 in my sample. The share of
girls in total siblings is 27% in the sample, and about 10% of the men are from multiple-
wives household (Mother’s rank not equal to one).
         Comparing the different subperiods, note that the average level of education
during Yuan and Ming times is relatively high. This is in part because lineages are
sometimes established with a progenitor that is educated, and there are relatively few
observations. In the analysis below the focus is largely on the post-1644 period.
         Table C in the appendix shows summary statistics across the seven lineages in my
sample, the Chen, Ma, Wang, Ye, Yin, Zhao, and the Zhou. The largest lineage in my data
are the Wang, with about 4,700 of the married men, followed by the Ye with around 1,600
men. While in many dimensions the differences across lineages are relatively small, they
are different in terms of the average level of human capital. In particular, the Ma lineage
is exceptionally well-educated, with one-third of the married adult men having extensive
formal education, in the sense of Education equal to 1.


     In addition, I report summary statistics separately by education level in Table 3.
Educated men tend to be recorded earlier than not educated men, with mean birth years of
1728 and 1766, respectively. This reflects the fact that compiling a family history
requires a certain level of skills. In contrast, there is no evidence that birth month differs
between educated and non-educated men, which is expected but at the same time
reassuring. Educated men live longer and have a larger number of wives than not
educated men (columns 3 and 4, respectively). Furthermore, educated men have a higher
number of siblings than not educated men as well as more educated fathers (columns 7
and 5, respectively). These are signs of resource and health differences across households.
     At the same time, the number of male siblings for educated men tends to be smaller
than for not educated men (column 6). This is consistent with a quality-quantity trade-off.
The last two columns of Table 3 show some evidence on positive matching in the


55
  Studies of fertility in China at times apply a scaling factor to account for any under-recorded births (male
and especially female). This would not affect the fertility-education relationship I focus on.


                                                          25
marriage market. Wives of educated men live on average eight years longer than wives of
not educated men, a difference which is even larger than for the men themselves.
Furthermore, while roughly one in three educated men have an educated father-in-law,
among not educated men only one in twenty has an educated father-in-law (last column).
These factors could play an important role in the human capital acquisition decision for
different parts of the population.
       In the next section I will compare this sample to other information on China, as
well as address a number of specific concerns.



       The Tongcheng sample compared with other evidence
       One way to check whether the genealogies provide a representative sample of
general demographic characteristics is to compare the Tongcheng data to other samples,
while noting the respective selection issues. I analyze the Tongcheng sample along a
number of dimensions. Comparing the Tongcheng data with that of the Liaoning Banner
populations of Lee, Campbell, and Anthony (1995) for 1774 to 1873, one finds a similar
variation in the probability of dying with age across the two populations (Telford 1990
Figure 2). The level of mortality is generally higher in the Tongcheng sample, especially
for the 50 to 70 year olds. A plausible reason noted by Telford is the Taiping Rebellion
(1850-64), which affected Tongcheng but not Liaoning because the rebels never got as
far north as that province.

       Returning to the fertility curves of Figure 2, are these rates consistent with fertility
control to achieve education goals? Below I will show that the difference in the number
of brothers between educated and non-educated men that are similar in many other
respects is about 0.3 (see Table 7), so expected fertility in a controlled regime (i.e. when
pursuing education goals) should not be very different from fertility when no educational
goals are being pursued. Nevertheless, it is worth noting that women of the Ma lineage
have comparatively low fertility rates when aged 20 to 30 years, while women of the
Chen and Zhao lineages have comparatively high fertility when they are around 20 and
30 years old, respectively. Given that the Ma lineage is highly educated while the Chen




                                                 26
and the Zhao lineages are the two least-educated lineages (see the averages in Table C),
this is consistent with a deliberate choice of quality versus quantity.

        The most systematic evidence on education in China during the Ming-Qing is
related to the state examinations. In particular, the number of licentiates (sheng-yuan),
individuals that passed the initial state examination, was about 500,000 in the year 1700
(Elman 2000), or roughly 0.3% of the population. In the Tongcheng sample, about 0.76%
of the men alive around 1700 were licentiates. Accounting for women, children, and
elderly indicates that the fraction of licentiates in Tongcheng was similar, or perhaps
somewhat lower than that in China as a whole.

        Moving up in terms of human capital to the highest degree holders (jinshi), in his
seminal study on China-wide mobility, Ho (1962) reports that during the Qing in Anhui
Province there were 41 jinshi per one million population, or, 0.0041 percent. The
province of Anhui, it should be noted, was below the provincial average in terms of jinshi
per capita in Qing China (Ho 1962, p. 228). In comparison, Tongcheng County in Anhui
had 14 jinshi during the Qing as per my sample, which comes to about 0.045 percent of
the population.57 Thus are about ten times more jinshi in my Tongcheng sample than in
Qing Anhui overall.

        While this suggests that Tongcheng had a higher level of education than Anhui’s
population on average, clearly, jinshi were rare, with many parts of Anhui not producing
a single jinshi over centuries. The strong influence of aggregation in these comparisons
becomes clear when noting that a single prefecture could have as many as 1,004 jinshi
during the Qing (Ho 1962, p. 247). With seven counties to a prefecture, this means that
the average county of that prefecture had 1,004/7 = 143 jinshi during the Qing, or an
order of magnitude higher than the number of jinshi in Tongcheng county. Overall, while
the number of men with the highest levels of human capital in Tongcheng was higher
than in the local surrounding area, Tongcheng was not among the top human capital areas
in China; rather, it was noteworthy at a local, perhaps provincial level.


57
  There are 8,291 married men during the Qing in the sample. To convert this into a population figure, I
assume that 20% of all men did not marry, and that the Qing population was composed of below-age-of-
marry/men/women to one-third each. This gives a scaling factor of 3.75: 14 jinshi/(8,291 x 3.75) = 0.045
percent.


                                                        27
        Moreover, variation in jinshi across lineages in the Tongcheng sample dwarfs the
difference between the sample variation in jinshi and what we know about the population.
At the top of the list, the Ma lineage had 9 jinshi relative to 627 men, a ratio of 1.4%,
whereas other lineages in my sample do not have a single jinshi. As a consequence,
sample variation across lineages can be used to assess the influence of status and sample
composition on the results (see Table F).

        We can also look at the representation of different status levels in the sample.
While there exists no generally agreed-upon status classification for Qing China, in the
Liaoning Eight Banner sample 98% of males had “No Status” while 2% were
“Officials”.58 This compares to about 71% of men having “No Status” (status level 0) in
the Tongcheng sample, while about 1.4% have an official position (as opposed to
expectant). The relatively high fraction of “Officials” in the Eight Banner population
might be related to the fact that it was a selected group. We know this was the case
because the degree allotments and quotas for the Liaoning, which was the homeland of
the ethnic Manchu rulers were higher than they were for the Han Chinese areas. The
status distinction in the Eight Banner data set appears to be also sharper than what I
consider here (see Table 1). This could help to explain why the fraction of “No Status”
men in the Tongcheng sample is relatively low.

        In sum, in terms of many characteristics potentially affecting the relationship
between fertility and education, the Tongcheng sample is quite similar to what we know
about China from other sources, and to the extent that there are differences they can be
explained partially by certain observables. Overall, this suggests that the Tongcheng
sample will be informative for the fertility-education relationship in China.

        Regression to the mean, recall bias, and survivor bias
        Variation across lineages is useful to examine a number of factors that could
affect that a particular observation is included in the sample. First, genealogies often
begin with a particularly noteworthy man, who then becomes the progenitor of the
lineage. Part of his noteworthiness might come from a high level of education, and a

58
  Source: Author’s computations from the China Multigenerational Dataset, Liaoning1749-1909,
http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/ICPSR/studies/27063.



                                                     28
trend of declining education over time, as I will show below, might be related to that
(regression to the mean).

       In my sample, there are three lineages whose records begin with an educated
progenitor, the Chen (progenitor born in 1298), the Wang (1358), and the Ma (1408).
These three progenitors had an intermediate level of human capital, not high; they were
Imperial students (see Table 1). For the other four lineages, the highest levels of
education are typically found nine generations after the inception of the lineage.
Controlling for lineage differences in average education, there is no evidence that typical
education levels in a lineage fall in later generations. Thus, a simple regression-to-the-
mean effect is unlikely to be important in driving my results. To further address this point
I include different trend variables in the regression analysis (Tables 5 and E).

       It may also be that the Tongcheng genealogy contains more records of educational
success rather than failure (positive selection). I examine this in a number of ways. First,
across the seven lineages the correlation between average education and the number of
observations is -0.10 (not significant). Thus there is no evidence that on average, more
successful lineages have included more entries in their genealogies.

       A related concern is that periods during which a lineage is successful are those
when relatively many lineage members are recorded. However, the correlation across
lineages and generations is relatively small and negative (-0.07). The updating of the
genealogy occurred retrospectively by the relatively resourceful lineage members. One
might therefore believe that periods right after a lineage had been relatively successful
are those when substantial resources would be devoted to updating the genealogy and the
number of records would be high. However, the correlation of -0.04 between average
education in the previous generation and the number of lineage members recorded in the
Tongcheng genealogy does not confirm this.

       Another concern is that strong groups of individuals tend to be overrepresented
towards the end of the sample (survivor bias). It is well-known that Chinese genealogies
deteriorate in their record keeping in the 20th century (e.g. Harrell, 1987). While here this
is not going to matter—the fraction of men in the sample alive in the twentieth century is
less than 0.5%--I have computed for each lineage the fraction of observations in the


                                                 29
nineteenth century and later, versus before. If survivor bias is strong one would expect
that lineages with high human capital achievements account for a relatively large share of
the post-1800 observations in the data. However, a regression of the lineage’s share of
post-1800 observations on (the log of) the lineage’s average education yields a coefficient
of 0.018 (s.e. = 0.062, R2 = 0.02). This suggests that a major survivor bias is unlikely.

         Overall, based on this analysis the evidence for recall bias or other forms of
selection bias is limited. I now move to the empirical analysis.


   5. Empirical results

Section 5.1 provides evidence that the nature of the fertility-human capital relationship,
as measured by the number of brothers and having prepared for or passed the state
examinations, changed going from the Ming to the Qing era. Section 5.2 shows that there
was a negative relationship between fertility and human capital acquisition during the
early Qing (1644 to 1800), consistent with the quantity-quality framework laid out in
section 3. Furthermore, instrumental-variables estimation for a subsample of men
provides support that lower fertility has a positive causal effect on human capital
accumulation. In Section 5.3 I show that the negative relationship between human capital
accumulation and fertility disappeared towards the end of the Qing. The weakening of the
child quantity-quality relationship is what would be expected when the return to human
capital accumulation fell, as described in section 2.



         5.1 The fertility-human capital relationship from the Yuan-Ming to the Qing
Period
         I have shown in section 2 that from the early Ming the state examination system
became more consistent over time. While no single change might have been decisive,
cumulatively the changes meant that human capital accumulation turned into the most
important reason for upward mobility in China. More changes took place during the 17th
century, in particular with dynastic change to the Qing dynasty (1644-1911). In what
follows I will take the beginning of the Qing era as the dividing line. While this likely



                                                  30
overstates the discreteness of changes affecting human capital accumulation, the dynastic
change from the Ming to the Qing is a natural breakpoint.

       The difference in the relationship between human capital and fertility between the
Yuan-Ming and the Qing eras is summarized in Table 4. We see that a man without
education had on average 2.7 brothers during the Yuan-Ming while with education he had
typically about 3.1 brothers. That male fertility was higher for educated than for not
educated men during the Yuan-Ming is also a statistically significant finding, as shown
on the right side of Table 4. In contrast, during the Qing educated men had fewer brothers
than non-educated men. This constitutes evidence for a change in the human capital-
fertility relationship from the Yuan-Ming to the Qing. During the Qing, the fertility and
human capital patterns in the sample are in support of a negative relationship between
child quantity and child quality, whereas during the earlier period the data points to a
positive relationship between child quantity and quality.

       Furthermore, I find that the negative relationship between the number of brothers
and education is stronger in the early than in the late Qing period. Restricting the analysis
to men born during the Qing years 1644 to 1800 (“Early Qing” in Table 4), educated men
have on average 0.35 brothers less than non-educated men, compared to 0.25 fewer for
the entire Qing era (Table 4). This is initial evidence for a weakening of the quantity-
quality relationship towards the end of the Qing. I will return to this in section 5.3 below.



       5.2 The human capital-fertility relationship between 1644 and 1800
       This section examines the relationship between child quantity and quality during
the early Qing period. I show that there is a negative relationship that is robust to
including demographic, health, and resource determinants in the analysis. Section 5.2.1
probes into the robustness of this finding by considering shocks, lineage-specific trends,
and heterogeneity across subpopulations and human capital levels. Further support for a
negative relationship between child quantity and quality is provided with the
instrumental-variables results for a subsample of men in Section 5.2.2.




                                                 31
         The model laid out in section 3 implies a negative relationship between child
quantity (n) and child quality (e); it is summarized in equation (3), which solving for e
can be rewritten as

               !      !!
(3’)     𝑒=         − !!
              !!!

         In this section, I employ simple regression specifications to test for this negative
relationship between e and n in my sample. Consider the following OLS specification:



(5)      𝐸𝑑𝑢𝑐𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛!!! = 𝛽! + 𝛽! 𝐵𝑟𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑠!!! + 𝑿! 𝜷 + 𝜀!!! ,



where 𝐸𝑑𝑢𝑐𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛!!! is the highest lifetime education level of individual i, 𝐵𝑟𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑠!!! is
the number of his brothers, and 𝜀!!! is the regression error. The superscripts h and l stand
for household and lineage, respectively. In my analysis I consider a range of other
determinants of human capital acquisition, including parental resources, lineage, health,
and trends. These factors are captured by the vector X in equation (5), and they will be
included successively.60

         The simple regression of education on the number of brothers gives a negative
coefficient of -0.09 (Table 5, column 1). The coefficient says that one brother less is
associated with a 0.9 percentage point higher chance of being educated. This compares
with a chance of about 7% that a randomly picked man in my sample would be educated.
I will return to a discussion of economic magnitudes below. Inferences are based on
standard errors clustered at the level of the household (as defined by the father), which
allow for an arbitrary variance-covariance matrix capturing potential correlation in the
residual error term (Wooldridge 2007, Ch. 7). In particular, one reason for this clustering
is that parent decisions may induce a correlation between the education levels of their
sons. It is shown below that other assumptions on the error term, including two-
dimensional clustering, do not affect these results very much.


60
  Brothers is defined as the number of brothers from the same father; results are similar when I include
half-brothers and adopted brothers in the analysis.


                                                         32
       As a first additional determinant of education outcomes that I consider is birth
order (see Black, Devereux, and Salvanes 2005). Including a fixed effect for each birth
order level increases the (absolute) size of the coefficient on Brothers (column 2), and I
include birth order fixed effects in all remaining specifications. Next I include the birth
year of the man, capturing trends in human capital acquisition over time (Trend). The
birth year of the man enters the regression with a negative coefficient, which simply
picks up that the fraction of men in the sample that are educated declines over time
(column 3). Extending this analysis below I allow for more general patterns over time as
well as trends that vary across lineages (Table E).

       Given that the sample includes lineages with quite different mean levels of human
capital (Table C, column 1), and the resources that comes with that, it is reasonable to
believe that some men have an easier time to acquire human capital themselves than other
men, irrespective of fertility levels. Furthermore, while average human capital levels at
the lineage are observed, there could be many unobserved determinants of Education that
remain unobserved. To the extent that there are constant over time the inclusion of
lineage fixed effects will eliminate their effect, and the Brothers coefficient is identified
from changes within the lineage over time. Results are shown in column 4. There is a
substantial increase in the R2, indicating that fixed cross-lineage differences are important.
While the coefficient on Brothers remains significant, its size falls upon inclusion of
lineage fixed effects. One would have overestimated the importance of fertility
differences without accounting for heterogeneity across lineages.

       Since the sample has for each man linked information on three generations, I can
quantify the role of inter-generational transmission of human capital for educational
outcomes in the current generation. Table 5 shows that a man’s chance to become
educated is increasing in both his father’s and his grandfather’s human capital levels
(column 5). Quantitatively, the size of the coefficients on father’s and grandfather’s
education indicate that past generations’ human capital matters a great deal. In particular,
the coefficient of about 0.09 on grandfather’s education is larger than the chance that a
randomly chosen man from the sample is educated (about 7%). At the same time, having
an educated grandfather (and father) put a man into a quite distinct environment in terms
of his chance to become educated himself: in the sample, one in three men with educated


                                                  33
father and grandfather becomes educated himself, whereas a man without educated father
and grandfather, this chance is only one in 50.

       In the following I consider a number of other household characteristics that might
help to pin down the relationship between the number of brothers and human capital
acquisition. In particular, it is possible that a lower number of Brothers is the result of
demographic factors that induce couples to have children relatively late, or to have longer
periods between their child births (spacing). While such behavior could be motivated by
the desire to raise average child quality, there are other possible reasons, such as health or
resources factors.

       Some light can be shed of these effects for the relationship between fertility and
education by considering the parents’ age at birth, because older parents will typically
have fewer children. We see that while human capital acquisition is less likely for men
with relatively old fathers, including father’s age at birth if anything strengthens the
negative relationship between the number of brothers and education (column 6). The
mother’s age at birth is not significant (column 7).

       Next, I turn to the health of the parents, which is correlated with their longevity,
and to the extent that death occurs during the woman’s period of fertility it directly
affects the number of children she can have. The results indicate that longevity of the
father is unrelated to the human capital acquisition of this son (column 8). In contrast, the
man’s chance to become educated in increasing in the longevity of his mother (column 9).
According to these results, the son of a women dying at age 50 has a one percentage point
higher chance to become educated compared to a man whose mother dies at age 40. In
addition to health, there is evidence that mothers specifically support the education
efforts of their sons (see section 2). Overall, including these demographic and health
controls strengthens the evidence for a negative relationship between child quantity and
child quality (compare the coefficients on Brothers in columns 5 and 10, respectively).

       I have also considered the total size of the household, as well as the gender
composition of the children. Size is to an extent an indicator of household resources, in
particular whether a man comes from a household in which the father had multiple wives.
Note that the number of total siblings a man has is not significantly related to his


                                                  34
education level (column 11). Furthermore, his chances of becoming educated are also
unaffected by the share of female children the household has (column 12). In contrast,
when the mother’s rank in the household was one, a man’s chance to become educated is
significantly lower (column 13). Mother’s rank of one captures primarily a single-woman
household, and the negative coefficient reflects that men growing up in households with
multiple wives have a better chance of becoming educated due to relatively abundant
resources.

       Column 13 shows the baseline results in my analysis. We see that controlling for
a trend, the inter-generational transmission of human capital, demographic, health, and
household size effects, as well as unobserved heterogeneity across lineages, there is a
negative relationship between fertility and human capital acquisition. The coefficient on
Brothers in column 13 is about -0.09. It means that typically during the early Qing (1644
-1800), one fewer brothers raised the chance of a man to become educated himself by
about 0.9 percentage points. Evaluated at the mean of Education, which is 0.067 during
this period, this amounts to a 13% higher chance of becoming educated. Arguably, this is
an economically significant magnitude.

       One might be concerned that this is only the quantity-quality relationship on
average, which might be of limited value if subsets of the Tongcheng population exhibit
fertility-human capital patterns that differ strongly from this average. In order to explore
this I estimate the baseline specification for a number of subsamples where it is plausible
that this effect might be important (see Table 6). In the first subsample, I focus on the
men whose father is not educated (n = 4,239). Given the strong inter-generational
transmission of human capital documented above, these men would generally be
relatively unlikely to acquire human capital themselves. This is reflected in the relatively
low average education level of 3.6%, compared to 6.9% in the baseline sample (see
columns 1 and 2, bottom). Also for these men I estimate a significant quantity-quality
relationship. The coefficient on Brothers is now lower than before, at -6.7% versus -9.2%.
Given the lower average education level for these men with uneducated father, however,
lower fertility in form of one brother less is associated with a moderately higher
probability of acquiring education when compared to the education mean of the sample
(bottom of Table 6, col. 2).


                                                 35
         In a second specification, I focus on the subset of men who have both educated
fathers and grandfathers. This is an elite group of n = 349 men. Although the sample is
relatively small and variation is limited, there is evidence that higher fertility is associated
with lower human capital levels for these men (column 3). The coefficient on Brothers is
about -0.42, significant at a 10% level, which is more than four times the size of the
coefficient for the whole sample. However, these elite men have roughly a one in three
chance to become educated (mean of Education is 0.344, see bottom of column 3). As a
consequence, the relatively high coefficient on Brothers means that one brother less for
these men is a associated with a higher chance of being educated by about 12%, quite
similar to the figure of 13% that I obtain for the sample as a whole.

         This shows that the quantity-quality relationship applies to rather diverse
subpopulations in the Tongcheng sample, and furthermore the implied economic
magnitude compared to typical education levels of the subpopulations does not
drastically differ.



5.2.1 Robustness
         Probit estimation I begin by showing probit specifications analogous to the
earlier results, see Table D. Marginal effects for Brothers are shown at the bottom of the
table. The estimates are generally similar to those with OLS in Table 5. In the baseline,
the marginal effect of Brothers is -0.098 in the probit, and -0.092 with OLS.

         Temporary shocks, trends, and two-way clustering In Table E I examine the
importance of temporary shocks and lineage-specific trends for the results, and also
explore other assumptions on the error term. Specifically, the baseline specification of
column 13 is repeated in the first column. Shown are four sets of alternative standard
errors. The first set is clustered by household, as before.61 The second set of standard
errors is clustered both on household and by decade (16 decades between 1644 and 1800).
This accounts for possible correlation of the residual error due to specific shocks in one
or several of these decades. The third set of standard errors is two-way clustered by

61
  The figures differ because I bootstrap standard errors in Table E for robustness, while standard errors in
Table 5 they are analytical; differences are small.


                                                          36
lineage and decade. This accounts for any correlation in the residual errors of men
belonging to the same lineage, for example because lineage resources are utilized in the
acquisition of human capital of these men. Finally, I present two-way clustered standard
errors by household and by lineage-specific cohort. Comparing the different sets of
standard errors shows that inferences are not much affected by these different
assumptions on the error.

       I have also considered a generalized time trend by including fixed effects for each
decade in the regression (column 2). This has no major effect on the estimates, indicating
that the results are not driven by temporary shocks. Table E also shows results that
include separate trends for each lineage. To the extent that my results are affected by
cross-lineage differences in how much the relationship between fertility and human
capital changes over time, separate trends for each lineage would pick this up. The results
suggest that differential trends across lineages play no role for my results (column 3).
Finally, I show results that include indicator variables for men that were born in one of
the eleven years in which a new emperor came to power during the period 1644 to 1800
(reign change). Such years can be associated with turmoil and other changes that might
affect the relationship between fertility and human capital. The results show that reign
change of the emperor does not greatly affect my findings (column 4).



       Human capital heterogeneity As described in section 2, during Qing China the
levels of human capital attained by men differed as evidenced by whether they had
passed a state examination or not, and if they had passed, which level. In the following I
examine the quantity-quality relationship separately for those men that prepared but did
not pass from those men that passed at least the first level examination. It is reasonable to
assume that the latter implied to acquire a higher level of human capital than the former.
Results are shown in Table 7.

       The baseline quantity-quality relationship is shown in column 1 for comparison. I
first focus on men that have prepared for (and hence, acquired human capital) but did not
pass the first-level state examination. These n = 109 cases are combined with the 4,473
men in the sample that did not invest into human capital (Education = 0). I estimate a


                                                 37
coefficient on Brothers of -0.027, not significant at standard levels. This is evidence for
at best a weak quantity-quality relationship for these men. One interpretation of this is
that these households did not reduce fertility enough to be successful in the state
examinations. Note also that the coefficients on father’s and grandfather’s education for
these relatively low human capital levels are lower than for higher levels of human
capital acquisition.

       In contrast, the significant relationship between child quantity and quality
reemerges for men with higher human capital investments, those that passed at least the
first state examination (column 3). Generally, the regression results for these men are
similar to the full sample results given in column 1. Overall, these results indicate that not
only was there a negative relationship between child quantity and quality during the early
Qing period, it was also stronger for higher human capital investments.



       Nearest-neighbor matching One might be concerned that the number of educated
people in the sample is small compared to those that are not educated (roughly 6% versus
94%, respectively), and as a consequence the two groups might differ in ways that are
hard to control in a regression. To address this issue, recall that the model describes an
equilibrium relationship between child quantity and quality (equation 3), and an
alternative approach to the quantity-quality relationship is to ask whether educated men
had a lower number of brothers compared to uneducated men.

       Given that Education is a 0/1 variable, a matching estimator is natural: each
educated man in the sample is paired with the one uneducated man who is as similar as
possible in many respects, except education (nearest-neighbor matching). The match is
based on the propensity score using all covariates in the baseline regression (Table 5,
column 13). This approach has the advantage that the fertility-human capital relationship
is examined for relatively similar educated versus uneducated men in the sample. Using
this approach, I find that educated men during the early Qing had on average 0.30 fewer
brothers than not educated men (Table 7, Panel B, column 1).

       For those men that studied for the state examination but did not pass, the
difference in the number of brothers to those men that did not acquire human capital is -


                                                 38
0.17 (column 2). In the third column, it is shown that men making relatively high human
capital investments have typically 0.32 fewer brothers.

       Overall, this means that the main regression finding of a negative child quantity-
child quality relationship is not driven by differences in characteristics between educated
and non-educated men that regression covariates cannot control for. The matching
approach yields two additional results. First, the focus on a more narrowly defined
comparison shows that even for relatively low levels of human capital there is a
marginally significant (10% level) negative relationship between child quantity and
quality. Second, the nearest-neighbor matching results show that the negative relationship
is strongest for relatively high human capital investments, which was not the case using
the regression approach (see columns 3 and 1 in Panels A and B).

       Differences across lineages There is a substantial amount of variation in terms of
human capital accumulation across lineages (Table C). To examine whether the negative
child quantity-quality relationship found above is robust, I re-estimate the baseline
specification (Table 5, column 13) with one of the lineages dropped at a time. The
analysis shows that none of the lineages by itself drives the estimated quantity-quality
relationship (see Table F). While certain lineages play a role for some of the results, such
as the coefficient on grandfather’s education, which is lower without the Ma and higher
without the Wang lineage, overall the results are quite stable. In particular, the coefficient
on Brothers is negative in all specifications, varying in a relatively narrow range around
the full-sample estimate of about -0.09.



       I now turn to the role of non-human capital investments.

       Purchased degrees The focus on the human capital-fertility relationship means
that in the main analysis I abstract from those men who obtain degree and official
position through purchase as opposed to passing the state examination. It is possible
though that the purchase of a degree had implications for fertility that were not unlike
those when the degree was obtained through human capital acquisition. The following
analysis explores this (see Table G).




                                                 39
          Coding the purchased degrees as Education equal to one instead of zero, I find
that the negative relationship between quantity and quality remains (column 2). In the
next specification I include the interaction Brothers x Purchase, where Purchase is one if
the degree is purchased and zero otherwise. The coefficient on this interaction is positive
at about 2. This means that the quantity-quality relationship is weaker for non-human
capital investments than for human capital investments. Is there evidence for a negative
relationship at all? The answer is yes. While one brother less is associated with a 0.9
percentage points higher chance of becoming educated, one brother less means a 0.6
percentage points higher chance that a degree is purchased. I have also examined whether
there is evidence that the role of father’s and grandfather’s education depends on whether
the degree is purchased or not, finding no evidence for it (column 4).




    5.2.2    The impact of a higher return on human capital accumulation: results from
             an instrumental-variables approach
          While I have shown in sections 5.2.1 and 5.2.2 that the negative child quantity-
quality relationship is not explained by a range of omitted variables, it remains possible
that this is influenced by specific households that decided to educate a son once the return
to human capital had increased by the 17th century.

          In order to obtain exogenous variation I exploit the fact that the early birth of a
daughter tends to reduce a household’s number of sons while at the same time a daughter
would not matter for human capital acquisition decision because women were precluded
from participating in the state examinations. Early-born daughters reduce the number of
sons because it generally leaves less time for the household to have more sons. This is
necessarily the case for a given couple given the woman’s fertile period is limited,
however it also applies for multiple-wives households given the increasing age of the
father.

          Because the Tongcheng genealogies give only gender-specific, not overall birth
order, I cannot employ birth order as an instrumental variable for the entire sample. For



                                                    40
the subset of observations with fathers that had several wives consecutively, I can use
information on the number of daughters from each wife to construct a gender-based birth-
order measure. Specifically, if a man has a high number of half-sisters from his father’s
earlier marriages (denoted by Earlier_halfsis), the man should have relatively few
brothers. In the subsample of households with multiple wives in the parent generation, a
simple regression of Brothers on Earlier_halfsis yields a coefficient of -0.017 (s.e. 0.009;
n = 338).

        Based on this I adopt a two-stage least squares approach with the second stage
given by equation (7)

(7)     𝐸𝑑𝑢𝑐𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛!!! = 𝛽! + 𝛽! 𝐵𝑟𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑠!!! + 𝑿! 𝜷 + 𝜀!!! ,



where in the first-stage regression the variable Brothers is instrumented by the number of
earlier half sisters, Earlier_halfsis



(8)     𝐵𝑟𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑠!!! = 𝛿! +      ! 𝛿!!   𝐸𝑎𝑟𝑙𝑖𝑒𝑟_ℎ𝑎𝑙𝑓𝑠𝑖𝑠!!! + 𝑿′ 𝜹 + 𝑢!!! .



The subscript v, v = 1,…,5 is an indicator for the number of the wife in the household,
which means that the impact of earlier half sisters on Brothers is allowed to vary, for
example, between the second and the third wife. Results are shown in Table 8, column 3.



        The first-stage regression (8) yields an Angrist-Pischke F-statistic of about 25,
suggesting that the instruments have some power despite the relatively small sample (n =
335). The second-stage coefficient on Brothers is estimated at about -2, marginally
significant at a 10% level. The result suggests that lowering fertility leads to higher
human capital accumulation. In terms of magnitude, the instrumental-variables effect of
fertility on education is quite large (compare with the OLS results for the sample as a
whole, and the multiple-wives sample in columns 1 and 2, respectively); the relatively
small number of observations could play a role in this. While the reader should be


                                                    41
cautious about placing too much emphasis on this instrumental variables estimation,
finding some evidence for a causal effect from fertility reductions on increases in human
capital accumulation strengthens the evidence on a negative relationship between child
quantity and quality provided so far.



         Having established that the early Qing was characterized by a negative
relationship between education and fertility, I now turn to examining whether this
changed as the returns to human capital fell in the subsequent period.



5.3 The fading of the quantity-quality relationship towards the end of the Qing
         In this section I examine the evidence for a change in the quantity-quality
relationship over time. As discussed in section 2, there is evidence that the return to
human capital fell over the Qing era, with men working as teachers earning much less
towards the end of the Qing than in earlier times, for example. According to the model
presented in section 3, this should lead to a weakening in the relationship between
fertility and education. To be sure, China witnessed many other changes over the Qing
period, including the opening of foreign treaty ports in the nineteenth century, natural
disasters, rebel activity, and the eventual end of China’s imperial period.65 Because this
poses challenges for tracing the quantity-quality relationship over relatively short periods
of time, I adopt a broader approach in which only two subperiods are compared, the Early
and the Late Qing era. My baseline for the split between early and late Qing is the year
1800.66 Below the robustness of the findings with respect to this breakdown into two
periods is discussed.

         The coefficient on Brothers for the Early Qing period of 1644-1800 is the
baseline result of -0.092 (Table 5, column 13), which is reproduced in Table 9, column 1.
For the Late Qing period, I estimate a coefficient on Brothers of virtually zero (Table 9,
column 2). Figure 3 illustrates the stark difference in the quantity-quality relationship
65
  The closest treaty port to Tongcheng was Wuhu, located in Anhui province.
66
  The change from the 18th to the 19th century appears to be a natural choice; the year 1800 is also not long
after the end of the reign of the Qianlong emperor (1796), which is often considered as a period of
relatively high levels of development.


                                                         42
between the early and late Qing periods.67 In the early period, lower fertility was
associated with higher human capital acquisition, while this is no longer the case in the
Late Qing period. The result is even more remarkable given that several other
determinants of human capital acquisition, such as father’s education and grandfather’s
education, change very little from the early to the late Qing.

         To what extent does this result depend on using the year 1800 to separate the
early from the late Qing period? This is explored this by shifting the breakpoint between
the periods to other breakpoints ranging from 1780 to 1820. These results for shifting the
breakpoint by five years at a time are shown as well in Table 9. The key findings are that
independent of the specific year to separate early from late Qing period there is, first,
always a significant quantity-quality relationship for the Early Qing, and second, there is
never a significant quantity-quality relationship for the Late Qing.

         The result is confirmed using probit regressions, as shown in Table H. In Figure 4
I show the probit marginal effects on Brothers for alternative dates for separating early
from late Qing periods. In the baseline with periods (1644-1800) and (1800-), the
Brothers marginal effect estimate is -0.098 for the Early and 0.016 for the Late Qing
(shown in the center of Figure 4). For alternative breakpoints into early and late Qing, the
quantity-quality relationship during the early period is there while for the Late Qing it is
not.

         One might still be concerned that the result of a stark change in the quantity-
quality relationship from the early to the late Qing period is in part driven by the
regression approach in which a declining number of educated men are compared to a
large and increasing number of uneducated men. To address this concern I have
employed the nearest-neighbor matching approach from above to compare the number of
brothers that educated and not educated men had during the Early versus the Late Qing.
These results, summarized in Figure A, confirm the regression results of Tables 9 and H.
Specifically, for any particular year dividing the Qing into early and late subperiods
between 1780 and 1820, during the Early Qing uneducated men had always a


67
  I take as Late Qing observations all men with birth year of 1800 or later; this includes a few that were
born after the fall of the Qing in 1911; they do not drive the result.


                                                          43
significantly higher number of brothers than educated men. In contrast, during the Late
Qing uneducated men had never a significantly higher number of brothers than educated
men. This confirms that the result that the quantity-quality relationship disappeared
during the later Qing period is not driven by the inability of the regression approach to
yield informative treatment-and-control comparisons.

       Robustness
       It could be that my results for the Late Qing period are affected by temporary
shocks, foreign intrusion, as well as internal warfare. To assess the influence of these
events on my results I re-estimate the fertility-education relationship with decade-specific
fixed effects (Table I). Comparing column 2 with column 1, there is no evidence that the
results on quantity-quality during the Late Qing are strongly affected by such shocks.

       I also revisit the question of non-human capital investments to obtain official
positions in the form of purchased degrees. Because of low tax revenue during the
Taiping Rebellion, the government resorted to the sale of government office during the
mid-19th century. Here I ask how this affects my estimate of the fertility-education
relationship during the Late Qing. I begin with a specification where the Education
variable is recoded from zero to equal one in the case of a degree purchase, which yields
a negative but insignificant coefficient on Brothers (column 3, Table I). I also allow for
an interaction variable between Brothers and Purchased Degree. This interaction enters
positively, indicating that there is more evidence for a child quantity-quality trade-off for
human capital investments than for degree purchases. This confirms the result for the
Early Qing era above. With about 1.5% of the Late Qing sample having a purchased
degree, the marginal effect of Brothers in the case of degree purchase is about -0.01,
compared to about -0.04 in the case of human capital investments (no degree purchase).
In either case the coefficients are not significantly different from zero, thus accounting
for the extent of degree sales of the Qing government during the 19th century does not
change the main finding.

       As a final step in my robustness analysis for the Late Qing, I have estimated the
effect of fertility on education using the instrumental-variables approach that was
employed earlier (section 5.2.2). In contrast to the Early Qing, during the Late Qing I do



                                                 44
not estimate a positive effect from lower fertility on education; see Table 8, columns 3
and 4. Furthermore, there is little evidence that this difference in the results is due to a
weakening of the instrumental variable (Earlier_halfsis), because although weaker the
first-stage F-statistic is still sizable.



        Overall, I find a robust quantity-quality relationship for the relatively early years
of the Qing. This is consistent with the hypothesis that the state examinations provided
households a clear path to upward mobility through human capital accumulation, which
in turn was facilitated by a relatively low number of children. Towards the end of the
Qing, this quantity-quality relationship disappeared. This is consistent with the lower
return to education shifting the household choice away from quality (education) and
towards quantity (fertility).


Conclusions

        Since the process of industrialization involves dramatic increases in the return to
human capital, an important issue in long-run development relates to the origins of
fertility behavior as the incentives to human capital accumulation change. This paper
shows that in China, there is evidence of fertility control for human capital objectives
starting in the 17th century. Here I have shown that the changes promoted by the Qing
state in the legitimacy of the civil service examination as an exclusive and predictable
channel in which to pursue high status official careers increased the return to education
and a negative quantity-quality relationship emerged. We have also seen that the decline
in the return to education towards the end of the Qing led to the disappearance of the
negative quantity-quality relationship. Together this is evidence that economic incentives
affect the quantity-quality choice.
        This presents new evidence that child quantity-quality tradeoffs are not
necessarily the exclusive consequence of industrialization, which would not arrive in
China for another several centuries. The findings also show that over the late Qing, the
quantity-quality relationship disappeared over time. The reduced intensity of the
quantity-quality tradeoff in China during the latter half of the Qing dynasty also shows



                                                  45
that fertility control behavior can rise and fall, reversing the course that it had been set on
previously. China’s lagging performance relative to Europe in the 18th and 19th centuries
has triggered influential work on the sources of divergence (Pomeranz 2000; Broadberry
and Gupta 2006). The finding of this paper, which shows declining rewards to human
capital in China in the 18th and 19th centuries, is generally consistent with the pattern of
divergence and per capita standards of living falling further behind that of Britain,
Western Europe, and other industrializing nations.
   Whereas the history of Western countries to date appear to show a broad trend of
increasing industrialization and lower fertility, it is possible that future micro studies will
reveal more intricate patterns, as well reversals, at least within certain subsamples
observed at the individual level. More generally, additional research on how differences
in rewards to education affected fertility choices of different groups of people in the past
should aid our understanding of the process of economic development.




                                                  46
References


Basso, Alberto (2012) “Fertility transition and the quantity-quality trade-off: historical
evidence from Spain.” Mimeo.

Beattie, Hillary (1979), Land and Lineage in China: A Study of T’ung-ch’eng County,
Anhwei, in the Ming and Ch’ing Dynasties. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Becker, Gary S. (1960), “An Economic Analysis of Fertility,” in Ansley J. Coale, ed.,
Demographic and economic change in developed countries. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.

Becker, Sascha O., Francesco Cinnirella, and Ludger Woessmann (2012), “The Effect of
Investment in Children’s Education on Fertility in 1816 Prussia”, Cliometrica 6(1): 29-44.

Becker, Sascha O., Francesco Cinnirella, and Ludger Woessmann (2010), “The trade-off
between fertility and education: evidence from before the demographic
transition.” Journal of Economic Growth, 15(3): 177-204.

Becker, Sascha O., and Ludger Woessmann (2009), “Was Weber Wrong? A Human
Capital Theory of Protestant Economic History”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(2):
531-596.

Black, Sandra E. Paul J. Devereaux and Kjell G. Salvanes (2005), “The More the Merrier?
The Effect of Family Size and Birth Order on Children’s Education.” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 120 (2): 669-700.

Broadberry, Stephen and Bishnupriya Gupta (2006), “The Early Modern Great
Divergence: Wages, Prices, and Economic Development in Europe and Asia, 1500-1800.”
Economic History Review, 59(1)”2-31.

Campbell, Cameron D., Wang Feng, and James Z. Lee (2002), “Pretransitional Fertility
in China”, Population and Development Review 28(4): 735-750.

Chang, Chung-li (1955), The Chinese Gentry: Studies on their Role in Nineteenth
Century Chinese Society. Seattle: University of Washington Press.

Chang, Chung-li (1962), The Income of the Chinese Gentry. Seattle: University of
Washington Press.

Clark, Gregory (2007), A Farewell to Alms, Princeton University Press.

Coale, Ansley J. (1985), “Fertility in Rural China: A Reconfirmation of the Barclay
Reassessment.” In S. Hanley and A.P. Wolf, eds., Family and Population in East Asian
History, Stanford: Stanford University Press.


                                                 47
Collins, William, and Marianne Wannamaker (2015), “Up from Slavery”, paper
presented at University of Colorado, Boulder.

Cong, Xiaoping (2007), Teachers’ Schools and the Makign of the Modern Chinese
Nation-State, 1897-1937, UBC Press.

Crafts, Nicholas (1995), “Exogenous or Endogenous Growth? The Industrial Revolution
Reconsidered.” Journal of Economic History 55(4): 745-72.

DeLong, J. Bradford, Claudia Goldin and Lawrence F. Katz (2003), “Sustaining U.S.
Economic Growth.” In Agenda for the Nation, edited by Henry Aaron, James M. Lindsay,
and Pietro S. Niyola, 17-60. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 2003.

Dittmar, Jeremiah (2011), “Information Technology and Technological Change: The
Impact of the Printing Press”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (3): 1133-1172.

Doepke, Matthias, 2004. “Accounting for Fertility Decline During the Transition to
Growth.” Journal of Economic Growth 9(3): 347-383.

Durand, John D. (1977), “Historical Estimates of World Population: An Evaluation.”
Population and Development Review 3(3): 253-296.

Daqinghuidian shili (1899 edition) Ch. 370. (ref p.9 fn. 16)

Easterlin, Richard A. and E.M. Crimmins (1985), The Fertility Revolution: A Supply-
Demand Analysis. University of Chicago Press.

Ebrey, Patricia, B. (1993), Chinese Civilization: A Sourcebook, 2nd ed. Free Press.

Elliot, Mark (2001). The Manchu Way: The Eight Banners and Ethnic Identity in Late
Imperial China. Stanford.

Elman, Benjamin (1991), “Political, Social, and Cultural Reproduction via Civil Service
Examinations in Late Imperial China”, Journal of Asian Studies 50(1): 7-28.

Elman, Benjamin (1994), “Changes in Civil Service Examinations from the Ming to the
Ch’ing Dynasties,” in Benjamin Elman and Alexander Woodside, eds., Education and
Society in Late Imperial China, 1600-1900. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Elman, Benjamin (2000), A Cultural History of Civil Examinations in Late Imperial
China. Los Angeles: University of California Press.

Elman, Benjamin (2002), “The Social Roles of Literati in Early to Mid-Ch’ing.” Part one:
The Ch'ing Empire to 1800. Ed. Willard J. Peterson. Cambridge University Press.




                                                48
Fei, John C. H. , and Ts’ui-jung Liu (1982), “The Growth and Decline of China Family
Clans”, Journal of Interdisciplinary History XII:3 (Winter): 375-408.

Fernihough, Alan, 2011. “Human Capital and the Quantity-Quality Trade-Off during the
Demographic Transition: New Evidence from Ireland," Working Papers 201113, School
of Economics, University College Dublin.

Galor, Oded, 2011. Unified Growth Theory. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Galor, Oded. 2012. “The Demographic Transition: Causes and Consequences.”
Cliometrica 5(1): 1-28.

Galor, Oded and Omer Moav, 2002. “Natural Selection and the Origin of Economic
Growth.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 115: 469-498.

Galor, Oded and David Weil, 2000. “Population, Technology and Growth: From
Malthusian Stagnation to the Demographic Transition and Beyond.” American Economic
Review 90: 806-828.

Garrett, Eilidh, Alice Read, Kevin Schurer, and Simon Szreter, 2001. Changing Family
Size in England and Wales: Place, Class and Demography, 1891-1911. Cambridge, U.K.:
Cambridge University Press.

Greenhalgh, Susan, 1988. “Fertility as Mobility: Sinic Transitions.” Population and
Development Review 14(4): 629-674.

Guinnane, Timothy, 2011. “The Historical Fertility Transition: A Guide for Economists.”
Journal of Economic Literature 49(3): 589-614.

Haines, Michael R. and J. David Hacker, 2011. “Spatial Aspects of the American Fertility
Transition in the Nineteenth Century,” In Myron Gutmann, Kenneth M. Sylvester, and
Glenn D. Deane, eds., Space and Time in Historical Demographic Studies: New Methods
and Models. Springer, pp. 37-63.

Harrell, Stevan, 1985. “The Rich Get Children: Segmentation, Stratification, and
Population in Three Chekiang Lineages, 1550-1850.” In S. Hanley and A.P. Wolf, eds.,
Family and Population in East Asian History, Stanford: Stanford University Press.

Harrell, Stevan, 1987. “On the Holes in Chinese Genealogies.” Late Imperial China 8(2):
53-77.

Ho, Ping-ti (1959), Studies on the Population of China, 1368-1953. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press.

Ho, Ping-ti (1962), The Ladder of Success in Imperial China: Aspects of Social Mobility
(1368-1911). New York: Columbia University Press.



                                               49
Klemp, Marc and Jacob Weisdorf (2012), “Fecundity, Fertility and Family Reconstitution
Data: The Child Quantity-Quality Trade-Off Revisited.” Working paper.

Knodel, John (1988), Demographic Behavior in the Past: A Study of Fourteen German
Villages in the Eighteenth and Nineteenth Centuries. New York: Cambridge University
Press.

Lavely, William (2007), “Sex, Breastfeeding, and Marital Fertility in Pre-transition
China.” Population and Development Review 33(2): 289-320.

Lavely, William and R. Bin Wong (1998), “Revising the Malthusian Narrative: The
Comparative Study of Population Dynamics in Late Imperial China.” The Journal of
Asian Studies, Vol. 57, No. 3. (Aug.), pp. 714-748.

Lavely, William, James Lee, and Feng Wang (1990), "Chinese demography: the state of
the field." The Journal of Asian Studies 49(4): 807-834.

Lee, Ronald (2003), “The Demographic Transition: Three Centuries of Fundamental
Change,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 17(4) pp. 167-190.

Lee, James and Cameron Campbell (1997), Fate and Fortune in Rural China: Social
organization and Population behavior in Liaoning 1774-1873. New York: Cambridge
University Press.

Lee, James and Cameron Campbell, and Lawrence Anthony (1995), “A Century of
Mortality in Rural Liaoning, 1774-1873”. In Harrell, Stevan, ed. 1995. Chinese
Historical Microdemography. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Lee, James and Feng Wang (2001), One Quarter of Humanity, Malthusian Mythology
and Chinese Realities, 1700-2000. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Leung, Angela Ki Che (1994), “Elementary Education in the Lower Yangtze Region in
the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries,” in Alexander Woodside and Benjamin A.
Elman eds., Education and Society in Late Imperial China. Berkeley: University of
California Press.

Liu Ts’ui-jung (1978), “Chinese genealogies as a source for the study of historical
demography.” In Studies and essays in commemoration of the golden jubilee of Academia
Sinica. Taipei: Academia Sinica.

Liu, Ts’ui-jung (1980), “The Demographic Dynamics of Some Clans in the Lower
Yangtze Area, c. 1400-1900”, paper presented at the International Conference on
Sinology, Taipei.




                                               50
Long, Jason, and Joseph Ferrie (2013), "Intergenerational Occupational Mobility in Great
Britain and the United States since 1850." American Economic Review, 103(4): 1109-37.

McEvedy, Colin and Richard Jones (1978), Atlas of world population history.
Harmondsworth, Middlesex: Penguin Books Ltd.

Miyazaki, Ichisada (1981), China’s Examination Hell: The civil service examinations of
imperial China, trans. Conrad Schirokauer. New York: Weatherhill.

Moav, Omer (2005), “Cheap Children and the Persistence of Poverty”, Economic Journal
115: 88 – 110.

Mokyr, Joel (2012), The Enlightened Economy: An Economic History of Britain 1700-
1850. New Haven: Yale University Press.

Murphy, Tommy, E. (2015), “Old habits die hard (sometimes).” Journal of Economic
Growth 20(2): 177-222.

Perkins, Dwight H., 1969. Agricultural Development in China, 1368-1968. Chicago, IL:
Aldine.

Pomeranz, Kenneth (2000), The Great Divergence: China, Europe, and the Making of the
Modern World Economy.” Princeton University Press.

Rawski, Evelyn S. (1979), Education and Popular Literacy in Ch’ing China. Ann Arbor:
University of Michigan Press.

Shiue, Carol H. (2015), “Economic Status and Intergenerational Mobility in Chinese
Clans.” Mimeo.

Shiue, Carol H. and Wolfgang Keller (2007), “Markets in China and Europe on the Eve
of the Industrial Revolution.” American Economic Review 97(4): 1189-1216.

Shryock, Henry S. and Jacob S. Siegel (1973), The Methods and Materials of
Demography. New York: Academic Press.

Telford, Ted A. (1995), “Fertility and Population Growth in the Lineages of Tongcheng
County, 1520-1661.” Chinese Historical Microdemography, ed. S. Harrell. Berkeley:
University of California Press.

Telford, Ted A. (1990), “Patching the holes in Chinese genealogies.” Late Imperial
China. 11(2): 116- 35.

Telford, Ted A. (1986), “A survey of social demographic data in Chinese genealogies.”
Late Imperial China 7: 118-48.




                                              51
Twitchett, Denis and Frederick W. Mote (1998), The Cambridge History of China (eds.),
Vol. 8. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Wakeman, Fredrick E. (1975), The Fall of Imperial China. New York: The Free Press.

Wang, Yeh-chien, (1974), Land taxation in Imperial China, 1750-1911. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.

Wolf, Arthur P. (2001), “Is There Evidence of Birth Control in Late Imperial China?”
Population and Development Review 27:133-154.

Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. (2007), Econometric analysis of cross section and panel data,
MIT Press.

World Bank (2014), Annual Report Overview, 2014. http://www.worldbank.org/en/
about/annual-report/overview#HumanDevelopment

Yuchtman, Noam (2014), “Teaching to the Tests: An Economic Analysis of Traditional
and Modern Education in Late Imperial and Republican China”, working paper, UC
Berkeley Haas, December.

Zhao, Zhongwei (2002), “Fertility Control in China’s Past”, Population and Development
Review 28(4): 751-757.

Zhao, Zhongwei (2001), “Chinese genealogies as a source for demographic research: A
further assessment of their reliability and biases”, Population Studies 55: 181-193.

Zhao, Zhongwei (1994), “Demographic Conditions and Multi-generation Households in
Chinese History. Results from Genealogical Research and Microsimulation”, Population
Studies 48: 413-425.




                                              52
                                                  Table 1. Education and socioeconomic status
 Education     Status      Obs.       Percent     Description
     0           0         6,956       71.08      No titles, degrees, office, other evidence of wealth
     0            1         36          0.37      Honorary or posthumous titles; main guest at the county banquet; village head
     0            2         786         8.03      Multiple wives in consecutive marriage, two or more not living at the same time

     0            3         912         9.32      Father a sheng-yuan, minor official, or official student; evidence of wealth, jian-sheng, expectant official

     0            4         23          0.24      Grandfather a juren, gongsheng, jinshi, or official
     0            5         38          0.39      Father a juren, gongsheng, jinshi, or official
     0            7         89          0.91      Concubinage (i.e. polygyny, two or more wives or concubines at the same time)
                                                  Substantial evidence of wealth and property; set up ancestral estates, large donations, philanthropy;
     0            8         11          0.11
                                                  wealthy farmer, landowner, or merchant
     0           10          1          0.01      Military sheng-yuan, minor military office
     0           11         146         1.49      Purchased jian-sheng and/or purchased office
     0           14         102         1.04      Expectant official, no degrees
     0           17         45          0.46      Civil official with no degree, minor degree, or purchased degree
                                                  Educated, scholar, no degrees or office; editor of genealogy, refused office, or prepared for but did not
     1            6         163         1.67
                                                  pass exam
     1            9         193         1.97      Official students
     1           12         99          1.01      Students of the Imperial Academy (non-purchased)
     1           13         53          0.54      Civil sheng-yuan; minor civil office
     1           15         4           0.04      Expectant official with one of the lower degrees
     1           16         28          0.29      Military juren, jinshi; major military officer
     1           18         27          0.28      Juren, gongsheng, with no office
     1           19         56          0.57      Juren, gongsheng, with expectant office
     1           20         0           0.00      Jinshi, no office
     1           21         11          0.11      Jinshi with official provincial post or expecant official
                                                  Jinshi with top-level position in Imperial bureaucracy (Hanlin Academy, Grand Secretariat, Five
     1           22          7          0.07
                                                  Boards, Prime Minister, etc.)

Notes: Table gives education and status for 9,787 of the adult men in the sample; coding developed using Chang (1959), Ho (1962), and Telford (1986).
See text for descriptions of the degree titles.
                                                    Table 2. Sample summary statistics
                                                         Yuan and Ming Dynasties            Early Qing               Late Qing
 Variable                          Full sample
                                                              (Before 1644)               (1644 - 1800)           (1800 and later)
                            Obs.      Mean       Std.      Obs.      Mean      Std.    Obs.    Mean     Std.    Obs.    Mean     Std.

Education                   8,893     0.063   0.244        601       0.165    0.371    4,951   0.067    0.251   3,341   0.039    0.194
Birth order                 8,892     1.976   1.423        601       1.684    1.352    4,950   1.940    1.390   3,341   2.083    1.473
No. of brothers             8,893     3.284   1.620        601       2.777    1.511    4,951   3.264    1.576   3,341   3.404    1.683
Birth year                  8,893     1.764   0.071        601       1.580    0.053    4,951   1.744    0.039   3,341   1.826    0.016
Father education            8,893     0.106   0.308        601       0.233    0.423    4,951   0.116    0.320   3,341   0.069    0.253
Grandfather education       8,893     0.152   0.359        601       0.213    0.410    4,951   0.165    0.371   3,341   0.120    0.325
Father's age at birth       8,893    31.868   8.439        601       29.047   7.479    4,951   31.538   8.534   3,341   32.865   8.307
Mother's age at birth       8,893    28.267   6.843        601       25.983   6.186    4,951   28.313   6.940   3,341   28.611   6.733
Father's age at death       8,658    57.442 12.942         596       55.284   11.766   4,939   58.578 13.501    3,123   56.057 12.039
Mother's age at death       8,252    58.379 14.657         595       54.353   13.431   4,807   59.892 14.812    2,850   56.667 14.291
Total no. of siblings       8,892     4.845   2.208        601       3.681    1.997    4,950   4.742    2.063   3,341   5.209    2.360
Share of siblings female    8,891     0.267   0.208        601       0.163    0.206    4,949   0.264    0.208   3,341   0.291    0.202
Mother's rank is one        8,893     0.902   0.298        601       0.913    0.281    4,951   0.925    0.263   3,341   0.865    0.342
Notes: Birth year is defined as man's birth year divided by 1,000.
                               Table 3. Sample characteristics of educated vs non-educated men
                                            Number                          Number     Number      Share               Wife's
                  Birth       Birth                   Age at     Father's                                  Wife age
                                              of                               of         of      female               father
                  year        month                   death     education                                  at death
                                             wives                          brothers   siblings   siblings            educated
No Education
Mean             1766.33       6.90          1.16     49.53       0.08       3.30       4.83       0.26     46.78      0.05
Std.              0.77         0.04          0.005    0.19        0.003      0.02       0.02       0.002    0.23       0.003
Obs.              8,329        8,329         8,329    6,798       8,329      8,329      8,328      8,327    6,349      4,780

Educated
Mean             1727.98        6.90         1.47     54.71       0.54        3.09       5.02      0.30     54.57       0.30
Std.              3.43          0.14         0.031    0.70        0.003       0.06       0.10      0.009    0.77        0.02
Obs.               564          564           563      520         564        564        564        564      520        466

Difference
Mean             38.35**       -0.002       -0.31**   -5.18**    -0.46**     0.20**     -0.19*    -0.03**   -7.79**    -0.24**

Total
Mean              1763.9       6.90          1.18     49.90       0.11       3.28       4.84       0.27     47.37      0.07
Std.               3.08        0.04          0.005    0.18        0.004      0.02       0.02       0.002    0.22       0.004
Obs.              8,893        8,893         8,892    7,318       8,893      8,893      8,892      8,891    6,869      5,246

Notes: **/* significant at a 1%/5% level.
       Table 4. Education and fertility: Yuan-Ming vs. Qing
                   (1)               (2)        (3)            (4)

                         Education

                   Yes               No      Difference    P(Yes > No)
Yuan-Ming         3.131          2.707         0.424          0.995
                 (n = 99)      (n = 502)


Qing              3.087           3.334        -0.247         0.007
                (n = 465)      (n = 7827)

Early Qing        2.934           3.288        -0.351         0.000
(1644-1800)     (n = 334)      (n = 4617)

Notes: Columns 1 and 2 report the mean number of brothers by man’s
education status between the different eras.
                                   Table 5. The quantity-quality relationship during the early Qing (1644-1800)
                      (1)              (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)           (6)           (7)         (8)          (9)          (10)         (11)          (12)          (13)
                                     Birth                      Lineage       Lineal          Early start and                                                                             Rank
                                                   Trend                                                                   Longevity                                   Sibship
                                     order                         FE           HC               spacing                                                                                 mother


Brothers              -0.090**      -0.140**      -0.134**       -0.062*      -0.058*      -0.077**      -0.074*      -0.058*      -0.073*      -0.105**      -0.100*       -0.107**    -0.092**
                       (0.026)       (0.034)       (0.033)       (0.030)      (0.027)       (0.029)      (0.029)      (0.028)      (0.029)      (0.032)       (0.043)       (0.033)      (0.031)
Trend                                             -0.692**      -0.517**      -0.261*       -0.261*      -0.251*      -0.263*      -0.262*      -0.251*       -0.251*       -0.250*      -0.251*
                                                   (0.123)       (0.108)      (0.104)       (0.104)      (0.103)      (0.104)      (0.106)      (0.105)       (0.105)       (0.105)      (0.104)
Father’s
                                                                              0.173**       0.172**      0.172**      0.172**      0.172**      0.170**       0.170**       0.170**      0.165**
education
                                                                              (0.026)       (0.026)      (0.026)      (0.026)      (0.026)      (0.026)       (0.026)       (0.026)      (0.026)
Grandfather’s                                                                 0.089**       0.088**      0.089**      0.089**      0.086**      0.085**       0.085**       0.085**      0.080**
education                                                                     (0.018)       (0.018)      (0.018)      (0.018)      (0.018)      (0.018)       (0.018)       (0.018)      (0.018)
Father age at
                                                                                            -0.001+                                              -0.001       -0.001         -0.001      -0.002*
birth
                                                                                            (0.001)                                             (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.001)
Mother age at
                                                                                                          -0.001                                 -0.001       -0.001         -0.001       0.000
birth
                                                                                                         (0.001)                                (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.001)
Father age at
                                                                                                                       -0.000
death
                                                                                                                      (0.000)
Mother age at                                                                                                                      0.001+        0.001*       0.001*         0.001*      0.001*
Death                                                                                                                              (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)
Total no. of                                                                                                                                                  -0.001
siblings                                                                                                                                                      (0.003)
Share female                                                                                                                                                                 -0.006
siblings                                                                                                                                                                    (0.020)
Mother’s rank                                                                                                                                                                           -0.057**
is one                                                                                                                                                                                   (0.020)

Observations           4,951          4,950         4,950         4,950        4,950         4,950        4,950        4,938        4,806        4,806         4,806         4,805        4,806
R-squared             0.003           0.005         0.017         0.133        0.209        0.210         0.210        0.209         0.208         0.210        0.210       0.210          0.213
Notes: Dependent variable is Education. Results by OLS. Brothers is number of brothers divided by 10. Birth year is man's birth year divided by 1,000. Robust standard errors clustered on
household in parentheses. **/*/+ significant at 1%/5%/10% level.
     Table 6. Quantity-quality relationship in different subsamples
                                                          Sample
                                         (1)               (2)                (3)
                                                                          Father and
                                                       Father not
                                      Baseline                           grandfather
                                                        educated
                                                                           educated

Brothers                               -0.092**          -0.067*            -0.419+
                                        (0.030)          (0.026)            (0.242)
Trend                                   -0.250*           -0.141             -0.552
                                        (0.105)          (0.093)            (0.642)
Father age at birth                    -0.002**         -0.001**             -0.006
                                        (0.001)          (0.001)            (0.004)
Mother age at death                      0.001*          0.001**             -0.002
                                        (0.000)          (0.000)            (0.002)
Father's education                      0.165**
                                        (0.026)
Grandfather's education                 0.081**          0.099**
                                        (0.018)          (0.019)
Mother's rank is one                   -0.056**          -0.041*             -0.106
                                        (0.020)          (0.018)            (0.079)

Birth order FE                            Y                 Y                  Y
Lineage FE                                Y                 Y                  Y

Mean of dependent var.                  0.069             0.036              0.344
1 brother less % of mean                13.04             18.61              12.18

Observations                            4,806             4,234                 349
R-squared                               0.213             0.109                0.185
Notes: Dependent variable is Education. Estimation by OLS; standard errors clustered by
household in parentheses. Brothers divided by 10. ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1
                        Table 7. Heterogeneity in human capital investment
Panel A. OLS Results                       (1)                        (2)                   (3)
                                           All               Studied, no pass            Pass

Brothers                                 -0.092**                  -0.027               -0.076**
                                          (0.030)                 (0.018)                (0.026)
Trend                                     -0.251*                 -0.098+                -0.195*
                                          (0.104)                 (0.058)                (0.096)
Father's age at birth                    -0.002**                 -0.001+               -0.001**
                                          (0.001)                 (0.000)                (0.000)
Mother's age at death                      0.001*                   0.000                0.001+
                                          (0.000)                 (0.000)                (0.000)
Father's education                        0.165**                  0.032*                0.161**
                                          (0.025)                 (0.016)                (0.024)
Grandfather's education                   0.081**                 0.043**                0.053**
                                          (0.018)                 (0.012)                (0.016)
Mother's rank is one                     -0.056**                  -0.022                -0.038*
                                          (0.020)                 (0.014)                (0.018)

Observations                              4,806                      4,582                4,697
R-squared                                 0.101                      0.027                0.096
Notes: Dependent variable is Education. Estimation by OLS; standard errors clustered on household
in parentheses. Brothers divided by 10. ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1

Panel B. Matching estimators
No Education
Mean no. of brothers                     3.240                3.165                  3.231

Education
Mean no. of brothers                     2.940                2.991                  2.915

Difference                                -0.300               -0.174                 -0.317
(s.e.)                                   (0.102)              (0.161)                (0.113)
90% Confidence Interval             (-0.473, -0.248)     (-0.420, -0.010)       (-0.578, -0.152)

No. of Education = 1                    333                    109                    224
Notes: Results based on nearest-neighbor matching based on propensity score
Based on bootstrapping with bias-corrected confidence intervals.
Table 8. The higher return effect on human capital accumulation: Instrumental-variables results


                                             (1)                  (2)                (3)                              (4)
                                                         Early Qing (1644-1800)                           Late Qing (> 1800)
                                            OLS                   OLS                 IV                               IV
                                                             Multiple wives     Multiple wives                  Multiple wives

Brothers                                  -0.095**                 0.041               -2.167+                       -0.037
                                           (0.031)               (0.149)               (1.381)                      (0.640)
                                        {-0.15, -0.05}        {-0.29, 0.28}         {-7.54, -0.57}               {-1.77, 0.68}
Trend                                      -0.202+                -0.303                 1.090                        0.430
                                           (0.119)               (0.623)               (1.155)                      (1.082)
Father's age at birth                      -0.001*                 0.001                -0.013                        0.001
                                           (0.001)               (0.003)               (0.009)                      (0.005)
Mother's age at death                       0.001*                 0.001                 0.006                       -0.003
                                           (0.000)               (0.002)               (0.004)                      (0.002)
Father's education                         0.167**              0.235**                  0.150                        0.110
                                           (0.027)               (0.075)               (0.100)                      (0.074)
Grandfather's education                    0.079**               0.120*                 0.232*                     0.181**
                                           (0.019)               (0.060)               (0.112)                      (0.067)

First-stage F-stat                                                                      25.36                        12.30
[p-value]                                                                             [< 0.001]                    [< 0.001]


Observations                                4,633                 335                   335                           375

Notes: Dependent variable is Education. Estimation in columns 1 and 2 by OLS, in columns 3 and 4 by two-stage least squares. All
specifications include birth order and lineage fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered on household in parentheses. Given is
the Angrist-Pischke F-statistic. Curly brackets give bias-corrected bootstrapped 90% confidence intervals. **/*/+ means significant
at the 1%/5%/10% level.
     Table 9. Changing quantity-quality relationship between early to late Qing:
                      results for alternative time breakpoints
                                                                                Robustness
                            Baseline
                                               Alternative 1         Alternative 2       Alternative 3           Alternative 4
                         Early      Late     Early       Late      Early       Late    Early       Late        Early       Late
                          Qing      Qing      Qing       Qing       Qing       Qing     Qing       Qing         Qing       Qing
                         <1800     ≥1800     <1780      ≥1780      <1785      <1785    <1790      ≥1790        <1795      ≥1795

Brothers                -0.092** 0.002       -0.067+     -0.037   -0.076*      -0.028   -0.089**     -0.014   -0.086**     -0.012
                         (0.030) (0.044)     (0.036)    (0.038)   (0.034)     (0.039)    (0.033)    (0.040)    (0.031)    (0.043)
Trend                    -0.250* -0.076       -0.162     -0.067    -0.166      0.015      -0.198     0.067     -0.258*     -0.067
                         (0.104) (0.278)     (0.137)    (0.196)   (0.130)     (0.204)    (0.124)    (0.212)    (0.113)    (0.252)
Father age at birth     -0.002** 0.000       -0.002**    -0.000   -0.002**     -0.000   -0.002**     0.000    -0.002**     0.000
                         (0.001) (0.001)      (0.001)   (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)
Mother age at death      0.001*   0.000        0.001    0.001*      0.001     0.001*     0.001+     0.001*     0.001+     0.001+
                         (0.000) (0.000)      (0.000)   (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)
Father's education      0.165** 0.160**      0.198**    0.120**   0.190**    0.121**    0.173**     0.143**    0.168**    0.153**
                        (0.025) (0.035)      (0.030)    (0.028)   (0.028)    (0.029)    (0.027)     (0.031)    (0.026)    (0.034)
Grandfather's           0.081**    0.074**   0.086**    0.074**   0.090**    0.067**    0.087**    0.069**    0.081**     0.076**
education                (0.018)   (0.020)   (0.020)    (0.019)   (0.020)    (0.018)     (0.019)   (0.019)     (0.019)    (0.020)
Mother's rank is one    -0.056**   -0.031+   -0.057*    -0.035*   -0.055*    -0.037*    -0.057**   -0.034+    -0.059**     -0.030
                         (0.020)   (0.018)   (0.023)    (0.017)   (0.023)    (0.017)     (0.022)   (0.018)     (0.021)    (0.018)

Birth order FE             Y         Y          Y         Y          Y          Y          Y          Y           Y          Y
Lineage FE                 Y         Y          Y         Y          Y          Y          Y          Y           Y          Y

Observations             4,806     2,850      3,725     3,931      3,948      3,708    4,194      3,462         4,486      3,170
R-squared                0.101     0.080      0.120     0.063      0.116      0.061    0.106      0.073         0.103      0.077
                                                                                Robustness
                            Baseline
                                               Alternative 5         Alternative 6       Alternative 7           Alternative 8
                         Early      Late     Early       Late      Early       Late    Early       Late        Early       Late
                          Qing      Qing      Qing       Qing       Qing       Qing     Qing       Qing         Qing       Qing
                         <1800     ≥1800     <1805      ≥1805      <1810      ≥1810    <1815      ≥1815        <1820      ≥1820

Brothers                -0.092** 0.002       -0.093**    0.014    -0.090**     0.022     -0.073*     -0.007    -0.064*     -0.022
                         (0.030) (0.044)      (0.029)   (0.047)    (0.029)    (0.050)    (0.030)    (0.052)    (0.029)    (0.048)
Trend                   -0.250*     -0.076   -0.258**    -0.231   -0.254**     -0.371    -0.217*     -0.028    -0.212*     -0.074
                        (0.104)    (0.278)    (0.096)   (0.328)    (0.091)    (0.374)    (0.090)    (0.393)    (0.086)    (0.523)
Father age at birth     -0.002** 0.000       -0.002**    0.001    -0.002**     0.001    -0.002**     0.001    -0.001**     0.001
                         (0.001) (0.001)      (0.001)   (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)
Mother age at death     0.001*      0.000    0.001*      0.000    0.001*       0.000     0.001*      0.001     0.001*      0.001
                        (0.000)    (0.000)   (0.000)    (0.000)   (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)
Father's education      0.165** 0.160**      0.156**    0.191**   0.154**    0.204**    0.159**     0.187**    0.158**    0.212**
                        (0.025) (0.035)      (0.024)    (0.038)   (0.024)    (0.039)    (0.024)     (0.045)    (0.023)    (0.049)
Grandfather's           0.081** 0.074**      0.083**    0.069**   0.085**    0.062**    0.084**     0.057**    0.084**    0.054*
education               (0.018) (0.020)      (0.017)    (0.020)   (0.017)    (0.020)    (0.016)     (0.021)    (0.016)    (0.024)
Mother's rank is one    -0.056** -0.031+     -0.053**   -0.031+   -0.048*    -0.036*    -0.051**   -0.029+    -0.049**     -0.029
                         (0.020) (0.018)      (0.020)   (0.018)   (0.019)    (0.018)     (0.019)   (0.018)     (0.018)    (0.021)

Birth order FE             Y         Y          Y         Y          Y          Y          Y          Y           Y          Y
Lineage FE                 Y         Y          Y         Y          Y          Y          Y          Y           Y          Y

Observations              4,806    2,850     5,156      2,500      5,461       2,195      5,751     1,905      6,056       1,600
R-squared                 0.101    0.080     0.098      0.091      0.098       0.096      0.100     0.081      0.098       0.093
Notes: Dependent variable is Education. Estimation by OLS; Qing period divided as given in column headers. Brothers divided by 10.
Robust standard errors clustered on household in parentheses. ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1
                      Figure 1. Frequency of birth year

      500
      400300
  Frequency
200   100
      0




               1200   1400             1600               1800   2000
                                       hbyr
                                     Figure 2. Fertility Curves All Lineages




                                       Fertility Curves for All Lineages
                          .15
Male Births per Woman-Year
       .05     0  .1




                            20-24   25-29         30-34       35-39             40-44   45-49
                                                      Age Range

                                                     Chen                Ma
                                                     Wang                Ye
                                                     Yin                 Zhao
                                                     Zhou
                          Figure 3. Quantity-quality relationship in Early versus Late Qing
                                     Education regressed on Brothers and covariates
                  0.02



                     0



                  -0.02
OLS coef)icient




                  -0.04



                  -0.06



                  -0.08



                   -0.1
                                 Early Qing (1644-1800)                 Late Qing (1800-)
                                               Figure 4. Early versus late Qing quantity-quality relationship
                                                              for alternative time breakpoints

                                       0.12
Marginal effect of Brothers - probit




                                       0.07
                                                 Early Qing always signi:icant,
                                                 late Qing never signi:icant
                                       0.02



                                       -0.03



                                       -0.08



                                       -0.13
                                               1780     1785       1790       1795     1800    1805   1810   1815   1820

                                                                          Early Qing   Late Qing
                    Table A. Characteristics of men and their wives
                      Variable              Obs.     Mean     Std.    Min    Max
Men
        Demographics
                      Birth year           9,787    1760.55   74.69   1298   1885
                      Birth month          9,787     6.90     3.51     1      12
                      Death year           8,142    1796.64   72.51   1348   1929
                      Death month          8,142     6.53     3.41     1      12

        Education
                      Education            9,787     0.07     0.25     0      1
                      Father's education   9,787     0.11     0.31     0      1

        Wealth
                      Status               9,786     1.65     3.67     0      22
                      No. of wives         9,783     1.17     0.44     1      5


                      Variable              Obs.     Mean     Std.    Min    Max
Women
        Demographics
                      Birth year           11,378   1766.24   75.31   1300   1887
                      Birth month          11,378    6.75     3.47     1      12
                      Death year           8,708    1797.10   73.66   1355   1930
                      Death month          8,708     6.54     3.39     1      12

        Other
                      Father's education   6,179     0.08     0.28     0      1
                      Father's status      6,179     1.86     4.74     0      22
                      Table B. Characteristics of sons and daughters
                            Variable         Obs.      Mean       Std.     Min     Max
Sons
            Demographics
                              Birth order     20,177    2.17       1.33      1      11
                              Birth year      20,176   1792.21     74.18    1330   1909
                              Birth month     20,175    6.79       3.49      1      12
                              Death year      14,849   1806.75     67.67    1380   1929
                              Death month     14,858    6.62       3.43      1      12
            Their fathers
                              Birth year      20,177   1759.80     73.56    1298   1866
                              Birth month     20,177    6.95       3.51      1      12
                              Age at death    16,448    55.40      13.12     17     91
                              Education       20,177    0.08       0.26      0      1

            Their mothers
                              Birth year      20,177   1763.88     74.02    1300   1887
                              Birth month     20,177    6.86       3.49      1      12
                              Age at death    15,165    55.70      15.15     16     96


                            Variable         Obs.      Mean       Std.     Min     Max
Daughters
            Demographics
                              Birth order     11,150    1.81       1.09      1      10
                              Birth year      2,443    1857.55     24.22    1615   1903
                              Birth month     2,443     6.46       3.42      1      12
                              Death year      1,418    1850.85     23.63    1654   1908
                              Death month     1,420     7.06       3.31      1      12
            Their fathers
                              Birth year      11,151   1770.63     66.09    1365   1866
                              Birth month     11,151    6.99       3.53      1      12
                              Age at death    8,541     55.37      13.42     15     90
                              Education       11,151    0.09       0.28      0      1

            Their mothers
                              Birth year      11,151   1774.78     66.55    1369   1870
                              Birth month     11,151    6.86       3.50      1      12
                              Age at death    7,784     55.87      15.44     11     96
                           Table C. Summary statistics by lineage


Lineage                                     Total       Share female    Father's   Mother's age
name           Education    Brothers       Siblings       siblings     education    at death
Chen    Obs.      291         291            291            291           291          250
        Mean     0.003       3.716          5.495          0.266         0.017       61.340
        Std.     0.059       1.831          2.732          0.207         0.130       13.631
Ma      Obs.      627          627           627            627           627         621
        Mean     0.327        2.691         4.396          0.302         0.415       60.359
        Std.     0.469        1.389         2.177          0.221         0.493       17.188
Wang    Obs.     4681         4681          4681           4681          4681         4333
        Mean     0.034        3.435         4.996          0.267         0.075       57.707
        Std.     0.181        1.640         2.183          0.200         0.263       14.113
Ye      Obs.     1607         1607          1607           1606          1607         1480
        Mean     0.101        3.103         4.711          0.274         0.156       58.911
        Std.     0.302        1.617         2.121          0.216         0.363       15.908
Yin     Obs.      604          604           604            604           604         567
        Mean     0.026        3.194         4.796          0.271         0.040       59.087
        Std.     0.161        1.523         2.234          0.229         0.195       13.824
Zhao    Obs.      769          769           769            769           769         693
        Mean     0.017        3.331         4.831          0.265         0.051       58.245
        Std.     0.129        1.495         2.151          0.193         0.220       14.184
Zhou    Obs.      314          314           313            313           314         304
        Mean     0.022        2.834         3.738          0.174         0.038       58.270
        Std.     0.148        1.568         2.100          0.220         0.192       12.883
Total   Obs.     8893         8893          8892           8891          8893         8248
        Mean     0.063        3.285         4.846          0.267         0.106       58.394
        Std.     0.244        1.621         2.208          0.208         0.308       14.656
                                 Table D. Quantity-quality relationship in early Qing 1644-1800 – Probit results
                         (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)          (8)          (9)         (10)          (11)             (12)      (13)
                                     Birth                      Lineage       Lineal        Early start and
                                                   Trend                                                                 Longevity                                  Sibship           Baseline
                                     order                         FE           HC             spacing
Brothers              -0.742**      -1.181**      -1.141**       -0.571+      -0.553+      -0.787*      -0.714*     -0.578+      -0.774*      -1.137**     -1.207**       -1.065**    -1.034**
                       (0.238)       (0.312)       (0.308)       (0.309)      (0.307)      (0.321)      (0.320)     (0.307)      (0.317)      (0.342)       (0.410)       (0.349)      (0.327)
Trend                                             -4.989**      -4.274**      -2.094*      -2.093*      -1.961*     -2.084*      -2.229*      -2.134*       -2.117*       -2.253*      -2.067*
                                                   (0.800)       (0.824)      (0.948)      (0.961)      (0.950)     (0.945)      (0.948)      (0.949)       (0.946)       (0.962)      (0.954)
Father's
education                                                                     0.816**      0.810**     0.814**      0.813**      0.801**      0.790**       0.786**       0.789**      0.750**
                                                                              (0.104)      (0.104)      (0.104)     (0.105)      (0.104)      (0.103)       (0.104)       (0.103)      (0.101)
Grandfather's                                                                 0.555**      0.554**     0.560**      0.555**      0.534**      0.536**       0.534**       0.531**      0.504**
education                                                                     (0.096)      (0.096)      (0.096)     (0.096)      (0.096)      (0.096)       (0.097)       (0.096)      (0.096)
Father's age at
birth                                                                                      -0.012*                                             -0.009       -0.009        -0.014*     -0.022**
                                                                                           (0.006)                                            (0.008)       (0.007)       (0.006)      (0.006)
Mother's age at
birth                                                                                                  -0.012+                                 -0.011       -0.010
                                                                                                        (0.007)                               (0.010)       (0.009)
Father's age at
death                                                                                                                0.002
                                                                                                                    (0.003)
Mother's age at
death                                                                                                                            0.008**      0.009**       0.009**       0.008**      0.008**
                                                                                                                                 (0.003)      (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.003)      (0.003)
Total no. of
siblings                                                                                                                                                     0.009
                                                                                                                                                            (0.029)
Share female                                                                                                                                                                  0.036
siblings                                                                                                                                                                  (0.184)
Mother's rank                                                                                                                                                                         -0.435**
                                                                                                                                                                                       (0.122)

Brothers
marginal              -0.096**      -0.153**      -0.145**       -0.062+      -0.052+      -0.074*      -0.067*     -0.055+      -0.074*      0.109**      -0.115**       -0.102**    -0.098**
effect
Observations          4,951           4,926        4,926         4,926         4,926       4,926        4,926         4,914        4,782        4,782        4,782         4,781         4,782
Notes: Dependent variable: Education. Results by probit. Brothers is number of brothers divided by 10. Birth year is man's birth year divided by 1,000. Robust standard errors clustered by
household in parentheses. **/*/+ significant at 1%/5%/10% level.
              Table E. Quantity-quality relationship in Early Qing – robustness
                                                  (1)                (2)                  (3)                 (4)
                                                Baseline         Generalized            Lineage             Dynasty
                                                                 Time Trend             Trends              Change

Brothers                                        -0.092**            -0.091**            -0.098**            -0.092**
                                                 (0.028)             (0.027)             (0.030)             (0.034)
                                                 (0.031)             (0.027)             (0.026)             (0.025)
                                                 (0.023)             (0.031)             (0.029)             (0.028)
                                                 (0.031)             (0.024)             (0.026)             (0.030)

Father's education                              0.165**             0.164**             0.167**             0.165**
                                                (0.026)             (0.021)             (0.025)             (0.028)
                                                (0.020)             (0.024)             (0.021)             (0.019)
                                                (0.022)             (0.022)             (0.021)             (0.026)
                                                (0.023)             (0.018)             (0.024)             (0.018)

Grandfather's education                         0.081**             0.081**             0.083**             0.080**
                                                (0.016)             (0.020)             (0.015)             (0.017)
                                                (0.015)             (0.017)             (0.018)             (0.014)
                                                (0.017)             (0.013)             (0.015)             (0.018)
                                                (0.019)             (0.013)             (0.015)             (0.016)

Father's age at birth                           -0.002**            -0.002**            -0.002**            -0.002**
                                                 (0.001)             (0.001)             (0.001)             (0.001)
                                                 (0.000)             (0.001)             (0.001)             (0.000)
                                                 (0.001)             (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.001)
                                                 (0.001)             (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.001)

Mother's age at death                            0.001*             0.001**             0.001*              0.001*
                                                 (0.000)            (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)
                                                 (0.000)            (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)
                                                 (0.000)            (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)
                                                 (0.000)            (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)

Mother rank equals one                          -0.056**            -0.055**            -0.056**            -0.057**
                                                 (0.017)             (0.019)             (0.020)             (0.020)
                                                 (0.017)             (0.017)             (0.021)             (0.017)
                                                 (0.021)             (0.017)             (0.020)             (0.016)
                                                 (0.016)             (0.016)             (0.018)             (0.019)

Trend                                            -0.250*                                                    -0.269**
                                                 (0.100)                                                     (0.095)
                                                 (0.087)                                                     (0.097)
                                                 (0.097)                                                     (0.114)
                                                 (0.091)                                                     (0.104)

Birth order FE                                      Y                  Y                   Y                   Y
Lineage FE                                          Y                  Y                   Y                   Y
Decade FE                                           N                  Y                   N                   N
Lineage x Trend FE                                  N                  N                   Y                   N
Reign Change Controls                               N                  N                   N                   Y
Observations                                      4,806              4,806               4,806               4,806
Notes: Dep. Var. Education. Estimation by OLS. Alternative standard errors in parentheses. First clustered on household
(1,297 clusters); second clustered on household and decade (clusters: 1,297/16); third clustered on lineage and decade
(clusters: 7/16); fourth on household and cohort of the lineage (clusters: 1,297/11). **/*/+ significant at 1%/5%/10%
level based on first set of standard errors.
Table F: Lineage differences and the child quantity-quality relationship
Early Qing (1644 to 1800)


                                     (1)            (2)          (3)           (4)            (5)          (6)          (7)         (8)
                                All Lineages      No Chen       No Ma        No Wang         No Ye        No Yin      No Zhao     No Zhou

Brothers                          -0.092**        -0.095**      -0.062*       -0.100+       -0.090**     -0.098**     -0.111**    -0.090**
                                   (0.030)         (0.031)      (0.027)        (0.056)       (0.031)      (0.032)      (0.031)     (0.031)
Trend                              -0.250*         -0.253*      -0.198*         -0.000      -0.377**      -0.270*      -0.265*     -0.246*
                                   (0.104)         (0.107)      (0.097)        (0.163)       (0.108)      (0.113)      (0.114)     (0.108)
Father's age at birth             -0.002**        -0.002**      -0.001*       -0.003**      -0.002**     -0.002**     -0.002**    -0.002**
                                   (0.001)         (0.001)      (0.000)        (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.001)
Mother's age at death               0.001*          0.001*      0.001**          0.001        0.001*       0.001*       0.001*      0.001*
                                   (0.000)         (0.000)      (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.000)
Father's education                 0.165**         0.165**      0.159**        0.159**       0.163**      0.164**      0.174**     0.166**
                                   (0.025)         (0.026)      (0.027)        (0.034)       (0.030)      (0.026)      (0.026)     (0.026)
Grandfather's education            0.081**         0.082**      0.048**        0.128**       0.090**      0.082**      0.075**     0.081**
                                   (0.018)         (0.018)      (0.017)        (0.027)       (0.022)      (0.018)      (0.019)     (0.018)
Mother's rank is one              -0.056**        -0.058**     -0.068**         -0.023       -0.060*     -0.056**     -0.058**    -0.060**
                                   (0.020)         (0.021)      (0.021)        (0.028)       (0.024)      (0.021)      (0.021)     (0.021)

Observations                       4,806           4,651         4,423         2,341         3,983        4,455        4,353        4,630

Notes: Dependent variable is Education. Estimation by OLS. All specifications include birth order and lineage fixed effects. Robust standard errors
clustered on household in parentheses. ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1. Mean Education of the seven lineages in the sample of column 1 are as follows (in
%): Chen 0.6, Ma 36.0, Wang 4.1, Ye 9.0, Yin 2.0, Zhao 2.0, Zhou 1.1.
             Table G. Fertility and human capital versus other investments
                                       (1)               (2)                (3)               (4)
                                    Education        Educated and       Educated and      Educated and
                                                      Purchased          Purchased         Purchased
Dependent Variable                                     Degrees            Degrees           Degrees

Brothers                             -0.092**           -0.109**           -0.136**           -0.136**
                                      (0.030)            (0.036)            (0.032)            (0.032)
Brothers × Purchase Degree                                                  1.990**            1.994**
                                                                            (0.111)            (0.139)
Trend                                -0.250*            -0.396**           -0.321**           -0.321**
                                     (0.104)             (0.113)            (0.107)            (0.107)
Father's education                   0.165**             0.203**            0.187**            0.185**
                                     (0.025)             (0.027)            (0.026)            (0.027)
Father's education                                                                               0.035
× Purchase Degree                                                                              (0.066)
Grandfather's education              0.081**            0.101**            0.081**             0.083**
                                     (0.018)            (0.021)            (0.019)             (0.019)
Grandfather's education                                                                         -0.028
× Purchase Degree                                                                              (0.066)
Father's age at birth                -0.002**           -0.002**           -0.002**           -0.002**
                                      (0.001)            (0.001)            (0.001)            (0.001)
Mother's age at death                 0.001*             0.001*             0.001*             0.001*
                                      (0.000)            (0.000)            (0.000)            (0.000)
Mother rank is one                   -0.056**           -0.078**           -0.070**           -0.069**
                                      (0.020)            (0.023)            (0.021)            (0.021)

Observations                            4,806              4,806             4,806               4,806
R-squared                               0.101              0.131             0.262               0.262
Notes: Dep. Var.: Education. Results by OLS. Brothers is number of brothers divided by 10. Birth year is
man's birth year divided by 1,000. Robust standard errors clustered by household in parentheses. **/*/+
significant at 1%/5%/10% level.
   Table H. Quantity-quality relationship in early versus late Qing – Probit results
                      (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)          (7)           (8)          (9)
                    <1780        ≥1780         <1785        ≥1785         <1790        ≥1790         <1795        ≥1795        <1800


Brothers           -0.777*       -0.258       -0.865*       -0.109       -0.973**       0.055       -0.968**      0.092       -1.032**
                   (0.357)       (0.502)      (0.347)       (0.512)       (0.338)      (0.533)       (0.329)     (0.551)       (0.327)

Trend               -1.672       -1.356       -1.483        -0.333       -1.546         0.863       -2.090*      -1.316        -2.069*
                    (1.171)      (2.514)      (1.111)       (2.715)      (1.072)       (2.870)      (1.002)      (3.356)       (0.954)

Father age at      -0.020**      -0.007       -0.020**      -0.006       -0.022**      -0.002       -0.021**     -0.003       -0.022**
birth               (0.007)      (0.006)       (0.007)      (0.007)       (0.006)      (0.007)       (0.006)     (0.007)       (0.006)

Mother age at       0.007*       0.010**      0.006*        0.012**      0.007*        0.012**      0.007**      0.011**       0.008**
death               (0.003)      (0.003)      (0.003)       (0.004)      (0.003)       (0.004)      (0.003)      (0.004)       (0.003)

Father's           0.853**       0.750**      0.828**       0.752**      0.769**       0.854**      0.764**      0.884**       0.750**
education          (0.112)       (0.131)      (0.107)       (0.138)      (0.105)       (0.143)      (0.103)      (0.150)       (0.101)

Grandfather's      0.517**       0.683**      0.544**       0.647**      0.528**       0.680**      0.504**      0.707**       0.504**
education          (0.106)       (0.121)      (0.101)       (0.127)      (0.099)       (0.132)      (0.098)      (0.135)       (0.096)

Mother's rank      -0.429**     -0.392**      -0.408**     -0.418**      -0.420**     -0.390**      -0.435**     -0.354*      -0.435**
is one              (0.131)      (0.140)       (0.128)      (0.143)       (0.125)      (0.148)       (0.123)     (0.153)       (0.122)


Brothers           -0.079*       -0.017       -0.088*       -0.007       -0.098**      0.003        -0.094**      0.006       -0.098**
marginal effect
Observations        3,708         3,843        3,930         3,625        4,175        3,384         4,464        3,098         4,782
                     (10)          (11)         (12)         (13)          (14)         (15)          (16)         (17)          (18)
                    ≥1800        <1805         ≥1805        <1810         ≥1810        <1815         ≥1815        <1820        ≥1820


Brothers             0.251      -1.047**       0.403       -1.000**       0.482        -0.774*       0.156       -0.675*       -0.092
                    (0.554)      (0.327)      (0.569)       (0.323)      (0.603)       (0.326)      (0.693)      (0.316)       (0.634)

Trend               -1.685       -2.159*      -3.829        -2.111*      -4.839       -1.683+       -0.169       -1.677*       -0.662
                    (3.668)      (0.913)      (4.214)       (0.888)      (4.678)      (0.875)       (5.503)      (0.849)       (7.422)

Father age at        0.001      -0.022**       0.003       -0.022**       0.005       -0.020**       0.008       -0.018**       0.010
birth               (0.007)      (0.006)      (0.007)       (0.006)      (0.008)       (0.006)      (0.008)       (0.006)      (0.010)

Mother age at       0.009*       0.008**      0.009*        0.009**      0.010*        0.008**      0.011*       0.008**       0.012*
death               (0.004)      (0.003)      (0.004)       (0.003)      (0.004)       (0.003)      (0.004)      (0.003)       (0.005)

Father's           0.907**       0.725**      1.020**       0.726**      1.066**       0.757**      1.012**      0.753**       1.183**
education          (0.155)       (0.099)      (0.157)       (0.097)      (0.158)       (0.097)      (0.191)      (0.095)       (0.202)

Grandfather's      0.691**       0.525**      0.630**       0.541**      0.578**       0.549**      0.551**      0.558**       0.531**
education          (0.137)       (0.093)      (0.141)       (0.091)      (0.142)       (0.089)      (0.161)      (0.087)       (0.178)

Mother's rank      -0.339*      -0.435**      -0.344*      -0.415**      -0.386*      -0.439**      -0.349*      -0.435**      -0.307
is one             (0.151)       (0.121)      (0.150)       (0.120)      (0.155)       (0.118)      (0.160)       (0.114)      (0.199)


Brothers            0.016       -0.097**       0.026       -0.090**       0.032        -0.070*       0.010       -0.060*       -0.006
marginal effect
Observations        2,786         5,131         2,441         5,452       2,141          5,741           1,856       6,045       1,437
Notes: Dependent variable is Education. Results by probit. Column header gives subperiod by birth year. Brothers is number of
brothers divided by 10. Birth year is man's birth year divided by 1,000. Robust standard errors clustered by household in
parentheses. All regressions include birth order fixed effects and lineage fixed effects. **/*/+ significant at 1%/5%/10% level.
Table I: Quantity-quality relationship in Late Qing - robustness


                                        (1)              (2)                (3)                  (4)
                                      Baseline       Generalized        Educated and         Educated and
                                                     Time Trend          Purchased            Purchased
                                                                          Degree               Degree

Brothers                                0.002           0.006                -0.017              -0.044
                                       (0.044)         (0.044)              (0.047)             (0.044)
Brothers x Purchased Degree                                                                     2.077**
                                                                                                (0.331)
Trend                                   -0.076                               0.268                0.082
                                       (0.279)                             (0.309)              (0.283)
Father's education                     0.160**         0.159**               0.000                0.000
                                       (0.035)         (0.035)             (0.001)              (0.001)
Grandfather's education                0.074**         0.074**              0.001+                0.000
                                       (0.020)         (0.020)             (0.000)              (0.000)
Father's age at birth                    0.000          0.000              0.249**              0.196**
                                       (0.001)         (0.001)             (0.039)              (0.037)
Mother's age at death                    0.000          0.000              0.077**              0.076**
                                       (0.000)         (0.000)             (0.021)              (0.020)
Mother rank is one                     -0.031+         -0.030+             -0.031+              -0.032+
                                       (0.018)         (0.018)             (0.018)              (0.018)

Observations                            2,850           2,850               2,850                2,850
Notes: Dependent variable is Education. Estimation by OLS. Brothers is number of brothers divided by 10.
Trend is man's birth date. Column 2 includes decade fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered on
household in parentheses. **/*/+ means significant at the 1%/5%/10% level.
        Figure A. Quantity-quality relationship in early versus late Qing:
          nearest-neighbor matching for alternative time breakpoints
        Excess number of brothers of uneducated compared to educated men
0.35

  0.3

0.25

  0.2

0.15

  0.1

0.05

   0

-0.05
               Difference in early Qing always signiEicant
 -0.1           Difference in late Qing never signiEicant

-0.15
        1780       1785       1790       1795        1800    1805   1810   1815   1820

                                        Early Qing     Late Qing
