NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CHINA: AN INSTITUTIONAL VIEW OF AN UNUSUAL MACROECONOMY
David Dollar
Benjamin F. Jones
Working Paper 19662
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19662

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2013

We are grateful to Aart Kraay for Chinese labor share data and Zhuqing Yang for excellent research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by David Dollar and Benjamin F. Jones. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

China: An Institutional View of an Unusual Macroeconomy
David Dollar and Benjamin F. Jones
NBER Working Paper No. 19662
November 2013
JEL No. E02,E2,O11,P2
ABSTRACT
China presents several macroeconomic patterns that appear inconsistent with standard stylized facts
about economic development and hence inconsistent with the standard neoclassical growth model.
We show that Chinese macroeconomic patterns instead appear consistent with an environment where
state control of factor markets can promote aggressive output goals. We consider the micro-institutional
features that can sustain this behavior, emphasizing the hukou system and state control over capital
allocation, and present a simple model built on these features. The model can explain several puzzling
facts about the Chinese economy, including its unusually low labor share and unusually high saving
and investment rates. Interestingly, the model also shows that free-market reforms can initially take
the economy further from global macroeconomic norms.

David Dollar
Brookings Institution
1775 Massachusetts Ave, NW
Washington, DC 20036
ddollar@brookings.edu
Benjamin F. Jones
Northwestern University
Kellogg School of Management
Department of Management and Strategy
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
bjones@kellogg.northwestern.edu

1

Introduction

Since 1978, China has recorded one of the fastest GDP growth rates ever known and has now
become the second largest economy in the world. This economic success has led to substantial interest in China’s development model, both as a potential guide for other countries and
as an increasing force shaping the world economy. At the same time, many observers question whether China’s growth can be sustained and whether the Chinese economic system is
converging towards a free-market, capitalist model.
In this paper, we first document that China is currently an outlier on several core macroeconomic dimensions. These dimensions include an unusually low labor share of income
coupled with unusually high investment and savings rates. These features, which are unusual compared to both global norms and the antecedent experience of other rapidly-growing
Asian economies, create tension with the traditional macroeconomic growth model, where
markets are competitive and factor shares approximately constant. Given this tension, we
then consider an alternative model where China seeks to increase output through state
control of factor markets, which are not fully competitive.
Building from a micro-institutional description of labor market policy (the hukou system)
and investment policy (the five-year plans and incentive systems used to promote them),
we build a simple model of the Chinese macroeconomy. The model shows how the state
can depress the labor share of income and create unusually high domestic savings and
investment rates, in successful pursuit of its output goals. We further discuss, qualitatively,
how this Chinese development model can allow trade surpluses as well as implications for
Chinese growth in the years ahead. In sum, this paper presents a perspective where China’s
extraordinary macroeconomic features hinge partly on state institutions that deviate sharply
from a competitive-market environment.
Our paper adds to a growing literature on China that emphasizes how various distortions
can aﬀect macroeconomic outcomes, in particular, elevating savings and investment. In
Song, Storesletten, and Zilibotti (2011), the key distortion is a still-large state enterprise
sector with low eﬃciency and a state-owned banking system that channels all loans to the
state enterprises. The financial market distortion incentivizes more eﬃcient private firms
to save and invest large amounts. Wei and Zhang (2011) alternatively focus on China’s

2

one-child policy which has had the unintended consequence of causing very high gender
imbalance in the young population. As the sex ratio rises, Chinese parents with a son raise
their savings in a competitive manner in order to improve their son’s relative attractiveness
for marriage. They find that this mechanism can potentially account for about half of the
rise in the household savings rate during 1990-2007. The main innovation of our paper is
to show how labor-market distortions, in conjunction with financial-market distortions, can
lead to elevated national savings and investment rates. Our paper draws on a microeconomic
literature that finds that, because of the hukou registration system, migrant workers operate
in a separate labor market from formally registered workers and are paid significantly less,
even after controlling for many observable characteristics [Lu and Song (2006), Park and
Wang (2010), Lee (2012)].
Section 2 of the paper considers China’s macroeconomic aggregates, showing their unusual features and then argues that these features appear at odds with the traditional growth
model. Section 3 introduces a perspective in which China harnesses state control of factor
markets to meet aggressive output goals, and grounds these ideas in micro-institutional features of the Chinese system. Section 4 presents a formal model. Section 5 summarizes the
findings and discusses further extensions.

2

China: An Unusual Macroeconomy

Chinese macroeconomic behavior appears unusual on several dimensions.

We document

here macroeconomic facts about the Chinese economy and then highlight their tension with
a traditional growth model.

2.1

Stylized Facts

In tandem with its high GDP growth rate, China features an unusually low labor share
of income coupled with elevated saving rates, investment rates, and capital-output ratios.
These features are unusual not only in comparison to the world distribution, but also in
comparison to earlier East Asian industrializers.

3

2.1.1

Labor Share

Figure 1A presents labor share estimates for China together with a broad sample of 54
countries analyzed by Bernanke and Gurkaynak (2002).1 In the cross-country sample, the
mean labor share is 0.66, with 72% of the countries showing estimates in the 0.60-0.80
range. Related evidence from long time series in the United States and United Kingdom
shows labor shares remain within a 0.60-0.75 range over the 1935-1985 period (Gollin 2002).
By contrast, the Chinese labor share appears unusually low (Bai, Hsieh, Qian 2006;
Lardy 2012). Kraay (2012) considers China’s labor share based on four diﬀerent sources:
provincial data on employee compensation, flow of funds data, input-output tables, and
household surveys. As shown in Figure 1B, all four sources agree that the Chinese labor
share was approximately .51 in 1993, putting China in the bottom 10% of the world sample.
By 2007, the average labor share from these four sources was .43, giving China the lowest
observed labor share seen in the data. Note that Figure 1B also suggests that the Chinese
labor share has declined with time, although this finding is less consistent across sources.2
While imputing labor shares can be challenging, especially in countries with poor data
quality and/or large informal sectors, available data suggests that China has an unusually
low labor share by international standards, and, if anything, now appears to be an extreme
outlier by most measures.
2.1.2

Saving Rate

Figure 2A shows the China’s domestic saving rate compared to a world sample of 175
countries. Saving rates for each country are taken from the World Development Indicators
and averaged over the 2000-2010 period. Figure 2B presents the same data, but excludes
oil exporters (where fuels account for at least 75% of exports).
China’s saving rate, averaging 46.4%, appears unusually high, exceeding saving rates
in 94% of other countries. Leaving out oil exporters, China’s average saving rate exceeds
1 The Bernanke and Gurkaynak estimates are measured in the 1980-1995 period and consider labor shares
making adjustments for self-employment income, building on Gollin (2002). Bernanke and Gurkaynak
construct as many as three diﬀerent estimates for each country; plotted points are means across the available
estimates for each country. Chinese labor shares, which are not included in Bernanke and Gurkaynak, are
averages across four methods analyzed by Kraay (2012), discussed in the text. Income per-capita (PPP) is
taken from the Penn World Tables.
2 Flow of funds data suggests the Chinese labor share in 2007 remains at approximately .51, while the
other three sources put labor share around .40. Lardy (2012) discusses some challenges with the provincial
aggregation in comparison to a flow-of-funds approach. Kraay (2012) considers these measures in addition
to the input-output and household survey approaches.

4

all but two other countries, which are both small and rich — Luxembourg and Singapore.
Figures 2A and 2B further show that China’s savings rate is especially high given its income
level. In a regression of average savings on log income per-capita and the share of fuels
in exports, which predict saving rates with an 2 of 0.6, China’s saving rate appears 32
percentage points higher than expected.
Figure 2C presents China’s domestic saving rate over time, comparing it to the earlier
industrializers, South Korea, Japan, and Singapore.

As in these other Asian economies,

growth in income per-capita is associated with rising saving rates. Strikingly, however,
when comparing saving rates at similar levels of per-capita income, China’s saving rate far
outpaces those in the other countries, exceeding Korea’s savings rate by approximately 10
percentage points and Singapore’s by approximately 20 percentage points.

Thus China

appears unusual not only in its absolute level of savings (now over 50%), but it appears
especially unusual given its level of economic development, even in comparison to the history
of other rapid-growth cases in Asia.
2.1.3

Consumption Rate

Unusually high saving rates are, not surprisingly, mirrored with unusually low consumption
rates.

Figure 3A presents China’s household consumption rate compared to the world

sample. Averaging over the 2000-2010 period, China’s consumption rate is 38.8%, which
is unusually low and consistent with the unusually low labor share of income.3 Comparing
China to other Asian economies, Figure 3B shows that China’s consumption appears 20-40
percentage points lower at comparable states of development.
2.1.4

Investment Rate

Figure 4A shows China’s average investment rate over 2000-2010, compared to a world
sample.

As with savings, consumption, and the labor share, China appears to be an

outlier. With an average investment rate of 39.8%, China in the first decade of this century
outpaced all other countries save two — Bhutan and Equatorial Guinea. Figure 4B shows
the evolution of China’s investment rate compared to other Asian Miracles. In each case,
economic development has been associated with high and rising investment rates. However,
3 Those rare countries with even lower consumption rates than China, as with the saving rate analysis,
are typically oil exporters.

5

as with the saving rate, China’s investment rate at a given level of per-capita income sharply
exceeds the historical precedent in these other high growth countries. In sum, China appears
unusual in its high rate of investment (now over 45%) both compared to the world sample
and to antecedent and remarkable growth experiences of other Asian countries.
Finally, unusually high investment rates imply that China’s capital-output ratio will also
appear unusually high. Using the perpetual inventory method, capital-output ratios can be
calculated under various assumptions about capital depreciation rates and the initial capital
stock.

Generally, China’s capital-output ratio will be elevated conditional on its level of

development, with an upward shift compared to other Asian economies similar to that seen
in Figure 4B.

2.2

The Standard Model

To see the challenges these facts impose on standard theory, consider that neoclassical growth
theory often builds on two core assumptions. First, factors are paid their marginal products.
Second, the aggregate production function can be approximated as Cobb-Douglas,  =
  ()

1−

. The first assumption corresponds to a setting where firms maximize profits

and are price takers (markets are competitive), and the program becomes
max   ()1− −  − 


(1)

where  is the rental price of capital and  is the wage.
In this environment, the capital and labor shares of income are constants. If labor is
paid its marginal product, then the labor share of income is  = 1 − . This model is
"standard" for several reasons, but most importantly for our purposes because, as reviewed
above, estimates of labor shares typically remain within narrow bounds.

This tendency

constitutes one of the major stylized facts of macroeconomics.4
Given that China does not satisfy this macroeconomic regularity, one is left with three
possible conclusions: (i) the Chinese data are not correctly measured; (ii) China’s production
function diverges substantially from the norm, and/or (iii) not all factors are paid their
4 A Cobb-Douglas production function, following Uzawa’s steady-state growth theorem, also has the
empirically appealing feature of allowing capital-augmenting technical progress in tandem with non-trending
interest rates, both of which appear important features of economic growth. Nonetheless, the CobbDouglas description is still open to debate. Theoretically, constant labor shares can be consistent with
non-unit elasticity of substitution between capital and labor, if capital- and labor-augmenting technical
change proceed in the right way (see, e.g., Antras 2004). Relaxing the Cobb-Douglas assumption may be
fruitful for understanding the Chinese economy, but this approach is not pursued in this paper.

6

marginal products. If one assumes that the data is suﬃciently accurate to take the stylized
facts above as broadly correct and that China’s production function does not diﬀer from the
rest of the world, where Cobb-Douglas remains a reasonable stylization, then the last option
remains. Namely, factor allocation in China departs from a competitive markets model.
This paper investigates this possibility.

3

China: An Alternative Approach

Our approach departs from the paradigm represented in (1) on two dimensions. Namely,
we consider a case where (1) the state attempts to achieve high output (possibly subject to
social stability considerations) and (2) factor markets are not fully competitive. The theory
draws on explicit Chinese state policies, as discussed below.
At a broad level, we can connect this approach to the observed macroeconomic results
along the following lines. Consider a program where China seeks to elevate output through
capital accumulation, subject to constraints on the capital accumulation process. Namely,
capital accumulation depends on investment, investment is limited by domestic savings
(given China’s capital controls), and domestic savings are in turn limited by factor payments
to labor. In particular, consider two policy parameters. Let labor be paid a wage, (),
where  is a policy parameter that creates distortions between wages and marginal products.
Meanwhile, let China set an investment policy  = , where  is a policy parameter
mapping savings into investment.

Given national output,  , and an average propensity

to consume from household wage income, , domestic savings are  =  − (). The
investment rate is then

µ
¶

()
= 1−



This set-up thus provides a straightforward approach for linking an unusually low labor
share, unusually high domestic saving rate, and unusually high investment rate. In particular, labor market policy () elevates the domestic saving rate, and capital market policy
() directs these savings toward domestic investment, working in tandem to meet China’s
output objectives.
We thus have a candidate approach for understanding some unusual features of the Chinese macroeconomy. The next section discusses how the Chinese economy can implement

7

this broad development approach, considering explicit state policies that can translate such
a centralized output objective into the actions of decentralized firms.

3.1

The Chinese System

We ground our theoretical approach in prominent institutional features of the Chinese political and economic system. In particular, we start with the labor market, emphasizing how
the hukou system influences the wages of migrant workers. We then consider explicit state
objectives, as emphasized in a succession of five-year plans, that work to direct available
savings into investment.
3.1.1

Labor Markets

China has long engaged in policies concerning population controls, including both population
growth (the one child policy) and population allocations across areas (the hukou system).
Demographic goals are explicit parts of state policy, encoded in successions of China’s five
year plans.

For example, the Eleventh Five Year Plan (2006-2011) set the urbanization

rate to grow from 43% to 47% and targeted an increase in urban employment by 45 million
jobs.
China’s hukou system, which has controlled internal migration within China since 1958,
has long created a rural-urban divide among the workforce. A hukou, which is a residence
permit, historically defines where people can live and work. Modeled on a similar system
in the Soviet Union, the hukou system initially featured outright prohibitions on migration
from rural to urban areas, largely as a means of political and social control. After the
beginning of economic reform in 1978 there was a growing demand for urban labor. The
government began to partially relax the restrictions on rural-urban migration to allow a
gradual flow of migrant workers, who were not entitled to the full benefits of urban residents. Local governments employed numerous mechanisms to control the flow of migrant
labor, including (1) quotas on the number of migrants that employers can hire, (2) fees
levied on firms employing migrants (which have been estimated to reach 44% of the average
monthly wage), and (3) recruitment fees paid to government agencies (Knight et al. 1999).
More generally, local governments control access to land, financing, and licensing for firms,
including construction and labor-intensive manufacturing firms, where migrants are often
employed, which can further control the number of jobs available to migrants.
8

A body of literature on the hukou system documents substantial wage discrimination,
where migrants earn far less than registered urban workers, even given similar observable
worker characteristics (e.g. Meng and Zhang 2001, Lu and Song 2006, Park and Wang
2010, Lee 2012). For example, Park and Wang (2010), taking data for ten Chinese cities in
2005, show that migrant workers’ hourly wages average 45% of registered urban workers.5
Lu and Song (2006), studying 2003 data from Tianjin, find that migrants earn 51% of the
urban-registered wage. Controlling for age, schooling, job tenure, and gender among other
characteristics, the urban-registered workers still enjoy a 38% wage premium. Lee (2012)
finds similar compensation premia when adjusting compensation for non-wage benefits, controlling for many observables and looking across five Chinese cities in 2005. These findings
are also broadly consistent with the recorded diﬀerence in average monthly wages between
migrants and urban-registered workers reported by China’s National Bureau of Statistics,
as shown in Figure 5.
Equilibrium unemployment search models provide a natural way to investigate the implications of the hukou system. With the hukou system and its supporting policies providing
limited urban vacancies for rural hukou workers, rural hukou workers can be viewed as the
"unemployed" - a surplus labor supply for the scarce urban vacancies. Consequently, migrants’ wages can fall below their marginal product and towards their outside option - the
rural wage.

With migrant wages below their urban marginal products, the labor share

of income falls. This feature in turn provides large domestic savings, via firms’ operating
surplus, which can support very high investment rates.
3.1.2

Capital Markets

The second piece of our analysis governs the use of elevated savings in the economy to
meet output goals. China’s five-year plans, at a high level, also provide guidance for state
objectives, giving explicit output targets. Noting that national GDP growth has consistently
met these targets over the last several decades suggests that these targets are implemented
through eﬀective micro-institutional measures.
In China’s one-party system, centralized goals can be decentralized to local leaders
through promotion incentives, where the Communist Party selects oﬃcials at all levels to
5 Moreover, urban-registered workers are found to receive pension and health benefits in over 55% of
cases, while migrants receives these additional benefits in less than 7% of cases.

9

serve a five-year term. Local leaders make decisions over "a substantial amount of resources,
such as land, firms, financial resources, energy, raw materials, and others" (Xu 2011) while
promotion incentives for local oﬃcials hinge on their success at bringing economic growth.
As described in Vogel (2011, pp. 699-700): “[Deng] established a system in which governing teams, selected by the next higher level, were given considerable independence as long
as they managed to bring rapid growth. . . In Deng’s era and in the decades after Deng,
those judgments were based overwhelmingly on how much the team contributed to China’s
overall economic growth.” This combination of decentralized decision-making and centralized promotion opportunities provide a means for centralized state growth objectives to be
decentralized to local oﬃcials (Edin 2003, Xu 2011).
To meet output goals, major institutional foundations include (1) state ownership of all
land; and (2) a repressed financial system. Only the state could alienate land out of agriculture into industrial and commercial use, which was necessary as urbanization proceeded.
The repressed financial system included ceilings on deposit interest rates, which have frequently been negative in real terms; dominance by four big state-owned commercial banks;
underdevelopment of stock and bond markets; and a closed capital account. The state’s
unusual power in land and capital markets meant that local governments could rapidly develop infrastructure (e.g., roads, ports, and power). Local government also had levers to
encourage industrial firms to invest by providing access to land, reliable infrastructure, and
low-cost financing.
Ultimately, one can model the decentralization of investment decisions in various ways.
Most simply, elevated output can be achieved indirectly by the state setting very low interest
rates, elevating investment demand to make use of the domestic savings. Here, managers
of firms may still seek to maximize profits, but they eﬀectively act to meet output targets
given their subsidized borrowing costs. This approach may be especially consonant with
China’s centralized control of the financial system (see also Song et al. 2011). Alternatively,
with promotion incentives based on meeting output targets, the managers of firms might
be viewed as seeking to achieve output goals directly, recycling the enterprise’s retained
earnings into further capital accumulation. In this view, the incentive system decentralizes
output goals to the firm manager level. This approach may be especially consonant with
public investments and state-owned enterprises. Both approaches, which are not mutually

10

exclusive, achieve similar outcomes - the deployment of savings into domestic investment.
For simplicity, we will take the former approach in the model below, decentralizing outputgoals through control of capital markets.

4

The Model

We use an equilibrium search model in the style of Pissarides (2000) to characterize the
labor market. We focus on migrant labor — rural-registered workers seeking higher-paying
jobs in cities, who are engaged in a search process.

The central mechanism emphasizes

that urban vacancies for rural-registered workers are scarce so that migrant workers have
weak bargaining power over wages when oﬀered jobs.

Vacancies are scarce because the

hukou system limits the employment of rural workers in cities, keeping would-be migrants
in oversupply.

Eﬀectively, urban firms have a collective form of monopsony power over

migrants, even though there are many urban firms who themselves are not collusive.

4.1

Workers

Consider three types of workers, indexed  ∈ {  }, where  denotes urban workers with
urban resident permits,  denotes rural workers with rural resident permits, and  denotes
migrant workers, who have rural resident permits but work in cities.
Let there be  workers in China, where
 +  +  = 
and  =   denotes the share of workers of each type. We let population grow at rate ,
and treat the number of urban ( ) and rural ( +  ) registrations as policy parameters,
which also grow at rate .

Thus, we take the total population  and registered-urban

population    as exogenous features.
Let wages be denoted  and let workers consume a fraction  of their wage income, which
is their only income source.6

For simplicity, rural workers earn a competitive wage,  ,

when staying in the rural sector, while urban (registered) workers earn a competitive wage,
 , in the urban sector. By contrast, migrant wages are determined through bargaining,
6 That is, workers have no capital income. This stylization is broadly consistent with the observation
that property and most enterprises remain owned by the state, while real interest rates on consumer deposits
in China are typically near zero. Flow of funds data suggest for example that household income outside of
labor compensation in 2008 amounted to only 2.4% of GDP (Lardy 2012).

11

where the share of migrant employment in urban firms is limited by policy as
  ≤ 
This "hukou" policy parameter, , creates limited vacancies for rural workers in the city,
which is the key to the wage behavior. It is taken as a simple way of modeling the various
restrictions imposed on migrant employment.

4.2

Matching

Migrant job vacancies are filled when firms and migrant workers meet. If vacancies are
scarce, then migrant workers find it hard to match.

This scarcity worsens the outside

option of the migrant worker, and their wage paid falls as a result.
For simplicity, let employment be forever — there is no job destruction.7

The "unem-

ployed" are the mass of rural workers,  . The mass of urban vacancies for rural workers
is  . Let the matching function be  (   ), which is constant returns to scale and has
the following natural properties. First,  (0 ) =  ( 0) = 0, so that matches are impossible in the absence of vacancies or job-seekers. Second, 1  0 and 2  0, so that
increasing the number of vacancies or job-seekers increases the rate of matching.

Third,

lim→∞  ( 1) = ∞ and lim→∞  (1 ) = ∞, so that vacancies are filled immediately
when there are infinitely many job-seekers per position and job-seekers find work immediately when there are infinitely many vacancies per worker.
Define the ratio of vacancies to rural workers as  =   .

The rate at which rural

workers find urban jobs is
() =

 (   )
=  (1 )


and the rate at which vacancies are filled is
() =

 (   )
=  (1 1)


It follows that 0 ()  0, 0 ()  0, (0) = (∞) = 0, and (∞) = (0) = ∞.

4.3

Value Functions

As a baseline, we consider a balanced growth setting, where the rural and urban sectors have
common productivity growth rates, . The Bellman equations for the migrant workers and
7 Job

destruction could easily be introduced.

12

the firms that employ them are

̃

= 

(2)

̃

=  +  ( −  )

(3)

̃

=  − 

(4)

̃

=  ( −  )

(5)

where  is the net present value of being employed as a migrant worker,  is the net
present value of rural employment,  is a firm’s net present value from filling a job with a
migrant, and  is the net present value of a vacancy. The flow value  is the marginal
value-added of a migrant worker for the urban firm. In equilibrium, this will be the same as
the registered urban wage,  . Note that the "eﬀective" discount rate is ̃ =  − , where
the real discount rate is    and taken as exogenous.

4.4

The Migrant Wage

The rural wage,  , and the value-added of the migrant worker,  , are known. They come
from the production functions and optimization behavior in agricultural firms and urban
firms, which we will consider below.
Using a standard (Nash Bargaining Solution) bargaining concept, we’ll assume that the
wage  is determined such that firm and worker have the same net gain against their
outside option
 −  =  − 
From (2), (3), (4) and (5) we can determine the migrant wage as
 = (1 − ) + 

(6)

where we define the migrant worker’s "bargaining power" as
=
and note that  ∈ [0 1].

 + ̃
 +  + 2̃

(7)

The migrant’s wage is thus a weighted average of the worker’s

outside option wage,  , and the migrant’s value-added in urban work,  . The migrant’s
capacity to extract her additional value-added through urban work depends on whether
13

vacancies are more or less scarce compared to the rural population (via the  and  terms),
which determines the migrant worker’s relative bargaining power, .

Increasingly scarce

vacancies ( =   falls) mean that  rises and  falls. Thus lots of rural labor compared
to urban vacancies will cause the wage to fall toward the outside option, the rural wage.
This outcome is the main point of this labor market model.

It follows naturally to the

extent that Chinese policy successfully limits urban vacancies for rural workers.

4.5

Production

We let the urban and rural sectors have Cobb-Douglas production functions, with decentralized firms seeking to maximize profits.

In general, workers are employed within one

of three types of firms: rural firms that employ rural-registered workers, urban firms that
employ urban-registered workers, and urban firms that employ migrant workers.

Firms

solve the problem

max  (  )1− −   − 

 

where  ∈ {  } denotes the type of worker and hence the type of firm.
that    and, for simplicity,  =  .

We imagine

In other words, urban production is more

productive than rural production.8
All firms are price takers on capital, given its rental price. This implies that capital is
1
¡  ¢ 1−
employed such that  =  
 in each sector. In practice, the state will set  to

clear the savings market. With lots of savings,  can be set low, elevating capital intensity
and output.

In this manner, state control of the capital market acts to decentralize the

state’s output objective into firm-level profit maximizing decisions.
Migrant employment, the focus of the model, features bargaining over wages as already
described. By contrast, we assume competitive labor markets among other types of workers
(those who work where they are registered) and who are thus paid their marginal products.9
8 The

assumption that productivity in urban sector firms is similar for both urban-registered and migrant
workers could be relaxed; we maintain this assumption to focus the model and emphasize the productivity
advantage of urban over rural work.
Note also that we have also assumed perfectly elastic demand for rural and urban output. Alternatively,
one could introduce CES preferences across the rural and urban products, allowing for downward sloping
demand. Because this latter approach adds some complexity without substantively altering the main points
of the model, we leave this approach aside. Results generalizing the demand side are available from the
authors upon request.
9 Equivalently, these firms can also be placed in a bargaining set-up, only in this case they are unconstrained in issuing vacancies, so that the the value of their vacancies is zero. Hence these firms have no

14

The migrant wage, as defined in (6), falls between the urban marginal product and the
(lower) rural wage. Therefore, since    , the urban firm will hire as many ruralregistered workers as possible, so that  =  , and the total urban workforce is thus
(1 + )  . Note also that the marginal product of workers in urban firms is  =  =  .
According to the population constraints, the allowable range for the hukou policy parameter, , is
 ∈ [0
and we will denote max =

1


1
− 1]


− 1, at which point all rural-registered workers would be

employed in cities.

4.6

Macroeconomic Aggregates

In this section we define the main macroeconomic aggregates that result from the above
policies and relate them back to the stylized facts of Section 2.
4.6.1

The Labor Share

Define the labor share of income as Λ = ̄ , where ̄ is the mean wage paid in China.
In the above model, the labor share in China falls due to migrants in the urban sector,
and China’s overall labor share is the GDP-weighted average of the urban and rural labor
shares.10 In particular, we have
Λ = (1 − ) −

( −  ) 


(8)

so that China’s labor share will decline (compared to its standard value of 1−) through two
forces: (i) the extent to which migrant workers are paid less than their marginal products,
 −  ; (ii) the mass of migrant workers,  . These forces can be expressed in terms of
the model’s exogenous parameters as follows
∙
Lemma 1 China’s labor share is Λ = (1 − ) 1 −

and  = −1 ( 1−(1+)
).



(1−)(1− 
)


1
1+ 1+  (
 (1+) −1)

¸
, where  =


1−(1+) +̃

1
1−(1+) 1+  +2̃

bargaining power against their workers, who therefore earn their marginal products. A bargaining approach
can be set-up along the lines of (4) and (5) where the costless issuance of vacancies means that the value
of vacancies goes to zero in equilibrium, which implies that the value of a filled job goes to zero for the
firm, and hence the worker captures their full marginal product. For simplicity and focus of exposition, we
simply assert that these firms pay marginal products.
1 0 One could also consider extensions where the rural wage is not fully competitive, allowing the rural wage
to also fall below the rural marginal product (e.g. through state control of rural enterprises). This decline
in the rural wage would further reduce the migrant wage in cities, as migrants’ outside option gets worse.

15

(

)

Proof: See appendix.
4.6.2

Saving, Investment, and Capital

The saving and investment rates follow as in Section 3. The saving rate is

= 1 − Λ


(9)

where  is households’ consumption rate from their labor payments. The saving rate can
thus be expressed in terms of underlying parameters using the labor share expression in the
Lemma, and the comparative statics properties of the savings rate are the opposite of those
for the labor share.11
The aggregate investment rate in this model, following the capital market rule  = ,
then follows directly from above

=  (1 − Λ)


(10)

where again the labor share is expressed in terms of underlying parameters using the Lemma.
The aggregate capital-stock, , and market clearing rental price, , are then determined
based on the supply and demand for capital. Capital accumulates in both the urban and
rural sectors as ̇ =  −  where  denotes the sector. The steady-state growth path of
the capital stock is then  =  ( +  + ), which implies


=
(1 − Λ)

++
On the demand side, firms are price-taking on capital in both rural and urban sectors
and thus set  = ()  , which implies that the total capital stock is  = () . The
rental price that clears the capital market is then
 = ( +  + )


−1
(1 − Λ)


(11)

so that a lower labor share, leading to elevated savings, causes the Chinese state’s capital
market to clear at a lower rental price.
Finally, aggregate GDP in the model, summing across the output of urban and rural
firms, is
 =

µ

 (1 − Λ)
++


¶ 1−

( (1 + )  +   )

(12)

1 1 Note that we leave the household saving rate as an exogenous parameter, to focus the model on the
labor share aspect. The household saving rate, 1 − , which is also high in China, is an interesting and
potentially complex subject in its own right. See, e.g., Wei and Zhang (2011) for analysis of the household
saving rate in China.

16

4.7

Comparative Statics

We can now consider comparative statics on the steady-state macroeconomic aggregates.
First, we consider a relative shock to the urban/rural productivity ratio.
Corollary 1 The labor share is decreasing in   , while the saving rate and investment
rate are increasing in   .
Proof: See appendix.
Intuitively, widening the productivity gap between the urban and rural sector, other
things equal, will increase the gap between the migrant’s wage and their marginal product, which causes the labor share to fall. Hence, productivity-enhancing reform targeted
at urban-areas will ultimately raise savings, investment, and capital stocks, while reform
targeted at rural-areas can have the opposite eﬀect.
Secondly, we consider the implications of relaxing the hukou policy, which has nonmonotonic eﬀects. There are two oﬀsetting features. First, as the hukou policy is relaxed (
rises), the bargaining power of migrant workers increases and their wage rises toward their
marginal product. This "migrant-wage" mechanism is captured in the following Lemma,
where we recall that  ∈ [0 1] is the migrant’s bargaining power and we define  =  
as the share of their marginal product that migrant workers capture.
Lemma 2  0 () ≥ 0, and { (0)  (max )} = {0 1}. Moreover,  0 () ≥ 0, and {(0) (max )} =
{   1}.
Proof: See appendix.
This increase in the migrant’s wage (toward their marginal product) causes the labor
share of income to rise, other things equal.
On the other hand, as the hukou policy relaxes, more rural workers take up migrant
work, causing a greater share of the labor force to be paid below their marginal product.
This "migrant-quantity" eﬀect causes the labor share to decline, other things equal.

In-

terestingly, in the contest between the migrant-wage eﬀect (the intensive margin) and the
migrant-quantity eﬀect (the extensive margin), relaxing the hukou policy — moving towards
a freer labor market — can actually cause the labor-share to decline, moving further from
the competitive market baseline. We encapsulate this non-monotonicity as follows.
17

Lemma 3 Λ (0) = Λ (max ) = 1 − , but Λ ()  1 −  for all 0    max .
Thus the equilibrium labor share of income must initially decline when migration is first
allowed but eventually rise.

Following (9) and (10), the saving rate and investment rate

are then non-monotonic in the hukou policy as well, but with the opposite sign, so that the
saving and investment rates rise as migration is first allowed but eventually fall.
Proof: See Appendix.
The final result concerns aggregate GDP. Here again there is a non-monotonicity in the
hukou policy, although for an additional reason. Namely, there is an allocative ineﬃciency
when the hukou policy traps agricultural workers in the less-productive, rural sector. On
this dimension, relaxing the hukou policy — allowing more rural workers to reallocate to
the urban sector - would appear only to increase income per-capita, which suggests that
income would be maximized with a fully relaxed hukou policy. However, the dynamics in
the labor share mean that the saving rate and investment rate can be maximized away from
a fully relaxed hukou policy.

In the tension between these two forces, it turns out that

maximal output is achieved somewhere between the hukou policy that minimizes the labor
share and a fully free labor market. Defining ̂ as a point such that Λ0 (̂) = 0, this result
is encapsulated formally as follows.
Lemma 4  0 (̂)  0.  0 (max )  0 if

̃




1−(1−)


Proof: See Appendix.
Overall, these results indicate that, other things equal, a restrictive hukou policy ( 
max ) can reduce the labor share, expand the saving rate, and expand the investment rate,
while also raising national output compared to competitive market norms where the hukou
policy is fully relaxed.

Thus, this institutional viewpoint may help provide a consistent

interpretation for China’s unusual macroeconomic aggregates.

We next consider simple

calibrations to further explore the magnitude of such eﬀects and their non-monotonicities.

4.8

Calibration

Using National Bureau of Labor Statistics wage data (see Figure 5), the migrant wage in 2010
is approximately 55% of the urban-registered wage, while the rural wage is approximately
16% of the urban-registered wage.12 Meanwhile, current estimates suggest that the migrant
1 2 Wages

are monthly. The data is available from http://www.stats.gov.cn/english/.

18

labor population is of similar magnitude to the urban-registered workforce, suggesting that
the key parameter of the model, , is approximately 1. Lastly, as shown in Figure 6, which
uses National Bureau of Statistics flow of funds data, the enterprise savings rate has risen
by about 10 percentage points in the last decade, making these savings the primary driver
of increased aggregate savings over that period, as seen in Figure 2C.
With these numbers in mind, we can turn to a specific calibration exercise. In particular,
we consider specific relationships between the hukou policy, , and labor market outcomes by
making assumptions about the matching function and about other exogenous parameters.
Specifically, we take recent observables of the urban-registered population share and the
population growth rate to choose  = 025 and  = 0005. We further set the productivity
growth rate, depreciation rate and eﬀective discount rate as  = 008,  = 06, and ̃ = 08.
The urban-rural productivity ratio is set as   = 16, matching the current registered
urban-rural wage ratio, and we set the capital elasticity of output at the standard value
 = 13. The marginal propensity to consume from household income is set at  = 062.
12

Lastly, we let the matching function be  (   ) =   12 , where  = 01. Then the
relationships between the hukou policy parameter and economic outcomes are as summarized
in Figure 7.
As is generally true by Lemma 3, the calibration shows the interesting result that the
equilibrium labor share declines when the migration restrictions are initially relaxed (upper
left panel).

While a less restrictive migration policy is associated with higher wages for

migrants (upper right panel), the increasing number of workers subjected to wages below
their marginal products (lower left panel) depresses the labor share on net. This plot also
shows migrant-urban wage diﬀerentials that are consistent with observed evidence (see, e.g.,
Figure 5) when  ≈ 1, and the labor share can be seen to decline by substantial amounts
through the hukou mechanism alone, broadly consistent with the magnitudes seen in Figure
1A or 1B. In particular, the labor share with  ≈ 1 is found to be about 15 percentage
points lower than would occur with fully competitive factor markets.13
Aggregate output, as shown in the model, reflects two mechanisms as the hukou policy
relaxes. On the one hand, average labor productivity increases as workers are increasingly
1 3 To the extent that the observed deviation in the labor share from international norms is thought to be
larger than this calibration delivers, one simple extension would be to introduce wage supression in the urban
and/or rural sector as well, given for example state control of property rights and state-owned enterprises,
which disproportionately employ workers with hukou.

19

reallocated from lower-productivity rural jobs to higher-productivity urban jobs.

Sepa-

rately, saving (and hence capital accumulation) rises and then falls, following the labor
share dynamics. The first force means that output peaks to the right of the minimum labor
share, where the maximum saving rate occurs but reallocative productivity gains are not
yet fully exploited (Lemma 4).
Figure 7 (lower right panel) plots the marginal percentage increases in equilibrium GDP

due to a marginal relaxation of the hukou policy (  log
 ). For this calibration, additional

relaxations of the hukou policy are seen to be growth enhancing over a wide range of , yet
the growth advantage declines at higher  and eventually turns negative. These diminishing
returns occur both because the percentage output gain from worker reallocation is declining
the more the reallocation has already occurred, and because diminishing returns to capital
increasingly mute the growth advantage of additional saving rate increases.14 Thus liberalizing the hukou system pays its biggest growth dividends at first. Eventually, once the
labor share rises and the saving rate plummets, further relaxation of the hukou policy causes
equilibrium output to fall.
Overall, in moving away from the fully restrictive population registration system, the
hukou policy turns from being a mechanism for political and social control into a mechanism
that can also facilitate economic growth and hence the attainment of aggressive output
objectives by the state. The calibration suggests that large changes in the labor share,
saving rate, and output can follow from natural parameterizations.

5
5.1

Discussion
Summary

This paper shows that China’s macroeconomic performance is an outlier with respect to (i)
global norms and (ii) the prior experience of other rapidly-growing Asian economies. In particular, China shows highly elevated savings and investment rates, coupled with depressed
consumption and a depressed labor share.

The paper then considers micro-institutional

features of the Chinese system that can lead to these unusual aggregate phenomena. The
1 4 Recall that we are assuming perfectly elastic demand for rural and urban output. If demand is instead
downward sloping, then the reallocation advantage becomes more muted as  increases, because the urbanrural price ratio falls. This eﬀect further reinforces the diminishing returns to equilibrium GDP from
relaxing . Analysis of the model and further calibrations with downward sloping demand are available
from the authors upon request.

20

model shows how the hukou system, limiting migration from rural to urban areas, can create surplus labor supply for higher-productivity jobs in cities, depressing the labor share
and expanding savings. Meanwhile, government control of capital markets, including crossborder capital controls and state-controlled domestic lending, direct elevated savings into
unusually high domestic investment rates.

In addition to suggesting an explanation for

unusual macroeconomic aggregates, the model is also broadly consistent with elevated enterprise saving rates and, perhaps most importantly, the large wage discount for migrant
workers in China’s cities that has been discussed extensively in the micro-literature.

5.2

Additional Applications

The model may also help inform other macroeconomic phenomena. For example, China’s
current account surplus follows automatically when domestic investment rates do not absorb
all domestic savings, and while earlier periods featured more neutral trade positions, China
has seen large trade surpluses in recent years. Fixing an investment path, the trade surplus
could be seen as a side eﬀect of increased savings as the hukou policy relaxes.

More

generally, the current account surplus follows if Chinese policymakers set   1.

While

the determination of this parameter is left outside the model, two natural explanations for
setting   1 may be consistent with the growth objectives in the five-year plans. First,
Chinese policy may explicitly favor export-led growth in pursuit of technology spillovers or
other productivity benefits. Second, having observed the Asian financial crisis in 1997-1998,
Chinese leaders may have explicitly built foreign reserves as self-insurance. Both motives
compete with a pure domestic investment strategy for domestic savings (where  = 1),
choosing additional avenues to facilitate growth.
Lastly, the model suggests views on China’s path forward. As Chinese leaders wrestle
with tradeoﬀs between investment growth and inequality, and consider methods to increase
domestic consumption, they may naturally consider both (i) productivity-enhancing rural
reforms and (ii) relaxing the hukou system. Rural reforms will help meet inequality goals,
but the model of this paper suggests that they will also cut against savings and limit
investment growth. In contrast, further relaxing the hukou system may, surprisingly, raise
migrant wages and yet further suppress the labor share and elevate the saving rate initially.
Here, reducing inequality among urban workers may actually facilitate high savings and

21

investment.

Ironically, additional moves toward a freer labor market may initially drive

China yet further from antecedent macroeconomic norms. Over the longer term, however,
if China fully relaxes the hukou policy, the hukou-savings mechanism identified in this paper
would ultimately cause the labor share to return to global averages.

In such a scenario,

more limited domestic saving would put pressure on the capacity of China to maintain both
a current account surplus and a high domestic investment rate.

References
[1] Antras, Pol, "Is the U.S. Production Function Cobb-Douglas? New Estimates of the
Elasticity of Substitution," Contributions to Macroeconomics, 2004.
[2] Bai, Chong-En, Chang-Tai Hsieh, and Yingyi Qian, "The Return to Capital in China,"
Brookings Papers in Economic Activity, 2006.
[3] Bernanke, Ben and Refet Gürkaynak, “Is Growth Exogenous? Taking Mankiw, Romer,
and Weil Seriously,” in: NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2001, 2002.
[4] Chan, Kam Wing, "Crossing the 50 Percent Population Rubicon: Can China Urbanize
to Prosperity?" Eurasian Geography and Economics, 2012.
[5] Edin, Maria, "State Capacity and Local Agent Control in China: CCP Cadre Management from a Township Perspective," China Quarterly, 2003.
[6] Gollin, Douglas, "Getting Income Shares Right," Journal of Political Economy, 2002.
[7] Jiang, Shiqing, Ming Lu and Hiroshi Sato, "Identity, Inequality, and Happiness: Evidence from Urban China," World Development, 2012.
[8] Knight, John, Lina Song & Jia Huaibin, "Chinese rural migrants in urban enterprises:
Three perspectives," Journal of Development Studies, 1999.
[9] Kraay, Aart, "China Labor Share: Data Inconsistencies," World Bank mimeo, 2012.
[10] Lardy, Nicholas, Sustaining China’s Economic Growth After the Global Financial Crisis, Petersen Institute for International Economics, 2012.

22

[11] Lee, Leng, "Decomposing Wage Diﬀerentials between Migrant Workers and Urban
Workers in Urban China’s Labor Markets," China Economic Review, 2012.
[12] Lu, Zhigang and Shunfeng Song, "Rural-Urban Migration and Wage Determination:
The Case of Tianjin, China," China Economic Review, 2006.
[13] Meng, Xin and Junsen Zhang, "The Two-Tier Labor Market in Urban China: Occupational Segregation and Wage Diﬀerentials between Urban Residents and Rural Migrants
in Shanghai," Journal of Comparative Economics, 2001.
[14] Park, Albert and Dewen Wang, “Migration and Urban Poverty and Inequality in
China,” China Economic Journal, 3(1), 2010.
[15] Pissarides, Christopher, Equilibrium Unemployment Theory 2nd Edition, MIT Press,
2000.
[16] Song, Zheng, Kjetil Storesletten, and Fabrizio Zilibotti, "Growing Like China," American Economic Review, 2011.
[17] Vogel, Ezra, Deng Xiaoping and the Transformation of China, Belknap Press, 2011.
[18] Wei, Shang-Jin and Xiaobo Zhang, "The Competitive Saving Motive: Evidence from
Rising Sex Ratios and Savings Rates in China," Journal of Political Economy, 2011.
[19] Xu, Chenggang, "The Fundamental Institutions of China’s Reforms and Development,"
Journal of Economic Literature, 2011.
[20] Xu, Ya, "Forecasting Labor Supply in Urban China: Integrating Demographic Dynamics and Socioeconomic Transition," IIASA Interim Report IR-00-11, 2000.

6

Appendix

Proof of Lemma 1
¸
∙

(1−)(1− 
)


, where  =
China’s labor share is Λ = (1 − ) 1 − 1+

1+ 
( 1 −1)
 (1+)

and  = −1 ( 1−(1+)
).


23


1−(1+) +̃

1
1−(1+) 1+  +2̃

(

)

Proof. From (8), and noting that per-capita urban output is  =   [(1 + )  ], we can
write the labor share as
Λ = (1 − ) −

 
 1 + 

µ
¶
 
1−
 

(13)

With urban-registered workers paid their marginal products, we have

=1−


(14)

Meanwhile, from (6), and noting that   =  


= (1 − )
+



(15)

Lastly, the urban GDP share is
 (1 + )

=
=

 (1 + ) +  
1+




³

1
1
(1+)

−1

´

(16)

where we have divided through by the numerator, replaced  =  − (1 + )  , and used
 =  .
Hence, putting (14), (15), and (16) into (13) we can write
³
´ ⎤
⎡

(1
−
)
1
−


´⎦
³
Λ = (1 − ) ⎣1 −
1
1 +  1 + 
−1


(1+)

proving the first part of the Lemma.

The second part of the Lemma considers the value of . With state policy setting the
registered urban worker population as  , population growth at rate , and the hukou policy
set to achieve  =  , then the rate of matching is ̇ =  ( − (1 + )    ) =  .
From the definition of  (), we can then write

() =


1 − (1 + ) 

(17)

It then follows from (7) that

=


1−(1+) + ̃
¡
¢

1
1−(1+) 1 +  +

2̃

where we recall that () = (). Further, since () is monotonically increasing, we can
write
−1

=

µ


1 − (1 + ) 
24

¶

completing the proof.

Proof of Corollary 1
The labor share is decreasing in   , while the saving rate and investment rate are
increasing in   .
Proof. Note that the migrant’s bargaining power  does not depend on   . From
Lemma 1, it is then clear by inspection that a rise in   causes


1− 


1+ 
( 1 −1)
 (1+)

to rise.



Hence, the labor share falls. By (9) and (10), the saving and investment rates then rise.

Proof of Lemma 2
 0 () ≥ 0, and { (0)  (max )} = {0 1}. Moreover,  0 () ≥ 0, and
{(0) (max )} = {   1}.
Proof. The migrant’s bargaining power, from (7), is  =



=

 
 

+̃
++2̃ .

By the chain rule

where
0  − 0 + (0 − 0 )̃

=
≥0

( +  + 2̃)2

This expression is signed recalling that 0 () ≥ 0 and 0 () ≤ 0.
Meanwhile, the function  () is defined implicitly by (17), which implies that
 0 () =

1
 (1 −  )
≥0
0 () (1 − (1 + )  )2

We therefore have  0 () ≥ 0.
Next, note that  ()=0 = 0. This follows because  ()=0 = 0 (from (17)), while the
properties of matching function tell us that  () = 0 only when  = 0. Hence
lim (()) = lim

→0

→0

() + ̃
=0
() + () + 2̃

where we use  (0) = 0 and (0) = ∞.
Next, note that  (max ) = ∞. This follows from (17), where  ((max )) = ∞, which in
turn implies  = ∞ from the properties of the matching function. Hence
lim (()) = lim

→max

→∞

() + ̃
=1
() + () + 2̃

where we use  (∞) = ∞ and  (∞) = 0.
25

Turning to the migrant wage, we note from (6) that  =   = (1−)  +. Since
 = 0 implies  = 0 (above) it also follows that  = 0 implies  =   .

Furthermore,

 = max implies  = 1 (above), which implies  = 1.
Lastly, since   =   , which is not a function of the hukou policy, it follows
from  0 () ≥ 0 and    1 that  0 () =  0 () (1 −   ) ≥ 0, completing the proof.

Proof of Lemma 3
Λ (0) = Λ (max ) = 1 − , but Λ ()  1 −  for all 0    max .
Proof. Recall that

³
´ ⎤

(1
−
)
1
−


´⎦
³
Λ () = (1 − ) ⎣1 −
1
1 +  1 + 
−
1
 (1+)
⎡

Noting that (i)    , (ii)   1, (iii)  ≤ max =

1


− 1, and (iv)  () ∈ [0 1] it

follows by inspection of Λ () that the expression in square brackets is weakly less than 1.
Hence Λ () ≤ 1 − . At any value of the hukou parameter, , the labor share is weakly
less than the competitive market norm.
It also follows by inspection that Λ(0) = 1 − .

(In this circumstance, there are no

migrant workers, so that all laborers are paid their marginal products.) Similarly, noting
from Lemma 2 that (max ) = 1, it also follows by inspection that Λ (max ) = 1−. (In this
circumstance, there are many migrant workers but they receive their full marginal product.)
Hence we have shown that Λ (0) = Λ (max ) = 1 − .
We can show that Λ ()  1 −  for all 0    max as follows.
First, we have just observed that Λ () ≤ 1 − .

³ ´
Second, by contradiction, assume there exists some 0  ̂  max where Λ ̂ = 1 − .
³ ´
Inspection of Λ () above shows we then require that  ̂ = 1. However, from Lemma

2, we know that  (max ) = 1 and  0 () ≥ 0. Therefore, if  0 (max )  0, then it must
follow that  ()  1 for all  ∈ (0 1), which is a contradiction. The proof can thus simply
establish that  0 (max )  0.
After some algebra, write  0 () as
0

 =

̃0
2 (1

− 1) +

20


(1 + ̃)
2

(1 + 1 + 2̃)
26

Noting that lim→max  () = ∞ and lim→max  = ∞, it follows that
0

lim  () =

→max

lim

→max

∙

¸
20
̃0
̃0
≥
lim
+
→max 2
2


where the weak inequality follows noting that

20


≥ 0 for all .

From (17), we can show that lim→max 0 ()  () =
lim  0 () ≥

→max



³

̃
1


1
.
( 1 −1)

Hence

´ 0
−1

which establishes, by contradiction, that Λ ()  1 −  for all 0    max .
Proof of Lemma 4
³ ´
 0 ̂  0.  0 (max )  0 if ̃ 

1−(1−)


Proof. Taking logs of aggregate GDP from (12), we can write
log  =


log (1 − Λ) + log [ −  ) (1 + )  +  ] + 
1−

where the  term is not a function of . The comparative static with respect to the hukou
policy is
 Λ0 ()
( −  )
 log 
=−
+
(18)

1 −  1 − Λ ( −  ) (1 + )  +  
³ ´
(i) Consider  0 (̂). At the minimum labor share, Λ0 ̂ = 0. Therefore, from (18)
¯
( −  )
 log  ¯¯
³
´
0
=
 ¯̂
( −  ) 1 + ̂  +  

where the last inequality follows recalling that    . Intuitively, where the labor share
is minimized, further small relaxations of the hukou policy have no eﬀect on the saving rate,
so that the only force operating is the reallocation of workers to higher productive urban
labor, which strictly raises national output.
(ii) Consider  0 (max ). At  = max ,  = (1 + max )  and Λ = 1 − , implying
¯
 − 
 log  ¯¯

Λ0 (max )
+
=−
¯
 max
1 −  1 − (1 − )  (1 + max )

It follows that  0 (max )  0 if and only if
Λ0 (max ) 

1 −  1 −  (1 − )  − 


 (1 + max )
27

(19)

Recalling Lemma 1, which determines Λ (), it is straightforward to show that
¶
µ

()
Λ () = − (1 − ) 1 −

0

where
 () =

1
1+1+




³

1
1
(1+)

⎡

⎤

1

(1
−

())
2
1 −  ()

⎦
´⎣
³  (1+) ´
−  0 () +

1
1
+

−1
1 +  (1+) − 1

Recalling (1 + max )  = 1 and  (max ) = 1, it follows that
0

Λ (max ) = (1 − )
Recalling that lim→max  0 () ≥

µ

 − 


̃
max

¶∙

¸

max
 0 (max )
1 + max

(20)

(see the proof to Lemma 3) we can then write a

suﬃcient condition for  0 (max )  0, using (19) and (20), as
1 −  (1 − )
̃




28

Figure 1A: Labor Shares, China versus Rest of World

Labor Shares

Labor Share % GDP
50
60
70

80

China vs World Sample

China 1993

40

China 2007

6

7

8
9
log(GDP per capita, PPP)

10

11

Figure 1B: China’s Labor Share, Various Sources

Labor Share

40

45

50

55

60

Four Chinese Data Sources

1990

1995

2000
year

Provincial Aggregate
Flow of Funds

29

2005
Input-Output Table
Household Survey

2010

Figure 2A: Saving Rates, China versus Rest of World

Saving Rates, World Sample

Saving % GDP
0
50

100

average over 2000-2010

-50

China

6

7

8
9
log(GDP per capita, PPP)

10

11

Figure 2B: Saving Rates, China versus Rest of World Excluding Oil States
and States with Less than 1 Million Inhabitants

Saving Rates, World Sample ex. Oil, Small States
50

average over 2000-2010

-50

Saving % GDP
0

China

6

7

8
9
log(GDP per capita, PPP)

30

10

11

Figure 2C: Saving Rates, China versus Other Asian Countries

Asian Countries: Rapid Growth Cases

0

10

Saving % GDP
20 30 40

50

60

1960-2010 time series

6

7

8
9
log(GDP per capita, PPP)
China
Japan

Singapore
Korea South

31

10

11

Figure 3A: Consumption Rates, China versus Rest of World

Figure 3B: Consumptions Rates, China versus Other Asian Countries

Asian Countries: Rapid Growth Cases

30

Consumption % GDP
40
50
60

70

1960-2010 time series

4

6

8
log(GDP per capita, PPP)
China
Japan

10

Singapore
Korea South

32

12

Figure 4A: Investment Rates, China versus Rest of World

Investment Rates, World Sample

Investment % GDP
20
30
40

50

average over 2000-2010

10

China

6

7

8
9
log(GDP per capita, PPP)

10

11

Figure 4B: Investment Rates, China versus Other Asian Countries

Asian Countries: Rapid Growth Cases

10

Investment % GDP
20
30
40

50

1960-2010 time series

6

7

8
9
log(GDP per capita, PPP)
China
Japan

Singapore
Korea South

33

10

11

Figure 5: Urban, Rural, and Migrant Wages in 2010

Average Wages (current yuan)
1,000
2,000

3,000

Urban

Migrant

0

Rural

10

Enterprise Saving Rate (%GDP)
12
14
16
18

20

Figure 6: Enterprise Savings Rates in China

1990

1995

2000
year

34

2005

2010

Figure 7: Calibration

-.2

.2

.4

-.15

-.1

.6

.8

-.05

1

Migrant Wage / Urban-Hukou Wage

0

Decline in Labor Share (p.p.)

0

1

2

3

0

1

2

3

theta

Migrant Labor / All Urban Labor

Marginal Increases in GDP (%)
.5

0

-1

.2

-.5

0

.4

.6

1

.8

theta

0

1

2

3

0

theta

1

2
theta

35

3

