NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SOVEREIGN DEBT MARKETS IN TURBULENT TIMES:
CREDITOR DISCRIMINATION AND CROWDING-OUT EFFECTS
Fernando Broner
Aitor Erce
Alberto Martin
Jaume Ventura
Working Paper 19676
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19676
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2013

We acknowledge financial support from the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation, the Spanish
Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness Severo Ochoa Program, the Generalitat de Catalunya, and
the European Research Council (Starting Grant FP7-263846 and Advanced Grant FP7-249588) for
financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the European Stability Mechanism or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Fernando Broner, Aitor Erce, Alberto Martin, and Jaume Ventura. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Sovereign Debt Markets in Turbulent Times: Creditor Discrimination and Crowding-Out Effects
Fernando Broner, Aitor Erce, Alberto Martin, and Jaume Ventura
NBER Working Paper No. 19676
November 2013
JEL No. F32,F34,F36,F41,F43,F44,F65,G15
ABSTRACT
In 2007, countries in the euro periphery were enjoying stable growth, low deficits, and low spreads.
Then the financial crisis erupted and pushed them into deep recessions, raising their deficits and debt
levels. By 2010, they were facing severe debt problems. Spreads increased and, surprisingly, so did
the share of the debt held by domestic creditors. Credit was reallocated from the private to the public
sectors, reducing investment and deepening the recessions even further. To account for these facts,
we propose a simple model of sovereign risk in which debt can be traded in secondary markets. The
model has two key ingredients: creditor discrimination and crowding-out effects. Creditor discrimination
arises because, in turbulent times, sovereign debt offers a higher expected return to domestic creditors
than to foreign ones. This provides incentives for domestic purchases of debt. Crowding-out effects
arise because private borrowing is limited by financial frictions. This implies that domestic debt purchases
displace productive investment. The model shows that these purchases reduce growth and welfare,
and may lead to self-fulfilling crises. It also shows how crowding-out effects can be transmitted to
other countries in the euro zone, and how they may be addressed by policies at the European level.
Fernando Broner
CREI,
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Ramon Trias Fargas, 25-27
08005 Barcelona
Spain
and Barcelona GSE
fbroner@crei.cat

Alberto Martin
CREI,
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Ramon Trias Fargas, 25-27
08005 Barcelona
Spain
and Barcelona GSE
amartin@crei.cat

Aitor Erce
European Stability Mechanism
43, Avenue John F.Kennedy
1855 Luxembourg
a.erce@esm.europa.eu

Jaume Ventura
CREI,
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Ramon Trias Fargas, 25-27
08005-Barcelona
SPAIN
and Barcelona GSE
and also NBER
jventura@crei.cat

In 2007 Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, and Spain —or ‘GIIPS’— were enjoying stable growth,
their fiscal deficits were low, their public debts were not particularly large and their sovereign
spreads were close to zero.1 The financial crisis that erupted in the summer of 2007 pushed these
economies, as it did many others around the world, into deep recessions. Figure 1 shows how this
aﬀected these countries’ sovereign debts. During 2008 and 2009, a combination of low growth and
large budget deficits led to rapidly increasing debt-to-GDP ratios. This did not seem worrisome
at the time, though, as financial markets absorbed this additional debt as they had done in the
past. Until late 2009, average spreads were still low and the share of sovereign debt in the hands
of domestic residents was below 50% in all GIIPS, and even below 30% in Ireland and Greece.
The situation deteriorated sharply at the end of 2009, leading to severe sovereign debt problems
in 2010. One piece of bad news was that some of the GIIPS, such as Ireland or Spain, reported
much larger budget deficits than previously anticipated. But the most striking development, took
place in Greece, where the new government revised the fiscal accounts for previous years and found
deficits much larger than previously reported. This discovery generated a loss of confidence on the
fiscal constraints under which Euro countries were supposed to operate.
These events did not slow down the growth of debt, but they did aﬀect how it was absorbed
by markets. This is also shown in Figure 1. Spreads started to rise sharply and, by the end of
2012, all GIIPS had spreads within 400 and 800 basis points, with the exception of Greece whose
spread was much higher. A more surprising development is that the share of debt held by these
countries’ private sectors increased alongside spreads. By the end of 2012, this share was above
50% in all GIIPS, and even above 70% in Spain and 60% in Italy.2 Contrary to the standard
logic of optimal diversification, private sectors in GIIPS bought a lot of sovereign debt precisely
as it became riskier and more correlated with domestic outcomes. As this appetite for debt grew,
credit was reallocated from the private to the public sectors, reducing investment and deepening
the recessions even further.
Soon these diﬃculties became too large to be handled domestically, and help from abroad
came in a variety of ways. It all started with the approval of oﬃcial support packages crafted
in the style of standard International Monetary Fund (IMF) programs. Greece received a first
1
Of course, there was more heterogeneity among GIIPS’ economies than this description suggests. In particular,
Portugal and Italy were growing more slowly, Portugal and Greece had larger deficits, and Italy and Greece had
larger public debts.
2
Brutti and Sauré (2013) have emphasized this aspect of the crisis and carefully documented it. Arslanalp and
Tsuda (2012) and Merler and Pisani-Ferry (2012) have also noticed this pattern. More generally, Broner et al.
(2013) show that periods of financial turbulence are often accompanied by a reduction in gross capital flows, in which
foreigners reduce their purchases of domestic assets and domestic residents reduce their purchases of foreign assets.

1

loan of 110 bn euros in May 2010 and an additional 130 bn euros in March 2012. The first loan
was articulated through bilateral agreements with euro area countries and an IMF program. The
second was financed jointly by the IMF and the European Financial Stability Fund (EFSF), the
first euro-zone institutional mechanism designed to jointly support distressed euro sovereigns. In
turn, Ireland received a loan of 67.5 bn euros in November 2010 and Portugal a loan of 78 bn euros
in April 2011, both also jointly financed by the IMF and the EFSF. As the crisis deepened the euro
zone decided to equip itself with a permanent crisis resolution institution, the European Stability
Mechanism (ESM). So far, the ESM has provided financing for the cleaning up of the financial
system in Spain in late 2012 and contributed most of the funding for the recently signed Cypriot
package. An important additional form of support came through the various measures taken by the
European Central Bank (ECB), most notably the Securities Markets Program (SMP) for purchases
of distressed sovereign bonds in secondary markets.3
Despite these eﬀorts by their European partners, at the time of writing, GIIPS are still far from
solving their sovereign debt problems. This is so despite painful fiscal adjustments and considerable
eﬀorts at implementing economic reforms. Even worse, there is still widespread disagreement
about the underlying causes and potential remedies of this situation. Why have sovereign spreads
increased so much? Why, in the midst of a deep recession, have the private sectors of GIIPS
purchased the debts of their sovereigns? What are the economic consequences of these purchases?
What are the key ineﬃciencies that they generate? What is the right set of policies to address
them? What diﬀerence does it make that GIIPS belong to the European Union? Is there a role for
Europe-wide policy?
The goal of this paper is to provide an analytical perspective on these issues.4 We propose
a theory with two key ingredients: creditor discrimination and crowding-out eﬀects. By creditor
discrimination we mean that, in turbulent times, sovereign debt oﬀers a higher expected return to
domestic creditors than to foreign ones. This happens in part because domestic creditors are less
likely to be defaulted on by their governments.5 It could also happen because of the plethora of
3

Additionally, the ECB has modified its collateral rules to accept lower rated sovereign debt, provided liquidity
through the Long-Term Repurchase Operations (LTRO), and even announced (on August 2012) the possibility of
purchasing unlimited amounts of sovereign securities through Outright Monetary Transactions (OMT).
4
Our narrative has been, per force, short and focused on the elements that we emphasize later in the theory. See
Ardagna and Caselli (2012), Lane (2012), and Shambaugh (2012) for detailed and very useful descriptions of the
European sovereign debt crisis. See also the many references therein for further details. Bolton and Jeanne (2011),
Catão et al. (2012), Roch and Uhlig (2012), and Conesa and Kehoe (2013) also use formal models to study this
episode.
5
Sturzenegger and Zettelmeyer (2007), Cruces and Trebesch (forthcoming), and Erce (2012 and forthcoming)
document the existence of breaches in inter-creditor equity during sovereign defaults, and that domestic residents are

2

ad-hoc domestic regulations imposed during these turbulent periods which tend to have a larger
impact on domestic than foreign creditors. Whatever its origin, though, discrimination provides
incentives for domestic purchases of debt. If private credit markets worked perfectly, the purchases
of sovereign debt by domestic creditors could be financed by borrowing from foreign creditors.
But private borrowing is limited by financial frictions. As a result, purchases of sovereign debt
by domestic creditors displace productive investment. This is the crowding-out eﬀect. Combined,
these two ingredients imply that these debt purchases are welfare-reducing. Even though creditors
might benefit from the high returns of domestic debt, the economy as a whole loses because of the
foregone investment opportunities.
We organize the rest of the paper in five sections. In Section 1, we document a number of
stylized facts for GIIPS, using France and Germany as a comparison group. As mentioned already,
debt-to-GDP ratios have increased substantially since 2008, while spreads started to grow only after
2010. We first decompose changes in debt-to-GDP ratios into various components and find that
their growth in GIIPS can be explained to an important extent by the deep recessions and high
interest rates they face since 2010. Then, we look at two characteristics of this debt. The first one
is its maturity structure, which has been stable and long term throughout the period. The second is
the identity of the debt holders which, as mentioned already, shifted from foreign to domestic after
2010. Finally, we examine how domestic credit markets were aﬀected during the period. We find
that not much happened until 2009. Starting in 2010, however, there was a marked reallocation
of credit from the private to the public sector. Also, the borrowing costs for the domestic private
sector increased substantially, mimicking those of the sovereign. These developments suggest that
crowding-out eﬀects are playing an important role in the European sovereign debt crisis.
In Sections 2 and 3, we develop the theory using a small open economy version of the Diamond
model with credit frictions. Without discrimination, this model features a concave law of motion
with standard convergence dynamics and a single steady state. Sovereign debt has no eﬀect on
investment and growth. With discrimination, however, the law of motion becomes convex for a
range of capital stocks leading to nonstandard dynamics and the possibility of multiple steady
states. Within this range, sovereign debt crowds out investment and lowers growth. The size and
shape of this “crowding-out region” depends on the stock of debt and the probability of default.
While some economies might eventually outgrow the crowding-out region and reach an equilibrium
more likely to be treated preferentially. Erce (2012) points to three additional determinants of discrimination: the
composition of debt, the health and size of the financial sector, and the private sector’s reliance on external sources
of finance.

3

with high output, others may be permanently trapped in equilibria with low investment and output.
We study the eﬃciency properties of these equilibria and discuss the type of policies that are needed
to reduce the crowding-out region and avoid low-output equilibria.
In Section 4, we use the model to show how discrimination can also lead to self-fulfilling crises.
The key additional assumption is that default penalties increase with the economy’s capital stock
or output.67 If the probability of default is expected to be low, foreign creditors purchase the debt,
investment and growth are high, and the probability of default is low. If the probability of default is
expected to be high, domestic creditors purchase the debt, investment and growth are low and the
probability of default is high. These self-fulfilling crises are possible in a subset of the crowding-out
region, which we label the crisis zone. Within this zone, crowding-out eﬀects are essentially random
and depend on expectations. Some economies remain indefinitely trapped within the crisis zone,
with permanent volatility driven by changes in expectations. Others experience these crises only as
temporary phenomena and eventually leave the crisis zone. They can do so from above and reach
a high level of investment and output, or from below and converge to a low level of investment and
output. The presence of multiple equilibria adds another dimension to policy design. In particular,
there might be policies that, without altering the crowding-out region, might still be helpful in
coordinating the economy to the optimistic equilibrium.
In Section 5, we extend the model to the case of an economic union. This is meant to capture
the increasingly important role that euro-zone institutions, such as the oﬃcial rescue mechanisms
(ESM/EFSF) and the ECB, are playing in the evolution of GIIPS’ economies and in the market for
their sovereign debts. The key additional assumption is that creditor discrimination is relatively
low within a union. This creates a union-wide market for the debt issued by any of the member
countries, through which crowding-out eﬀects are eﬀectively ‘exported’ to the rest of the union.
Conversely, if there is an increase in the probability of a union break up, debt flows back to the
originating countries, concentrating the crowding-out eﬀects and fostering divergence within the
union. We use this extension of the model to explore the role of union-wide policies in reducing
the strength of crowding-out eﬀects.
In Section 6, we go back to the questions raised above and show how the theory helps providing
tentative answers. Before going through this plan, though, we oﬀer a short review of related
6

The assumption that the loss imposed by creditors is increasing in the size of the economy is standard in the
literature. This would be the case if, for example, defaults lead to lower productivity or, in a richer model, an increase
in the cost of trading goods with foreigners.
7
Consistent with the evidence presented by Cruces and Trebesch (forthcoming), we assume that penalties are
increasing in the size of the default.

4

literature.
LITERATURE REVIEW:
Our paper is part of a growing literature that emphasizes the role of secondary markets in
enforcing debts. This work has so far focused on how secondary markets restrict the actions of
governments ex post, i.e. close to maturity or after defaults. Close to maturity, Broner et al.
(2010) show that secondary markets both reduce the probability of default on foreigners and make
it diﬃcult for governments to discriminate among creditors. Guembel and Sussman (2009), Broner
and Ventura (2010 and 2011), Brutti (2011), and Gennaioli et al. (forthcoming) show that this
inability to discriminate increases the probability of both repayment to foreigners and default on
domestic residents. After default, secondary markets raise the bargaining power of creditors and
reduce ineﬃciencies. For instance, Lanau (2011) shows that renegotiations lead to smaller haircuts
when debts can be sold to those agents that can extract more repayment. Pitchford and Wright
(forthcoming) show that secondary markets can increase repayment by concentrating debts on the
optimal number of creditors. Bai and Zhang (2012) show that secondary markets can reduce delay
by providing information on creditors’ reservation values. In all these cases, since governments face
a time inconsistency problem, the constraints imposed on them ex post by secondary markets can
be either beneficial or damaging from an ex ante point of view.
Here we focus instead on how secondary markets restrict the actions of governments ex ante,
i.e. far from maturity. We model a situation in which secondary markets are open now but might
fail to be open in the future, for example due to capital controls. This creates an expectation of
discrimination that leads foreigners to sell their non-maturing debts to domestic residents. These
purchases of government debt by domestic residents crowd out investment, reduce growth, and
can increase the probability of default. In this case secondary markets also constraint the actions
of governments. In particular, secondary markets make it diﬃcult for governments to segment
domestic and foreign markets when debts are issued and to control the retrading of non-maturing
debts. If we assume that governments are benevolent, these ex-ante constraints are damaging to
welfare.
Our paper is also related to a recent literature that analyzes how sovereign defaults aﬀect
private investment and growth. One set of papers, Aguiar et al. (2009) and Aguiar and Amador
(2011), show that high levels of public debt can reduce private investment and growth by increasing
governments’ incentives to default and expropriate private capital. As in our model, in these papers

5

investment is aﬀected by the size of government debt. But the allocation of debt between foreign
and domestic creditors and the potential for crowding out play no role in the mechanism. Another
set of papers, Brutti (2011), Erce (2012), Mendoza and Yue (2012), Mengus (2012), and Gennaioli
et al. (forthcoming), show that sovereign defaults can reduce investment and growth due to their
eﬀects on private balance sheets and borrowing limits. Unlike our model, in these papers growth
is not reduced by the accumulation of debts in domestic hands as risk increases, but rather by the
actual realization of defaults. So these papers’ implications for the timing of events is very diﬀerent
from ours.
Finally, our paper is related to the literature on self-fulfilling debt crises, notably Calvo (1988),
Cole and Kehoe (2000), Corsetti and Dedola (2012), Aguiar et al. (2013), Conesa and Kehoe
(2013), and Lorenzoni and Werning (2013). Like us, these papers show that crises can be triggered
by creditors becoming pessimistic and, thus, either refusing to buy the debt or demanding very high
interest rates. However, the mechanism in these papers is diﬀerent from ours. For example, a key
message of this literature is that lengthening the maturity structure reduces countries’ vulnerability
to self-fulfilling debt crises. The reason is that the longer the maturity the smaller the payments
countries must make if the debt cannot be refinanced, i.e. the smaller the potential “run” by
foreigners. In our model, however, this is not the case because secondary markets allow foreigners
to sell non-maturing debts to domestic residents. As a result, the potential run by foreigners is
not reduced by a longer maturity. Instead, the degree of discrimination is what determines the
potential crowding out and, thus, whether the pessimistic equilibrium exists.

1

A bird’s-eye view of the European debt crisis

In this section, we present six stylized facts about the European sovereign debt crisis. We focus
on five “periphery” countries, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, and Spain, or GIIPS. We contrast
their performance with that of two “core” countries, Germany and France. Appendix 4 provides a
detailed description of our data sources.
1.DEBT AND SPREADS: Debt-to-GDP ratios have been increasing fast in GIIPS since 2008. But
spreads remained low through 2009 and increased sharply in 2010.
This has already been shown in Figure 1 of the introduction. The most notable feature of this
figure is the delay between the increase in debt-to-GDP ratios and the increase in sovereign spreads.

6

2. DEBT DYNAMICS: The increase in debt-to-GDP ratios in GIIPS have been due to a large
extent to the deep recessions and high interest rates these countries are facing.
We can decompose the changes in debt-to-GDP ratios into growth, interest-rate, and deficit
components using the following identity:
4 = −

 · −1  · −1
+
+   ,
1 + 
1 + 

(1)

where  is the debt-to-GDP ratio,  is the growth rate of nominal GDP,  is the nominal interest
rate, and   is the primary deficit plus the ‘stock-flow adjustment’ over GDP. The stock-flow
adjustment takes into account operations that aﬀect the level of debt but not the deficit.89
Figure 2 presents the average changes in debt-to-GDP ratios and the average growth, interestrate, and deficit components over three time periods. The first period runs from 2000 to 2007 and
it describes debt dynamics before the crisis. The second period runs from 2008 to 2009, or the peak
of the global financial crisis. The third period runs from 2010 to 2012 and it shows debt dynamics
once GIIPS started facing severe debt pressures.
It is clear that the drivers of debt accumulation in GIIPS and in Germany and France have
been very diﬀerent. In the run up to the crisis, growth was particularly important in helping to
reduce debt-to-GDP ratios in GIIPS, and to a lesser extent in Germany and France. There was
heterogeneity in deficits, but on average they were not higher in GIIPS than in Germany and France.
The debt dynamics during the global financial crisis were similar in both groups of countries, with
negative growth and large deficits contributing to increase their debt-to-GDP ratios. Since 2010,
deficits have remained high in most countries.10 But while the growth component has helped reduce
debt-to-GDP ratios in Germany and France, this has not been the case in GIIPS, and in Greece
negative growth has been the most important factor explaining its increase in debt-to-GDP ratio.
In addition, very low interest rates in Germany and France have helped keep their interest-rate
8
Examples of such operations include governments borrowing to finance bank recapitalization programs or privatizations. In these cases there is a change in gross assets and liabilities but not in net assets so that it does not appear
in oﬃcial deficit statistics. In the case of bank recapitalizations, if and when losses are realized they will aﬀect the
deficit.
9
The data on government finances comes from the OECD’s Economic Outlook Database and the data on nominal
GDP from Eurostat.
10
Our measure of deficit includes a variety of factors that partially obscures its interpretation. First, a decomposition
of deficit into structural and cyclical (using OECD data) shows that GIIPS’ high deficits are almost solely explained
by their cyclical component, reinforcing our observation that debt dynamics are driven by the deep recessions they
face. In fact, fiscal austerity in these countries has eliminated their structural deficits by now. Second, the very low
deficit in Greece reflects the reduction in debt due to its restructuring. Third, our measure of deficits have been
especially large due stock-flow adjustments in those countries that spent substantial resources recapitalizing their
banks.

7

component from increasing despite higher debts. But the high interest rates GIIPS are facing have
increased the interest-rate component in these countries and will continue to do so in the future
since these high rates have been locked into their long-term debt. Overall, relative to Germany
and France the debt-to-GDP ratios in GIIPS have increased as a result of deep recessions and high
borrowing costs they face since 2010.
3. DEBT MATURITY: The sovereign debt maturity structure in GIIPS has been stable, long term,
and quite similar to that in Germany and France.
We have compiled information on the maturity structure of sovereign debt from various sources.11
The top panel of Figure 3 shows that, since the inception of the euro, GIIPS have increased their
average debt maturity. By 2007, they had brought it in line with the average maturity in France
and Germany, at around five-seven years. As a result, when the crisis hit there was no significant
diﬀerence in debt maturity between GIIPS and Germany and France. Average maturity fell temporarily to four years in Ireland in 2008, and it has increased markedly in Greece after its debt
restructuring.
The bottom panel of Figure 3 shows the fraction of sovereign debt that is short term, or due
in less than one year. Short-term debt has more variation across countries than average maturity.
But GIIPS have actually less short-term debt than France and Germany, with the exception of
Ireland in 2008.
4. DEBT HOLDINGS: As sovereign spreads increased, sovereign debt holdings shifted from foreign
to domestic residents in GIIPS. Among domestic residents, banks have played a major role but
other domestic sectors have also increased their holdings of public debt.
We put together a dataset on sovereign debt holdings by foreign private, foreign oﬃcial, domestic financial, domestic non-financial and domestic public sectors. We used some of the data in
Andritzky (2013) and Merler and Pisani-Ferry (2012), replacing their series that were at market
prices with updated face-value data from national sources.1213
11

The data on average maturity is from the ECB, the OECD, and the Spanish Ministry of finance. The data on
short-term debt is from the ECB, the Irish Central Bank, and the Spanish Ministry of Finance.
12
National sources include Treasuries and Central Banks. For Greece the only data available mixes nominal and
market prices. For France, the non-financial and public domestic sectors cannot be disentangled.
13
Several recent papers have also analyzed the behavior of sovereign debt holdings for GIIPS, including IMF’s
Global Financial Stability Report (2011), Arslanalp and Tsuda (2013), and Brutti and Sauré (2013). These papers
combine data from the IMF’s International Financial Statistics on domestic sovereign debt holdings with data from
the BIS on public debt holdings by non-resident banks. An advantage of these data sources is that the BIS data
is bilateral. This allows Brutti and Sauré (2013) to analyze the diﬀerential behavior of banks within and outside

8

Figure 4 shows the proportion of sovereign debt held by domestic residents and by foreigners,
and also the corresponding 10-year country spreads. The figure clearly shows that the crisis marked
a turning point in the behavior of domestic versus foreign debt holdings. Prior to the crisis, the
proportion of sovereign debt in the hands of foreigners had been increasing for all countries but
Portugal. As sovereign spreads rose, the share of debt in the hands of foreigners started decreasing.
At the same time, domestic residents increased significantly their exposure to their own sovereign
debt. This shift is clear in all GIIPS. Even in France there has been a small shift from foreign
to domestic debt holders, coinciding with a smaller increase in spreads. Instead, in Germany the
fraction of sovereign debt held by foreigners has kept increasing throughout the crisis.
Figure 5 shows the behavior of sovereign debt holdings by the non-financial and financial domestic private sectors and by foreigners. As foreigners decreased their debt holdings, domestic banks
clearly increased their exposure to their sovereign’s debt. But the non-financial sector also tended
to increase its exposure in those countries in which they had held significant amounts of sovereign
debt before the crisis. This is the case in Italy, Greece, Spain, and perhaps even in France. In
Portugal, though, debt holdings by the non-financial sector continued trending down as before the
crisis. Overall, although banks have played an important role in absorbing their countries’ sovereign
debt, other domestic sectors have not behaved too diﬀerently.
5. CREDIT ALLOCATION: Domestic credit has shifted from the private to the public sector in
GIIPS. This shift has coincided in time with the rise in each country’s corresponding sovereign
spread.
To analyze the allocation of credit across domestic sectors, we collected information on the
lending by domestic banks, either through loans or security holdings, to three sectors: general
government, non-financial corporations, and households.14 Figure 6 shows bank credit as a fraction
of GDP to these three sectors. The figure shows how until the onset of the crisis both households
and corporations had received an increasing amount of credit in GIIPS. This pattern is most clear
in Spain and Ireland, but is also present in Portugal, Italy and Greece. In France and Germany,
instead, credit to households and corporations had remained stable, with the exception of credit
to households in France starting in 2005. This behavior contrasts with that of public borrowing,
the euro area. A disadvantage of these data sources is that debt is valued at market prices, making it diﬃcult
to disentangle changes in portfolios due to trading and price changes. Arslanalp and Tsuda (2013) addressed this
problem by converting the data back to face value using each country’s reported valuation method.
14
These data are from each country’s Financial Accounts and from their National Central Banks’ Monetary Surveys.
We also use 10-year sovereign bond spreads from Datastream.

9

which had barely increased and, for Spain and Germany, even presented a declining trend prior
to the crisis. These patterns changed markedly after the onset of the crisis. Since then, in GIIPS
credit to households and corporations stopped growing and, in Ireland, Portugal, and Spain, started
contracting. At the same time, credit to the government increased sharply. In contrast, in Germany
and France the crisis has had very little eﬀect on credit to these three sectors.
Figure 7 shows the ratio of public credit (or credit to the government) to private credit (sum of
credit to non-financial corporations and households) and 10-year sovereign spreads.15 In all GIIPS
there has been a marked increase in the ratio of public to private credit since the beginning of the
crisis, breaking earlier downward trends. This is not observed in Germany of France.16 Importantly,
the timing of the start of the shift in the relative importance of public and private credit coincides
precisely with the increase in sovereign spreads in each of the GIIPS. In France, where sovereign
spreads have remained low, there is no such pattern.
6. BORROWING COSTS FOR PRIVATE SECTOR: As sovereign spreads increased in GIIPS, so
did borrowing costs for the domestic private sector.
Figure 8 shows the behavior of private-sector and sovereign borrowing costs. For private-sector
borrowing costs, we use corporate and consumer spreads, calculated as the diﬀerence between
bank lending rates at 5-year horizons for both sectors and German 5-year sovereign rates. For
sovereign borrowing costs we use sovereign spreads also at a 5-year horizon. The figure shows that
as sovereign spreads started increasing in GIIPS in 2010, both corporate and consumer spreads
started increasing as well. This suggests that the credit reallocation from the private to the public
sectors pointed out above led to crowding out and more diﬃcult access to credit for domestic firms
and consumers.
These six stylized facts provide an interesting and somewhat puzzling account of recent events
in Europe. In 2007 the economies of Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, and Spain were growing fast,
their fiscal deficits were low and their public debts were not particularly large. The 2008-2009
financial crisis changed this. It pushed each of the GIIPS into deep recessions with the result that
budget deficits, together with falling GDP, led to higher and rapidly increasing debt-to-GDP ratios
in these economies. Debt maturity however remained stable and long term.
15

Since spreads are computed relative to German bonds, the spread is zero by definition for Germany.
In Greece the ratio of public to private credit fell with the sovereign debt restructuring in 2012, but it has started
to increase again since then. In Germany there was also an increase credit to the public in 2008 due to the need to
recapitalize banks after the subprime crisis, but this was reversed soon afterwards.
16

10

Something happened in early 2010 that caused severe sovereign debt problems. Perhaps fundamentals deteriorated or were revealed to be worse than expected. Perhaps there was a change in
investor sentiment in a situation where multiple equilibria were possible. Whatever it was, it led
to a substantial increase in sovereign spreads. Sovereign costs increased and recessions deepened
even further, leading to further increases in debt-to-GDP ratios in GIIPS. In the midst of these
developments, the private sectors of these countries began accumulating their own governments’
debts. As the appetite for domestic debt grew there was a marked reallocation of credit from the
private to the public sector, increasing borrowing costs for domestic firms and consumers. How can
we make sense of these developments? The rest of the papers attempts to answer this question.

2

A model of sovereign debt, investment and growth

In this section we build on a small open economy version of the Diamond model to study the eﬀects
of sovereign debt on investment and growth. If foreign and domestic creditors are treated equally,
this model features a concave law of motion with standard convergence dynamics and a single
steady state. Sovereign debt has no eﬀects on investment and growth. If there is discrimination
against foreign creditors, however, the law of motion becomes convex for a range of capital stocks.
Within this range, sovereign debt crowds out investment and lowers growth. The size and shape of
this “crowding-out region” depends on the stock of debt and the probability of default.

2.1

The baseline model

Consider a country with a private sector that consists of generations that live for two periods. All
generations have size one and contain a measure  of patient individuals that maximize expected
consumption during old age, and a measure 1 −  of impatient individuals that maximize consumption during youth. Thus, the patient save all their youth income and invest these savings so as to
maximize their expected return. The impatient consume all their income during youth.
All generations receive one unit of labor when young, which they supply inelastically. They
have access to a Cobb-Douglas technology to produce goods:  (   ) = 1− ·  ; where  is
employment and  is the capital stock and  ∈ (0 1). The production of one unit of capital in
period  + 1 requires the investment of one unit of the consumption good at time . We assume
that capital depreciates at a rate  ∈ (0 1), and is reversible. Factor markets are competitive and,

11

as a result, all available factors are employed and paid their marginal products:
 = (1 − ) · 

(2)

 =  · −1

(3)

where  and  are the wage and the rental rate, respectively. Equations (2) and (3) already take
into consideration that  = 1 in equilibrium.
There is a risk-neutral international financial market willing to borrow or lend at a (gross)
expected return of   1. We refer to  as the interest rate. Here we introduce the first friction:
the private sector can pledge to its creditors only a return of    per unit of investment.17 As a
result, it faces the following credit constraint:
 ≤

 · +1


(4)

where  is the financing or credit that the private sector receives from the international financial
market. Equation (4) says that this credit cannot exceed the net present value of pledgeable funds.
Since these funds are known as of period , the credit obtained by the private sector is riskless. If
the credit constraint is not binding, the return to investment equals the rental rate plus the value of
undepreciated capital, i.e. +1 + 1 − . If the credit constraint is binding, the return to investment
is higher since each unit of capital can be leveraged to further expand borrowing and investment,


i.e.
· (+1 + 1 −  − ). Thus, for each unit of output invested
units of capital are
−
−
produced, and each of these units of capital delivers the rental rate plus the undepreciated capital
minus the financing costs.
The law of motion of the capital stock is given by:

+1 = min

(


·  ·  
−

µ


+−1

¶

1
1−

)

(5)

µ

¶ 1
1−

≡
is the unwhere  ≡  · (1 − ) is the economy’s gross saving rate and
+−1
constrained level of capital. Equation (5) has upward-sloping and horizontal sections, depicted as
∗

the solid line in Figure 9. The domestic private sector would like to invest until the return to
17

For instance, the private sector cannot pledge future output, but it can pledge some undepreciated capital. Under
this interpretation, we have that  ∈ [0 1 − ].

12

investment equals the interest rate, i.e. until +1 = ∗ . But this investment might be unattainable if the credit constraint binds. In this case, the private sector invests as much as possible and

+1 =
·  ·  .18 Since the law of motion is globally concave, this economy has a single steady
−
state to which it converges monotonically.

2.2

Sovereign debt, default and crowding-out eﬀects

We now introduce sovereign debt into the analysis. In particular, we consider a government that
inherits an amount of debt  . The government can issue one-period bonds. Let  be the gross
contractual rate of one-period bonds issued at  − 1. Let  be the primary budget surplus, which
equals the proceeds from consumption taxes minus (useless) government spending.19 With probability  ≤ 1, the institutions of the country succeed in forcing the government to pay the debt.
When institutions fail, the government defaults. We follow much of the literature on sovereign debt
and assume that a default, either full or partial, leads to a permanent inability to issue new debt.
This means that the primary budget surplus is zero from then onwards.
Thus, we can write the law of motion of the debt conditional on not having defaulted before
period  as follows:
+1

⎧
⎨  ·  −  with prob. 
=
⎩ 0
with prob. 1 − 

(6)

Equation (6) shows that the evolution of the debt depends on two key variables: (i) the size of
the fiscal adjustment or eﬀort, as measured by the primary budget surplus  ; and (ii) the quality
of institutions or credibility of the government, as measured by the probability of repayment  .
These variables play a key role in what follows.
The eﬀect on sovereign debt on the economy depends crucially on who purchases the debt. And
this, in turn, depends on what happens when the government defaults on its debt. Consider first
the case in which the government defaults on foreign and domestic creditors alike. In this case, the
contractual interest rate on government debt is given by:
+1 =


+1

(7)

Equation (7) says that the spread on sovereign debt must compensate for default risk. With this
18

When the constraint is binding, we have that  =

 · +1
and +1 =  ·  +  . Combining these observations,


we find the maximum attainable investment.
19
We only consider paths of  that ensure that the debt never explodes.

13

compensation, foreign and domestic creditors are indiﬀerent between purchasing sovereign debt or
lending in the international financial market. Interestingly, this implies that sovereign debt does not
aﬀect the law of motion in Equation (5), and, therefore, it does not aﬀect investment and growth. If
the return to investment exceeds  and the credit constraint is binding, the domestic private sector
devotes all its resources to investment and the debt is purchased entirely by foreigners. If the return
to investment equals  and the credit constraint is not binding, any purchase of sovereign debt by
the domestic private sector replaces its lending to the rest of the world, and not investment. To be
clear, the budget surplus and the probability of default determine the amount of debt that can be
issued and welfare. But these variables have no impact on investment and growth.20
Consider next the case in which the government defaults on the debt held by foreign creditors,
but it repays the debt held by domestic creditors. This creates a wedge between the expected return
to holding debt by domestic and foreign creditors. In particular, the expected return for domestic
and foreign creditors is +1 and +1 · +1 , respectively. Thus, the contractual interest rate on
sovereign debt depends on the identity of the marginal buyer. If this is a foreign creditor, the
contractual interest rate of debt must be such that this creditor is indiﬀerent between purchasing
sovereign debt or lending. If the marginal buyer of debt is a domestic creditor, however, purchasing
sovereign debt always dominates lending and the contractual interest rate must be such that this
creditor is indiﬀerent between purchasing sovereign debt and investing. This implies that the
contractual interest rate is given as follows:
+1 = min

½


+1

¡
¢
−1
  · +1
+1−− ·


−

¾

(8)

Equation (8) says that, if the return to investment exceeds the interest rate, the domestic private
sector does not buy the debt and the marginal buyer is a foreign creditor. If instead the return
to investment falls short of the contractual interest rate, the domestic private sector buys the debt
and the marginal buyer is a domestic creditor.
This discussion suggests that the identity of the marginal buyer of debt, and hence the eﬀects
of debt on investment and growth, depends on the economy’s capital stock. Indeed, we can write

· . And the
−
welfare of taxpayers declines by . The path of  is unaﬀected, though. This is due to our assumption that taxation
does not aﬀect investment. Appendix 1 relaxes this assumption and shows that this does not aﬀect our main results,
though.
20

For instance, if  =  and  = , the maximum debt that the government can issue is

14

the law of motion of the capital stock as follows:

+1

⎧
(
µ
¶ 1 )
⎪
1−


⎪
⎪
·  ·  
if   ̄
⎨ min
−
( − ) +1 +  +  − 1
= +1 ( ; +1 ) ≡
½
¾
⎪

⎪
⎪
· ( ·  −  )   ∗
if  ≥ ̄
⎩ min
−

(9)

where ̄ is the capital stock at which the marginal buyer shifts from a foreign to a domestic creditor,
and it is implicitly defined as follows:
¢
¡

·  · ̄ −  =
−

µ


( − ) +1 +  +  − 1

¶

1
1−

.

(10)

Equation (9) shows the law of motion of the capital stock when default aﬀects only foreign creditors,
and is depicted as the dashed line in Figure 9. Recall that the solid line depicts the law of motion
when default aﬀects foreign and domestic creditors alike, and coincides with +1 (·; 1).
The most noticeable aspect of this law of motion is the convex region in which the solid and
dashed lines do not coincide. We refer to this region as the ‘crowding-out region’, because inside
it sovereign debt crowds out investment and lowers growth. If   ̄ , this crowding-out eﬀect is
only partial, as some of the debt is held by foreign creditors. If instead  ≥ ̄ , this crowding-out
eﬀect is full, as all the debt is held by domestic creditors. Figure 10 helps us build intuitions on
how the size and shape of the crowding-out region depends on the stock of debt and the quality
of institutions. The top panel shows the eﬀects of changes in  for a fixed +1 , while the bottom
panel shows the eﬀects of changes in +1 for a fixed  .
Without the credit constraint, the crowding-out region would not exist. To see this formally,
recall that as  grows, the credit constraint is relaxed. Indeed, in the the limit  →  the credit
constraint becomes irrelevant. The reason is that each unit of credit, which requires payment of
 units of goods tomorrow, allows the investors to purchase one unit of capital, which produces
pledgeable funds of  units tomorrow. Thus, credit is unbounded. As we approach this limit, the
law of motion in Equations (9)-(10) converges to:

+1 = ∗

(11)

Equation (11) simply says that, in the absence of a credit constraint, the patient young borrow
enough to purchase the sovereign debt and invest until the return to investment equals the interest

15

rate. Thus, sovereign debt does not aﬀect investment and growth.21

2.3

Secondary markets and discrimination

When does the government default? When does the government discriminate between domestic and
foreign creditors? There are three elements or assumptions that define our view of sovereign default.
The first one is that the institutional framework within which governments operate impedes default
in normal times. This is particularly true in European countries where judicial and parliamentary
systems are strong and use their power to ensure that governments do not break the law and honor
the contracts they sign.
The second element is that, even in European countries, the institutional framework fails sometimes and governments can act opportunistically and default. In the previous section, this meant
always defaulting on foreign creditors and we explored two alternative scenarios with and without
default on domestic creditors. These scenarios are simple and clear cut but, naturally, the picture
is more nuanced once we think more deeply about the implications of acting opportunistically.
When it comes to domestic creditors, the choice to repay or default revolves around the identity
of domestic debt holders and taxpayers. After all, defaulting on domestic debt is equivalent to
making a transfer from the former to the latter. Whether the government favors such a transfer
depends on political factors that are beyond the scope of this paper. But it seems reasonable to
think that these factors fluctuate over time and, as a result, so does the preference of governments
towards domestic default.
When it comes to foreign creditors, the choice to repay or default depends on the magnitude of
international sanctions. Defaulting on foreign debt consists of a transfer from foreign debtholders
to taxpayers. The traditional approach in the sovereign debt literature is that the government
dislikes this transfer and the only deterrent to it is the fear of international sanctions. Whether the
government defaults on foreign creditors depends on the size of the foreign debt relative to the cost
of international sanctions. Once again, it seems reasonable to think that these sanctions fluctuate
over time and, as a result, so does the preference of governments towards foreign default.22
The third element of our view is that the presence of secondary markets provides a link between
the decisions to default on domestic and foreign creditors.23 As argued above, these decisions
21

While the presence of a credit constraint is crucial for our results, its specific form is not. Appendix 2 shows the
case in which sovereign debt can also be pledged as collateral.
22
We shall choose one specific way to do this in Section 4 below.
23
For a more thorough discussion see Broner et al. (2010).

16

depend on diﬀerent factors and there is no ‘a priori’ reason to expect equal treatment. And yet,
secondary markets make it diﬃcult for governments to discriminate between domestic and foreign
creditors.
The argument is based on the classic notion that markets transfer assets to those that value
them most. And this value is derived not only from diﬀerences in risk or patience, but also from
diﬀerences in the ability to be repaid. For example, imagine that the government announces a
policy to repay domestic creditors and default on foreigners. Then the latter has incentives to go
to the secondary market and sell their debts to the former. Competition among domestic creditors
ensures that these debts are purchased at face value. When the government pays the debt, it is
already in the hands of domestic creditors. And even though foreigners are not paid ‘de jure’ they
are paid ‘de facto.’ Thus, the government can only default on both groups or none.
Attempts at discrimination are more likely to succeed when secondary markets fail or work
imperfectly. The presence of transaction costs and non-competitive behavior can reduce trade in
secondary markets. Also, governments can impose capital controls to make it easier to discriminate. For these and other reasons, secondary markets sometimes fail to discipline governments and
discrimination succeeds.
How should one model this rich and complex view of sovereign debt crises? We refer the reader
to the papers cited in the introduction for a wide range of possible environments in which some
these issues arise. Here the focus is less on the microfoundations of alternative default scenarios
and more on their macroeconomic implications. Thus, we adopt the expedient device of defining
the following set of repayment probabilities:

Foreign\Domestic

Pay

Default

Pay

+1

+1

Default


+1

1 − +1 − +1 − 
+1

There are four default scenarios. With probability +1 both domestic and foreign creditors are
repaid. This is the sum of the probability that institutions impose full repayment on the government
and the probability that institutions fail but the government still repays in full. Also, +1 and 
+1
are the probabilities that institutions fail and the government repays, respectively, only foreign and
only domestic creditors. Finally, 1 − +1 − +1 − 
+1 is the probability that institutions fail and
the government defaults on both domestic and foreign creditors.
17

A key assumption that we use throughout is that discrimination is more likely against foreign
creditors than domestic ones:


+1 ≥ +1

(12)

This assumption is crucial in what follows since the crowding-out eﬀects that we emphasize here
are the result of a wedge between the expected return to holding debt by domestic and foreign
creditors, and this wedge is in turn a consequence of discriminatory treatment against foreigners in
the event of default. When this assumption fails, the domestic private sector prefers to lend abroad
than to the government, and the crowding-out eﬀects that we emphasize here vanish.
To generalize the model in the previous section to account for this richer set of probabilities,
we need first to replace Equation (8) by the following one:

+1 = min

(

−1
 · +1
+1−−



·


−
+1 + +1
+1 + +1

)

(13)

Equation (13) recognizes that defaults do not always discriminate in favor of domestic creditors,
and that it is even possible that they sometimes discriminate in favor of foreign creditors. We also
need to replace +1 in Equations (9)-(10) with the following variable:
̃+1 =

+1 + +1
+1 + 
+1

(14)

where ̃+1 is the ratio of repayment probabilities to foreign and domestic creditors. Assumption
(12) ensures that ̃+1 ≤ 1. These couple of simple adjustments generalize the model.
There are two additional aspects of discrimination that are worth mentioning. The first one is
that discrimination might vary across diﬀerent types of government debt. This might happen, for
example, across currency denomination, jurisdiction of issuance, maturity, or issuing government
agency. If the wedge between the domestic and foreign valuations varies across types of debt, the
domestic private sector first purchases the type of debt with the highest wedge, then the one with
the second-highest wedge, and so on. Ultimately, the size and shape of the crowding-out region
depends on the valuation wedges and total stocks of the diﬀerent classes of debt.24
The second aspect is that discrimination need not happen only in the event of default. The
government could oﬀer a favorable tax treatment to domestic debtholders, or it could impose
24

Appendix 3 extends our model to the case of diﬀerent maturities. It also identifies suﬃcient conditions for the
valuation wedge to be the same for all maturities: (i) when the government defaults, it does so simultaneously on all
maturities, and; (ii) in the event of a default, bonds of all maturities are treated equally.

18

regulations on the portfolios of domestic residents that are fulfilled or relaxed by holding its debt.
Whatever these additional advantages of holding domestic debt might be, they only reinforce our
basic argument: that discrimination introduces a wedge between domestic and foreign valuations
of debt, giving rise to crowding-out eﬀects.

3

Crowding-out eﬀects: dynamics and eﬃciency

In this section, we derive some implications of crowding-out eﬀects. First, we show why some
economies might eventually outgrow the crowding-out region and reach an equilibrium with high
output, while others may be permanently trapped in equilibria with low investment and output.
Second, we analyze the eﬃciency properties of these equilibria and discuss the distributive eﬀects
of eﬃciency-enhancing policies.

3.1

Dynamics

An interesting implication of the crowding-out region is that it gives rise to non-standard dynamics
and the possibility of multiple steady states. We show this with the help of a sequence of examples
in which (i) the government keeps the debt constant, i.e.  = ( − 1) ·  ; and (ii) the degree of
discrimination also remains constant, i.e. ̃+1 = ̃. These assumptions are helpful because they
make the law of motion time-invariant and the system can be analyzed with standard graphical
tools.25
Moving over the panels of Figure 11, we find a sequence of economies with progressively higher
degree of discrimination, i.e. lower ̃. Since increases in the probability of default raise the degree
of discrimination, we use this sequence of examples to illustrate how changes in the probability of
default aﬀect the dynamics of the economy.
Panel (a) shows an economy where the probability of default is zero. In this economy, there
∗ . As usual, the economy
is no crowding-out region. There is a single and stable steady state, 

converges to this steady state monotonically.
Panel (b) shows an economy where the probability of default is small. This generates a small
crowding-out region. The steady state does not change. But the crowding-out region slows down
the rate of convergence towards it making the growth rate non-monotonic. Growth slows down
25

These dynamics are all conditional on default not taking place, of course. Technically, once default occurs the
debt goes to zero and the economy behaves as the baseline model of section 2.1. This only shows that our model has
been designed to study the macroeconomic eﬀects of a positive probability of default. It has not been designed to
study the aftermath of default.

19

when the country enters the crowding-out region and some of the savings that would have been
invested are instead used to purchase sovereign debt. Only after all sovereign debt has been
purchased by domestic creditors, additional savings are used for investment and growth picks up
∗ .
again. Eventually, the country exits the crowding-out region and reaches the steady state 

Panel (c) shows an economy where the probability of default is intermediate, and so is the
∗ and
crowding-out region. An interesting novelty is that there are now two stable steady states 
∗ , and an unstable one  ∗ . If the economy starts above  ∗ , the economy converges towards



∗ outside the crowding-out region. Just as in the previous example, the
the high steady state 

convergence is slower and the growth rate non-monotonic. But these eﬀects are only temporary, as
∗ . If the
the economy eventually exits the crowding-out region and reaches the high steady state 
∗ , however, it converges to the low steady state  ∗ inside the crowding-out
economy starts below 


region. As a result, crowding-out eﬀects become permanent.
Panel (d) shows an economy with a high probability of default. The crowding-out region is so
large that the high steady state no longer exists. The economy has a single steady state ∗ located
inside the crowding-out region. Regardless of where the economy starts, crowding-out eﬀects are
always permanent as the economy converges towards the low steady state ∗ .
This sequence of examples is suggestive of what might be happening in GIIPS. An increase
in the probability of default has raised sovereign spreads and provided incentives for domestic
creditors to purchase sovereign debt. This has created crowding-out regions. If these regions
have not become too large, it might still be possible to outgrow them just by stabilizing debts,
even without institutional reforms that lower the probability of default and sovereign spreads. It
might take time for this to happen, of course, but GIIPS would eventually return to a high-output
equilibrium. If these crowding-out regions have become too large, though, it might not be possible
anymore to outgrow them without reducing debts and undertaking institutional reforms that lower
the probability of default and sovereign spreads. Without these policy adjustments, GIIPS would
remain permanently trapped in a low-output equilibrium.

3.2

Eﬃciency

Within the crowding-out region, the economy is ineﬃcient in the traditional sense that a government that can transfer resources costlessly among domestic residents could implement a Pareto
improvement. To see this, consider a given sequence of public debt { }∞
= . In any period , the
repayment of this debt is financed partly through taxation and partly through the issue of new debt,
20

+1 . This new debt, in turn, can be either sold to domestic creditors, in which case we denote it

by 
+1 , or to foreign ones, in which case we denote it by +1 . Let  be the total domestic income.

Then, we have that:

 +1 = +1
+ (1 −  − ) · +1 −  · +1 ,

(15)

where
+1 =

¢
¡

and +1 + 
·  ·  − 
+1
+1 = +1 .
−

Equation (15) shows the expected total income at time +1. This includes output and undepreciated
capital, net of expected credit payments by the domestic private sector and of debt payments to
foreign creditors by the government. Since we are considering what happens in the crowding-out
region, the expression implicitly assumes that the private sector is credit constrained by setting its
credit payments equal to  · +1 . It also takes into account that, in expectation, the unit cost of
borrowing from foreign creditors equals .
Consider next the eﬀects of replacing one unit of foreign borrowing with one unit of domestic
one, while keeping the total stock of debt constant. The derivative of total expected income with
respect to 
+1 equals
¢
¡
 +1

−1
=−
+ 1 −  −  + ,
·  · +1

−
+1
which is negative whenever the private sector is credit constrained. Thus, increases in domestic
debt reduce the economy’s expected income. The reason is very intuitive: each unit of debt sold
to foreign creditors has an expected cost equal to the interest rate, while each unit of debt sold to
domestic creditors reduces investment and therefore has a cost equal to the return to investment.
Since the return to investment exceeds the interest rate, an increase in domestic borrowing reduces
total income by replacing a cheap (external) source of funds with an expensive (internal) one. Hence,
the crowding-out eﬀect imposes an ineﬃciency on the economy by reducing its total income.
Imagine that the government can adopt a policy that prevents domestic debt purchases altogether and gets rid of this ineﬃciency. It could do so, for instance, by eliminating the source of
discrimination between domestic and foreign creditors. The gains from this policy are unevenly
distributed, though. The patient young at time  lose because this policy does not aﬀect their wage
but lowers the return to their savings. The young at  + 1 gain from this policy, however, as they
are born into an economy with more capital and higher wages. Because the economy’s total income

21

increases, the gains of the young at  + 1 exceed the losses young at . If the government could
redistribute income from the latter to the former the policy could be made Pareto improving.
Outside the crowding-out region, there is no ineﬃciency associated with sovereign debt. If the
capital stock is below the crowding-out region, the domestic private sector does not purchase any
debt. If the capital stock is above the crowding-out region, the return to investment already equals
the interest rate and there is no gain from reducing domestic debt holdings.
The model therefore suggests that repurchases of sovereign debt by the private sectors of GIIPS
are ineﬃcient, and policies that penalize these purchases would bring eﬃciency gains. The model
also points at some of the political-economy problems that are likely to arise when policies of this
sort are considered. The eﬃciency gains are likely to benefit future generations, while current
generations experience loses. And the transfers that would ensure that everybody is made better
oﬀ may or may not be politically feasible.

4

Self-fulfilling crises and random crowding-out eﬀects

The model illustrates how increases in the probability of default worsen macroeconomic performance. But it misses a key element that seems to have been at play in recent years: a worsening
macroeconomic performance also increases the probability of default. To sharpen our view of the
European debt crisis, we endogenize default probabilities and provide a fuller picture of the interplay between macroeconomic performance and the probability of default. The key additional
assumption is that default penalties increase with the economy’s capital stock or output. We find
that self-fulfilling crises are possible in a subset of the crowding-out region, which we label the “crisis
zone”. Within this zone, crowding-out eﬀects are essentially random and depend on expectations.

4.1

The model with endogenous defaults

Assume next that: (i) institutions succeed at time  + 1 and force the government to repay in full
with probability +1 ; (ii) if institutions fail, domestic creditors are always repaid. It follows then
that ̃+1 = +1 ∈ [+1  1]. What determines the probability of (discriminatory) default 1 − +1 ?
The conventional answer is that governments repay in order to avoid costly international sanctions,
such as the loss of reputation, trade embargoes or even military interventions. When these penalties
are large relative to the payments owed to them, governments repay; otherwise, they default.26
26
When governments cannot discriminate between domestic and foreign creditors they might repay foreigners to
avoid the cost of domestic default. This eﬀect is absent here because we are ignoring costs of domestic defaults.

22

We introduce these considerations into the model by assuming that, for each unit of debt that is
defaulted upon, the country suﬀers a loss equal to a fraction  of the economy’s capital stock. This
loss could be interpreted as the result of sanctions or penalties imposed by defaulted creditors, or
as the resources that taxpayers have to provide in order for the government to defend itself against
the legal actions of creditors. Whatever the interpretation, we assume that it is a deadweight loss
that does not report any benefits to the creditors themselves.
Foreign creditors are defaulted on if the benefits of doing so exceed the costs. The benefit of a
default is the reduction in expected net payments from domestic taxpayers to foreigners. If we let
 denote the stock of debt in the hands of foreigners at time , that benefit is equal to  ·  .
The costs of a default are equal to  ·  ·  ·  . Thus, a default on foreign creditors at time  is
optimal only if
 ≤ −1 .

(16)

Equation (16) provides the default decision rule. Its key aspect is that default depends negatively
on the capital stock and, thus, on past investment. This feature is crucial for the results to come.
To assess whether full repayment may be sustained in equilibrium, imagine that foreign creditors
at time  are ‘optimistic’ and expect to be repaid in period  + 1, i.e. +1 = 1. Hence, there is
no crowding-out eﬀect and capital accumulation is given by the law of motion in Equation (5), or
Equation (9) for +1 = 1:
+1 = +1 ( ; 1).

(17)

To check whether these expectations are consistent with equilibrium, we just need to verify that
the government repays foreign creditors at  + 1 even when institutions fail. According to Equation
(16), this is the case as long as +1 (  1) ≥ −1 . Thus, if we define
⎧
⎨ min © : +1 ( 1) = −1 ª if −1 ≤  ∗

 =
,
⎩ ∞
if −1   ∗

(18)

there exists an optimistic equilibrium at time  as long as  ≥  .

The intuition behind Equation (18) is clear. In the optimistic equilibrium the government repays
foreigners because +1 and, thus, the cost of default are so high that defaulting on foreigners is
not worth its cost. In such an equilibrium, everyone expects the government to repay its foreign
creditors: because of this, there is no crowding out eﬀect and domestic investment is high, which
raises the costs of default ex-post and validates expectations. Since +1 (·; 1) is weakly increasing, if
23

the optimistic equilibrium exists for a given  it will also exist for higher levels of the capital stock.
This is why there is a threshold level  such that the optimistic equilibrium exists if  ≥   . If
−1   ∗ , however, this equilibrium cannot exist: even if foreign creditors expect to be fully repaid,
the cost of default is so low that government finds it optimal to default even if the unconstrained
level of capital is achieved. The solid line of Figure 12 below illustrates the optimistic law of motion
for the case in which −1   ∗ .
The economy can also display a ‘pessimistic’ equilibrium. In this equilibrium the government
repays foreigners at  + 1 only when institutions succeed, i.e. +1 = +1 . If foreigners expect
to be repaid with probability +1 , they are less willing to buy government debt, there is more
scope for crowding out, and capital accumulation is given by the law of motion of Equation (9) for
+1 = +1 :
+1 = +1 (  +1 ).

(19)

To check whether this is an equilibrium, we need to verify that the government actually prefers
to default on foreign creditors at  + 1 when institutions fail. According to Equation (16), this is
the case as long as +1 (  +1 ) ≤ −1 . Thus, if we define,
⎧
⎨ max © : +1 ( +1 ) = −1 ª if −1 ≤  ∗

 =
,
⎩ ∞
if −1   ∗

(20)

there exists a pessimistic equilibrium at time  whenever  ≤   .

The intuition behind Equation (20) is also clear. In the pessimistic equilibrium the government
defaults on foreigners because +1 and, thus, the cost of default are so low that repaying foreigners
is not worth its cost. In such an equilibrium, everyone expects the government to default when
institutions fail: because of this, the risk premium on debt is high, which leads to crowding out
of domestic investment, and in turn lowers the costs of default and validates expectations. Since
+1 (· +1 ) is weakly increasing, if the pessimistic equilibrium exists for a given  it will also
exist for lower levels of the capital stock. That is why there is a threshold level   such that the
pessimistic equilibrium exists if  ≤   . The pessimistic law of motion is depicted by the dashed
line in Figure 12. Because +1 ( +1 ) ≤ +1 ( 1) for all , it follows from Equations (18) and
(20) that  ≥  .
The law of motion has at least two distinct parts or sections. For low capital stocks,  ≤
 , only the pessimistic equilibrium exists. For high capital stocks  ≥   , only the optimistic
24

equilibrium exists. If  =  , the law of motion contains no other part or section. If    ,
the law of motion contains a third additional part or section in which      . We refer to
this section as the “crisis zone”. Within it, both the pessimistic and optimistic equilibria exist and
outcomes depend on expectations. As usual, we model these expectations with a sunspot variable
that takes two values, ‘optimism’ and ‘pessimism’.
The crisis zone is a subset of the crowding-out region for the simple reason that, outside this
region,   =   and both equilibria cannot exist simultaneously. But the existence of a crowdingout region does not guarantee the existence of a crisis zone. If  is either too small or too large,
only the pessimistic or only the optimistic equilibria exist within the crowding-out region. For both
equilibria to coexist,  must take intermediate values.27

4.2

Dynamics with crisis zones

When the economy visits the crisis zone it might experience substantial volatility. This volatility
is not caused by any fundamental shocks, but instead by fluctuations in investor sentiment. In
optimistic periods, foreign creditors purchase the sovereign debt at zero spreads. The domestic
private sector uses all its resources to invest. As a result, growth is high and the probability of
default drops to zero. In pessimistic periods, foreign creditors are reluctant to purchase the debt
and require large spreads. Thus, some (or all) of this debt is purchased by domestic creditors
and this crowds out investment. As a result, growth is low and the probability of default is
high. Alternating optimistic and pessimistic periods generate volatility in spreads and the share of
sovereign debt that is in the hand of domestic and foreign creditors. It also generates volatility in
investment and growth.
An interesting question is whether visits to the crisis zone are permanent or temporary. And,
if temporary, what determines whether the economy will exit from above and converge to a highoutput equilibrium or, instead, exit from below and converge to a low-output equilibrium. We
illustrate diﬀerent possibilities in Figure 13 using four examples in which (i) the government keeps
the debt constant, i.e.  = ( − 1) ·  ; and (ii) the quality of institutions remains constant, i.e.
 = . Under these assumptions the laws of motion are time invariant and the system can be
27

Unlike other models in the sovereign-debt literature (and reviewed in the introduction), the maturity structure
of debt is basically irrelevant here. To understand why this is the case, consider a government that has issued debts
of diﬀerent maturities. If expectations are pessimistic, foreign creditors can sell both maturing and non-maturing
debts to domestic creditors. Thus, the potential for crowding-out depends on the full amount of debt, not only on
maturing debts. We show this in Appendix 3 where we extend the model to the case of diﬀerent maturities.

25

analyzed with simple graphical tools.28
∗
In all the examples of Figure 13, we depict economies that have two stable steady states, 
∗ . In the high steady state, the probability of default is zero. In the low steady state, the
and 

probability of default is 1 − . In all examples, we have chosen a value of  that ensures that there
is a crisis zone within the crowding-out region.
Panel (a) shows an example in which both steady states are within the crisis zone. Regardless
of the initial condition, the economy always converges to the crisis zone. Once inside this zone,
the economy never leaves it. The two steady states act as barriers that impede the economy to go
∗ . Thus, the economy wanders between these two values forever. In optimistic
below ∗ or above 

periods, the probability of default is low and investment and growth are high. In pessimistic periods,
the probability of default is high and investment and growth are low.
Panels (b) and (c) show examples in which one steady state lies within the crisis zone and the
other one outside. The only absorbing steady state is the one outside of the crisis zone. Even if
the economy is arbitrarily close to the steady state inside the crisis zone, a sequence of investor
sentiment shocks can take the economy close enough to the other steady state and outside of the
crisis zone. Thus, the economy in panel (b) eventually will reach the high steady state with zero
probability of default, while the economy in panel (c) will reach the low steady state with a high
probability of default. Convergence towards the absorbing steady state might take time and, while
in the crisis zone, the economy might be subject to an arbitrarily large number of cycles of optimism
and pessimism.
Panel (d) shows an example in which both steady states lie outside the crisis zone. Thus, both
of them are absorbing states. If the economy starts above the crisis zone, it converges to the high
equilibrium. If the economy starts below the crisis zone, it converges to the low equilibrium. If
the economy starts within the crisis zone, it will eventually exit it. But only luck determines how
this happens. A long enough sequence of optimism would lead to an exit above and convergence
to the high steady state. A long enough sequence of pessimism would lead to an exit below and
convergence towards the low steady state.
These examples suggest another interpretation of what might be happening in GIIPS. Perhaps
the deep recessions and the uncertainties that followed the financial crisis of 2007 had already placed
these countries inside the crisis zone. Optimistic market expectations kept sovereign spreads low for
a while. But events in late 2009, and most notably Greece’s revelation that its deficits were larger
28

Once again, we remind the reader that these dynamics are all conditional on default not taking place.

26

than reported, caused market expectations to turn pessimistic. Looking forward, one might ask
what it takes to ensure that GIIPS exit the crisis zone from above. If the high steady state is inside
the zone, this might require a substantial reduction in their debts that shrinks the crowding-out
region until the high steady state falls outside of the crisis zone. In the meantime, there is a role
for policies that coordinate market expectations towards the optimistic equilibrium.

5

Spillovers and transfers

We have so far considered a small open economy interacting with a passive international financial market. In Europe, though, foreign governments and European institutions are playing an
increasingly important role in sovereign debt markets. To understand this behavior and its possible
eﬀects, this section extends our analysis to the case of an economic union. The key assumption
is that creditor discrimination is relatively low within the union. We show how debtor countries
export crowding-out eﬀects to the rest of the union. We study how these spillover eﬀects shape the
dynamics of the whole union, and then analyze the role of transfers among union members.

5.1

The model with an economic union

Assume next that the economy belongs to an economic union. For our purposes, the defining
feature of the economic union is that residents of the union receive preferential treatment in the
event of default. Members of an economic union are also likely to have more integrated goods and
factor markets. We abstract from these issues here, though, to keep the analysis manageable.29
The government, like all other governments in the union, pays its debt to domestic creditors,
to creditors in the rest of the union, and to creditors outside the union with probabilities 1, +1 ,
and +1 , respectively. Naturally, 1 ≥ +1 ≥ +1 ≥ 0. When +1 = 1, creditors in the rest
of the union are treated as domestic creditors. When +1 = +1 , creditors in the rest of the
union are treated as creditors outside the union. Although there are other ways to interpret this
parametrization, in what follows we emphasize the probability of exiting the union. In particular,
we think of 1 − +1 as the probability that there is a default and the country exits the union,
in which case creditors in the rest of the union are treated as foreign. Similarly, we think of
+1 − +1 as the probability that there is a default and the country stays in the union, in which
29
Another manageable approach would be to re-interpret the model developed so far as a model for the union and
define member countries as subsets of the population. This alternative approach assumes that goods and factors
markets are so integrated that wages and rental rates are equalized across the union.

27

case creditors inside the union are treated as domestic. Thus, when we refer to an increase in the
probability of exiting the union we are specifically referring to a decline in +1 , holding +1
constant.30
To determine the interest rate on the debt, we now must take into account that there are three
potential marginal buyers: domestic creditors, creditors in the rest of the union, and creditors
outside the union. Their expected returns to holding the sovereign debt are +1 , +1 · +1 and
+1 · +1 , respectively. Define +1 as the lowest return to investment in the rest of the union.
For further reference, we note that +1 ≥  since residents of the union never invest beyond the
point in which the return to investment equals the interest rate. With this notation, we can write
the contractual interest rate as follows:
+1 = min

½

¢
+1 ¡

−1

  · +1
+1−− ·
+1 +1
−


¾

(21)

Equation (21) shows how the interest rate varies with the marginal buyer and should be familiar at
this point. The only novelty is that there is now a new set of creditors from the rest of the union.
These creditors are willing to purchase the debt if +1 · +1 is as large as +1 .
Assume now that our economy is small relative to the union so that we can take +1 as
exogenous. We can then write the law of motion of the capital stock as follows:

+1

⎧
(
µ
¶ 1 )
1−
⎪


⎪

⎪
if   ̄
⎪
⎨ min  −  ·  ·   ( − ) · min { 1/ +1  +1 / ( · +1 )} +  +  − 1
(
)
=
,
µ
¶ 1
⎪
1−


⎪

⎪
⎪
if  ≥ ̄
⎩ min  −  · ( ·  −  )  ( − ) · min { 
+1 /  +1 / +1 } +  +  − 1
(22)

where ̄ is defined as

¢
¡

·  · ̄ −  =
−

µ


( − ) · min { 1/ +1  +1 / ( · +1 )} +  +  − 1

¶

1
1−

,

(23)

Equations (22)-(23) show the law of motion of the capital stock in the presence of an economic
union. A comparison of Equations (22)-(23) and (9)-(10) reveals that the economic union aﬀects
the law of motion through +1 . This return depends on the whole distribution of capital stocks
and sovereign debts in the union.
30
To simplify the discussion, we ignore the possibility of multiple equilibria. That is, we assume that default
penalties are negligible.

28

Figure 14 plots the law of motion with and without the economic union for this case. The solid
line shows the familiar case without a union which we have studied so far, while the dashed line
shows the new case with a union. The figure shows that belonging to an economic union aﬀects
the law of motion of our economy in two regions.
First, there is a range of relatively low capital stocks where the union shifts the law of motion
up. This happens because the contractual rate on the debt is lower due to the lower probability of
defaulting on other union members: +1  +1 . The return to investment is high in this range
of capital stocks. Without the union, though, the domestic private sector would reduce investment
to purchase all or part of the debt since the contractual interest rate is even higher. But the
preferential treatment granted to creditors in the rest of the union lowers the contractual interest
rate and reduces domestic purchases. In this range of capital stocks, our economy is eﬀectively
exporting crowding-out eﬀects to the rest of the union. This raises investment and growth.
Second, there is a range of relatively high capital stocks where the union shifts the law of motion
down. This happens because all members of the union are credit constrained and the lowest return
to investment in the union exceeds the interest rate: +1  . The return to investment is low
in this range of capital stocks. Without the union, though, domestic creditors would use additional
funds to invest since the interest rate is even lower. But the preferential treatment that domestic
creditors receive from other members of the union induces the private sector to stop investing and
instead purchase debt from other union members. In this range of capital stocks, our economy is
eﬀectively importing crowding-out eﬀects from the rest of the union. This lowers investment and
growth.
The union therefore redistributes crowding-out eﬀects from members that have low capital
stocks and high debts, towards members that have high capital stocks and low debts. The importance of this re-distribution depends on how preferential the treatment of creditors within the
union is. As this preferential treatment increases the crowding-out eﬀect moves away from union
members that issue the debt and towards the richer union members.

5.2

Dynamics of an economic union

The analysis so far has considered the cross-sectional implications of an economic union. To have
a complete analysis of the dynamics of the union, we cannot take +1 as given. As mentioned
above, +1 is the lowest return to investment in the union. Thus, this return must be determined
endogenously together with the whole distribution of capital stocks in the union.
29

To show some of the implications of the theory, we consider a simple example in which the union
has two sets or groups of countries with equal populations. North countries have high initial capital
stocks. South countries have low initial capital stocks. Within each group there is no heterogeneity.
As a result, each group can be treated as if it were a single country, and the whole union can be
treated as a two-country union. We want to determine how debt aﬀects convergence and growth
within the union.
Figure 15 shows four simulations of the model. In all of them, the union starts in period  = 0
without debt. For a while, both South and North grow towards their common steady states. Since
South starts out with a lower capital stock, it grows faster than North. In period  = 6, South
issues an amount of debt  to finance consumption and then keeps this debt constant from then
onwards. We choose parameter values such that both South and North are credit constrained even
in the long run. The four panels in Figure 15 show the eﬀects of debt on growth and convergence
for diﬀerent levels of debt  and the probability of a union breakup 1 − +1 .
Panel (a) shows the dynamics of South and North when debt  is small and the probability of
breakup 1 − +1 is low. In this case, debt generates a mild recession. The recession aﬀects North
to a greater extent since South exports most of the crowding-out eﬀects. As a result, growth slows
down in the union but convergence accelerates. In the long run, South and North converge to a
similar steady state with South’s debt evenly divided between South and North.
Panel (b) illustrates the case of small debt and high probability of a breakup. Since debt is
small, the recession is mild as in the previous case. But the high probability of breakup implies
that the crowding-out eﬀects are stronger in the country that issued the debt. Thus, the recession
aﬀects South more than North and convergence slows down. In the long run, South converges to a
steady state that is lower than North’s as most of the debt remains in South.
Panel (c) shows the case in which debt is large and the probability of breakup is low. The large
debt generates a much larger recession than in the previous two cases. But the low probability of
breakup means that the recession is more severe in North and convergence speeds up. The large
debt also leads to a much lower steady state in both South and North. But since the probability
of breakup is low the debt is held in both South and North and their steady states are similar.
Finally, panel (d) shows the case of large debt and high probability of breakup. The recession
is severe and, due to the high probability of breakup, its eﬀects are concentrated in South. Convergence falls both in the short and in the long run, as the crowding-out eﬀects remain concentrated
in South. This is the case that resembles the most what we have observed in Europe since the
30

start of the crisis. However, it does not capture the potential role of oﬃcial creditors, who can lean
against these forces driving private investment decisions and aﬀect growth outcomes. We turn to
this next.

5.3

A role for transfers

If there are crowding-out eﬀects within the union, the equilibrium is ineﬃcient in the same sense
that we discussed in section 3, i.e., if governments could transfer resources costlessly among residents
of the union they could implement a Pareto improvement. Imagine, for instance, that governments
adopt a policy that prevents debt purchases within the union, and get rid of this ineﬃciency.
This policy necessarily raises the income of the union as a whole because it allows governments to
borrow from foreigners at a unit cost of  and frees up union resources for productive investment,
which has a higher return than . The gains from this policy are unevenly distributed within the
union, though. Countries that issue debt gain, because now they can do so at a lower interest
rate. Countries that purchase debt lose despite being the ones that suﬀer the crowding-out eﬀect
of this debt. The reason is that now they receive a lower interest rate on their savings. Because the
union’s total income increases, though, it is always possible to redistribute income so as to attain
a Pareto improvement. The interesting twist is that this requires redistribution across countries,
which might be hard to coordinate among national governments.
Even if the union’s private sectors cannot be prevented from purchasing debt, they might be
‘discouraged’ from doing so through government intervention. This can be done insofar as the
quality of institutions varies across union members. To see this, consider again the case of a union
with two groups of countries, South and North. In South, the government: (i) keeps the debt
constant and equal to  , and; (ii) repays domestic creditors, North creditors and creditors outside
the union with probabilities 1,  and  , respectively, where  ≥  . In North, there is no debt
to begin with and the government repays all creditors with probability 1. In this case, the debt
of South pays a risk premium and it tends to crowd out capital accumulation within the union,
possibly in North.
Imagine that the government of North intervenes to outbid the union’s private sector and
purchase the debt of South itself. It can finance this purchase by selling an amount  of debt to
outside creditors.31 Because North always repays all creditors, Equation (21) says that the interest
31

This is actually the way both the EFSF and the ESM work. These institutions use the capital provided by the
various euro-area countries to safely borrow at low rates and grant loans to stressed countries at a cost below their
respective market rates.

31

rate on its debt is +1 = . The key aspect of such a debt purchase by North is that it lowers
the interest rate at which South borrows, +1 : by taking debt away from the union’s private
sector, it fosters capital accumulation within the union and reduces +1 . Once  =  and all
of South’s debt is held by the government of North, the union’s private sectors do not hold any
debt and +1 is determined by some bargaining process between both governments.32
What are the eﬀects of such a policy? Whenever   0, South is partly borrowing from
outside creditors by using North as an intermediary. From the perspective of the union as a whole,
this raises total expected income. The reason is, once again, the one we have outlined for the case
of a single country: every time the government of North purchases a bond of South, it increases
debt funding by creditors outside of the union (at an expected cost of ) at the expense of debt
funding by the union’s private sectors (at a cost higher than ). To maximize the total resources of
the union, North would therefore have to set  =  and completely eliminate the crowding-out
eﬀect.
The benefits of this policy might be unevenly distributed, though. South clearly benefits because
it is able to borrow at a lower interest rate: from its perspective,  should be as large as possible.
The eﬀects on North, however, are ambiguous. To see this, let 
 denote the debt of South that is
held by the private sector of North. In this case, the total income of North at time  + 1 is given by
¢
¡

+ (1 −  − ) · +1 + 
 +1 = +1
+1 +  ·  · +1 −  · ,

(24)

where
+1 =

¢
¡


− 
·  · 
+1 .
−

(25)

Equation (15) denotes the total amount of goods available to residents of North at time  + 1:
it includes output and undepreciated capital, as well as debt payments received by the domestic
private sector and profits made by the government of North as a consequence of its intermediation.
The expression implicitly assumes that the private sector is credit constrained by setting its credit
payments equal to  · +1 .
By substituting Equation (25) into Equation (15), we can compute the derivative of North’s
32

Even in this case, of course, it must be that +1 ≤

+1
because otherwise the union’s private sector would


demand debt.

32

total income with respect to  as
 +1
+1
= ( · +1 − ) + (
.
+1 +  ) ·  ·



(26)

Equation (26) says that an increase in  has opposing eﬀects on the total income of North. The
first term captures the profits made by North on each unit of debt that it intermediates, and it
could be positive of negative depending on +1 . The second term captures the eﬀect of  on
+1 , which is always negative: as long as North is a creditor of South, the fall in +1 reduces
its income. The net eﬀect of a transfer or debt-purchase scheme on the total income of North is
thus unclear.
These results suggest that, if left to decide the size of such an intermediation scheme on its
own, North might suboptimally set    or it might even choose not to set up a scheme at
all. If North could be properly compensated for intermediating the entire stock of South’s debt,
however, it would do so and fully eliminate the crowding-out eﬀect. There is nothing in our union
to prevent this compensation, though! South can always issue additional debt 0 and ‘give’ it to
the government of North in exchange for running the optimal scheme. Because we know that the
total income of the union is maximized when  =  , this compensation can always be tailored
to raise the income of both countries.
The main message of this section is that an economic union maximizes its income by channeling
its external borrowing through its most ‘credible’ members. To illustrate this, we have focused on
the extreme case in which North always repays creditors outside of the union. This means that
+1 = , so that an intermediation scheme like the one proposed can fully eliminate crowdingout eﬀects within the union. The same logic would apply if North only repaid creditors from outside
of the union with probability   1, though. The only diﬀerence is that the debt issued by North

as part of the scheme would then pay an interest rate +1 =
. Although, at this interest

rate, North might still be able to intermediate for South, it might not be able to fully eliminate the
crowding-out eﬀects of debt.

6

Back to Europe: What have we learned?

The paper began with a description of the European sovereign debt crisis and a number of questions.
We can now return to these questions and see how the model we presented helps address them.

33

Why have sovereign spreads increased so much? Because the probability of sovereign default
has increased, for which our model oﬀers two explanations. The first is a decline in the quality
of institutions, i.e., a decrease in . According to this view, spreads increased in 2009 because
there was a fundamental shift in the way that GIIPS’ economies were perceived: news of data
manipulation in Greece and weak economic performance made investors realize that, despite years
of convergence, institutional quality in these economies still lagged behind the rest of Europe. The
second explanation is that spreads rose because there was a shift in investor sentiment, i.e., because
the economy shifted to a pessimistic equilibrium. According to this view, institutional quality had
always been relatively low in GIIPS, but this did not lead to a high probability of default until
international investors became pessimistic and reduced their demand for GIIPS’ sovereign debt.
Whether the originating shock was a decline in institutional quality or a decline in the demand of
debt by international investors, the outcome was an increase in the probability of default.
Why, in the midst of a deep recession, have the private sectors of GIIPS purchased
the debts of their sovereigns? Because when the risk of default increases, sovereign debt
oﬀers a higher expected return to domestic creditors than to foreigners; in other words, there
is discrimination in favor of domestic creditors. Discrimination may take the form of domestic
creditors being less likely to be defaulted on, or, equivalently, more likely to be compensated in the
event of a default. It may also arise because of regulatory bias or moral suasion. As the sovereign
spreads of GIIPS increased, so did the expectation of creditor discrimination and thus domestic
demand for sovereign debt.
What are the economic consequences of these domestic purchases of debt? In the absence
of financial frictions, none: after all, domestic creditors could always finance these purchases by
borrowing from foreigners. If domestic creditors are constrained, though, these purchases crowd
out private credit and investment. In the model, this pushes the economy into the crowding-out
region, which reduces growth and may lead to self-fulfilling crises.33 In terms of GIIPS’ economies,
these purchases have prolonged the recession and exposed these countries to volatility driven by
shifts in creditor expectations. Going forward, the model tells us that these crowding-out eﬀects
may be temporary or permanent depending on the stock of debt. Economies with low levels of debt
33

The negative eﬀect of public indebtedness on growth is consistent with the evidence reported by Reinhart and
Rogoﬀ (2010) and Reinhart, Reinhart, and Rogoﬀ (2012). Our model makes the additional prediction that, everything
else equal, public debt held domestically should have a more negative eﬀect on growth than public debt held by
foreigners. The reason is that while the taxes needed to repay the debt (which for simplicity we assumed to be
non-distortionary) do not depend on who holds the debt, only domestic holdings crowd out domestic investment.

34

eventually exit the crowding-out region and return to normal and stable growth rates. Economies
with high levels of debt, though, may be permanently trapped within the crowding-out region.
What are the key ineﬃciencies that these purchases generate? If the domestic private
sector is financially constrained, domestic purchases of debt are ineﬃcient because they reduce the
economy’s total stock of resources. In the model, governments can always sell a unit of debt to
foreign creditors by paying the international interest rate in expectation. This is what an economy
saves if this unit of debt is instead purchased by a domestic creditor. At the same time, though, this
purchase displaces productive investment. As long as investment is constrained and its productivity
exceeds the international interest rate, the economy as a whole loses from these purchases because
they replace a cheap, external source of debt financing with an expensive, internal one.
What is the right set of policies to address them? The goal of policy should be to get
the economy out of the crowding-out region. An immediate way of doing this is to eliminate the
source of creditor discrimination: this might be hard to do in practice, though, because it requires
a credible commitment to treat all creditors equally. A more realistic alternative is to exert a fiscal
eﬀort to reduce the debt burden. This ‘austerity’ policy reduces consumption in the short run,
as taxes are raised, but it eventually boosts growth by eliminating the crowding-out eﬀect. It is
interesting to note that there can be threshold eﬀects associated with this policy. In order for the
policy to raise investment and restore growth, debt must be reduced below the level of current
domestic holdings. Otherwise austerity reduces current consumption but has no expansionary
eﬀects. Thus, the model suggests that there are nonlinear benefits to austerity programs like the
ones adopted in GIIPS.
What diﬀerence does it make that GIIPS belong to the euro zone? It makes a big
diﬀerence. The key assumption here is that creditor discrimination is relatively low within a union
like the euro zone. Under this assumption, a country’s debt is purchased by other union members
and the crowding-out eﬀect is shared with the rest of the union. The absence of discrimination
within the union generates a larger market for debt issued by its members. This provides an
alternative interpretation for the increase in spreads that began late in 2009: as the recession
dragged on, a break-up of the euro zone began to be perceived as a possibility.34 This reduced
the demand for GIIPS’ debts, as residents of other euro-zone countries began to look increasingly
34

In its European edition of December 2nd, 2010 The Economist dedicated a full-length article to this possibility.

35

like foreign creditors. It also led to the shift in debt holdings towards domestic creditors. This
concentrated crowding out in these economies and led to the observed divergence in growth rates
within the euro zone.
Is there a role for Europe-wide policy? Yes, our model can rationalize two types of policies. First, regardless of the origin of the crisis, it shows how the ‘safe’ countries of a union can
intermediate between the international financial market and the union’s distressed members. This
intermediation reduces crowding out and raises growth in the countries with weak institutions. In
fact, the loans to GIIPS’ by the European Financial Stabilization Facility (EFSF) and the European
Stability Mechanism’s facilities for purchasing debt both in primary and secondary markets can be
thought of as such a policy.35 But, as we have shown, this intermediation can hurt safe countries
if they are not properly compensated. This might be one reason why the EFSF has been quite unpopular among the euro zone’s safe members, who perceive it as a covert transfer to the rest of the
union. Second, if the crisis is self fulfilling, our model also shows that a European intervention could
be beneficial and even entail no costs. In this case, the focus of the policy should be to coordinate
creditors by eliminating the pessimistic equilibrium. One such measure is a commitment by other
members of the euro zone to purchase the debt at face value regardless of the risk of default: if this
commitment is credible, the crisis is avoided and no purchases are actually required. In fact, this
is exactly the policy that has been carried out since August 2012 by the ECB. Under the Outright
Monetary Transactions (OMT) program, the ECB has promised to purchase unlimited amounts
of GIIPS’ debts in secondary markets to maintain low spreads and facilitate the transmission of
monetary policy.36
From a conceptual standpoint, this paper focuses on an important implication of the institutional changes that have taken place in sovereign debt markets over the past few decades. Nowadays,
most governments borrow by selling bonds that are traded in deep secondary markets. One consequence of this trade is that it can improve repayment by transferring debts to individuals that are
more likely to be repaid. Close to maturity, secondary markets reduce the probability of default
and make it diﬃcult for governments to discriminate among creditors. Before maturity, however,
trading in secondary markets can interfere with the allocation of resources, displacing productive
investment, reducing growth, and potentially giving rise to self-fulfilling crises.37 The interaction
35

For a detailed description of these debt-purchase programs see www.esm.europa.eu/index.htm.
Although less explicitly, bond purchases under the earlier ECB’s SMP program and the current ESM play a
similar role.
37
In this paper, we have emphasized the crowding-out eﬀects of domestic purchases of government debt before
36

36

between trade in decentralized secondary markets, default risk, and economic outcomes is crucial
for understanding modern sovereign debt crises, and it remains and exciting and fruitful research
agenda.

References
[1] Aguiar, M., and M. Amador, (2011). “Growth in the shadow of expropriation,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 126, 651-97
[2] Aguiar, M., M. Amador, E. Farhi, and G. Gopinath, (2013). “Crisis and commitment: Inflation
credibility and the vulnerability to sovereign debt crises,” Mimeo
[3] Aguiar, M., M. Amador, and G. Gopinath, (2009). “Investment cycles and sovereign debt
overhang,” Review of Economic Studies 76, 1-31
[4] Andritzky, J., (2012). “Government bonds and their investors: What are the facts and do they
matter?” IMF Working Paper 12/158
[5] Ardagna, S., and F. Caselli, (2012). “The political economy of the Greek debt crisis: A tale of
two bailouts,” Centre for Economic Performance Special Paper 25
[6] Arslanalp, S., and T. Tsuda, (2012). “Tracking global demand for advanced economy sovereign
debt,” IMF Working Paper 12/284
[7] Bai, Y., and J. Zhang, (2012). “Duration of sovereign debt renegotiation,” Journal of International Economics 86, 252-68
[8] Bolton, P., and O. Jeanne, (2011). “Sovereign default risk and bank fragility in financially
integrated economies,” IMF Economic Review 59, 162-94
[9] Broner, F., T. Didier, A. Erce, and S. Schmukler, (2013). “Gross capital flows: Dynamics and
crises,” Journal of Monetary Economics 60, 113-33
[10] Broner, F., A. Martin, and J. Ventura, (2010). “Sovereign risk and secondary markets,” American Economic Review 100, 1523-55
maturity because they provide a natural explanation for many aspects of the European crisis. But in some cases
these purchases can have countervailing eﬀects. For example, if it is diﬃcult to discriminate between domestic
and foreign creditors a higher share of debt held domestically can reduce the incentives to default. This eﬀect is
emphasized in Brutti (2011) and Gennaioli et al. (forthcoming).

37

[11] Broner, F., and J. Ventura, (2010). “Rethinking the eﬀects of financial liberalization,” Mimeo
[12] Broner, F., and J. Ventura, (2011). “Globalization and risk sharing,” Review of Economic
Studies 78, 49-82
[13] Brutti, F., (2011). “Sovereign defaults and liquidity crises,” Journal of International Economics
84, 65-72
[14] Brutti, F., and P. Sauré (2013). “Sovereign debt crises and bond ownership: Testing the
secondary market theory,” Mimeo
[15] Calvo, G., (1988). “Servicing the public debt: The role of expectations,” American Economic
Review 78, 647-61
[16] Catão, L., A. Fostel, and R. Ranciere, (2012). “Fiscal discoveries, stops and defaults,” Mimeo
[17] Cole, H., and T. Kehoe, (2000). “Self-fulfilling debt crises,” Review of Economic Studies 67,
91-116
[18] Conesa, J., and T. Kehoe, (2013), “Gambling for redemption and self-fulfilling debt crises,”
Mimeo
[19] Corsetti, G., and L. Dedola, (2012). “The mystery of the printing press: Self-fulfilling debt
crises and monetary sovereignty,” Mimeo
[20] Cruces, J., and C. Trebesch, (forthcoming). “Sovereign defaults: The price of haircuts,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics
[21] Erce, A., (2012). “Selective sovereign defaults,” Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Working Paper
127
[22] Erce, A., (forthcoming). “Seniority beats growth: The IMF and sovereigns’ private creditors,”
Governance
[23] Gennaioli, N., A. Martin, and S. Rossi, (forthcoming). “Sovereign default, domestic banks,
and financial institutions,” Journal of Finance
[24] Guembel, A., and O. Sussman, (2009). “Sovereign debt without default penalties,” Review of
Economic Studies 76, 1297-320

38

[25] International Monetary Fund, (2011). Global Financial Stability Report
[26] Lanau, S., (2011). “The contractual approach to sovereign debt restructuring,” Bank of England Working Paper 409
[27] Lane, P., (2012). “The European sovereign debt crisis,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 26,
49-68
[28] Lorenzoni, G., and I. Werning, (2013). “Slow moving debt crises,” NBER Working Paper
19228
[29] Mendoza, E., and V. Yue, (2012). “A general equilibrium model of sovereign default and
business cycles,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 127, 889-946
[30] Mengus, E., (2012). “Foreign borrowing, portfolio allocation and bailouts,” Mimeo
[31] Merler, S., and J. Pisani-Ferry, (2012). “Who’s afraid of sovereign bonds?” Bruegel Policy
Contribution 2012/02
[32] Pitchford, R., and M. Wright, (forthcoming). “Strategic behavior in sovereign debt restructuring: Impact and policy responses,” in Debt Crises and their Resolution: Analysis and Policies
[33] Reinhart, C., V. Reinhart, and K. Rogoﬀ, (2012). “Public debt overhangs: Advanced-economy
episodes since 1800,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 26, 69-86
[34] Reinhart, C., and K. Rogoﬀ, (2010). “Growth in a time of debt,” American Economic Review
P&P 100, 573-8
[35] Roch, F., and H. Uhlig, (2012). “The dynamics of sovereign debt crises and bailouts,” Mimeo
[36] Shambaugh, J., (2012). “The euro’s three crises,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
Spring 2012, 157-211
[37] Sturzenegger, F., and J. Zettelmeyer, (2007). “Haircuts: Estimating investor losses in sovereign
debt restructurings, 1998-2005,” Journal of International Money and Finance 27, 780-805

Appendix 1: Taxing investment
We assume throughout the paper that the government taxes only consumption. This assumption
is convenient but it does not aﬀect our main results. Its main implication is that all taxes are paid
39

by the old and the impatient young. If the patient young also paid some taxes, their wealth would
be reduced and, as a result, so would their investment. To see how this innovation would aﬀect
our model, we use  to denote the share of taxes that are paid by the patient young. Then, we just
need to modify the law of motion as follows:

+1

⎧
(
µ
¶ 1 )
1−
⎪


⎪

⎪
if   ̄
⎪
⎨ min  −  · ( ·  −  ·  )  ( − ) +1 +  +  − 1
(
=
µ
¶ 1 )
⎪
1−


⎪
⎪
⎪ min
· ( ·  −  ·  −  ) 
if  ≥ ̄
⎩
−
+−1

where ̄ is now defined as:

¡
¢

·  · ̄ −  ·  −  =
−

µ


( − ) +1 +  +  − 1

¶

1
1−

The main diﬀerence with Equations (9)-(10) is the appearance of the new term − ·  . Taxing
the young means that sovereign debt has two eﬀects on investment and growth when compared
to the economy without government in Equation (5): the crowding-out eﬀect that we emphasize
in the main text and a wealth eﬀect. Both lower investment and growth, for diﬀerent reasons.
The crowding-out eﬀect arises because sovereign debt displaces investment from the portfolio of
investors, and its size depends on the importance of discrimination,  . The wealth eﬀect arises
because taxation reduces the portfolio of investors, and its size depends on the distribution of taxes,
. Thus, adding taxes on investment reinforces the notion that sovereign debt reduces investment
and growth.

Appendix 2: Sovereign debt as collateral
In this appendix, we show that nothing substantial changes if sovereign debt can also be pledged
as collateral. Assume, for instance, that the credit constraint of Equation (4) is given by:
 ≤

 · (+1 +  )


40

In this case, we have that the law of motion takes the following form:

+1

⎧
(
µ
¶ 1 )
1−
⎪


⎪

⎪
if   ̄
⎪
⎨ min  −  ·  ·   +1 +  − 1
(
=
µ
¶ 1 )
⎪
1−


⎪

⎪
⎪
if  ≥ ̄
⎩ min  −  ·  ·  −    +  − 1

where ̄ is now defined as follows:


·  · ̄ −  =
−

µ


+1 +  − 1

¶

1
1−

There are two key diﬀerences with Equations (9)-(10) in the main body of the paper. The first
µ
¶ 1
1−

is that  no longer shows up in the first flat of the law of motion,
. The
+1 +  − 1
reason is that, once capital and debt can be equally pledged as collateral,  does not aﬀect the

relative return of both assets. The second diﬀerence is that  is no longer pre-multiplied by
.
−
This reflects the assumption that investors can borrow against the debt they hold, which provides
additional resources for investment. These are the only changes to our baseline model and they do
not aﬀect any of our main results.

Appendix 3: Long-term bonds
In this appendix, we examine the implications of having diﬀerent types of debt. We start by
assuming that there are two types of debt: (i) a short-term bond issued in period  at price one

that promises a payment +1
in period  + 1; and (ii) a long-term bond issued in period  also

at price one that promises a payment of +2
in period  + 2. We define +1 as the price of this

long-term bond one period before maturity (or one period after issuance). As usual, defaulting on
short-term bonds automatically implies default on long-term bonds.
Assume first that the government defaults on both domestic and foreign creditors, i.e.  =

 = 0. This means that all bonds held by domestic and foreign creditors become worthless. This
implies that:

+1
= +1 =


+1

=

+1

(27)

In period , creditors can choose among short-term bonds and long-term bonds that mature in
periods  + 1 and  + 2. Equation (27) says that all these bonds must oﬀer the same expected return

41

and, since the international financial market is risk-neutral, this expected return must equal the
interest rate . Under these circumstances, all bonds are perfect substitutes from the perspective
of both domestic and foreign creditors. The presence of diﬀerent maturities does not change the
analysis, and the law of motion of the economy is still given by Equation (5). Thus, in the absence
of discrimination, introducing long-term bonds does not aﬀect the dynamics of the economy.
Assume now that the government defaults on foreign creditors only, i.e.  = 0 and 
 = 1− .
This means that all bonds held by foreign creditors become worthless. What happens to the diﬀerent
bonds held by domestic creditors in a default? In the main text, there are only short-term bonds
 . A natural
and we make the assumption that domestic creditors receive the contractual rate +1

assumption would be that long-term bonds that mature in the same period are also paid the
 . This means that all maturing bonds held by domestic creditors are perfect
contractual rate +1

substitutes and, as a result, we have that:

+1


= +1 = min


½


+1

¡
¢
−1
  · +1
+1−− ·


−

¾

(28)

Equation (28) says that, if the return to investment net of financing costs exceeds the expected
return on maturing bonds, the domestic private sector does not buy the maturing debt and the
marginal buyer is a foreign creditor. If instead the return to investment net of financing costs falls
short of the expected return on maturing bonds, the domestic private sector buys the maturing
debt and the marginal buyer is a domestic creditor.
What happens to non-maturing bonds held by domestic creditors in a default? Let +1 be the
price that these creditors receive as a share of the price that these bonds would have had in the
absence of default. Then, we have that:

+1 = min

(

−1
 · +1
+1−−


·
+1 1 + (1 − +1 ) · (+1 − 1)  − 



)

(29)

Equation (29) is analogous to Equation (28). It says that if the return to investment net of
financing costs exceeds the expected return on non-maturing bonds, the domestic private sector
does not buy the non-maturing bonds and the marginal buyer is a foreign creditor. If instead
the return to investment net of financing costs falls short of the expected return on non-maturing
bonds, the domestic private sector buys the maturing bonds and the marginal buyer is a domestic
creditor.

42

If +1 = 1, domestic creditors receive the same from these bonds regardless of whether or not
there is a default. Maturing and non-maturing bonds are thus treated equally and, as a result,
they become perfect substitutes and their expected returns are equalized always. In this case,
introducing long-term bonds does not aﬀect the analysis in the main text. In particular, the law
of motion is still given by Equations (9)-(10). This confirms that our model is unaﬀected by the
maturity structure of debt under two conditions: (i) when the government defaults, it does so
simultaneously on all maturities, and; (ii) in the event of a default, bonds of all maturities are
treated equally.
The introduction of diﬀerent maturities only aﬀects the analysis if they are treated asymmetrically in the event of a default. Assume, for instance, that non-maturing bonds are paid at face
−1
 if the default occurs in period  + 1. It follows that 

value, i.e. +2
+1 = +2 · +1  1, because

the bond pays at face value but one period before the original maturity. This means that nonmaturing bonds are treated better than maturing bonds in the event of a default and, as a result,
they are more attractive to domestic creditors. Under this assumption, the law of motion becomes:

+1

⎧
(
⎪

⎪
⎪
min
⎪
⎪
⎪
−
⎪
⎪
(
⎪
⎨

=
min
⎪

−

⎪
⎪
(
⎪
⎪
⎪

⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩ min  − 

µ


·  ·  
( − ) · [1 + (1 − +1 ) · (+1 − 1)] +1 +  +  − 1
µ
¶ 1 )
1−
¢
¡



·  ·  −  
( − ) +1 +  +  − 1
µ
¶ 1 )
1−

· ( ·  −  ) 
+−1

¶

1
1−

)

if  ≤  
if     ̄
if  ≥ ̄

where 
 is the non-maturing debt and   and ̄ are defined as:
¢
¡

=
·  ·  − 

−

µ


( − ) · [1 + (1 − +1 ) · (+1 − 1)] +1 +  +  − 1

¢
¡

·  · ̄ −  =
−

µ


( − ) +1 +  +  − 1

¶

¶

1
1−

1
1−

The main diﬀerence with Equations (9)-(10) is the appearance of an additional step in the crowdingout region. The intuition is simple. If  ≤  domestic creditors purchase only non-maturing debt,
if any, because the return to investment is high. If      ̄ the return to investment is lower
and domestic creditors purchase the entire stock of non-maturing debt along with some maturing
debt. If  ≥ ̄ , the return to investment is so low that domestic creditors purchase the entire
stock of debt, both maturing and non-maturing. In this particular example, then, long-term debt
43

enlarges the crowding-out region and thus the crisis zone.

Appendix 4: Data description
To support the analysis on the paper, whenever possible, we collected a database comprising seven
euro-area countries (Germany, France, Italy, Spain, Portugal, Ireland and Greece) for the period
2000-2012. Almost all data series cover the full sample period, but a few cover only until 2010. The
data contains information on GDP and GDP growth, spreads, public debt and deficits and their
components, banks’ allocation of credit by sector, sovereign debt holdings by residence and sector,
and public debt maturity structure. The data on nominal GDP used throughout the empirical part
was obtained from Eurostat. A detailed description of the rest of the data sources is presented in
what follows.
Spreads: We collected data on public and private spreads. The spreads equal the diﬀerence in yield
between the corresponding bond and the German reference Bund. For figures 1,4 and 6, we used
quarterly data on 10-year sovereign spreads coming from Datastream. Sovereign spreads in Figure
8 were obtained from Haver Analytics and correspond to 5-year sovereign bonds. Information on
private-sector spreads was derived separately for corporates and households. Data on yields on
corporate loans and consumption loans for households also come from Haver Analytics. Corporate
yields refer to loans above 1 million euro and maturities between 1 and 5 years for all countries
but Greece, where long time series were only available for loans of maturities up to one year, and
Ireland and Portugal, where loans of all maturities are pooled. Household yields refer to loans with
maturities between 1 and 5 years for all sample countries. Private spreads are calculated against
the benchmark 5-year German Bund. All spreads presented in Figures 1, 4, 6 and 8, are measured
in basis points (Bps).
Public debt, public deficit and subcomponents: Figure 2 represents a decomposition of both public
debt and deficits. Data, on an annual basis, was obtained from the OECD’s Economic Outlook
Database. More specially, from this source we gathered the following general-government series:
financial balance; cyclically-adjusted balance; underlying balance adjusted for the cycle and oneoﬀs; underlying primary balance adjusted for the cycle and one-oﬀs and excluding net interest
payments (i.e. the structural primary balance), net debt interest payments, and gross financial
liabilities (i.e. public debt). Using these variables, we calculated the general government primary

44

balance by subtracting net debt interest payments from the financial balance. Additionally, we
disaggregated the primary balance into the structural primary balance component (underlying
primary balance) and the cyclical primary balance component. The cyclical primary balance was
derived by subtracting from the primary balance the underlying primary balance and one-oﬀs. Oneoﬀs, in turn, are the diﬀerence between underlying balance and cyclically-adjusted balance. The
other adjustments category was obtained by subtracting the interest component, growth component,
cyclical component and structural component from the change in public debt.
Government debt maturity structure: In order to gauge the relevance of public debt maturity we
collected data on government debt average term to maturity (top panel of Figure 3) and short-term
debt as a percent of total debt (bottom panel of Figure 3). The data on average term to maturity
comes from the OECD and the Irish Treasury for Ireland, from the OECD for Germany, from the
Ministry of Finance for Spain, and from the European Central Bank for France, Portugal, Italy,
and Greece. The OECD’s dataset ends in 2010. For Ireland we recovered the missing data using
the Treasury’s 2012 Annual Report. Unfortunately, we could not obtain analogous information for
Germany. Short-term debt refers to gross government debt with residual maturities up to one year.
The term government debt refers to general government debt for all countries except Ireland, where
it refers to central government debt. End-of-year data for Germany, France, Spain, Greece, Italy
and Portugal comes from the European Central Bank. Quarterly data for Ireland comes from the
Central Bank of Ireland.38
Sovereign debt holdings: In order to understand the nationality of the agents holding the outstanding sovereign debt we resorted to a variety of sources feeding from our sample-countries Central
Banks. We combined various sources as our interest was in obtaining, whenever possible, information regarding nominal holdings, avoiding mark to market measures which can be significantly
aﬀected by price dynamics.39 More specifically, data on sovereign debt holdings of Germany,
Greece, Ireland and Italy comes from Merler and Pisani-Ferry (2012). In turn, data on sovereign
debt holdings for France and Spain come from the corresponding Central Banks and for Portugal
from Andritzky (2012) and the European Central Bank. Unfortunately the definition of sovereign
debt is not homogeneous among countries. Sovereign debt holdings refer to central government
38

Specifically, we used the Statistical Appendix - Section E - Table E.1 Government Debt, from the Irish Central
Bank Quarterly Bulletin.
39
Actually, the data is nominal value for all countries but Greece where, according to the Bank of Greece, it mixes
market and nominal values.

45

OATs (medium-long term securities) for France, to general government debt for Germany, to central government long term bonds for Ireland, and to central government securities for Spain, Greece,
Italy and Portugal. As shown in Figure 5, the data on holdings by residents comes disaggregated
by diﬀerent economic agents. In order to present the data using a foreign-domestic divide, as in
Figure 4, we added together the corresponding categories of resident debtholders.40
Allocation of bank credit by sector: In order to understand the allocation of credit among the
diﬀerent economic sectors we resorted to each country’s National Central Banks’ Monetary Surveys.
From these surveys we obtained data on bond holdings and loan provisioning by banks vis-a-vis
the following sectors: non-financial corporations, households and the public sector. In order to
get the total credit exposure by sector we added the information on bond holdings and loans
provided to each sector. The data was collected on a monthly format for Germany, France, Italy
and Greece, and on a quarterly fashion for Spain, Ireland and Portugal. We used quarterly data
on nominal GDP from Eurostat to calculate bank credit as percentage of GDP. This set of data
was used to construct Figures 7 and 8. While Figure 7 simply depicts our credit series by sector,
Figure 8 presents a ratio of public-sector credit to private-sector credit. We derived such ratio by
dividing credit to the general government (loans plus bonds) by the sum of credit to non-financial
corporations (bonds plus loans) and credit to households (loans). In France, the existing data
for monetary financial institutions prevented us from separating data on loans for households and
non-financial corporations. For that reason we used instead information for credit institutions.

40

For Ireland and Spain the data on holdings by financial institutions includes the Central Bank.

46

Figure 1. A bird's eye view of the Euro periphery
Public debt as a percentage of GDP
200
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0

Spain

Italy

Ireland

Portugal

Greece

Portugal

Greece

Sovereign spreads
2400
2000
1600
1200
800
400
0

Spain

Italy

Ireland

Fraction of public debt held domestically
0.80
0.70
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00

Spain

Italy

Ireland

Portugal

Greece

Data on gross public liabilities comes from the OECD. Data on spreads, measured in basis
points, refers to the spread against the 10 year German Bund and was obtained from
Datastream. Data on sovereign debt holdings comes from our sample countries' Central
Banks and Merler and Pisani-Ferry (2012).

Figure 2. Public debt and deficit
Germany

France

25
12
10
20
8
15
6
4
10
2
5
0
-2
0
-4
-5
-6
-10
-8

12
25
10
20
8
15
6
4
10
2
5
0
-2
0
-4
-5
-6
-10
-8

2000-2007
Interest payments
#¡REF!

2008-2009

2010-2012

2000-2007

Growth #¡REF!
Primary balance #¡REF!
+ adjustments

Interest payments
#¡REF!

Italy

2008-2009

2010-2012

Growth#¡REF!
Primary balance#¡REF!
+ adjustments

Spain

12
25

254

20
10

202

15
8
10
6
5
4
0

15
0
10
-2
5
-4
0

2
-5

-6
-5

-10
0

-10
-8

2000-2007
Interest payments
#¡REF!

2008-2009

2010-2012

2000-2007

Growth#¡REF!
Primary balance#¡REF!
+ adjustments

Interest payments
#¡REF!

2008-2009

2010-2012

Growth#¡REF!
Primary balance#¡REF!
+ adjustments

Ireland

Portugal
3.5
25

25
4
20
2

20
3

15
0
10
-2
5
-4
0

2.5
15

-6
-5

0.5-5

10
2
1.55
10

-10
0

-10
-8

2000-2007
Interest payments
#¡REF!

2008-2009

2010-2012

Growth#¡REF!
Primary balance
#¡REF!
+ adjustments

Greece
20
20
15
15
10
105
0
5
-5
-10
0

2000-2007

2008-2009

2008-2009

2010-2012

#¡REF!
Growth#¡REF!Primary balance
+ adjustments

Decomposition of public debt changes based on data from the
OECD's Economic Outlook Database, Eurostat and authors'
calculations. In order to highlight the relevance of growth and
interest rate developments we added together the primary
balance and stock-flow and one-off adjustments to deficits and
debt stocks. The data is presented as a percentage of GDP.

25

Interest payments
#¡REF!

2000-2007
#¡REF!
Interest payments

2010-2012

Growth#¡REF!
Primary balance
#¡REF!
+ adjustments

Figure 3. Sovereign debt maturity structure
Average term to maturity
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0

Germany
Ireland

France
Portugal

Spain
Greece

Italy

Short term debt to total debt
0.45
0.4
0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0

Germany

France

Spain

Ireland

Portugal

Greece

Italy

Average term maturity data comes from the OECD and Central Bank of Ireland for Ireland
and Germany, and the Spanish Treasury for Spain. For the other sample-countries we used
ECB data on average residual maturity. Government short-term debt is government debt
with maturity up to 1 year. Short term debt data comes from the ECB for all of our samplecountries but Ireland, for which data coming from the Central Bank of Ireland was used.

Figure 4. Resident and foreign holdings of sovereign debt
Germany

France

1

1

0.9

0.9

0.8

0.8

0.7

0.7

0.6

0.6

0.5

0.5

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0

0

Residents

Non-residents

1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0

Residents

Italy

Non-residents

spread (RHS)

Spain

1

1200

0.9

1

1200

0.9
1000

0.8
0.7

800

0.6

1000

0.8
0.7

800

0.6

0.5

600

0.4

0.5

600

0.4
400

0.3
0.2

200

0.1

400

0.3
0.2

200

0.1
0

0

Residents

Non-residents

0

0

spread (RHS)

Residents

Portugal

Non-residents

spread (RHS)

Ireland
1200

1
0.9

1200

1
0.9

0.8
0.7

1000

0.8

1000

800

0.7

800

0.6

0.6

0.5

600

0.4

0.5

600

0.4

0.3
0.2

400

0.3

400

200

0.2

200

0.1

0.1
0

0

Residents

Non-residents

spread (RHS)

Residents

Greece
1

4000

0.9

3500

0.8

3000

0.7
0.6

2500

0.5

2000

0.4

1500

0.3

1000

0.2

500

0.1

0

0

Residents

Non-residents

spread (RHS)

0

0

Non-residents

spread (RHS)

Data on sovereign debt holdings comes our sample-countries
Central Banks and Merler and Pisani-Ferry (2012). Spreads come
from Datastream. The spreads refers to the difference in yield
between the corresponding reference 10 years bond and the
German 10 years Bund. Data on sovereign holdings is nominal
value for all countries but Greece, where it mixes market and
nominal values. The right hand side axis for Greece presents a
different scale to better collect the jump in the sovereign spread in
2011.

Figure 5. Residents' sovereign debt holdings by sector
France

Germany
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

Banks

Private non-financial

Non-Residents

Banks

Italy

Other Residents

Non-Residents

Spain

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

Banks

Private non-financial

Non-Residents

Banks

Portugal

Private non-financial

Non residents

Ireland

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

Banks

Private non-financial

Non residents

Private non-financial

Private non-financial

Non residents

Data comes from our sample-countries' Central Banks and Merler
and Pisani-Ferry (2012). The vertical axis measures the ratio of
each domestic sector's holdings to the total outstanding. For all
countries but France, we show two components of residents’
holdings, banks' holdings and private non-financial holdings,
which equals holdings by households and firms. For France the
breakdown available prevented us from disentangling public
sector's holdings from private non financial holdings.

Greece
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

Banks

Banks

Non-Residents

Figure 6. Credit allocation
Germany

% GDP

140%

120%

120%

100%

100%

80%

80%

60%

60%

40%

40%

20%

20%

0%

0%

General Government

Non financial corporations

Households

Italy

% GDP

General Government

140%

120%

120%

100%

100%

80%

80%

60%

60%

40%

40%

20%

20%

0%

0%

Non financial corporations

Households

Portugal

% GDP

General Government

140%

120%

120%

100%

100%

80%

80%

60%

60%

40%

40%

20%

20%

0%

0%

General Government

Non financial corporations

Households

Greece

% GDP

120%
100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
0%

Non financial corporations

Non financial corporations

Households

General Government

Non financial corporations

Households

Data on bank credit to the public, corporate and household
sectors comes from our sample-countries Monetary Surveys
and Financial Accounts. Credit includes both loans and
securities holdings. For France disaggregated data covered
all credit institutions. For the rest of our sample countries
the data refers to other monetary financial institutions.

140%

General Government

Households

Ireland

% GDP

140%

Non Financial Corporations

Spain

% GDP

140%

General Government

France

% GDP

140%

Households

Figure 7. Private versus public credit and sovereign spreads
Germany

France

Bps

0.6

0.6

1200

0.5

0.5

1000

0.4

0.4

800

0.3

0.3

600

0.2

0.2

400

0.1

0.1

200

0

0

Public sector credit over private sector credit

Italy

0

Public sector credit over private sector credit

Spain

Bps

Spread (RHS)

Bps

0.6

1200

0.6

1200

0.5

1000

0.5

1000

0.4

800

0.4

800

0.3

600

0.3

600

0.2

400

0.2

400

0.1

200

0.1

200

0

0

Public sector credit over private sector credit

Portugal

0

0

Spread (RHS)

Public sector credit over private sector credit

Ireland

Bps

Spread (RHS)

Bps

0.6

1200

0.6

1200

0.5

1000

0.5

1000

0.4

800

0.4

800

0.3

600

0.3

600

0.2

400

0.2

400

0.1

200

0.1

200

0

0

Public sector credit over private sector credit

Greece
0.6

Spread (RHS)

Bps
4000
3500

0.5

3000
0.4

2500

0.3

2000
1500

0.2

1000
0.1

500
0

0

Public sector credit over private sector credit

Spread (RHS)

0

0

Public sector credit over private sector credit

Spread (RHS)

Data on credit comes from National Central Banks' Monetary
Surveys and sample countries' financial accounts. Data on
sovereign spreads, from Datastream, refers to the difference
between the corresponding 10 year benchmark bond and the
German 10 year Bund. Spreads, measured in basis points, are
presented on the right hand side axis. The right hand side axis for
Greece presents a different scale to better collect the jump in the
sovereign spread in 2011.

Figure 8. Sovereign and private spreads
Germany

France

1600

1600

1400

1400

1200

1200

1000

1000

800

800

600

600

400

400

200

200

0

0

Consumer

Corporate

Consumer

1600

1400

1400

1200

1200

1000

1000

800

800

600

600

400

400

200

200

0

0

Corporate

Consumer

Sovereign

Portugal
1600

1400

1400

1200

1200

1000

1000

800

800

600

600

400

400

200

200

0

0

Corporate

Sovereign

Greece
3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0

Corporate

Sovereign

Consumer

Corporate

Sovereign

Data on yields on corporate loans and consumption loans for
households come from Haver Analytics. Corporate yields refer to
operations above 1 million euro and maturities between 1 and 5
years for all countries but Greece, where long time series were
only available for short term loans (up to one year), and Ireland
and Portugal, where the yield refers to all maturities. Household
yields refer to operations with maturities between 1 and 5 years
for all sample countries. Sovereign 5 year yields were also
obtained from Haver Analytics. All the spreads a measured
against the 5 year German Bund and presented in basis
points.The right hand side axis for Greece presents a different
scale to better collect the jump in the sovereign spread in 2011.

4000

Consumer

Corporate

Ireland

1600

Consumer

Sovereign

Spain

Italy
1600

Consumer

Corporate

Sovereign

Figure 9: The law of motion with and without discrimination
kt+1

No Discrimination
Discrimination
k∗

kt

The solid line shows the law of motion of the capital stock when there is no discrimination between foreign and domestic creditors. It
is dened by Equation (5). The dashed line shows the law of motion of the capital stock when default aects only foreign creditors,
and is dened by Equations (9) and (10). The dash-dot line is the 45◦ line.

Figure 10: The eects of changes in debt and repayment probability
kt+1

An increase in debt

Baseline
Increase in dt
kt
A decrease in the probability of repayment
kt+1

Baseline
Decrease in pt+1
kt

In both panels, the solid line shows the law of motion of the capital stock when default aects only foreign creditors, as dened by
Equations (9) and (10). The dashed line shows the same law of motion when changing one parameter value: in the top panel, dt
increases and in the bottom panel, pt+1 decreases. The dash-dot line in both panels is the 45◦ line.

Figure 11: Crowding-out eects and dynamics
Panel (a): zero default probability
kt+1

∗
kH

Panel (b): small default probability
kt+1

∗
kH

kt

kt

Panel (c): intermediate default probability
Panel (d): high default probability
kt+1
kt+1

∗
kL

∗
kM

∗
kH

kt

∗
kL

kt

The solid line in the four panels shows the law of motion of the capital stock as dened by Equations (9) and (10), modied by taking
into account Equation (14). Moving from Panel (a) to Panel (d), the probability of default pt+1 is gradually increased. In Panels (c)
and (d), the debt level d is also slightly higher than in Panels (a) and (b). The dash-dot line in all panels is the 45◦ line.

Figure 12: The law of motion with multiple equilibria
kt+1

Pessimistic law of motion
Optimistic law of motion
kt
The solid line represents the optimistic law of motion as dened by Equation (17). The dotted line represents the pessimistic law of
motion as dened by Equation (19). The dash-dot line is the 45◦ line.

Figure 13: Dynamics with crisis zones
Panel (a): both steady states in the crisis zone

kt+1

Panel (b): absorbing high steady state

kt+1

∗
kL

∗
kH
kt

Panel (c): absorbing low steady state

kt+1

∗
kL

∗
kH
kt

Panel (d): both steady states outside the crisis zone

kt+1

∗
kL

∗
kH

kt

∗
kL

∗
kH

kt

In all panels, the solid line represents the optimistic law of motion as dened by Equation (17), and the dotted line represents the
pessimistic law of motion as dened by Equation (19). In panels (a) and (c), the debt level is high, so that both the optimistic and
the pessimistic equilibrium exist at the high steady state. In panels (b) and (d), the debt level is lower, so that only the optimistic
equilibrium exists at the high steady state. Furthermore, in panels (b) and (d), the curvature of the law of motion (governed by the
parameters α and φ) is higher. In all panels, the dash-dot line is the 45◦ line.

Figure 14: The eects of joining an economic union
kt+1

Outside the union
Inside the union
kt
The solid line represents the low of motion of the capital stock outside the economic union, as dened by Equations (9) and (10).
The dotted line represents the law of motion of the capital stock inside the economic union, as dened by Equations (22) and (23).
The dash-dot line is the 45◦ line.

Figure 15: Dynamics of an economic union
Panel (a): Low debt, low breakup probability

Panel (b): Low debt, high breakup probability
0.6

Capital Stock

Capital Stock

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.4

0.2

South
North

South
North
0
0

5

10

15

20

25

0
0

30

Time
Panel (c): High debt, low breakup probability

5

10

15

20

25

30

Time
Panel (d): High debt, high breakup probability

0.4

Capital Stock

Capital Stock

0.4

0.2

0.2

South
North

South
North
0
0

5

10

15

Time

20

25

30

0
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Time

This gure shows the evolution of the capital stock for two countries (South and North) belonging to an economic union, under the
assumption that South issues an amount of debt d in period t = 6. The solid line indicates the evolution of South's capital stock
and the dotted line the evolution of North's capital stock. The dierent panels consider dierent parameter values for the breakup
probability of the union and for the amount of debt issued by South.

