                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 IDEOLOGY AND ONLINE NEWS

                                          Matthew Gentzkow
                                           Jesse M. Shapiro

                                         Working Paper 19675
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19675


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2013




Chapter in preparation for forthcoming NBER volume The Economics of Digitization: An Agenda.
We are grateful to the project organizers, Shane Greenstein, Avi Goldfarb, and Catherine Tucker, and
to the participants for helpful comments during the preparation of the chapter. We are especially grateful
to Ben Jones for an outstanding discussion. We acknowledge financial support from the Alfred P.
Sloan Foundation (through the Sloan Research Fellowship), the National Science Foundation, and
the Initiative on Global Markets and the George J. Stigler Center for the Study of the Economy and
the State at the University of Chicago. Wharton Research Data Services (WRDS) was used in preparing
this chapter. This service and the data available thereon constitute valuable intellectual property and
trade secrets of WRDS and/or its third-party suppliers. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Matthew Gentzkow and Jesse M. Shapiro. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Ideology and Online News
Matthew Gentzkow and Jesse M. Shapiro
NBER Working Paper No. 19675
November 2013
JEL No. D83,L86

                                             ABSTRACT

News consumption is moving online. If this move fundamentally changes how news is produced and
consumed it will have important ramifications for politics. In this chapter we formulate a model of
the supply and demand of news online that is motivated by descriptive features of online news consumption.
We estimate the demand model using a combination of microdata and aggregate moments from a panel
of Internet users. We evaluate the fit of the model to key features of the data and use it to compute
the predictions of the supply model. We discuss how such a model can inform debates about the effects
of the Internet on political polarization and other outcomes of interest.


Matthew Gentzkow
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
gentzkow@chicagobooth.edu

Jesse M. Shapiro
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
jmshapir@uchicago.edu
1    Introduction
The news media are a fundamental democratic institution. Access to the news affects political
participation (Gentzkow et al. 2011) and the portrayal of the news affects how voters vote (Della
Vigna and Kaplan 2007). Digital news is still in its infancy, with digital platforms accounting for
only 8 percent of time spent consuming news in the US (Edmonds 2013). Yet it seems inevitable
that this share will climb as new technologies develop and diffuse. If this march of technology will
transform the Fourth Estate, it may thereby transform democratic politics.
    Key to understanding how the rise of digital media will affect politics is understanding how it
will affect the breadth and depth of sources from which Americans get their news. These effects are
theoretically ambiguous (Mullainathan and Shleifer 2005). On the one hand, the Internet enables
inexpensive access to a tremendous range of sources. On the other hand, inexpensive customization
may permit highly specialized outlets that serve niche tastes and create echo chambers of self-
confirming ideological banter (Sunstein 2001).
    In this chapter we formulate an estimable economic model of the production and consumption
of online news. We estimate the demand side of the model using a combination of microdata and
aggregate moments from a panel of Internet users. We evaluate the fit of the model to key features
of the data and use it to explore predictions for the supply of news.
    Our model is designed to parsimoniously capture important empirical features of online news
consumption. In the model, sites are endowed with two attributes: an ideology and an overall
quality. Households are likewise endowed with an overall taste for news and with an ideology.
Households choose news sites based on the ideological match between the site and the household.
News sites face fixed costs of content that depend on quality and possibly on ideology. News site
revenue is from advertising, and advertising revenue depends on audience metrics.
    We estimate the demand portion of the model using panel microdata on a sample of Internet
users from comScore. For each user we observe total visits to a set of five news sites in 2008.
For identification we supplement these data with the overall share conservative on each site, as
measured through a separate comScore survey. The demand model fits many aggregate moments
well, though it predicts more cross-visiting between news outlets than is present in the data.
    We then turn to our supply model. We show that the economics of advertising competition may


                                                 2
lead to an important incentive to differentiate ideologically. For a benchmark model of advertising
competition, we compute (in the spirit of Gentzkow and Shapiro 2010) the extent to which different
news sites are close to their optimal ideological position given the positions of other sites.
    The model we present in this chapter complements the descriptive analysis in Gentzkow and
Shapiro (2011). In that paper, which we describe in more detail later in the chapter, we use data
on the size and ideological composition of online news to construct a measure of ideological seg-
regation for the Internet and to compare the Internet to other media and to non-media domains in
which political interaction takes place. We find that the extent of ideological segregation online is
low both in absolute terms and in comparison to other domains of interaction.
    The value of the model is that it permits evaluation of counterfactual changes in tastes or
technology that by definition cannot be envisioned by descriptive statistics alone. Although we do
not undertake such calculations here, the model could in principle be used to calculate how the
configuration of the market and the consumption of news will change as fixed costs fall, or as news
domains sub-divide into more specialized or customized outlets. Because the model incorporates
the advertising market, it can also confront changes in the online advertising market, and predict
how these will change the mix of products on offer.
    The model may also provide a window into the underlying motivations of online news con-
sumers. Where our model fails to fit the facts, there is room for additional modeling to more
accurately capture the structure of consumer preferences.
    The remainder of the chapter is as follows. Section 2 provides background on broader issues
surrounding digitization and the consumption of political news. Section 3 summarizes our data and
the descriptive evidence in Gentzkow and Shapiro (2011). Section 4 presents our model. Section
5 discusses our estimation strategy and presents our results. Section 6 concludes with an agenda
for future work.



2    Digitization and Political News
There is good evidence of rising elite polarization in the US. Roll-call voting records in the US
Congress show a widening gap between the parties since the 1970s (McCarty et al. 2006). Though
the evidence for a rise in polarization among non-elites is weaker (Fiorina and Abrams 2008),


                                                  3
there are important patterns in the data that suggest strengthening party identification among at
least some groups of voters (Prior 2013).
   A possible explanation for these patterns comes from widening media choice. The rise of cable
television, and the subsequent rise of the Internet, proliferate options that may change how citizens
obtain the news. Prior (2005) shows that expanding media choice reduces political engagement
among those seeking entertainment but increases it among those seeking information. Prior (2013)
reviews evidence on other channels by which the media may influence political polarization.
   A central theme in the literature on media and polarization is selective exposure. With many
choices, it is easier for an individual with a strong ideological predisposition to consume like-
minded news. This can reduce the moderating influence of mainstream media and can result in an
ideologically pigeonholed society (Sunstein 2001).
   The logic for this type of effect is as follows. Imagine the news is differentiated only hori-
zontally and that news outlets are arrayed on a unit line segment from left to right, along which
citizens are uniformly distributed. Suppose that there are J news outlets, equally spaced along the
line, and each citizen consumes news from the outlet closest to her. In a world with J = 1 news
outlet, everyone sees the same news, and the news outlet optimally caters to a broad audience. In
a world with J = 2, those on the extreme right share an outlet with those on the moderate right,
and similarly for the left. So, right-wingers see right-wing news, but extreme right-wingers may
not get extreme right-wing news. In a world with J = 3, those close to the center (right or left)
share an outlet and those on the wings get dedicated outlets, though perhaps not yet fringe outlets.
And so on. As J rises, news outlets serve narrower audiences, and so presumably serve them with
narrower content. Mullainathan and Shleifer (2005) formalize this type of logic in a model with
much richer economic forces.
   The logic of this prediction is strongest in a model with purely horizontal differentiation and
each citizen consuming news from a single outlet. The addition of vertical attributes and the option
to visit multiple outlets both complicate the picture. To see why, step away from the news domain
and consider another: the market for DVDs. When DVDs were rented via brick-and-mortar shops,
catalogs were often limited to the top films of the day. The advent of rental services like Netflix
meant that choice expanded tremendously because inventory costs fell by orders of magnitude
(Anderson 2006). Obscure films were now widely available.


                                                 4
    But expanding choice did not polarize the movie rental market. Data from Quickflix (an Aus-
tralian DVD-by-mail service) show that those renting movies from the bottom decile by popularity
devote only 8 percent of their rentals to movies in that group, and over a third to movies in the top
decile by popularity. Subscribers who rent at least one movie from the least popular decile rent
more than twice as many movies total as those who rent at least one from the most popular decile
(Elberse 2008).
    Put differently, those with niche tastes are still highly engaged with mainstream content, a
finding that resonates with evidence from other domains such as cable television (Webster and
Ksiazek 2012). Some watch ESPN and some watch the Food Network. Both groups meet at CBS.
    In Gentzkow and Shapiro (2011) we show that something similar is at work in online news.
The Internet makes sites with extreme content available. But the visitors to these sites get the
majority of their news elsewhere, and as a result, patterns of viewership are not well approximated
by the simple horizontal model that we sketch above.
    There are two reasons. First, in the purely horizontal model, an extreme liberal consumes news
from the most liberal news outlet and no other outlet. In practice, she might combine reading
from a progressive blog with reading of a middle-of-the-road website like cnn.com. Second, in the
purely horizontal model, all outlets are equally good. In practice, they are not, and since quality is
primarily a fixed cost, quality is highest where the market is largest, which is in the middle of the
road. There are websites that spin the news from a Neo-Nazi perspective, but even accounting for
the perspective the overall quality and timeliness of their coverage is poor.
    In this chapter we will review the evidence in Gentzkow and Shapiro (2011) and complement
it with a model that can rationalize patterns of online news consumption. Though we focus on
the news, the model we present may also be useful in understanding consumption in other media
domains that have undergone transformative increases in product variety.



3    Data and Descriptive Evidence
In this section we describe our data sources and we summarize the descriptive evidence in Gentzkow
and Shapiro (2011) regarding the ideological segregation of online news. Portions of this section
are excerpted from Gentzkow and Shapiro (2011).


                                                  5
3.1   Data Sources

Our data on Internet news consumption come from comScore. We construct a universe of 119
national political news and opinion websites for which it is possible to measure both the size and
ideology of the audience (Gentzkow and Shapiro 2011).
   We measure site size using the average daily unique visitors to each site over the twelve months
in 2009 from comScore Media Metrix. Media Metrix data come from comScore’s panel of over
one million US-resident Internet users. Panelists install software on their computers to permit
monitoring of their browsing behavior, and comScore uses a passive method to distinguish multiple
users of the same machine.
   We measure site ideology using data from comScore Plan Metrix. Plan Metrix data come from
a survey distributed electronically to approximately 12,000 comScore panelists. The survey asks
panelists the question “In terms of your political outlook, do you think of yourself as...? [very
conservative / somewhat conservative / middle of the road / somewhat liberal / very liberal]”. The
average number of daily unique visitors in each category is reported by comScore for each site for
each month. We average these figures over the twelve months in 2009.
   We also use comScore microdata on the browsing behavior of a subset of panelists obtained
from Wharton Research Data Services (WRDS). The data include 50,000-100,000 machines per
year and contain the domain name of each site visited.
   Relative to the site-level aggregates, the microdata have two important limitations. First, be-
cause the comScore microdata are defined at the domain level (e.g., yahoo.com), we cannot dis-
tinguish news content on sub-pages of large sites such as aol.com and yahoo.com. Sites such as
Yahoo! News and AOL News are therefore excluded from the microdata sample. Second, the
microdata do not distinguish between multiple users of the same machine.
   In this chapter, we use a subset of the data for structural estimation. We focus on five sites:
foxnews.com, nytimes.com, huffingtonpost.com, drudgereport.com, and cnn.com. We use the
2008 comScore microdata panel and we limit to machines that visit the universe of news sites
in Gentzkow and Shapiro (2011) no more than 100 times total throughout the year.




                                                6
3.2    Descriptive Features of Online News Consumption

In Gentzkow and Shapiro (2011) we use data on the news consumption habits of a panel of Internet
users to evaluate whether news online constitutes an “echo chamber” in which people hear only
their own views. To do this, we measure the ideological segregation of online news using an
approach borrowed from the literature on racial segregation.
   For each news outlet, we define the share conservative: the share of users who report their
political outlook as “conservative” among those who report being either “conservative” or “liberal.”
We then define each individual’s conservative exposure to be the average share conservative on the
outlets she visits. For example, if the only outlet an individual visits is nytimes.com, her exposure is
defined as the share conservative on nytimes.com. If she visits both nytimes.com and foxnews.com,
her exposure is the average of the conservative shares on these two sites. Next, we define the
isolation index (White 1986; Cutler et al. 1999) as the difference in the average conservative
exposure of conservatives minus the average conservative exposure of liberals. If conservatives
only visit foxnews.com and liberals only visit nytimes.com, the isolation index will be equal to
100 percentage points. If both conservatives and liberals get all their news from cnn.com, the two
groups will have the same conservative exposure, and the isolation index will be equal to zero.
   We find that news consumption online is far from perfectly segregated. The average Internet
news consumer’s exposure to conservatives is 57 percent. (Excluding self-described moderates,
about two-thirds of the US population self-describes as conservative.) The average conservative’s
exposure is 60.6 percent, similar to a person who gets all her news from usatoday.com. The av-
erage liberal’s exposure is 53.1 percent, similar to a person who gets all her news from cnn.com.
The isolation index for the Internet is 7.5 percentage points, the difference between the average
conservative’s exposure and the average liberal’s exposure.
   News consumers with extremely high or low exposure are rare. A consumer who got news
exclusively from nytimes.com would have a more liberal news diet than 95 percent of Internet
news users, and a consumer who got news exclusively from foxnews.com would have a more
conservative news diet than 99 percent of Internet news users.
   The isolation index we estimate for the Internet is higher than that of broadcast television news
(1.8), cable television news (3.3), magazines (4.7), and local newspapers (4.8), and lower than



                                                   7
that of national newspapers (10.4). We estimate that eliminating the Internet would reduce the
ideological segregation of news and opinion consumption across all media from 5.1 to 4.1.
    Online segregation is somewhat higher than that of a social network where individuals matched
randomly within counties (5.9), and lower than that of a network where individuals matched ran-
domly within zipcodes (9.4). It is significantly lower than the segregation of actual networks
formed through voluntary associations (14.5), work (16.8), neighborhoods (18.7), or family (24.3).
The Internet is also far less segregated than networks of trusted friends (30.3) and political discus-
sants (39.4).
    Figure 1 shows the relative segregation of different domains graphically.



4    Model
The facts we describe above suggest the elements of a satisfactory model of the production and
consumption of news online.
    News outlets differ in two dimensions: a vertical or quality dimension, and a horizontal or
ideology dimension. Accounting for quality variation is critical because most online news con-
sumption is concentrated among a very small number of outlets. In Gentzkow and Shapiro (2011)
we report that the top 20 sites account for nearly 80 percent of the daily visits to news outlets
online. Accounting for variation in ideology is critical because it is an important driver of demand.
For example, 78 percent of visitors to drudgereport.com are conservative as against 22 percent
for huffingtonpost.com. Accounting for ideology is also important because many of the concerns
about the effects of the Internet relate to its effects on the ideological composition of the news diet.
    News consumers differ in two ways as well: their overall taste for consuming news online, and
their ideology. We have already stressed the importance of modeling ideology. As we document
below, there is enormous heterogeneity across households in the amount of online news consumed,
suggesting significant heterogeneity in the overall taste for news (or equivalently in the value of
the outside option).
    News outlets, especially those with no offline presence, primarily compete for advertising rev-
enue. The growing literature on platform competition with multi-homing (Armstrong 2002; Am-
brus and Reisinger 2006; Anderson et al. 2010; Athey et al. 2013) shows that two outlets compete


                                                   8
in the market for advertising to the extent that they have audience in common. Therefore, a news
outlet’s revenue will increase to the extent that the outlet garners a greater audience, and especially
to the extent that its audience does not overlap with the audience of other outlets. The importance
of audience overlap in determining advertising revenue also suggests that a good model should
allow for significant multi-homing by consumers.
    News outlets face costs of news production. Improving along the vertical or quality dimension
requires payment of fixed costs that do not depend on the size of the audience (Berry and Waldfogel
2010). The costs of varying along the horizontal or ideology dimension are less clear; we will think
of these costs as negligible for the purposes of discussion.
    In this model, only a small number of outlets will want to make large investments in quality
(Shaked and Sutton 1987), and those that do will want to appeal to the widest possible audience.
This helps explain the dominance of a small number of relatively centrist sites. Moreover, the
incentive to operate outlets on the ideological fringe depends greatly on whether fringe outlets
attract unique audience. To the extent that their audience mostly overlaps with that of the major
sites, they will obtain vanishingly small revenues in a model in which only unique audience pays.


4.1        Model of Demand

4.1.1      Setup and Notation

There is a set of news outlets {1, ..., J} indexed by j and a set of consumers {1, ..., I} indexed by
i. Each consumer has Ti occasions to consume news online. At each occasion t ∈ {1, ..., Ti } each
consumer must choose one news outlet. We can think of an occasion as a unit of time—a minute,
say—that is small enough so that it is impractical to visit multiple outlets on the same occasion.
Let yit ∈ {1, ..., J} denote consumer i’s choice at occasion t.
    Each consumer i has a time-constant ideology τi , and ideologies are distributed i.i.d. across
consumers with known pdf φ ().1 Each consumer i has a taste for news µi , with µi distributed i.i.d.
Gamma (θ , θ ) conditional on τi .
    Conditional on τi and µi , the number of occasions to consume news Ti is distributed across

    1 Inestimation we will assume that τ is standard normal. The assumption that the pdf φ () is known is necessary
in order to pin down the scale of outlet ideology. In the normal case, an equivalent alternative would be to normalize
the scale of outlet ideology and allow the standard deviation of τ to be a model parameter.


                                                          9
consumers as Pois (λi ) , where


                                                      log (λi ) = log f (τi ) + log (µi )          (1)


Conditional on τi , this defines a negative binomial count model (Greene 2012, Ch. 18.4.4).2 We
include f (τi ) in the arrival probability to capture the possibility that taste for news is correlated
with ideology.
   A site j is characterized by a quality α j and an ideology γ j , where higher values represent
higher quality or more right-wing ideology. The utility to consumer i from visiting site j on
occasion t is
                                                                                2
                                                       ui jt = α j − τi − γ j        + εi jt       (2)

where εi jt is a type-I extreme value error, drawn independently across consumers, outlets, and
occasions, and independently of µi and τi . On each occasion, a consumer chooses the site that
maximizes her utility:
                                                     yit = j ⇐⇒ ui jt ≥ ui j0t ∀ j0 6= j.          (3)


4.1.2   Choice Probabilities

Let π j (τ) ≡ Pr (yit = j|τi = τ) denote the probability that a household with ideology τ chooses to
visit site j on a given occasion, conditional on choosing to consume news. Then:
                                                                           2 
                                                          exp α j − τ − γ j
                                           π j (τ) =                            2               (4)
                                                      J
                                                     ∑ j0 =1 exp α j − τ − γ j
                                                                    0          0




Let π (τ) = (π1 (τ) , ..., πJ (τ)) denote the vector of πs.


4.1.3   Likelihood

                                                 Ti                                    Ti
An econometrician observes the sequence {yit }t=1   for each consumer i. Let Ki j = ∑t=1  1yit = j
                                                                       J
denote the number of visits to site j made by consumer i. Let Ki = Ki j j=1 denote the vector of
visit counts for consumer i.
                                               
   2 Formally,                        f (τi )
                 Ti |τi ∼ NB θ ,   f (τi )+θ     .


                                                                      10
    Let                                                                       Ti                  θ
                                          Γ (θ + Ti )               f (τi )                θ
                        B (τi , Ti ) =
                                       Γ (Ti + 1) Γ (θ )         f (τi ) + θ           f (τi ) + θ
denote the negative binomial probability that a household with ideology τi has Ti occasions to
consume news.
    Let Multinomial (Ki , Ti , π (τi )) denote the probability of visit counts Ki given Ti occasions and
ideology τi .
    The conditional likelihood for household i given ideology τi is then


                            L (Ti , Ki |τi ) = B (τi , Ti ) Multinomial (Ki , Ti , π (τi ))


The unconditional likelihood for household i is
                                                    ˆ   ∞
                                   L (Ti , Ki ) =           L (Ti , Ki |τi ) φ (τi ) dτi .                (5)
                                                    −∞


The unconditional log likelihood of the data is

                                                            I
                                            ln (L) = ∑ ln L (Ti , Ki ) .                                  (6)
                                                        i=1


Here we make explicit the dependence on Ti just for emphasis; Ti is just the sum of the elements of
the vector Ki .
    The parameters of the likelihood, which we have suppressed in the notation above, are θ ,
          J
 α j , γ j j=1 , and any parameters of the function f () .


4.1.4     Constraints

Let ci = 1τi >τ0 be an indicator for whether a household reports being conservative, where τ0 is a
cutoff.
    With some abuse of notation, let
                                                            ∑Ii=1 ci Ki j
                                                 cj =                                                     (7)
                                                            ∑Ii=1 Ki j
denote the share of visitors to site j who are conservative.
                                     J
   The econometrician observes c j j=1 . The econometrician can therefore impose the following

                                                                11
J constraints:
                                            ´∞
                                                 π j (τ) f (τ) φ (τ) dτ
                                  c j = ´ ∞0
                                          τ
                                                                          .                          (8)
                                             −∞ π j (τ) f (τ) φ (τ) dτ


These constraints are necessary to identify τ0 and the γ j ’s in a sample of households whose ideol-
ogy is unknown.


4.2     Model of Supply of Online News

4.2.1   Setup and Notation

We define several summaries of the number of visits to site j . Let V j denote the total number of
visitors to site j. Let S j denote the fraction of consumers who visit site j at least once. Let X j
denote the fraction of consumers who visit site j and no other site.
   Write the operating profits of outlet j as

                                                                     
                                    Π j = a Vj, S j, X j − g α j, γ j

                                                                    
where a V j , S j , X j is annual advertising revenue and g α j , γ j is the annual cost of content pro-
duction.
                                                                                                          
   The function a () allows for several possible advertising technologies. The case where a V j , S j , XJ =
ãV j for some constant ã corresponds to a constant per-viewer advertising rate. The case where
                
a V j , S j , XJ = ãS j exhibits strong diminishing returns to additional impressions to the same viewer
                                                     
on the same site. The case where a V j , S j , X j = ãX j exhibits strong diminishing returns to ad-
ditional impressions both across and between sites. This last form of diminishing returns is espe-
cially interesting in light of the theoretical literature on multi-homing (Armstrong 2002; Ambrus
and Reisinger 2006; Anderson et al. 2010; Athey et al. 2013).
                                                                                                 
   The function g α j , γ j is similarly abstract. A convenient starting point is that g α j , γ j =
     
g α j strictly increasing in α j . Such an assumption implies that it is costly to produce quality but
free to locate anywhere on the ideological spectrum for a given quality.




                                                    12
4.2.2     Audience Metrics

Using our demand model it is possible to derive simple expressions for the various audience metrics
that we define above.
     The number of visits to site j by the average consumer is given by
                                                  ˆ   ∞     ∞
                                  Vj =
                                                   −∞
                                                           ∑ π j (τ) T Pr (T |τ) φ (τ) dτ                                         (9)
                                                  ˆ ∞ T =0
                                          =                π j (τ) f (τ) φ (τ) dτ.
                                                      −∞


The derivation uses the fact that E (T |τ) = f (τ).
     The share of consumers who ever visit site j is given by
                                      ˆ   ∞       ∞                  T 
                         Sj =                 ∑        1 − 1 − π j (τ)     Pr (T |τ) φ (τ) dτ                                   (10)
                                        −∞ T =0
                                              ˆ   ∞                           θ
                                                                   θ
                                 = 1−                                               φ (τ) dτ.
                                              −∞           f (τ) π j (τ) + θ

To derive the second expression from the first, observe that

 ∞                                                                                                                                          θ
                   T                           T                                                                          θ
∑       1 − π j (τ) Pr (T |τ) = ET |τ 1 − π j (τ)     = ET |τ exp T ln 1 − π j (τ)    =                                                           ,
T =0                                                                                                                     f (τ) π j (τ) + θ

where the last step follows from the moment generating function of the negative binomial.
     The share of consumers who visit site j and no other site is given by
                         ˆ   ∞    ∞              T
                Xj =         ∑            π j (τ) Pr (T |τ) φ (τ) dτ                                                            (11)
                          −∞     T =1
                         ˆ
                                                                       !θ                              
                             ∞                                                                    θ
                                                 θ                                         θ
                     =                                                       −                         φ (τ) dτ
                          −∞            f (τ) 1 − π j (τ) + θ                          f (τ) + θ

                                                                                          T
The derivation here is analogous to that for S j , but begins by noting that ∑∞
                                                                              T =1 π j (τ) Pr (T |τ) =
            T 
ET |τ π j (τ)     − Pr (T = 0|τ).




                                                                  13
4.2.3   Equilibrium Choice of Attributes
                                                                 J
Given the set of outlets, we suppose that attributes α j , γ j    j=1
                                                                      are   a Nash equilibrium of a game in
which all outlets simultaneously choose attributes. The first order conditions are that

                                          ∂Πj ∂Πj
                                              =     = 0∀ j.                                           (12)
                                          ∂αj   ∂γj

The first order conditions are a useful starting point for empirical work, because the game we have
specified will in general have many equilibria. (For example, any set of attributes that constitutes
an equilibrium is also an equilibrium under a relabeling of the outlets.)
    Coupled with an estimate of demand the first order conditions have substantial empirical con-
                                                                
tent. Consider for example the case in which Π j = ãV j − g α j for some constant ã. Then the
model implies that
                                                      ∂V j
                                          g0 α j = ã
                                                
                                                           ∀ j.
                                                      ∂αj
                                                          ∂V
An estimate of the demand model implies a value for ∂ α jj and the constant ã may be approximated
from aggregate data. By plotting g0 α j against α j for all outlets j one can trace out the shape of
                                       

the cost function for quality. The model also implies that

                                                   ∂V j
                                              0=        ∀ j.                                          (13)
                                                   ∂γj

That is, since we have assumed that ideology can be chosen freely, each outlet must be at the visit-
maximizing ideology. This is a version of Gentzkow and Shapiro’s (2010) test for the optimality
of print newspapers’ choice of slant.


4.2.4   Equilibrium Number of Outlets

If news outlets are substitutes in demand then in general the profits of all outlets will decline in the
number of outlets. A natural way to define the equilibrium number of outlets is then the number of
outlets such that the next entering outlet would be unprofitable. For such a number to exist there
must be a sunk entry cost. Suppose that this cost is uniform across potential entrants. Then the
sunk cost can be bounded above by the operating profit of the least profitable outlet and below by



                                                   14
the operating profit that the J + 1st outlet would earn if it were to enter and choose the optimal
position given the positions of the existing J outlets.



5     Estimation and Results

5.1    Empirical Strategy and Identification

Our demand estimator solves the following problem:


                        minτ                      J       ln (L)                                        (14)
                                        {α j ,γ j } j=1
                             0 ,θ , f (),
                                                                   ´∞
                                                                        π j (τ) f (τ) φ (τ) dτ
                                                          c j = ´ ∞0
                                                                  τ
                                    s.t.                                                         ∀ j.   (15)
                                                                   −∞ π j (τ)   f (τ) φ (τ) dτ

subject to a normalization of the location of the αs and γs.
    Our data include panel microdata on individual households, but to develop intuition for model
identification it is useful to imagine data that consist only of the shares c j and the market shares of
                                                                   J
each site. Consider the problem of identifying τ0 and α j , γ j j=1 taking as given the parameters
governing the number of sites visited by each household.
    There are J conservative shares c j and J − 1 market shares (these must sum to one): 2J − 1
empirical objects that can vary separately.
    Up to an appropriate normalization, there are J − 1 qualities α j , J − 1 site ideologies γ j , and
one reporting cutoff τ0 : 2J − 1 parameters.
    We assume that τ ∼ N (0, 1). We parameterize f (τ) = κ for some constant κ. This allows us
to factor the likelihood into two components: the likelihood for the count model of total visits and
the likelihood for the logit model of outlet choice. We exploit this factoring to estimate the model
via two-step maximum likelihood, first fitting the count model to the total number of visits Ti ,
then fitting the logit choice model to each household’s individual sequence of visits. In the second
step we limit attention to consumers who make 15 or fewer visits to the five sites in our sample.
Appendix table 1 presents Monte Carlo evidence on the performance of our estimator.




                                                             15
5.2    Demand Estimates

Table 1 presents estimates of model parameters and their standard errors. We normalize γ so that
it has a visit-weighted mean of zero. We normalize α so that it is equal to zero for the least visited
site. Estimates are in general very precise; this precision is somewhat overstated as we do not
incorporate uncertainty in the constraints in equation (15).
    We explore several dimensions of model fit.
    Figure 2 shows that the negative binomial model provides a good fit to the distribution of total
visits across machines in our panel.
    Table 2 shows that the model provides a good fit to the overall size and ideological composition
of the sites.
    Table 3 shows that the model does an adequate job of replicating the distribution of conservative
exposure in the data.
    Table 4 shows that the model predicts far more cross-visiting than is observed in the data.


5.3    Supply Estimates

We focus on the supply model’s implications for sites’ choice of ideology. To get a feel for how
the model works we begin with the incentives of a hypothetical news site. Consider a world with
J = 2 and α1 = α2 = 0. Suppose that site 1 chooses γ1 = 0. Should site 2 stick to the center as well
or move out to the extremes?
    Figure 3 plots our three audience size metrics—average visits V j , share ever visiting S j , and
share visiting exclusively X j —as a function of site 2’s choice of γ2 . We find that site 2 maximizes
visits and the share ever visiting by being centrist. In the case of a site maximizing exclusive
visits, it is optimal to be slightly to the right or to the left of the center. Moving away from the
center attracts viewers who are not attracted to site 1, and hence who are more likely to visit site 2
exclusively.
    Figure 4 explores the incentive to differentiate ideologically in the context of the five sites in
our data. We take the αs as given at their estimated values. For each site j, we plot our audience
size metrics as a function of γ j , taking as given the estimated γs for the other sites. The plot also
shows the estimated position γ̂ j for each site.


                                                   16
    Whether a given site would increase its audience by moving closer to or further from the center
depends on the audience metric of interest. Most sites would get more households to visit at least
once by moving to the center. But most would get more exclusive visitors by moving further from
the center. Most sites would also increase total visits by becoming more ideologically extreme.



6    Discussion and Conclusions
We propose a model of the demand and supply of online news designed to capture key descriptive
features of the market. We estimate the model on data from a panel of Internet users and explore
its fit to consumer behavior. We then study the model’s implications for the supply of news.
    We stop short of a full equilibrium model of the supply of news, but we believe such a model
can be estimated with the primitives we propose. A proposed strategy is as follows. From our
demand model, it is possible to calculate how much each outlet would gain in terms of audience
from increasing its quality. Using a model of equilibrium advertising rates, one can translate this
audience gain into a revenue gain. Conditions for a static equilibrium imply that the gain in revenue
must equal the cost of additional content. By performing this exercise for a large set of sites, it
is in principle possible to trace out the marginal cost of quality at different points in the quality
distribution, and hence to recover the shape of the cost function for quality. A similar exercise
could in principle yield a cost function for ideology.
    Given cost functions and a notion of equilibrium, the model implies a set of equilibrium posi-
tions for news outlets under various assumptions. For example, it would be possible to contemplate
changes in the value of online audience to advertisers, or changes in fixed costs or other elements
of the news production technology. The model will imply a mapping from these primitives to
features of consumer demand such as the extent of ideological segregation.
    Stepping further back, it may also be interesting to explore how well the same model can
perform in rationalizing patterns of demand in other domains. As we note in section 2, many of the
descriptive features of news consumption are reminiscent of other domains such as DVD-by-mail
rental patterns. Though the conditions of supply likely differ greatly across domains, common
features in demand may suggest a similar underlying model of consumer behavior.
    Finally, it is important to note that we focus on the supply and demand for news but not its


                                                 17
impact on political beliefs or behavior. As technology evolves it will be important to accumulate
theory and evidence on how media platforms change politics.




                                               18
References
Ambrus, Attila, and Markus Reisinger. 2006. Exclusive vs overlapping viewers in media markets.
       Harvard University mimeograph.
Anderson, Chris. 2006. The Long Tail: Why the Future of Business is Selling Less of More. New
       York: Hyperion.
Anderson, Simon P., Øystein Foros, and Hans Jarle Kind. 2010. Hotelling competition with
       multi-purchasing: Time magazine, Newsweek, or both? CESIFO Working Paper Industrial
       Organization No. 3096.
Armstrong, Mark. 2002. Competition in two-sided markets. Nuffield College mimeograph.
Athey, Susan, Emilio Calvano, and Joshua S. Gans. 2013. The impact of the internet on advertising
       markets for news media. Rotman School of Management Working Paper No. 2180851.
Berry, Steven, and Joel Waldfogel. 2010. Product quality and market size. Journal of Industrial
       Economics 58(1): 1-31.
Cutler, David M., Edward L. Glaeser, and Jacob L. Vigdor. 1999. The rise and decline of the
       American ghetto. The Journal of Political Economy 107(3): 455-506.
Della Vigna, Stefano and Ethan Kaplan. 2007. The Fox News effect: Media bias and voting.
       Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(3): 1187-1234.
Edmonds, Rick. 2013. New research finds 92 percent of time spent on news consumption is still
       on legacy platforms. Poynter. Accessed at <http://www.poynter.org/latest-news/business-
       news/the-biz-blog/212550/new-research-finds-92-percent-of-news-consumption-is-still-on-
       legacy-platforms/> on August 1 2013.
Elberse, Anita. 2008. Should you invest in the long tail? Harvard Business Review 86(7): 88-96.
Fiorina, Morris P. and Samuel J. Abrams. 2008. Political polarization in the American public.
       Annual Review of Political Science 11: 563-588.
Gentzkow, Matthew, and Jesse M. Shapiro. 2010. What drives media slant? Evidence from US
       daily newspapers. Econometrica 78(1): 35-71.
Gentzkow, Matthew, Michael Sinkinson, and Jesse M. Shapiro. 2011. The effect of newspaper
       entry and exit on electoral politics. American Economic Review 101(7): 2980-3018.
Gentzkow, Matthew, and Jesse M. Shapiro. 2011. Ideological segregation online and offline.


                                               19
       Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(4): 1799-1839.
Greene, William H. 2012. Econometric Analysis. New York: Prentice Hall.
McCarty, Nolan, Keith T. Poole and Howard Rosenthal. 2006. Polarized America: The Dance of
       Ideology and Unequal Riches. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Mullainathan, Sendhil, and Andrei Shleifer. 2005. The market for news. American Economic
       Review 95(4): 1031-1053.
Prior, Markus. 2005. News vs. entertainment: How increasing media choice widens gaps in
       political knowledge and turnout. American Journal of Political Science 49(3): 577-592.
Prior, Markus. 2013. Media and political polarization. Annual Review of Political Science 16:
       101-27.
Shaked, Avner, and John Sutton. 1987. Product differentiation and industrial structure. The Jour-
       nal of Industrial Economics 36(2): 131-146.
Sunstein, Cass R. 2001. Republic.com. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Webster, James G. and Thomas B. Ksiazek. 2012. The dynamics of audience fragmentation:
       Public attention in an age of digital media. Journal of Communication 62: 39-56.
White, Michael J. 1986. Segregation and diversity measures in population distribution. Population
       Index 52(2): 198-221.




                                               20
                                        Table 1: Model parameters


                                    γ
                                        CNN             -0.0127
                                                        (0.0006)
                                        Drudge Report    0.7229
                                                        (0.0000)
                                        Fox News         0.5320
                                                        (0.0002)
                                        Huffington Post -0.3645
                                                        (0.0008)
                                        New York Times -0.2156
                                                        (0.0007)
                                    α
                                        CNN            4.3252
                                                      (0.0488)
                                      Drudge Report    0.0000
                                                      (0.0000)
                                      Fox News         2.7345
                                                      (0.0475)
                                      Huffington Post  1.8632
                                                      (0.0547)
                                      New York Times 3.6381
                                                      (0.0502)
                                    θ                  0.3132
                                                      (0.0000)
                                    κ                  3.0259
                                                      (0.0000)
                                    Pr(τ > τ0 )        0.5431
                                                      (0.0009)
Notes: The table presents the estimated parameters of the model presented in section 4. Estimates use 2008
comScore data for 5 sites. Estimation is by two-step maximum likelihood, estimating (θ , κ) in the first step
and the remaining parameters in the second step. We normalize γ to have a visit-weighted mean of zero
across all sites, and α to take value zero for the least-visited site. Asymptotic standard errors are in
parentheses.




                                                   21
                       Table 2: Model fit to size and ideology of news outlets

                            Share of total visits            Conservative share of site visits
                             Data Simulation                  Data         Simulation
            CNN             0.5297     0.5348                0.5504          0.5604
            Drudge Report   0.0113     0.0101                0.9266          0.9270
            Fox News        0.1401     0.1339                0.8669          0.8731
            Huffington Post 0.0483     0.0488                0.3008          0.3079
            New York Times 0.2707      0.2724                0.4027          0.4080
Notes: The table presents, for each site, the share of total visits that each site receives, and the share of
visits to each site from conservative consumers, along with analogues from a single simulation at the
estimated parameters.




                                                      22
                             Table 3: Model fit to conservative exposure

                  Conservative exposure of households visiting at least one site
                                  Percentile
                   5th    25th     50th      75th    95th         Mean Standard deviation
  Data           0.4027 0.4256 0.5504 0.5504 0.8669              0.5387          0.1360
  Simulation     0.4080 0.4842 0.5604 0.5805 0.8213              0.5516          0.1155
Notes: The table presents statistics of the distribution of conservative exposure in the data and in a single
simulation at the estimated model parameters. A consumer’s conservative exposure is the visit-weighted
average share conservative across the sites visited by the consumer.




                                                    23
                                             Table 4: Model fit to cross-visiting patterns

     Share of visitors to site:                                                   Also visiting site:
                                                   CNN       Drudge Report       Fox News Huffington Post            New York Times
                                  Data              .           0.0087            0.1635          0.0711                 0.3027
     CNN
                                  Simulation        .           0.0406            0.3254          0.1781                 0.5667

                                  Data            0.4131             .             0.2278            0.0656                0.2857
     Drudge Report
                                  Simulation      0.8495             .             0.6905            0.1153                0.5133




24
                                  Data            0.4774          0.0140               .             0.0826                0.2996
     Fox News
                                  Simulation      0.8019          0.0814               .             0.1485                0.5684

                                  Data            0.4640          0.0090           0.1847                .                 0.3556
     Huffington Post
                                  Simulation      0.8442          0.0261           0.2857                .                 0.7363

                                  Data            0.4472          0.0089           0.1516            0.0805                      .
     New York Times
                                  Simulation      0.7896          0.0342           0.3213            0.2164                      .
              Notes: For each site, the table shows the share of visitors to that site who also visit each of the other sites,
              both for the empirical data and for a single simulation at the estimated parameters.
                                         Figure 1: Ideological segregation across domains




                            .4     .3
                    Isolation Index
                          .2.1
                            0

                                           s

                                                    le

                                                              es


                                                                        s

                                                                                  y

                                                                                           et

                                                                                                    de


                                                                                                               s

                                                                                                                        ns


                                                                                                                                 k

                                                                                                                                           d

                                                                                                                                                    ily


                                                                                                                                                                t

                                                                                                                                                                          s
                                                                                                                                                               us
                                          ew




                                                                     er


                                                                              nt




                                                                                                            er




                                                                                                                              or




                                                                                                                                                                       nt
                                                                                                                                        oo
                                                 ab




                                                                                        rn




                                                                                                                                                m
                                                           in




                                                                                                                    tio
                                                                                                  co
                                                                             ou




                                                                                                                                                          Tr

                                                                                                                                                                     sa
                                                                   ap




                                                                                                          ap




                                                                                                                             W

                                                                                                                                      rh
                                                                                      te
                                        tN




                                                                                                                                               Fa
                                                         az
                                                C




                                                                                                                   ia
                                                                                                p




                                                                                                                                                                   s
                                                                            C
                                                                sp




                                                                                                       sp
                                                                                   In




                                                                                                                                   bo




                                                                                                                                                          u
                                                                                             Zi
                                                      ag




                                                                                                                  c




                                                                                                                                                                cu
                                    as




                                                                                                                                                     Yo
                                                                                                               so
                                                              ew




                                                                                                     ew




                                                                                                                                 gh




                                                                                                                                                                is
                                                    M
                               dc




                                                                                                            As




                                                                                                                                                  le

                                                                                                                                                               D
                                                                                                                              ei
                                                           lN




                                                                                                  lN
                         oa




                                                                                                                                               op
                                                                                                                             N




                                                                                                                                                          al
                                                                                                          y
                                                         ca




                                                                                                na
                    Br




                                                                                                          ar




                                                                                                                                                          ic
                                                                                                                                             Pe
                                                      Lo




                                                                                             io




                                                                                                                                                       lit
                                                                                                       nt




                                                                                                                                                    Po
                                                                                           at

                                                                                                     lu
                                                                                        N

                                               Offline Media                 Local Communities    Vo                         Internet               Acquaintances


Notes: Internet data are from 2009 comScore Media Metrix and Plan Metrix. County, zipcode, and offline
media data are from the 2007 and 2008 Mediamark Research and Intelligence Surveys of the American
Consumer. Voluntary associations, work, neighborhood, family, and “people you trust” data are from the
2006 General Social Survey. Political discussants data are from the 1992 Cross-National Election Study.
Figure is reprinted from Gentzkow and Shapiro (2011).




                                                                                                     25
                                     Figure 2: Fit of model to total visit counts

                     0.45
                                                                                    Distribution of data
                                                                                    Theoretical distribution
                      0.4


                     0.35


                      0.3


                     0.25
           Density




                      0.2


                     0.15


                      0.1


                     0.05


                       0
                            0   10     20      30     40         50       60   70        80         90
                                                           Total visits

Notes: Plot shows total visits to the 5 sites in our sample in 2008 for each machine in the panel and the
density predicted from our estimated model.




                                                           26
                                   Figure 3: Audience size and ideology: hypothetical news site
                  1.8                                                          0.44                                                                   0.1




                                                                                                                       Share visiting exclusively
                  1.7                                                          0.42                                                                 0.098




                                                         Share ever visiting
                  1.6
                                                                                0.4
 Average visits




                                                                                                                                                    0.096
                  1.5
                                                                               0.38
                  1.4                                                                                                                               0.094
                                                                               0.36
                  1.3
                                                                                                                                                    0.092
                                                                               0.34
                  1.2
                                                                               0.32                                                                  0.09
                  1.1

                   1                                                            0.3                                                                 0.088
                   −1   −0.5         0         0.5   1                           −1   −0.5         0         0.5   1                                    −1   −0.5         0         0.5   1
                               Site ideology                                                 Site ideology                                                          Site ideology
Notes: The figure shows objects computed from our model using the values of the parameters θ and κ in
table 1. In each plot we assume that J = 2, that α1 = α2 = 0 and that γ1 = 0, and we plot measures of
the size of the audience for outlet j = 2 as a function of its ideology γ2 . “Average visits” is the number of
visits V2 made by the average consumer to site 2 across all consumers. “Share ever visiting” is the share of
consumers S2 who visit site 2 at least once. “Share visiting exclusively” is the share of consumers X2 who
visit site 2 and only site 2. See text for formal definitions. Audience size metrics are approximated using
Gaussian quadrature.




                                                                                       27
                                                Figure 4: Audience size and ideology: actual news sites
                                                                                                           Panel A: CNN
                              2                                                                  0.5                                                                         0.12




                                                                                                                                            Share visiting exclusively
                                                                                              0.45
                                                                                                                                                                             0.11




                                                                     Share ever visiting
            Average visits                                                                       0.4
                             1.5                                                                                                                                                    0.1
                                                                                              0.35

                                                                                                 0.3                                                                         0.09

                                                                                              0.25
                              1                                                                                                                                              0.08
                                                                                                 0.2
                                                                                                                                                                             0.07
                                                                                              0.15

                             0.5                                                                 0.1                                                                         0.06
                              −2      −1          0          1   2                                −2        −1           0          1   2                                       −2                −1          0         1   2
                                            Site ideology                                                          Site ideology                                                                        Site ideology

                                                                                                 Panel B: Drudge Report
                                                                                                                                                                                             −3
                                                                                                                                                                                          x 10
                              0.06                                                                0.04                                                                               3




                                                                                                                                                       Share visiting exclusively
                             0.055
                                                                                                                                                                                    2.5



                                                                           Share ever visiting
                              0.05                                                               0.035
           Average visits




                             0.045                                                                                                                                                   2
                              0.04                                                                0.03

                             0.035                                                                                                                                                  1.5

                              0.03                                                               0.025
                                                                                                                                                                                     1
                             0.025

                              0.02                                                                0.02                                                                              0.5
                                 −2    −1             0      1   2                                   −2       −1             0      1   2                                            −2           −1          0         1   2
                                             Site ideology                                                          Site ideology                                                                       Site ideology

                                                                                                         Panel C: Fox News
                             0.5                                                                 0.25                                                                               0.04




                                                                                                                                                Share visiting exclusively
                                                                                                                                                                               0.035
                                                                        Share ever visiting




                            0.45                                                                  0.2
         Average visits




                                                                                                                                                                                    0.03
                             0.4                                                                 0.15
                                                                                                                                                                               0.025

                            0.35                                                                  0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                    0.02


                             0.3                                                                 0.05                                                                          0.015
                              −2      −1          0          1   2                                  −2       −1          0          1   2                                          −2              −1         0         1   2
                                            Site ideology                                                          Site ideology                                                                        Site ideology

                                                                                           Panel D: Huffington Post
                            0.25                                                                 0.11                                                                          0.015
                                                                                                                                                Share visiting exclusively




                                                                                                  0.1
                                                                        Share ever visiting
         Average visits




                             0.2
                                                                                                 0.09
                                                                                                                                                                                    0.01
                                                                                                 0.08
                            0.15

                                                                                                 0.07


                             0.1                                                                 0.06                                                                          0.005
                              −2      −1          0          1   2                                  −2       −1          0          1   2                                          −2              −1         0         1   2
                                            Site ideology                                                          Site ideology                                                                        Site ideology

                                                                                           Panel E: New York Times
                             0.9                                                                 0.4                                                                                0.06
                                                                                                                                            Share visiting exclusively




                                                                                              0.35
                             0.8
                                                                     Share ever visiting




                                                                                                 0.3                                                                         0.055
            Average visits




                             0.7                                                              0.25

                                                                                                 0.2                                                                                0.05
                             0.6                                                              0.15

                                                                                                 0.1                                                                         0.045
                             0.5
                                                                                              0.05

                             0.4                                                                   0                                                                                0.04
                              −2      −1          0          1   2                                 −2       −1           0          1   2                                              −2         −1          0         1   2
                                            Site ideology                                                          Site ideology                                                                        Site ideology

Notes: The figure shows objects computed from our model using the values of the parameters γ, α, θ and κ
in table 1. In each plot we show measures of the size of the audience for outlet j as a function of its ideology
γ j , holding constant all other parameters. “Average visits” is the number of visits V j made by the average
consumer to site j across all consumers. “Share ever visiting” is the share of consumers S j who visit site j
at least once. “Share visiting exclusively” is the share of consumers X j who visit site j and only site j. See
text for formal definitions. Audience size metrics are approximated using Gaussian quadrature. The dashed
line indicates the site’s estimated ideology γ̂ j .

                                                                                                                    28
                        Appendix Table 1: Monte Carlo experiments
                         Baseline Average estimate      Asymptotic                 Bootstrap
  Parameter              estimate across simulations standard errors            standard errors
  γ
      CNN                 -0.0127           -0.0127              0.0006             0.0000
      Drudge Report        0.7229           0.7230               0.0000             0.0003
      Fox News             0.5320           0.5321               0.0002             0.0002
      Huffington Post     -0.3645           -0.3645              0.0008             0.0001
      New York Times      -0.2156           -0.2157              0.0007             0.0001
  α
      CNN                  4.3252           4.3264               0.0488             0.0267
      Drudge Report        0.0000           0.0000               0.0000             0.0000
      Fox News             2.7345           2.7389               0.0475             0.0237
      Huffington Post      1.8632           1.8663               0.0547             0.0303
      New York Times       3.6381           3.6393               0.0502             0.0249
  θ                        0.3132           0.3132               0.0000             0.0000
  κ                        3.0259           3.0259               0.0000             0.0000
  Pr(τ > τ0 )              0.5431           0.5432               0.0009             0.0003
Notes: The table reports the results of Monte Carlo experiments in which we first simulate 10
datasets from our model at the parameter values shown in the first column, then re-estimate our
model on each simulated dataset with the starting parameters set at the estimated values.




                                                29
