                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  LEARNING BY DOING IN A MULTI-PRODUCT MANUFACTURING ENVIRONMENT:
PRODUCT VARIETY, CUSTOMIZATIONS, AND OVERLAPPING PRODUCT GENERATIONS

                                          Carolyn D. Egelman
                                             Dennis Epple
                                             Linda Argote
                                           Erica R.H. Fuchs

                                         Working Paper 19674
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19674


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2013




 The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support provided by Science of Science and Innovation
 Policy & Innovation and Organization Sciences Joint NSF Grant 0965442, Innovation & Organization
 Sciences NSF Grant 0622863, a Sloan Industry Studies Grant, and a Berkman Faculty Development
 Grant. The authors also gratefully acknowledge the support from managers, engineers, and employees
 at the study's focus firm. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
 reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
 reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
 NBER publications.

 © 2013 by Carolyn D. Egelman, Dennis Epple, Linda Argote, and Erica R.H. Fuchs. All rights reserved.
 Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
 that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Learning by Doing in a Multi-Product Manufacturing Environment: Product Variety, Customizations,
and Overlapping Product Generations
Carolyn D. Egelman, Dennis Epple, Linda Argote, and Erica R.H. Fuchs
NBER Working Paper No. 19674
November 2013
JEL No. D2,L2,L6,O3

                                             ABSTRACT

Extending research on organizational learning to multi-product environments is of particular importance
given that the vast majority of products are manufactured in such environments. We investigate learning
in a multi-product facility drawing on exceptionally rich data for a manufacturing firm that is a leading
producer of high technology components. Weekly data for 10 years from the firm's production and
human resource tracking systems are augmented by surveys of managers and engineers and by extensive
first-hand observation. We find that productivity improves when multiple generations of the firm's
primary product family are produced concurrently, reflecting the firm's ability to augment and transfer
knowledge from older to newer product generations. No significant transfer of knowledge is evident
between the primary product family and other products. Productivity is, however, decreased when
the production facility is faced with extensive within-product buyer-specific customizations.We develop
the implications of these findings for theory and practice.


Carolyn D. Egelman                                  Linda Argote
Dept. of Engineering & Public Policy                Tepper School of Business
Carnegie Mellon University                          Carnegie Mellon University
Baker Hall 129                                      Pittsburgh, PA 15213
Pittsburgh, PA 15213                                argote@andrew.cmu.edu
cdenomme@cmu.edu
                                                    Erica R.H. Fuchs
Dennis Epple                                        Dept. of Engineering & Public Policy
Tepper School of Business                           Carnegie Mellon University
Carnegie Mellon University                          Baker Hall 131E
Posner Hall, Room 257B                              Pittsburgh, PA 15213
Pittsburgh, PA 15213                                erhf@andrew.cmu.edu
and NBER
epple@cmu.edu
1.     Introduction
Organizational learning and knowledge transfer are key to any firm’s competitive advan-
tage [Kogut and Zander (1992), Argote and Ingram (2000)]. Yet, learning and knowledge
transfer in a multi-product production setting are not well understood. The production
and operations management literature largely starts from the understanding that produc-
tion of a variety of products is harmful. At the same time the organizational learning
literature suggests that there can be benefits to producing heterogeneous products. These
differences in findings with respect to product heterogeneity can, to some extent, be traced
to differences in the nature of such heterogeneity. In this paper we leverage facility-level
production data to unpack the nature of product heterogeneity in that facility, and the
implications of that heterogeneity for organizational learning and knowledge transfer.
     This work investigates organizational learning and knowledge transfer in a U.S.-owned
overseas manufacturing facility that is a leading producer of high technology hardware
components. The firm produces five generations of high-volume focus products as well as
several non-focus products that vary widely from the focus products in form factor and
market application and are produced in relatively small volumes. The firm also undertakes
thousands of variations of products to meet individual buyer specifications. We draw on 10
years of firm archival data, along with qualitative survey and observational data collected
at the site, to develop insights into the acquisition and transfer of knowledge within and
across product generations. Our analysis employs weekly data on five generations of a focus
product, including the thousands of variations tailored to buyer specifications, as well as
data for the suite of heterogeneous small-volume products produced by the firm. These
data coupled with information from surveys and interviews with managers, engineers,
and trainers enable us to understand the differential effects on knowledge acquisition and
transfer of contemporaneous variation in product types as well as intertemporal variation
as technological advances bring new products into the firm’s repertoire.
     Our results reconcile differences between the organizational learning and production
and operations management literatures by identifying both advantages and disadvantages
to product heterogeneity on the production line, depending on the extent and nature of
product differences. We find that productivity improves when multiple generations of the
same product are produced in the same facility. This positive impact on productivity of
having multiple generations of the same product on the line is explained in part by the


                                             1
firm’s ability to transfer knowledge rapidly from older to newer generations of the product
and thereby improve long-term productivity. In contrast, we find productivity is decreased
both when the production line is faced with product types that are quite different from
each other and when faced with increases in buyer-specific product variations. In addition,
we do not find evidence of knowledge depreciation.

2.     Theoretical Motivation
2.1.     Organizational Learning
Learning curves have been found within many organizations and serve as a valuable indica-
tor of the extent to which organizational performance improves with experience [Lapré and
Nembhard (2010), Argote et al. (2003)]. Learning has been found in a breadth of indus-
tries from service industries, such as pizza franchises and booksellers [Darr et al. (1995),
Ton and Huckman (2008)], to a variety of manufacturing settings, such as semiconductors,
airplanes, ships, and trucks [Argote et al. (1990), Epple et al. (1991), Benkard (2000)].
     The classic form of this organizational learning curve is given as

                                             yi = aQbi                                       (1)

and is often written for estimation purposes in logarithmic form

                                         ln yi = c + b ln Qi                                 (2)

where y is the unit cost or number of labor hours to produce the ith unit, a is cost or the
number of labor hours required to produce the first unit, c is a constant equal to ln a, Q is
the cumulative number of units through time period i, b is the learning rate, and i is a time
subscript [Argote (2013)]. In addition to unit costs, other metrics such as defects per unit
or waste per unit [Lapré et al. (2000)] have been shown to follow a learning curve pattern.
Thus, y can represent different performance metrics that vary, and generally improve, with
experience.
     From the learning rate, a progress ratio can be calculated. Typically the progress ratio, p,
is the change in the performance metric, y, when cumulative production is doubled or,
mathematically, p = 2b [Dutton and Thomas (1984)]. Dutton and Thomas performed an
assessment across more than 200 empirical studies of progress functions and found that
learning rates differ widely not only across different industries, processes, and products
but also within the same or similar processes and products [Dutton and Thomas (1984)].


                                                 2
This has stimulated research focused on determining reasons for this variation in learning
rates.
  The accumulated learning within a firm is often called organizational knowledge. Knowl-
edge within a firm can be embedded in its people, its products, its technology, or its
structure [Walsh and Ungson (1991)]. The ability of a firm to transfer knowledge effectively
across these elements within its own organizational boundaries can be a key element of
competitive advantage [Argote (2013), Argote and Ingram (2000)]. Past research has quan-
tified the amount of knowledge transfer across boundaries in the case of ship production
(cross-location transfer), truck production (cross-shift transfer), and aircraft production
(cross-product transfer) by modifying the experience term in the classic learning model to
include a transfer parameter [Argote et al. (1990), Epple et al. (1996), Benkard (2000)].

2.2.     Learning Across Products
The majority of organizational learning studies focus on production of a small number
of products with minor variations (e.g. aircraft, ships, trucks, and automobiles) [Alchian
(1963), Rapping (1965), Argote and Epple (1990), Levitt et al. (2013)]. Yet, 87% of U.S.
output comes from multi-product firms and over half of all U.S. firms alter their product
mix every five years [Bernard et al. (2010)]. Research that looks at learning and product
heterogeneity shows both advantages and disadvantages to an increase or change in product
variety. A consensus has not emerged as to when and how firms should handle processing
a multitude of products simultaneously.
  The benefits associated with specialization were noted as early as Adam Smith [Smith
(1776)]. Indeed, production management and operations largely starts from the assumption
that product variety increases production costs. Results from this literature show that
changeovers in a multi-product environment can be costly due to operators forgetting in the
time in between working on same products [Shtub et al. (1993)] and in the time to switch
tools or molds [Womack et al. (1990)]. An increase in the variety of products produced on
one line also complicates task scheduling, planning of material handling and inventory, as
well as quality control [Fisher and Ittner (1999)].
  Studies have shown different ways to mitigate the negative impacts of product hetero-
geneity. Designing products with shared components [Fisher et al. (1999)], products that
have commonality in their design [Desai et al. (2001)], or products that implement a mod-
ular design or have components that can be reused [Suarez et al. (1995)] can all improve


                                             3
productivity on a production line that handles a mixture of products. Lean manufacturing
and flexible manufacturing systems also implement methods to allow a production line
to handle a variety of products efficiently [Suarez et al. (1996), MacDuffie et al. (1996),
Gaimon and Morton (2005), Suarez et al. (1995), Randall and Ulrich (2001)]. Goyal and
Netessine investigate differences between product flexibility and volume flexibility in the
context of response to demand uncertainty and find adding volume flexibility to existing
product flexibility is always beneficial but that the converse is not always true [Goyal and
Netessine (2011)]. An analysis of survey data of automotive manufacturing plants spanning
from 1999-2007 by Gopal et al. found that the high costs of new product introductions
could be reduced by launching new products at flexible plants with experience in related
platforms [Gopal et al. (2013)]. Studies on these flexible systems characterize the different
types of flexibility these systems can handle yet do not address long term implications for
learning or knowledge development that arise from these product differences.
  Despite this focus in the production and operations management literature on mitigat-
ing product variety and the harmful implications thereof, not all empirical studies find
a negative impact from an increase in product heterogeneity. Indeed, the literature on
organizational learning suggests that the impact of product heterogeneity can be positive.
Past work on accidents in the airline industry suggest that organizations learn more from
diverse than homogenous experiences [Haunschild and Sullivan (2002)]. In manufacturing,
Bernard et al. (2010) show that changing product heterogeneity causes firms to reallocate
resources more efficiently. Additionally, Wiersma (2007) found that heterogeneity in related
products had a positive impact on the learning rate within the Royal Dutch Mail. Boh
et al. (2007) found that heterogeneous experience in related systems enhanced learning in
software development teams.
  Recent work has begun to unpack why product variety can in some cases have positive
implications and in other cases negative implications for productivity. Work by Staats
and Gino (2011) on the Japanese banking industry found the impact of variety on worker
productivity to differ depending on whether a worker experienced the variety within a
single day or across several days. Specialization of tasks within a single day increased
worker productivity. However, variety (switching tasks) over the course of multiple days
improved productivity of the same workers. In addition, workers who experienced higher
variety stayed longer at the firm than those experiencing lower variety. Other work has


                                             4
suggested that heterogeneity within certain confines can be valuable for a worker’s ability
to learn. An experimental study performed by Shilling et al. found that learning rates
were faster when participants were given related tasks than when participants were given
identical tasks or completely unrelated tasks [Schilling et al. (2003)].
  The effect of product variety on productivity also depends on the ability of firms to
transfer knowledge between or across products. Utilizing a dataset that includes successive
models of airplanes built simultaneously on the same production line, Benkard (2000) finds
that there are substantial spillovers from one model to another. Studying the introduction
of three successive variants of an automobile, Levitt et al. (2013) obtain mixed results.
The researchers find that defect rates of the first model were adversely impacted by the
ramp up of the second model while defect rates for the second were not impacted by
ramp up of the third. In the case of knowledge transfer across DRAM generations Irwin
and Klenow (1994) find transfer is statistically significant in five of seven generations and
economically significant (producing a non-trivial impact of production experience) in two
of those generations.
  Retention of knowledge is another factor influencing learning. Beginning with Argote
et al. (1990), a series of studies investigated whether organizational knowledge is cumu-
lative, as the conventional learning curve implies, or whether knowledge depreciates.
Researchers found variation in the extent of knowledge depreciation with several studies
finding significant depreciation [Benkard (2000), Darr et al. (1995), David and Brachet
(2011), Kellogg (2011), Kim and Seo (2009), Madsen and Desai (2010)] and other studies
finding little or no depreciation [Ingram and Simons (2002), Thompson (2007)]. Under-
standing how the extent of knowledge depreciation varies as a function of the organizational
context [Argote (2013)] and the mechanisms underlying depreciation [David and Brachet
(2011)] are active research areas. Knowledge retention, transfer and product variety can
be related so it is important to examine them together in a study. For example, product
variety can cause negative transfer when workers inappropriately apply knowledge gar-
nered on one product to another. If not controlled for, this negative transfer could cause
the appearance of incomplete knowledge retention.
  Past research in operations management and organizational behavior raises important
questions regarding how the nature of product variety might influence organizational learn-
ing and knowledge transfer. We bring empirical evidence to the debate about whether prod-
uct variety is harmful or helpful by examining the effects of different types of heterogeneity


                                              5
and the mechanisms through which the effects occur in a multi-product manufacturing
environment.

2.3.    Research Questions
Our research addresses several interrelated questions all of which focus on bringing under-
standing of learning and knowledge transfer into a multi-product manufacturing environ-
ment:
  1. Does organizational learning occur in a multi-product environment?
  2. Does product heterogeneity affect productivity and learning from experience?
  3. Does knowledge transfer occur across products?
  4. Does knowledge transfer explain the effect of product heterogeneity on productivity
and organizational learning?
  5. Does knowledge acquired through organizational learning depreciate?
In order to unpack the effect of product heterogeneity, we develop measures of different
types of heterogeneity and investigate their effects on both short-term and long-term pro-
ductivity by analyzing the effect of product heterogeneity on the firm’s knowledge base.

2.4.    Definitions and Measures of Product Variety
Product variety can exist on many levels within a factory or firm, and studies within the
production and operations management literature use many definitions of product variety.
How product mix is defined and measured can affect its impact on productivity. Indeed,
MacDuffie et al. find in a study of the automotive industry that different forms of product
variety (e.g., model mix complexity, parts complexity, option content, and option variabil-
ity) have varied impacts on plant productivity [MacDuffie et al. (1996)]. In the printed
circuit board industry, Suarez et al. (1995) identify predictors of flexibility but do not find
a relationship between flexibility and product cost or quality. In the case of the bicycle
industry, work examines variation across attributes (e.g., material, geometry and size, and
color) of components and finds that some variations increase production costs, while others
instead impact “market mediation” costs (i.e., uncertainty in product demand) [Randall
and Ulrich (2001)]. Finally, Kekre and Srinivasan (1990) examine product line breadth
based on self-reported survey data from the PIMS (Profit Impact of Marketing Strategies)
database in their analysis of over 1,400 business units (most of which are part of a Fortune
500 firm) and find firms with larger product lines have increased market share with mini-
mal impact on production costs. Although these studies have advanced our understanding


                                              6
of the effects of product variety on various measures of plant performance, they have not
examined the long-term implications of product variety for organizational learning and the
development of a firm’s knowledge stock. We aim to fill this gap by analyzing the effect
of product variety on both productivity in the short run and learning in the long run
leveraging detailed plant-level data.

3.     Data and Methods
We analyze organizational learning and knowledge transfer within a firm that is a leading
producer of high technology hardware components and one of the leading revenue earners
in its industry. The firm, which is U.S. owned, began moving production from the U.S.
to a developing country in 2001 and by 2004 all of the products had been transferred to
the production facility in the developing country. Our analysis draws on data from 2001
to 2011 at the manufacturing facility in the developing country. The setting we study has
characteristics that make it exceptionally well suited to researching learning in a multi-
product environment: high technology products that require sophisticated assembly and
testing, multiple generations of focal products, large numbers of customized variations
within generations, and a suite of market-related but physically quite different non-focus
products.

3.1.   Data Collection
Our paper leverages three types of data: 1) quantitative archival data from the firm’s
production and human resource tracking systems, 2) surveys conducted with engineers and
direct line worker trainers about process differences, and 3) a qualitative understanding
of production floor and firm operations based on on-site semi-structured interviews and
participant observations at the facility. Table 1 details the types of data collected on the
site visits. Over its history the factory has kept detailed records of production volumes
and yields, sales orders and shipments, labor hours worked, and employment histories of
all its employees. From this record, the data we have obtained, spanning almost a decade,
provide extraordinary detail, including order date, requested delivery date, actual delivery
date, and detailed specifications for each of millions of units produced. In addition, we
have obtained weekly data on labor inputs, and detailed measures of process steps required
for each product type as well as assessments by engineers and trainers of the relative
complexity of these process steps. Our research has also benefitted from knowledge obtained


                                             7
                                 Table 1    Overview of data collection.
                                Site Visit & Data Collection Overview
             Preliminary Site Visit                                        2 days
             First Data Collection Collection Site Visit                   7 days
             Second Data Collection Site Visit                             10 days
                                                                 12 hours observation
             Production Floor Observation
                                                                 2 hours participation
                                                                 8 with vice president
             Semi-structured Interviews                     30 with engineers & managers
                                                                    3 with trainers
                                                              11 final product engineers
             Surveys                                          2 subcomponent engineers
                                                                       3 trainers
             Field Notes                                           112 typed pages
                                                           17.5GB of data from production
             Archival Data Records                         and human resources databases
                                                                from as early as 2001


by extensive observation within the facility and from exceptional support and expertise of
the company’s management, engineers, and trainers.

 3.1.1.   Quantitative Archival Data Details about each type of data provided by the
firm for this study are given in Table 2.
  We use the company’s weekly shipment data from 2001-2011 as our measure of weekly
firm output (qt ), and cumulative output, or production experience (Qt ). The sales and
shipment tracking database, from which we retrieved these data, tracks details of all orders
the factory receives, manufactures, and ships, and includes data on these dates and order
volumes. In addition, the shipment data include information on when orders were placed,
requested for delivery, scheduled for shipment, and actually shipped.
  Although shipment data can have limitations as a measure of output, due to a potential
lag between completion of production and shipment to the customer, these limitations
are not an issue in our empirical context. Because of distinctive specifications from cus-
tomers, the firm produces almost entirely to order. Hence, inventory holdings are minimal,
and production-delivery lags are short. As long as any order-delivery lags vary randomly
from week to week, these variations do not bias our estimates [Greene (2003)]. Systematic
variation in order-delivery lags could potentially cause bias, for example, if end-of-quarter
reports incentivized shortening such lags as the end of quarter draws near. To investigate
this possibility, we have included within-quarter variables denoting the number of weeks


                                                    8
                       Table 2     Overview of quantitative archival data sources.
                                 Primary Data                                 Secondary Data
                                           Human Resources                             Hard Copies of
                    Sales & Shipment                              Production Floor
 Data Source                                 Employment                                Weekly Hours
                         Reports                                  Tracking System
                                              Database                                    Report
 Data Details        Volume of each        Date that each of     Input and output      Weekly hours
                     order and date        the factory’s over        production        worked by rate
                      the order was        20, 000 employees      volumes for key       and division
                    place, requested,          was hired,           testing steps
                      scheduled for             resigned,         broken down by:
                     shipment, and           promoted, or          shift, product,
                    actually shipped            changed          exact test station,
                                           shifts/supervisors       and operator
 Data                  2001–2011              2001–2011              2004–2009            2004–2008
 Availability
 Calculated        Shipment volumes        Labor input (Lt )         Per-step            Labor hours
 Variable(s)        (qt , Qt ), Product                         production volumes
                   heterogeneity (sn,t ,
                     Gt , Mt ), Order
                      equivalents of
                          product
                      heterogeneity
                       measures for
                        instruments


to the end of quarter. As we discuss more fully below, these variables do not affect our
findings.
  We use the company’s weekly employed count of direct line workers from 2001-2011 as
a measure of labor input (Lt ). The employment database, from which we retrieve these
data, tracks each employee’s hire date, resignation date, and any promotions or changes in
position at a daily level. Employee counts can, nonetheless, have limitations as a measure
of labor input if employees do not work regularly. Our firm experienced growing demand
over the time period we study, and local labor conditions permitted the firm to add to its
workforce as needed to accommodate growing demand. Hence, the count of employees and
actual labor input track each other closely.

  3.1.2.    Surveys/Structured Interviews We worked with the firm’s engineers to estab-
lish a list of process steps for each of the focus products. The aggregate of these lists encom-
passed seventy-seven different processes across the focus products. Once the process list
was defined, we distributed surveys to additional engineers, asking them: to rank process
difficulty by product; estimate the commonality of machinery, trainers, technicians, and
engineers across focus products; and answer general questions about commonalities across


                                                    9
products. These questions included eliciting the engineer’s perceptions of what makes prod-
ucts similar and their experience with implementing new products on the production line.
  The processes cover three stages of production: assembly, testing, and final preparation.
Different engineers are responsible for each of these stages of production. A total of eleven
engineers in the primary section of the factory filled out the survey from which we develop
our engineering process measures. Two additional engineers filled out the survey for sections
of the factory responsible for producing subcomponents. A sample of the survey given to
engineers can be found in Appendix A.
  We also used a modified version of the process survey to conduct structured interviews
with three trainers. The modified survey can be found in Appendix B. We talked through
each process step with the trainer and asked for a process categorization and average train-
ing time for each process. One head trainer is responsible for the three stages of production
within the primary production line. While we interviewed two other trainers responsible
for sections of the facility that produce subcomponents, we relied on our detailed interview
with the head trainer for creating the training process measures used in our analysis.

  3.1.3.   Qualitative Data Over the course of the three site visits, we spent a total of
nineteen days in the production facility, twelve hours observing the production floor, and an
additional two hours actually participating on the production line (assisted by a trainer).
We performed forty-one semi-structured interviews with managers, engineers, and train-
ers. These observations and interviews were transcribed, along with regular interactions
with employees throughout the day, observations from a weekend outing spent with two
employees, and interactions over the course of twenty-four meals shared with employees,
into 112 typed pages of notes. All transcriptions were completed within at least forty-eight
hours, the majority within twenty-four hours. Through these interactions we were able
to gain insights in to the history of the plant, how engineers and managers think about
product similarity, and how production innovations, such as altered training procedures or
new testing equipment, are incorporated into the flow of the plant.

3.2.   Product Heterogeneity
Between 2001 and 2011, the developing country facility manufactured five types of focus
products and fourteen types of non-focus products, comprising 86% and 14%, respectively,
of total production volume. Table 3 details for each of the focus and non-focus product


                                             10
                         Table 3     Comparison of focus and non-focus products.
       Focus or                                 Percentage of  Number of   Physical Volume
       Non-Focus Form Factor                     Cumulative      Distinct    Relative to
       Products                                Shipped Volume Part Numbers   Focus FF1

       Focus       FF1: Focus Products 1-2          72.83%             887         1.0
                   FF2: Focus Products 3-5          12.91%             252         1.0
       Non-focus   Focus Variation 1                3.16%             2,227        1.0
                   Focus Variation 2                1.95%              127         1.2
                   Focus Variation 3                0.16%               11         1.0
                   Subcomponent                     2.03%              109         0.1
                   Accessory                        1.87%               5          1.1
                   Non   Focus   1                  1.79%              385         3.1
                   Non   Focus   2                  1.55%             1,862        1.9
                   Non   Focus   3                  0.73%               51         6.7
                   Non   Focus   4                  0.11%               14         8.2
                   Non   Focus   5                  0.10%               14         1.3
                   Non   Focus   6                  0.05%              157         9.0
                   Non   Focus   7                  0.02%               17         5.5
                   Non   Focus   8                  0.01%               25         0.5
                   Miscellaneous                    0.72%              977         –


types: the shipment volumes as a percentage of cumulative shipped volume, number of
distinct part numbers (a measure of variety within specific product types driven largely
by customer-specific customizations), and physical volume relative to the primary focus
product form factor.
  The focus products are similar in form factor (i.e., size and shape) and end use. While
the end use of focal products does not change across generations, technological advances
result in changes of components within those products from one generation to the next,
and associated increase in capabilities. Each new generation of the focal product adds to
the firm’s product offerings; prior generations continue to be produced and sold. The firm
considers these focal products its main priority and is a leader in this market. The flow of
orders over time for the five generations of the firm’s focus products is much less volatile
than for the remaining products in the firm’s portfolio. The focus products are expected
to improve roughly every 6-18 months, and customers plan accordingly.
  By contrast, the non-focus products are a mixture of product types with different under-
lying end-uses for customers, different form factors based on industry standards, and dif-
ferent implementations of the underlying technology. We were able to group the non-focus
products into fourteen categories: three variations on the focus product form factor, one


                                                    11
grouping of subcomponents sold directly, one accessory product, eight alternate form fac-
tors, and a collection of miscellaneous products.
     The relative physical volume measure provides a sense of how different the various prod-
ucts are from each other. The physical size of the non-focus products ranges from 0.1 to 9.0
times that of the physical size of the focus products. Although the underlying technology
across all of the firm’s products is based on the same scientific principles, the end prod-
ucts across these non-focus groupings are dramatically different not only from the focus
products, but also from each other.
     Figure 1A shows the shares of shipment volume over time for each of the focus product
generations and the grouping of all non-focus products1 . Figure 1B shows the shares of
non-focus shipment volume over time for each type of non-focus product. Each shaded
region in Figure 1B is a unique non-focus product grouping.




                                                         Figure 1



     Beyond core product differences, there is an additional level of variety within products
due to customers often requesting specific variations including tailored performance speci-
fications, additional required tests, or cosmetic alterations (such as label placement). Each
product, including each customization, receives a distinct part number. These customized
parts can be produced in the facility for a long period of time or can be one-time orders

1
    To facilitate visual illustration of patterns over time, all figures show four-week averages of variables being portrayed.



                                                              12
over its 10-year history. The facility has manufactured 1,139 specific variations across the
five types of focus products and 5,818 specific variations across the fourteen types of non-
focus products as measured by unique part numbers, typically producing multiple units of
each variation.

 3.2.1.   Measures We utilize the data detailed above to create four measures of product
heterogeneity – the share of non-focus products, the generational overlap index (which
captures the variety of product generations produced contemporaneously on the line),
and customization indices for both focus and non-focus products (based on the customer-
specific product requests).
  Using the shipment data we calculate shipment volumes by product grouping and use
this by-grouping data to calculate our heterogeneity measures. The share of non-focus
products is our first measure of product heterogeneity on the line. Figure 1A shows the
share of non-focus products over time.
  Our second measure of product heterogeneity is a variant of the Herfindahl index that
captures the mix of focus product generations being produced contemporaneously on the
line. Two recent studies on the impact of product heterogeneity on productivity have used
the Herfindahl index to aggregate data across types of products or tasks into a single term
representing the variety of products on the line [Wiersma (2007), Staats and Gino (2011)].
This index accounts for changes in product mix more broadly than would a measure of the
share of one type of product. The Herfindahl index, or Herfindahl-Hirschman index, is the
sum of squared shares, s, of the variable of interest:
                                              N
                                              X
                                         H=         s2i                                  (3)
                                              i=1

  Our index of co-production of different generations of the focus products is one minus
the Herfindahl index of shares of those products. This definition facilitates interpretation
because the index increases with increasing heterogeneity of products produced. We refer
to this as our generational overlap index:
                                                  5
                                                  X
                                       G=1−             s2i                              (4)
                                                  i=1

  Importantly, this measure is based only on generations of focus products; non-focus
products are sufficiently heterogeneous as to lack a natural classification into generations.


                                             13
The degree of generational overlap is increasing in G. G takes on a value of 0 when only
one generation is being produced. As the number of generations produced at a given time
increases, the value of G rises. G also increases as the shares of different generations being
produced become more equal. Figure 2A shows a plot of our generational overlap index.




                                          Figure 2




  This figure shows the increasing generations of the focus product on the line over time.
The increase in G arises because, as shown in Figure 1A, the introduction of new genera-
tions does not result in the phasing out of previous generations.
  We define two measures – which we call our customization indices (M ) – to capture
product customizations within our focus and non-focus product groupings undertaken
by the firm to meet specific customer requests. These measures, for focus and non-focus
products respectively, are total part numbers for each product category divided by the
shipment volume of that product category. We denote these part numbers per volume
measures as Mf,t and Mn,t . Figure 2B shows a plot comparing this measure for focus
products and non-focus products.
  As can be seen in Figure 2B, the ratio of part numbers to shipment volume is much higher
for the non-focus products than the focus products. Of course, the number of focus products
produced is more than four times the number of non-focus products. Hence the total
number of customizations of focus products is greater than the number of customizations
of non-focus products.


                                              14
  3.2.2.   Variation in the Difficulty of Producing Different Products Certain products
may be more difficult to produce than others. Our models include measures of the share of
non-focus products to capture a major likely source of differences in difficulty. To investi-
gate this issue further, we collected data on the process steps required for each generation
of the focus products and three different measures of the difficulty of each of those steps:
the category assigned to each process step in the firm’s training system, the time required
to teach new workers each of the process steps as part of their training system, and the
difficulty (on a scale of 1-5) assigned by engineers to each of the process steps. We col-
lected data on all three of these measures in October 2011 through the surveys described in
section 3.1.2. To create weekly measures of the difficulty of the products being produced,
we multiplied the process difficulty measure by the number of that type of process that
went into the focus products shipped in a given week. For example, the company’s training
system has three categories for processes: simple processes, for which a machine conducts
the primary action; skill-based processes, which require some training; and criteria-based
processes, which require the direct line worker to meet a particular criteria before passing
the product on to the next process step. We have trainer categorization of all 77 process
steps identified for the focus product generations, training time for each, and engineer
difficulty rank for each.
  Figure 3 shows over-time plots of: a) shares of levels of engineer difficulty ranking,
b) shares of levels of training times, and c) shares of trainer categorization. The three
metrics (engineering rank, training time, trainer categorization) give a relatively consistent
picture of the evolution of the difficulty of processes within the factory: as the focus prod-
ucts have evolved through their generations and become more technologically complex,
the plant has shifted towards more criteria-based processes which require longer training
times and which are perceived by engineers to be more difficult processes. At the same
time, the more complex products require fewer engineer-ranked simple processes and fewer
very-short-training-time processes.

3.3.   Empirical Models
To analyze the organization’s learning rate, we begin with the traditional learning model.
We then expand this model to incorporate measures of product heterogeneity and knowl-
edge depreciation. We conclude by looking at transfer of knowledge across product gener-
ations [Epple et al. (1991, 1996), Benkard (2000)].


                                             15
                                             Figure 3


  3.3.1.   Foundational Learning Model We begin with a basic model of firm productivity
that incorporates learning and labor input

                           ln (qt ) = β0 + β1 ln (Qt−1 ) + β3 ln (Lt ) + t                   (5)

where qt is the production volume in week t as measured by products shipped, Qt is the
cumulative production volume through week t also as measured by products shipped, Lt is
the labor input as measured by the total number of line workers employed in week t, and
t is the error term [Argote (2013)].
  To investigate whether the incremental gain from learning varies over time, we add a
quadratic experience term, ln (Qt−1 )2 . To examine the impact of the mix of non-focus versus
focus products on the firm’s overall productivity, we add the share of non-focus products
shipped in week t, sn,t . To analyze the impact of the mix of generations of focus products on
the line on the firm’s overall productivity, we include our focus product generational overlap
index, Gt , as defined previously in section 3.2.1. To capture the impact of buyer-requested
customizations on the firm’s overall productivity we include our two customization indices,
part numbers per unit for focus products, Mf,t and part numbers per unit for non-focus
products, Mn,t , as defined previously in section 3.2.1:

 ln (qt ) = β0 +β1 ln (Qt−1 )+β2 ln (Qt−1 )2 +β3 ln (Lt )+β4 sn,t +β5 Gt +β6 Mf,t +β7 Mn,t +t (6)

  3.3.2.   Knowledge Retention We next extend the model to investigate whether knowl-
edge depreciates. Following Argote et al. (1990), we replace cumulative production, Q,
with a measure, K, that allows for potential depreciation:

                                         Kt = λKt−1 + qt                                      (7)

If knowledge depreciates, λ < 1. If there is no depreciation of knowledge, λ = 1. In the
latter case of no knowledge depreciation, this measure reduces to the cumulative output
measure in the previous section.


                                                 16
 3.3.3.     Learning Model with Cross-Product Knowledge Transfer We next incorpo-
rate knowledge transfer into the model detailed in the preceding section 3.3.1. We general-
ize the knowledge variable to permit differences in transfer of knowledge across products.
This model is similar to the transfer model introduced in [Epple et al. (1991)] and further
developed in [Epple et al. (1996)]. The model is:

           ln (qt ) = β0 + β1 ln (Kt−1 ) + β3 ln (Lt ) + β4 sn,t + β5 Gt + β6 Mf,t + β7 Mn,t + t
                         X
          where Kt =        si,t Ki,t
                         i                                                                          (8)
                 Ki,t = Qi,t + γ (Qt − Qi,t )
                        qi,t
                 si,t =
                        qt
To simplify the exposition, we do not incorporate depreciation in the above. As in our
model from the preceding section, it is straightforward to incorporate depreciation, and
we do so at the appropriate juncture in our analysis. In defining knowledge when there
are differences in cross-product transfer, it is necessary to adopt a specification of the
way in which knowledge about production of individual products aggregates to overall
knowledge employed in production. In a joint-product environment, it is inherent that
there is not a separate productivity measure for each product. Hence, inference about
transfer across products must be made from information about overall productivity of the
suite of products produced in each period. Our specification of the knowledge variable,
Kt , in equation (8) weights knowledge specific to product i, Ki,t , by share of the product
produced at date t, si,t . The weighing of Ki,t by product shares to form Kt is based on
the logic that knowledge about product i used in production is proportional to the share
of product i being produced. This share-weighting formulation is, we believe, the most
natural specification, but it is nonetheless an important assumption underlying our analysis
of transfer. This model permits each product to accumulate knowledge from its own past
production, Qi,t , and to benefit from possible transfer of knowledge from other products
(Qt − Qi,t ). Parameter γ measures the proportion of knowledge gained from production of
other products that is transferred to enhance knowledge for production of product i. Our
previous model in equation 6 implicitly sets γ equal to 1.
  The transfer specification above assumes symmetry in transfer of knowledge across prod-
ucts, i.e., γ is the same for all products. We extend this model of knowledge accumulation
to allow potential asymmetries in knowledge transfer across products.


                                                    17
     We explore whether there is differential transfer of knowledge by introducing four transfer
parameters that capture transfer from non-focus products to focus products (γn2f ), transfer
from focus products to non-focus products (γf 2n ), transfer “up” the generational hierarchy
(from older focus products to newer products) (γu ), and transfer “down” the generational
hierarchy (from newer focus products to older focus products) (γd ). This yields the following
specification of knowledge accumulation for our six products:

                           K1,t = Q1,t + γd (Q2,t + Q3,t ) + γn2f Qn,t
                           K2,t = Q2,t + γu (Q1,t ) + γd (Q3,t ) + γn2f Qn,t
                                                                                            (9)
                           K3,t = Q3,t + γu (Q1,t + Q2,t ) + γn2f Qn,t

                           Kn,t = Qn,t + γf 2n (Q1,t + Q2,t + Q3,t )

where K1 to K3 are knowledge for our focus product generations and Kn is knowledge for
our non-focus products. We aggregate generations 3, 4, and 5 of the focus product into one
generation to avoid proliferation of parameters. As is evident from Figure 1A, generations
3 and 4 were introduced at approximately the same time. These generations, as well as
generation 5, share common technological advances that distinguish them from both first
and second generation products. Production of generation 5 was exceedingly small during
the time frame of our data. Thus, K1 is knowledge for generation 1, K2 is knowledge for
generation 2, and K3 is knowledge for generations 3-5.

4.     Results
We first present results from the model in equation 6 which assumes that each product
benefits equally from all prior units of all products produced. We then follow with results
for the generalization in Section 3.3.3 that allows differential knowledge transfer across
products.

4.1.     Organizational Learning
We report and discuss results obtained when estimating our models by ordinary least
squares, in anticipation of our later finding that our results are robust to instrumenting
for the potential endogeneity of labor and our product heterogeneity variables. All models
reported in this paper are estimated with weekly data.
     It is instructive to begin with the series of results presented in Table 4 that do not
incorporate cross-product transfer or depreciation. The baseline model in column (1) and


                                                 18
                  Table 4   Estimation results: Learning model with part number per volume measures.
                               (1)        (2)           (3)              (4)           (5)            (6)            (7)
    β1 , Experience         0.548*** 3.794***       2.785***       0.434         0.283***       0.283***        0.276***
       ln (Qt−1 )           (0.100)  (0.614)        (0.403)        (0.316)       (0.041)        (0.041)         (0.041)
    β2 , Experience Sq.                -0.103*** -0.076*** -0.005
                   2
       (ln (Qt−1 ))                    (0.022)   (0.013)   (0.010)
    β3 , Labor              0.206      0.562*       0.477***       0.270***      0.259***       0.274***        0.245***
       ln (Lt )             (0.280)    (0.312)      (0.156)        (0.070)       (0.072)        (0.075)         (0.067)
    β4 , Share Non-focus                            -1.992*** -0.584             -0.634         -0.603          -0.674
       sn,t                                         (0.335)   (0.415)            (0.402)        (0.402)         (0.427)
    β5 , Gen. Overlap                               0.789***       0.505***      0.480***       0.497***        0.481***
       Gf,t                                         (0.255)        (0.127)       (0.122)        (0.123)         (0.128)
    β6 , Cust.: Focus                                              -810.422*** -813.042*** -810.861*** -813.434***
       Mf,t                                                        (87.219)    (86.192)    (87.343)    (82.585)
    β7 , Cust.: Non-focus                                          -23.165***    -23.623***     -23.447***      -24.024***
       Mn,t                                                        (5.061)       (4.940)        (4.960)         (4.928)
    Eng. Rank Avg.                                                                              -0.464
                                                                                                (0.996)
                                                                                                                           a
    Depreciation                                                                                                1.001***
      λ                                                                                                         (0.002)
    Observations            461        461          461            461           461            461             461
    R-squared               0.834      0.860        0.880          0.956         0.956          0.956           0.956
    Durbin-Watson           1.536      1.817        1.958          1.873         1.873          1.873           2.710
    Log Likelihood          -158.259 -120.279       -84.990        144.871       144.685        144.813         144.800
    Note: *, **, *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels respectively. Newey-West
    robust standard errors reported in parentheses for columns 1–6 and White robust standard errors reported
    in parentheses for column 7. The constant term is omitted for firm confidentiality.

a
 Statistical significance is marked here as difference from 0, consistent with other parameters, however we are interested in
difference from 1 for the depreciation parameter.




all subsequent specifications show significant learning by doing as well as significant coef-
ficients for labor input. The model in column (2) incorporates a quadratic in cumulative
past production to investigate possible diminution in the effect of learning as experience
accumulates. The significant negative coefficient on this term suggests that the rate of
learning diminishes as cumulative production increases2 . As we show below, however, our
exceptionally rich data set permits us to look into the black box to shed light on the mech-

2
 The peak of this quadratic function occurs well beyond the cumulative volume observed in our data. Hence, this
specification implies that learning by doing continues throughout the entire production period that we observe.



                                                              19
anisms at work and demonstrate that the evidence does not, in fact, imply a decline in the
benefits of learning.
  In column (3), we add the share of non-focus products, sn,t , and the generational-
overlap index for focus products, Gt . We find that a higher proportion of non-focus prod-
ucts decreases productivity. As we detailed in Section 3.2, these products differ in many
important respects from the focus products. In contrast, increasing generational overlap
in production increases productivity. Our finding that this form of product heterogeneity
increases productivity is striking. Before turning to a more detailed exploration of this
finding, we explore the effects of controlling for other factors that can impact productiv-
ity. In column (4), we introduce measures of customizations arising from buyer-specific
requests for product modifications, with separate customization indices for focus and non-
focus products. We find that increases in customizations per unit of both product types
reduce productivity. This finding about the difficulty of producing many variations of core
products is in line with our qualitative findings from interviews with engineers. Specifically,
one engineer stated “Things are . . . customized because we try to keep market share. The
mix on the line of multiple shells and types of enclosures is hard.”
  To interpret the customization coefficients, it is useful to convert them to elasticities
– the percent change in production from a one percent change in customization holding
other variables constant. With the dependent variable expressed in logarithmic form, the
elasticity of output with respect to any non-logged independent variable, x, is Eq,x = βx x̄.
We find that focus products have a customization index elasticity of −0.20; a 1% increase in
customizations reduces production by 0.2%. Our non-focus products have a customization
index elasticity of −0.07. These elasticities show that a 1% increase in custom part numbers
per unit volume of focus products has an adverse effect on productivity that is three times
as large as a 1% increase in custom part numbers per unit volume of a non-focus product.
Interestingly, the coefficient of the share of non-focus products becomes smaller and less
significant in column (4), suggesting that the customizations (part numbers per volume)
account for part of the negative effect of the share of non-focus products. The effect of
generational overlap remains positive and significant when the customization variables are
included.
  Once we control for buyer-specific product modifications, as we do in columns (4) and (5),
we no longer find evidence of a diminution in the rate of learning (the quadratic term in


                                              20
cumulative output becomes small in magnitude and statistically insignificant). This finding
demonstrates the importance the kind of rich product detail that we have been fortunate
to obtain for this analysis can play in understanding the dynamics of learning in a multi-
product facility. Absent this extensive detail, we could have mistakenly concluded that the
benefit of learning by doing in the plant diminished over time.
    Our ability to characterize three different types of product heterogeneity also offers an
opportunity to reconcile past results from research on organizational learning with other
results from operations management. Our finding with respect to the negative impact
of buyer-specific product customizations echoes findings in the operations management
literature that frequent product changes are costly. Our finding with respect to the benefits
of producing overlapping generations of focus products echoes prior findings in the learning
literature about the potential benefits to productivity of product variety. Thus, producing
different generations of the same product helps productivity, while product customizations
harm productivity. We examine in a subsequent section whether the positive effect of
co-producing different generations of focus products is explained by knowledge transfer.
    In column (6) in Table 4, we add the engineering difficulty measure. This measure has
the anticipated algebraic sign showing that an increase in engineering difficulty decreases
productivity. This variable, however, is not statistically significant and including it does
not affect our other coefficients. Hence, column (5) is our preferred model from our analysis
thus far3 .
    It is useful to interpret the quantitative magnitudes of the estimates in column (5).
The coefficients of the logarithm of experience and the logarithm of labor are elasticities.
Hence, a 1% increase in experience increases output by 0.28% holding all else constant.
A 1% increase in labor increases output 0.26% holding all else constant. The elasticity
of output with respect to share non-focus is −0.08. The elasticity of output with respect
to the generational overlap index is 0.90. This is a strikingly large effect. As Figure 2A
shows, the generational overlap index increased from zero to 0.5 from 2005 to 2006. This
coupled with the coefficient on 0.48 in column (5) imply an increase in production of 27%
from the increase in generational overlap during that period. The index continues to rise

3
 We see similar results when we add in our other two process difficulty measures, share of training categorization and
average training time. In these cases as well the measures themselves are not significant and have minimal change to
the magnitudes and no change to the significance levels of the core variables in the model.



                                                         21
in subsequent years to 0.75. Hence, over the period of our data, the generational overlap
index is associated with a total increase in productivity of 43%. We explore these and other
managerial implications in greater detail in a later section of the paper.

 4.1.1.   Endogeneity & Robustness One might be concerned about endogeneity in our
product mix variables if the firm intentionally alters their product mix in a given week to
improve productivity. We investigated potential endogeneity using instrumental variables.
Order arrivals provide ideal variables for constructing instruments. Order placement is
driven by customer demand and the firm does not restrict the number of orders accepted
by its sales staff. Thus, order flow is exogenous to our production facility.
  We investigated potential endogeneity of all independent-variables in column (5) of
Table 4 except lagged cumulative output. We created instruments as follows. We calcu-
lated for each week the share of non-focus products in orders, a generational overlap index
from orders, and customization indices from orders. We then calculated six-week averages
of each of these variables, and used the one-period lag of each these as instruments. As
an instrument for the logarithm of labor, we used the lagged logarithm of labor. These
are strong instruments. The first-stage F-statistics were 24 or higher for each of the five
potentially endogenous regressors. Using these instruments, we tested for exogeneity of the
five potentially endogenous variables, and found p-values above 0.4 for all variables except
share non-focus, for which we obtained a p-value of 0.09. Thus, we find no evidence to
reject exogeneity of any right-hand-side variable except, possibly, share non-focus.
  In Table 5 we report instrumental variable estimates. For ease of comparison, column (5)
of Table 4 is repeated as column (1) of Table 5. In column (2), we report the results of
instrumental variable (IV) estimation treating all but lagged cumulative output as endoge-
nous and using the five instruments described in the preceding paragraph. In column (3) we
report results of instrumenting only for share non-focus using the lagged six-week average
of share non-focus described in the preceding paragraph. In column (2), the estimate of the
coefficient of share non-focus increases substantially relative to column (1). In column (3),
the estimate of share non-focus is much higher and is statistically significant.
  The change in the coefficient of share non-focus with IV estimation is intuitive. A per-
spicacious manager might choose to increase the share of the more-difficult-to-produce
non-focus products during weeks when the production process is going quite well (i.e.,


                                             22
     Table 5   Estimation results: Instrumented learning model with part number per volume measures.
                                                     (1)          (2)           (3)
                β1 , Experience                 0.283***      0.295***      0.323***
                   ln (Qt−1 )                   (0.041)       (0.073)       (0.043)
                β3 , Labor                      0.259***      0.293***      0.302***
                   ln (Lt )                     (0.072)       (0.076)       (0.071)
                β4 , Share Non-focus            -0.634        -1.487        -2.409***
                   sn,t                         (0.402)       (1.080)       (0.820)
                β5 , Generational Overlap       0.480***      0.425*        0.409***
                   Gt                           (0.122)       (0.242)       (0.130)
                β6 , Customization: Focus       -813.042*** -747.970*** -589.099***
                   Mf,t                         (86.192)    (214.534)   (125.913)
                β7 , Customization: Non-focus -23.623***      -28.012**     -39.203***
                   Mn,t                       (4.940)         (12.601)      (8.353)
                Observations                  461             461           461
                R2                              0.956         0.954         0.951
                Durbin-Watson                   1.873         1.913         1.943
                Note: *, **, *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
                levels respectively. White standard errors are used and are reported in
                parentheses. The constant term is omitted for firm confidentiality.

t > 0). By thus increasing sn,t during weeks of high t , the manager creates a positive cor-
relation between the sn,t and t . This imparts an upward bias to the coefficient of sn,t when
the equation is estimated by least squares. IV estimation removes this upward bias, and,
hence, yields a larger estimate of the cost of increasing the share of non-focus products.
Note, relatedly that with IV estimation the coefficient of the customization index, Mn,t ,
declines in magnitude. This too is intuitive, because bias in the coefficient of an endogenous
variable impart bias to coefficients of variables that are correlated with the endogenous
variable. Variables Mn,t (the non-focus customization index) and sn,t (the share of non-
focus products) are negatively correlated. Eliminating the bias in the coefficient of sn,t also
eliminates bias the coefficient of Mn,t .
  While the effect of correcting for endogeneity of sn,t is quite intuitive, the correction
does not change our substantive findings or conclusions. Indeed, aside from the shift in the
coefficients of sn,t and Mn,t , the coefficients of other variables are little affected. Overall,
then, the IV estimates ratify our findings and conclusions with respect to learning in the
multi-product environment that we study.
  We investigated robustness of our generational overlap measure by reducing the exponent
                          P  1.5                                            P  2
to a level of 1.5, G = 1 − 5i=1 qqitt , from the baseline value of 2, G = 1 − 5i=1 qqitt .


                                                   23
This allows the generational overlap index to give larger weight to product generations
with smaller shares. Our results are robust to this alternate calculation of the generational
overlap index4 . We verified the robustness of our results to adding controls for differences
in process difficulty across our generations of focus products.
    We also investigated capital investment as an alternative source of productivity growth.
The firm that we study did not make significant new capital investments in the facility
during the timeframe of our analysis. From interviews and on-site observation, we learned
that new testing equipment was developed within the plant that permitted more rapid
testing and thereby potentially enhanced productivity. This development in the plant can
be thought of as embedding knowledge from learning by doing into equipment. Experience
with production created the knowledge base that led engineers to develop insights leading
to improvements in testing equipment and procedures. It is nonetheless of interest to
investigate whether this testing innovation had a significant effect on productivity. To do
so, we created a dummy variable, Dt , which is equal to 0 before the new testing equipment
was introduced and equal to 1 afterward. Table 6 shows the results of the inclusion of this
dummy variable and an interaction term of this dummy variable with experience. Neither
the dummy variable nor the interaction term themselves are significant and they do not
impact our results. Thus, our results are robust to the inclusion of this control for improved
testing equipment.
    In additional analysis, we investigated whether the residuals exhibit serial correlation
in our preferred model in column (5) of Table 4 by calculating Q-statistics. We found no
evidence of serial correlation up through 12 lags, but significant correlation at the 13th lag.
An effect at the 13th lag could potentially arise, for example, if the facility exerts some
extra effort at the end-of-quarter to speed shipment of completed products to meet delivery
requests. Estimating the model in column (5) with an autorogressive term at the 13th
lag, we obtain a significant but modest auroregressive coefficient of 0.24. The coefficients
and significance levels of the variables in column (5) were otherwise not notably affected
aside from an increase in the significance of share non-focus. Hence, there is, overall, little
serial correlation, and no effect on our conclusions when we account for the modest serial
correlation evident at quarterly frequency.
4
 Concern has been raised about potential bias in the Herfindahl Index, the basis for our generational overlap index,
due to measurement error, [Hall (2005)]. Bias can arise when the index is calculated from count data with a small
number of counts. Our data do not suffer from this problem because our product counts are exceedingly large. For a
discussion of the merits of the Herfindahl index relative to other indices, see Palan (2010).



                                                        24
                   Table 6    Estimation results: Inclusion of capital dummy variable.
                                                               (1)           (2)
                    β1 , Experience                       0.276***      0.276***
                       ln (Qt−1 )                         (0.046)       (0.049)
                    β3 , Labor                            0.254***      0.254***
                       ln (Lt )                           (0.068)       (0.090)
                    β4 , Share Non-focus                  -0.672*       -0.672
                       sn,t                               (0.406)       (0.426)
                    β5 , Generational Overlap             0.487***      0.486***
                       Gf,t                               (0.122)       (0.123)
                    β6 , Customization: Focus             -816.408*** -816.383***
                       Mf,t                               (87.752)    (87.768)
                    β7 , Customization: Non-focus         -23.979***    -23.988***
                       Mn,t                               (5.044)       (5.136)
                    Capital                               0.022         0.006
                      Dt                                  (0.036)       (1.186)
                    Interaction: Capital & Experience                   0.001
                      Dt × ln (Qt−1 )                                   (0.067)
                    Observations                      461               461
                    R2                                    0.956         0.956
                    Durbin-Watson                         1.878         1.878
                    Log Likelihood                        144.967       144.967
                    Note: *, **, *** denote statistical significance at the 10%,
                    5%, and 1% levels respectively. Newey-West robust standard
                    errors reported in parentheses. The constant term is omitted
                    for firm confidentiality.




4.2.   Knowledge Retention

We next turn to investigation of knowledge retention. In column (7) of Table 4, we incorpo-
rate the depreciation parameter detailed in equation 7. Here, we see that the depreciation
parameter, previously set equal to one, is not significantly different from one, and we
conclude that the facility does not exhibit forgetting or knowledge depreciation.
  We also investigated the potential for confounding learning and time-varying influences
unrelated to learning. To do this, we added a time trend to the model in column (7) of
Table 4. We find the estimated coefficient of the time trend to be quantitatively small and
statistically insignificant. The statistical significance of all other variables is unchanged,
including an estimated depreciation parameter that does not differ from 1.


                                                   25
4.3.   Knowledge Transfer
A key and robust finding from our analysis thus far is that production of overlapping
product generations enhances productivity. We turn to a more detailed investigation of
transfer to better understand why this effect occurs. The framework in equation (9) is a
generalization of the framework we have studied thus far, and reduces to the latter when
all of the transfer parameters equal 1. We estimate this model by nonlinear least squares.


       Table 7    Estimation results: Knowledge transfer model with part number per volume measures.
                                                                (1)           (2)            (3)
        β1 , Knowledge                                     0.287***      0.375***      0.285***
           ln (Kt−1 )                                      (0.040)       (0.060)       (0.040)
        β3 , Labor                                         0.261***      0.203***      0.271***
           ln (Lt )                                        (0.066)       (0.075)       (0.065)
        β4 , Share Non-focus                               -0.338        -0.229        -0.207
           sn,t                                            (0.386)       (0.404)       (0.393)
        β5 , Generational Overlap                          0.603***      0.407**       0.366**
           Gt                                              (0.142)       (0.169)       (0.144)
        Partnums/Vol Focus                                 -803.880*** -820.586*** -809.796***
          P P Vf,t                                         (77.801)    (81.416)    (79.894)
        Partnums/Vol Nonfocus                              -21.619***    -21.182***    -20.423***
          P P Vn,t                                         (4.472)       (4.714)       (4.720)
        Transfer: Non-focus→Focus                          0.590         6.725         =0
          γn2f                                             (1.720)       (5.267)
        Transfer: Focus→Non-focus                          -0.127        -0.133        =0
          γf 2n                                            (0.304)       (0.525)
        Transfer: Older→Newer Focus                        1.402**
          γu                                               (0.546)
        Transfer: Older→Newer Focus, year 1 only                         3.037*        2.948**
                                                                         (1.814)       (1.215)
        Transfer: Older→Newer Focus, after year 1 only                   -0.650        0.500
                                                                         (1.202)       (0.844)
        Transfer: Newer→Older Focus                        -2.669***     -1.899        =0
          γd                                               (0.793)       (1.212)
        Observations                                       461           461           461
        R2                                                 0.957         0.958         0.957
        Durbin-Watson                                      1.937         1.918         1.924
        Log Likelihood                                     153.919       156.380       152.701
        Note: *, **, *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels respectively.
        Standard errors are reported in parentheses. The constant term is omitted for firm confi-
        dentiality.


                                                    26
  Column (1) of Table 7 reports the results of estimating the model in equation (9).
The coefficients of the knowledge variable, Kt−1 , labor input, Lt , and each of the product
heterogeneity terms (sn,t , Gt , Mf,t , Mn,t ) retain similar magnitudes and significance levels
as their counterparts in column (5) of Table 4. This similarity speaks to the robustness of
our findings.
  Turning to the estimates of the transfer parameters, we see, as expected, that transfer
from older to newer focus products, γu , is substantial and statistically significant. Not
surprisingly, the parameters capturing transfer between focus and non-focus products, γn2f
and γf 2n , are insignificantly different from 0. By contrast, the large negative value of the
coefficient measuring transfer from newer to older products, γd , is unexpected. Introduction
of newer products might entail production changes that adversely affect production of
older products, as found by Levitt et al. (2013), but the magnitude and significance of
the estimate in column (1) is unexpected, especially given that large volumes of the older
products continue to be produced throughout the timeframe of our data. These results,
however, match insights we gained from our discussions with the firm. One high-level
manager stated “In general we focus our energy for making process improvements on
newer generations of products. This makes our engineering investments more effective and
requires less customer notification/qualification.” This explanation corroborates that we
would not expect improvements on newer products to transfer to older products.
  We conjectured that estimated negative transfer to older products might be an artifact
of failing to capture fully the timing of transfer of knowledge from older to newer products.
Hence, we extended our transfer model further to investigate this issue. Prior research
has found that transfer across facilities [Argote et al. (1990)], and across shifts within
a facility [Epple et al. (1996)], is often most rapid during the period immediately after
startup of the new facility or shift. Hence, we extend our transfer model to permit forward
transfer during the first year of introduction of a new product to differ from forward
transfer thereafter. We find, column (2) of Table 7, that estimated forward transfer during
the first year is substantial while transfer thereafter is small and statistically insignificant.
In addition, we find that the estimated negative transfer from newer to older products
is smaller and no longer statistically significant. In column (3), we refine this model by
dropping the insignificant coefficients of transfer between focus and non-focus products and
the insignificant backward transfer coefficient. This model reinforces the conclusion that


                                               27
forward transfer occurs largely during the first year after introduction of a new product.
Thereafter, learning continues to accumulate as increased cumulative production of a given
product enhances productivity for that product, but cross-product transfer is small and
statistically insignificant. We have investigated if these findings are sensitive to whether
the initial forward transfer is assumed to occur over a shorter or longer period (fewer than
12 months or greater than 12 months) and have found that the fit of the model is not
improved by departing from the assumed one-year period of forward transfer.
  The forward-transfer estimate of 3 in column (3) of Table 7 suggests that, during the
first year, a new product, i, benefits much more from transfer of the accumulated stock
from prior production of other products than from its own production. The estimated
value of 3, while significantly different from 0, is not significantly different from 1. Hence,
we do not reject the hypothesis that knowledge acquired per cumulative unit of a new
product i is the same as the knowledge transfer per unit from older products. Of course,
during the first year of production of a new product, the cumulative production of older
products dominates the cumulative production of the new product, making transfer the
predominant contributor to productivity for the new product even if the transfer coefficient
is 1.
  In looking across the models in Table 7, we see that the coefficient of the generational
overlap index decreases as we move from one model to the next. This change supports our
conclusion that a substantial component of the productivity enhancement from producing
overlapping generations is captured by the rapid transfer of knowledge across product
generations. The coefficient of the generational overlap index continues to be significant,
however, pointing to synergies from co-production in addition to the benefits of transfer
across generations. It is also useful to note that the estimates of the other (i.e., non-transfer)
parameters of our model are similar across the three specifications in Table 7. Hence, this
analysis of transfer reinforces the robustness of our primary findings with respect to the
importance of learning by doing.
  In further analysis (not shown), we added a time trend to the model of column (3) of
Table 7 and also allowed for possible depreciation of knowledge. We find that the time trend
differs negligibly from zero and the depreciation parameter, λ, does not differ significantly
from one. Hence, our findings with respect to both of these factors are unchanged; there is


                                               28
no “forgetting” and no evidence of gains in productivity associated with time, per se, as
distinct from gains arising from learning.
     As we have seen, the estimated forward transfer in the knowledge transfer specifica-
tion of the model is quite large. These large gains were realized during times when there
were no major new capital expenditures. How then were such large gains realized? Based
on discussion with the managers of the firm, we learned that the firm developed and
implemented innovations in production practices by leveraging experiences with early gen-
erations of products to enhance efficiency of production of newer products. Innovations in
testing practices are one example. Managers and engineers cite innovations in testing that
emerged from knowledge gained during production, innovations that led to internal recon-
figuration of testing equipment and procedures to allow quicker testing of focus products
and more flexibility for use across different generations of products and across product
customizations. The flexibility developed from these innovations in testing practices may
have played a role in facilitating the transfer of knowledge across product generations that
we have found during the first year of new product introductions. In addition to facilitating
knowledge transfer, these innovations in testing practices may also have served to embed
important acquired knowledge in the testing routines, thereby facilitating the retention of
knowledge that we have found in our analysis.
     As a second example of productivity-enhancing knowledge acquisition, the firm discov-
ered that “block” changes, which entail implementing changes simultaneously as a group or
“block” rather than implementing a series of individual changes at different points in time,
enhanced efficiency. This new approach was first applied and discovered to enhance pro-
ductivity during implementation of a set of product changes required for compliance with
new environmental regulations (specifically, the EU’s Restriction on Hazardous Substances
directive (RoHS)). This strategy often involves changes to components or subassemblies
across product generations or across different products. These changes may help explain the
firm’s efficient transfer of knowledge across products, as learning is embedded in machine,
component, or other hardware changes common across multiple products.

5.     Managerial Implications
In addition to advancing the frontier in understanding organizational learning, quantifi-
cation of learning in a multi-product environment provides valuable information for man-
agers. Findings with respect to learning provide guidance about circumstances in which


                                             29
synergies across products can be expected as well as those in which there might be no syn-
ergies, or even adverse impacts of multi-product production. Regarding the former, we have
seen that co-production of overlapping generations of a given product family can give rise
to significant synergies. Our investigation of transfer between focus and non-focus products
suggests that there is no synergy in learning across these two product families. Products
in these two product families differ markedly from each other, and our results show that
neither family benefits from knowledge acquired in producing the other. We have found
that extensive product variety, such as that arising from customizing individual products
to meet buyer needs, can lead to adverse effects on productivity. These findings suggest
important considerations for firms in planning new production facilities, deciding which
production activities should be housed in a given facility, in setting policy about the extent
of product variation that will be undertaken in response to buyer requests for customiza-
tion, and in taking account of learning-by-doing in anticipating future labor requirements.
These findings can also be useful to firms in making judgments about price premia to set
in order to make such customizations profitable.
  Over the time frame of our analysis, the facility we study achieved more than a 16-fold
increase in weekly production. It is instructive to provide an accounting of the role of var-
ious factors in enabling this increase. Our estimates in column (5) of Table 4 imply that
a doubling of cumulative output permits increasing production by 22% holding labor and
other factors (product mix and product customization rates) constant. Cumulative output
doubled approximately 6.2 times over the period that we study. Hence, learning permitted
increasing production by a multiple of 3.4 holding labor constant. The generational overlap
index increased over the time period we studied from 0 to 0.75. Holding labor and other
factors (customizations and cumulative volume) constant, our estimates in column (5) of
Table 4 imply that the increase in generational overlap would have permitted an increase
in output by a multiple of 1.43. Labor input increased five fold, contributing a multiple
of 50.259 = 1.52. Over the time period we study, customizations for focus products were
reduced markedly. During the last six months of the period we study, focus customizations
were 60% lower that during the first six months. Other things constant, this contributed a
proportionate increase in output of e−813(0.00156−0.00593) = 2.2, and provides a striking illus-
tration of the magnitude of the productivity effects of providing buyer-specific product


                                              30
variants. Turning to non-focus products, we find negligible difference in the six-month cus-
tomization average at the end as compared to the six-month average at the beginning of
our sample period. Hence, other things constant, we find no effect of non-focus customiza-
tions in accounting for the increased output at the end relative to the beginning of the
period we study. The change in share non-focus products was modestly lower at the end
than at the beginning of the production period, giving rise to only a 1.03 multiple to pro-
duction evaluated with the share non-focus coefficient from column (5) of Table 4. Drawing
together the above, we find that learning, increased production of overlapping product
generations, increased labor, reduction of focus product customizations, and reduction of
share of non-focus products yield a proportionate increase in output over the period we
study of (3.41 ∗ 1.43 ∗ 1.52 ∗ 2.2 ∗ 1.03) = 16.7. The factors included in our model thus
account for the more than 16-fold increase in output achieved by the firm over the time
period of our study.
     Our production function estimates also permit answering “what if” questions. For exam-
ple, what would it save to decrease the proportion of focus product customizations by 1%?
This can be answered by determining the amount by which labor would be able to be
decreased (or saved) as a consequence of decreased customizations when holding constant
the number of units produced. From equation (6), we see that this requires holding con-
stant the following: β3 ln (Lt ) + β6 Mf,t . Inserting our estimates from column (5) of Table 4,
this implies holding constant 0.259 ln (Lt ) − 813.0Mf,t . Using this result and evaluating at
sample averages, we find that a 1% decrease in customizations would allow decreasing labor
inputs by approximately 2.2%. The same analysis for non-focus products reveals that a 1%
decrease in non-focus customizations would enable approximately a 0.9% decrease (or sav-
ings) in labor. The firm would, of course, need to balance the cost savings associated with
reduced labor requirements against potential revenue lost from reduced customer-specific
product offerings.

6.     Conclusions and Discussion
The production and operations management literature generally starts from the assump-
tion that producing a variety of products decreases productivity. As a consequence, a
significant portion of the literature focuses on developing strategies to counteract the com-
plications of a varied product mix [Womack et al. (1990), Fisher and Ittner (1999), Desai


                                              31
et al. (2001), Suarez et al. (1995)]. In contrast, the organizational learning literature pro-
vides cases where organizations learn more from diverse than homogenous experiences,
where product heterogeneity is beneficial for learning, and where changes in product mix
stimulate more efficient resource allocation [Haunschild and Sullivan (2002), Schilling et al.
(2003), Bernard et al. (2010), Wiersma (2007)]. Prior to the current paper, the benefits of
heterogeneity have not been found in a traditional manufacturing environment.
  Drawing on 10 years of production and human resource tracking system data from a
manufacturing facility that is a leading producer of high technology hardware components,
we demonstrate that whether product heterogeneity is helpful or harmful depends on the
extent of the differences between the products on the line. Consistent with the organiza-
tional learning literature, we find that productivity improves when multiple generations of
the same product are produced at the same time. We were able to investigate a mechanism,
knowledge transfer that could explain the benefits of product heterogeneity. The positive
impact on productivity of having multiple generations of the same product on the line is
explained in part by the firm’s ability to transfer knowledge from older to newer genera-
tions of the product. We also find that having multiple generations of the focus product
on the line is beneficial to firm productivity above and beyond the benefits of generational
knowledge transfer.
  At the same time, we find productivity is decreased when the production line is faced
with products that are very different (e.g., low-volume non-focus products) and when faced
with extensive within-product variation (e.g., buyer-specific product customizations). This
variety takes a toll on the firm’s productivity, in accord with the assumption underlying
much of the production and operations management literature.
  In addition to enabling us to provide a comprehensive analysis of learning and other
factors influencing productivity, the rich dataset that we collected provides us with strong
instruments to investigate potential endogeneity. Our measures of product order arrivals
provide ideal instruments for the product heterogeneity variables because such order
arrivals are the central driver of heterogeneity of products produced, but the timing of
order placements is exogenous to the production process at the firm. As we demonstrated,
our findings are robust to correction for potential endogeneity bias.
  Our study is, of course, limited to one firm. While studying only one firm allows us to
focus on a specific multi-product context, gain a deep understanding of the organization,


                                             32
and collect a rich dataset, it will be important to test the implications of product hetero-
geneity on learning and knowledge transfer in additional settings. We expect our results
will most likely generalize to other facilities with labor-intensive production of complex
products. Interesting additional contexts that would enable us to identify the boundary
conditions for our findings include highly automated mechanical assembly factories as well
as different industries, such as pharmaceuticals or chemicals [Lieberman (1984)], where
production focuses on processes rather than products.
  Our findings have important implications for organizations that manage a multitude
of products in one location. Our results suggest that industries that see products evolve
through generations can benefit – in terms of productivity – from co-producing older prod-
ucts at the same time as newer ones in the same facility. On the other hand, producing
distinctly different products, even if only in small volumes, and customizing to meet differ-
ent buyer specifications, can hurt firm productivity. In addition to building understanding
of the mechanisms of learning by doing, our approach can also aid firms in evaluating
whether the revenue benefits of offering particular products and customer-specific cus-
tomizations are sufficient to compensate for the adverse productivity effects of product
variety offered.




                                             33
Appendix A:         Engineer Survey Questions
Background Information:
What is your name?
What is your position title at [firm]?
What is your email address and phone extension (will only be used for questions on survey)?
When did you start working at [firm]?
What production area do you work in (example: [stage 1, stage 2], etc.)
What types of products or processes have you worked on during your tenure at [firm]?
Questions on Processes & Products:
For questions that ask about specific product families, please only fill out information on products that you
have worked with directly.
  1. In your mind, what makes products similar during production (for example, [end use application],
[attribute (A or B)], products that undergo certain process steps, products that have a specific form factor
or component)?
  2. Please describe your experience with implementing a new product on the production line. Please be as
specific as possible.
  3. Please rate each process step for each grouping of products based on difficulty for the line worker on a
scale of 1-5 where 1 is very simple, 2 is simple, 3 is neutral, 4 is difficult, and 5 is very difficult.


                             Process Step 1a 1b 2a 2b 3a 3b 4a 4b
                             Process Step 1
                             Process Step 2
                             ...
                             Process Step 77


  4. For your production area, what percentage of machines are used on both products in a given box below?
Example for bold box: x% of machinery used for 1a products is also used for 1b products.


                                          1a 1b 2a 2b 3a 3b 4a 4b
                                    1a
                                    1b
                                    2a
                                    2b
                                    3a
                                    3b
                                    4a
                                    4b


  5. For your production area, what percentage of trainers have ever worked on both products in a given
box below?
Example for bold box: x% of trainers who work on 1a products have also ever worked on 1b products.


                                                         34
                                      1a 1b 2a 2b 3a 3b 4a 4b
                                 1a
                                 1b
                                 2a
                                 2b
                                 3a
                                 3b
                                 4a
                                 4b


  6. For your production area, what percentage of technicians have ever worked on both products in a given
box below?
Example for bold box: x% of technicians who work on 1a products have also ever worked on 1b products.

                                      1a 1b 2a 2b 3a 3b 4a 4b
                                 1a
                                 1b
                                 2a
                                 2b
                                 3a
                                 3b
                                 4a
                                 4b


  7. What percentage of engineers have ever worked on both products in a given box below?
Example for bold box: x% of engineers who work on 1a products have also ever worked on 1b products

                                      1a 1b 2a 2b 3a 3b 4a 4b
                                 1a
                                 1b
                                 2a
                                 2b
                                 3a
                                 3b
                                 4a
                                 4b


  8. For your production area, please list any major tool or equipment changes (if any) that have happened.
(For example: new oven, more production lines, new soldering equipment, new automated machinery, etc.)




                                                   35
                               Year Major tool or equipment changes
                               2001
                               2002
                               2003
                               2004
                               2005
                               2006
                               2007
                               2008
                               2009
                               2010
                               2011


Appendix B:        Trainer Survey Questions
Background Information:
What is your name?
What is your position title at [firm]?
What is your email address and phone extension (will only be used for questions on survey)?
When did you start working at [firm]?
What types of products or processes have you worked on during your tenure at [firm]?
Questions on Processes & Products:
  1. Please describe each type of process (simple, skill-based, criteria-based, special case, hazardous, other)
and list how long it takes on average to train a manufacturing specialist in that process.

                            Process Step 1a 1b 2a 2b 3a 3b 4a 4b
                            Process Step 1
                            Process Step 2
                            ...
                            Process Step 77




                                                     36
References
Alchian, Armen. 1963. Reliability of Progress Curves in Airframe Production. Econometrica: Journal of the
     Econometric Society 679–693.

Argote, Linda. 2013. Organizational Learning: Creating, Retaining and Transferring Knowledge. 2nd ed.
     Springer.

Argote, Linda, Sara Beckman, Dennis Epple. 1990. The persistence and transfer of learning in industrial
     settings. Management Science 36(2) 140–154.

Argote, Linda, Dennis Epple. 1990. Learning curves in manufacturing. Science 247(4945) 920–924.

Argote, Linda, Paul Ingram. 2000. Knowledge Transfer: A Basis for Competitive Advantage in Firms.
     Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 82(1) 150–169.

Argote, Linda, Bill McEvily, Ray Reagans. 2003. Introduction to the Special Issue on Managing Knowledge
     in Organizations: Creating, Retaining, and Transferring Knowledge. Management Science 49(4) v–viii.

Benkard, C Lanier. 2000. Learning and Forgetting: The Dynamics of Aircraft Production. The American
     Economic Review 90(4) 1034–1054.

Bernard, Andrew, Stephen Redding, Peter Schott. 2010. Multiple-Product Firms and Product Switching.
     American Economic Review 100(1) 70–97.

Boh, Wai Fong, Sandra A Slaughter, J Alberto Espinosa. 2007. Learning from Experience in Software
     Development: A Multilevel Analysis. Management Science 53(8) 1315–1331.

Darr, Eric, Linda Argote, Dennis Epple. 1995. The acquisition, transfer, and depreciation of knowledge in
     service organizations: Productivity in franchises. Management Science 41(11) 1750–1762.

David, Guy, Tanguy Brachet. 2011. On the Determinants of Organizational Forgetting. American Economic
     Journal: Microeconomics 3(3) 100–123.

Desai, Preyas, Sunder Kekre, Suresh Radhakrishnan, Kannan Srinivasan. 2001. Product Differentiation and
     Commonality in Design: Balancing Revenue and Cost Drivers. Management Science 47(1) 37–51.

Dutton, John, Annie Thomas. 1984. Treating Progress Functions as a Managerial Opportunity. The Academy
     of Management Review 9(2) 235–247.

Epple, Dennis, Linda Argote, Rukmini Devadas. 1991. Organizational learning curves: A method for inves-
     tigating intra-plant transfer of knowledge acquired through learning by doing. Organization Science
     2(1) 58–70.

Epple, Dennis, Linda Argote, Kenneth Murphy. 1996. An empirical investigation of the microstructure of
     knowledge acquisition and transfer through learning by doing. Operations Research 44 77–86.

Fisher, Marshall, Christopher Ittner. 1999. The Impact of Product Variety on Automobile Assembly Oper-
     ations: Empirical Evidence and Simulation Analysis. Management Science 45(6) 771–786.


                                                   37
Fisher, Marshall, Kamalini Ramdas, Karl Ulrich. 1999. Component Sharing in the Management of Product
     Variety: A Study of Automotive Braking Systems. Management Science 45(3) 297–315.

Gaimon, Cheryl, Alysse Morton. 2005. Investment in Facility Changeover Flexibility for Early Entry into
     High-Tech Markets. Production and Operations Management 14(2) 159–174.

Gopal, A, M Goyal, S Netessine, M Reindorp. 2013. The Impact of New Product Introduction on Plant
     Productivity in the North American Automotive Industry. Management Science .

Goyal, M, S Netessine. 2011. Volume Flexibility, Product Flexibility, or Both: The Role of Demand Corre-
     lation and Product Substitution. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 13(2) 180–193.

Greene, William H. 2003. Econometric Analysis. 5th ed. Prentice Hall.

Hall, Bronwyn. 2005. Note on the Bias in the Herfindahl Based on Count Data. Revue d’Economie Industrielle
     110 149–156.

Haunschild, Pamela, Bilian Sullivan. 2002. Learning from Complexity: Effects of Prior Accidents and Inci-
     dents on Airlines’ Learning. Administrative Science Quarterly 47(4) 609–643.

Ingram, Paul, Tal Simons. 2002. The Transfer of Experience in Groups of Organizations: Implications for
     Performance and Competition. Management Science 48(12) 1517–1533.

Irwin, Douglas, Peter Klenow. 1994. Learning-by-Doing Spillovers in the Semiconductor Industry. The
     Journal of Political Economy 102(6) 1200–1227.

Kekre, Sunder, Kannan Srinivasan. 1990. Broader Product Line: A Necessity to Achieve Success? Manage-
     ment Science 36(10) 1216–1231.

Kellogg, R. 2011. Learning by Drilling: Interfirm Learning and Relationship Persistence in the Texas Oilpatch.
     The Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(4) 1961–2004.

Kim, Ilhyung, Hae Lim Seo. 2009. Depreciation and transfer of knowledge: an empirical exploration of a
     shipbuilding process. International Journal of Production Research 47(7) 1857–1876.

Kogut, Bruce, Udo Zander. 1992. Knowledge of the Firm, Combinative Capabilities, and the Replication of
     Technology. Organization Science 3(3) 383–397.

Lapré, Michael A, Amit Shankar Mukherjee, Luk N Van Wassenhove. 2000. Behind the Learning Curve:
     Linking Learning Activities to Waste Reduction. Management Science 46(5) 597–611.

Lapré, Michael A, Ingrid M Nembhard. 2010. Inside the Organizational Learning Curve: Understanding the
     Organizational Learning Process. Foundations and Trends R in Technology, Information and Opera-
     tions Management 4(1) 1–103.

Levitt, Steven D, John A List, Chad Syverson. 2013. Toward an Understanding of Learning by Doing:
     Evidence from an Automobile Assembly Plant. Journal of Political Economy 121(4) 643–681.

Lieberman, Marvin B. 1984. The Learning Curve and Pricing in the Chemical Processing Industries. The
     RAND Journal of Economics 15(2) 213–228.


                                                     38
MacDuffie, John, Kannan Sethuraman, Marshall Fisher. 1996. Product Variety and Manufacturing Per-
     formance: Evidence from the International Automotive Assembly Plant Study. Management Science
     42(3) 350–369.

Madsen, P M, V Desai. 2010. Failing to Learn? The Effects of Failure and Success on Organizational Learning
     in the Global Orbital Launch Vehicle Industry. Academy of Management Journal 53(3) 451–476.

Palan, Nicole. 2010. Measurement of Specialization - The Choice of Indices. FIW Working Paper 1–38.

Randall, Taylor, Karl Ulrich. 2001. Product Variety, Supply Chain Structure, and Firm Performance: Anal-
     ysis of the U. S. Bicycle Industry. Management Science 47(12) 1588–1604.

Rapping, Leonard. 1965. Learning and World War II Production Functions. The Review of Economics and
     Statistics 47(1) 81–86.

Schilling, Melissa A, Patricia Vidal, Robert E Ployhart, Alexandre Marangoni. 2003. Learning by Doing
     Something Else: Variation, Relatedness, and the Learning Curve. Management Science 49(1) 39–56.

Shtub, Avraham, Nissan Levin, Shlomo Globerson. 1993. Learning and forgetting industrial skills: An
     experimental model. International Journal of Human Factors in Manufacturing 3(3) 293–305.

Smith, Adam. 1776. The Wealth of Nations. University of Chicago Press, Chichago, IL.

Staats, Bradley, Francesca Gino. 2011. Specialization and Variety in Repetitive Tasks: Evidence from a
     Japanese Bank. Working Paper 1–33.

Suarez, Fernando, Michael Cusumano, Charles Fine. 1995. An Empirical Study of Flexibility in Manufac-
     turing. Sloan Management Review 37(1) 25–32.

Suarez, Fernando, Michael Cusumano, Charles Fine. 1996. An Empirical Study of Manufacturing Flexibility
     in Printed Circuit Board Assembly. Operations Research 44(1) 223–240.

Thompson, Peter. 2007. How Much Did the Liberty Shipbuilders Forget? Management Science 53(6)
     908–918.

Ton, Zeynep, Robert S Huckman. 2008. Managing the Impact of Employee Turnover on Performance: The
     Role of Process Conformance. Organization Science 19(1) 56–68.

Walsh, James P, Gerado Rivera Ungson. 1991. Organizational Memory. Academy of Management Review
     16(1) 57–91.

Wiersma, Eelke. 2007. Conditions That Shape the Learning Curve: Factors That Increase the Ability and
     Opportunity to Learn. Management Science 53(12) 1903–1915.

Womack, James P, Daniel T Jones, Daniel Roos. 1990. The Machine That Changed the World: The Story
     of Lean Production. 1st ed. Harper Perennial, New York.




                                                    39
