NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE CYCLICALITY OF THE OPPORTUNITY COST OF EMPLOYMENT
Gabriel Chodorow-Reich
Loukas Karabarbounis
Working Paper 19678
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19678
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2013

We are especially grateful to Bob Hall for many insightful discussions and for his generous comments
at various stages of this project. This paper also benefited from comments and conversations with
Mark Bils, Steve Davis, Dan Feenberg, Peter Ganong, Erik Hurst, Greg Kaplan, Larry Katz, Pat Kehoe,
Guido Lorenzoni, Iourii Manovskii, Kurt Mitman, Giuseppe Moscarini, Casey Mulligan, Nicolas Petrosky-Nadeau,
Richard Rogerson, Rob Shimer, Harald Uhlig, Gianluca Violante, anonymous referees, and numerous
seminar participants. Much of this paper was written while Gabriel Chodorow-Reich was visiting the
Julis-Rabinowitz Center at Princeton University. Loukas Karabarbounis thanks Chicago Booth for
summer financial support. The Appendix and dataset that accompany this paper are available at the
authors' webpages. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of
the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Gabriel Chodorow-Reich and Loukas Karabarbounis. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Cyclicality of the Opportunity Cost of Employment
Gabriel Chodorow-Reich and Loukas Karabarbounis
NBER Working Paper No. 19678
November 2013, Revised August 2015
JEL No. E24,E32,J22,J64
ABSTRACT
The flow opportunity cost of moving from unemployment to employment consists of foregone public
benefits and the foregone value of non-working time in units of consumption. We construct a time
series of the opportunity cost of employment using detailed microdata and administrative or national
accounts data to estimate benefit levels, eligibility and take-up of benefits, consumption by labor force
status, hours per worker, taxes, and preference parameters. Our estimated opportunity cost is procyclical
and volatile over the business cycle. The estimated cyclicality implies far less unemployment volatility
in many leading models of the labor market than that observed in the data, irrespective of the level
of the opportunity cost.
Gabriel Chodorow-Reich
Department of Economics
Harvard University
1805 Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
chodorowreich@fas.harvard.edu
Loukas Karabarbounis
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
loukas.karabarbounis@chicagobooth.edu

1

Introduction

Understanding the causes of labor market fluctuations ranks among the most important and
difficult issues in economics. In recent decades, economists have turned attention to models of
equilibrium unemployment. These models feature optimization decisions by workers and firms
along with frictions which prevent all workers from supplying their desired amount of labor.
The flow value of the opportunity cost of employment, which we denote by z, plays a crucial
role in many such models. The importance of this variable has generated debate about its
level, but the literature has almost uniformly adopted the assumption that the opportunity cost
is constant over the business cycle. Fluctuations in the opportunity cost correspond loosely
to shifts in desired labor supply and, therefore, can affect the volatility of unemployment and
wages. While this insight goes back at least as far as Pissarides (1985), to date the cyclical
properties of the opportunity cost in the data remain unknown.
The main contribution of this paper is to develop and implement an empirical framework
to measure z in the data.1 We find that, irrespective of its level, z is procyclical and volatile
over the business cycle. The cyclicality of z poses a significant challenge to models that rely on
a constant z to solve the unemployment volatility puzzle highlighted by Shimer (2005). This is
because a procyclical z undoes the endogenous wage rigidity generated by these models.
We begin in Section 2 by deriving an expression for the opportunity cost z. We start
our analysis within a framework that borrows elements from the search and matching model
developed in Mortensen and Pissarides (1994) (hereafter MP model). We show, however, that
the same measure of z also arises naturally in many other environments. For example, the
same expression for z plays an important role in models that allow for ex-ante heterogeneity
across workers, models that use alternative wage bargaining protocols, and models with directed
instead of random search. In this wide class of models, fluctuations in equilibrium unemployment
depend on the behavior of z relative to the behavior of the after-tax marginal product of
employment (which we denote by pτ ).
1

Our approach complements recent research that uses surveys to ask respondents directly about their reservation
wage (Hall and Mueller, 2013; Krueger and Mueller, 2013). Relative to survey estimates, our approach allows us
to construct a long time series for z, which is crucial for studying cyclical patterns.

1

We write the opportunity cost of employment as the sum of two terms, z = b + ξ. The
first term, which we denote by b, is the value of public benefits that unemployed forgo upon
employment. Our expression for b departs from the literature in three significant ways. First, we
argue that b should depend on effective rather than statutory benefit rates. Second, we consider
both unemployment insurance (UI) benefits, which are directly related to unemployment status,
and non-UI benefits such as supplemental nutritional assistance (SNAP), welfare assistance
(AFDC/TANF), and health care (Medicaid). The latter belong in the opportunity cost to
the extent that receipt of these benefits changes with unemployment status. Third, we take
into account UI benefits expiration, incorporate taxes, and model and measure the utility costs
associated with taking up UI benefits (for instance, job search costs and other filing and time
costs). These utility costs allow the model to match the fact that roughly one-third of eligible
unemployed do not actually take up UI benefits.
In Section 3 we measure b over the period 1961(1) to 2012(4). For the measurement of b
we require time series of UI and non-UI benefits per unemployed. Combining household and
individual-level data from the Current Population Survey (CPS) and the Survey of Income and
Program Participation (SIPP) with program administrative data, we estimate the value of UI,
SNAP, AFDC/TANF, and Medicaid benefits that belong in b. We further incorporate into
our measurement of b the time series of UI eligibility, take-up rates, and number of recipients.
Finally, we use IRS Public Use Files to estimate tax rates on UI benefits.
Our estimated b is countercyclical, rising around every recession since 1961. However, because we incorporate effective rather than statutory rates and because we account for costs
associated with UI take-up and for the expiration of UI benefits, the level of b is much smaller
than what the literature has traditionally calibrated. We find that b is only 6 percent of the
sample average of the after-tax marginal product of employment pτ .
The second term of the opportunity cost of employment z = b+ξ, which we denote by ξ, is the
foregone value of non-working time expressed in units of consumption. With concave preferences
over consumption and an explicit value of non-working time, this component resembles the
marginal rate of substitution between non-working time and consumption in the real business

2

cycle (RBC) model, with the difference being that the value of non-working time is calculated
along the extensive margin. In the RBC model, an intraperiod first-order condition equates
the marginal rate of substitution between non-working time and consumption to the after-tax
marginal product of labor. While the search and matching literature has appealed to this
equality to motivate setting the level of z close to that of the marginal product, the same logic
suggests that the ξ component of z would move cyclically with the marginal product just as in
the RBC model.
We measure the ξ component of the opportunity cost in Section 4. For the measurement of
ξ we require estimates of preference parameters and time series of consumption expenditures by
labor force status, hours per worker, and labor income and consumption taxes. The consumption
of the employed and unemployed do not have direct counterparts in existing data sources. We
generate time series of consumptions using estimates of relative consumption by labor force
status from the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CE) and the Panel Study of Income Dynamics
(PSID), population shares by labor force status, and NIPA consumption of non-durables and
services per capita. We measure hours per worker from the CPS. Finally, we use IRS Public
Use Files to estimate tax rates on labor income and NIPA data to measure effective taxes on
consumption.
The measurement of ξ also depends on preference parameters, which we calibrate for various
common utility functions. We discipline preference parameters by requiring that the steady state
of the model be consistent with empirical estimates of hours per worker and the consumption
decline upon unemployment. We present specifications that result in levels of z ranging from
0.47 to 0.96 relative to an after-tax marginal product of employment equal to pτ = 1. We
show how the level of z across these specifications depends on estimates of the total endowment
of utility-enhancing time, the curvature of the utility function, and fixed time or utility costs
associated with working.
We find that the ξ component of the opportunity cost is highly procyclical, irrespective of
its level. This procyclicality reflects the procyclical movements in consumption and hours per
worker. Intuitively, ξ falls in recessions because the household values more the contribution of

3

the employed (through higher wage income) relative to that of the unemployed (through higher
non-working time) in states of the world in which consumption is low and non-working time is
high.
Combining the opportunity cost associated with benefits b with the opportunity cost associated with the value of non-working time ξ, Section 5 shows that our time series of z = b + ξ is
procyclical and volatile. The procyclicality of z reflects the outcome of two opposing forces. In
the absence of ξ, fluctuations in b would imply a countercyclical z. However, because the level
of b is much smaller than the level of ξ, the procyclical ξ component accounts for the majority
of the fluctuations in z.
The elasticity of the cyclical component of z with respect to the cyclical component of
the marginal product of employment p is an informative summary statistic when assessing the
performance of a large class of models. Across specifications, this elasticity exceeds 0.8 and is
typically close to 1. Importantly, z comoves roughly proportionally with p over the business cycle
irrespective of whether the level of z is high or low. The positive and large elasticity appears
robust to a number of alternative modeling choices and data moments, including replacing the
hours per worker series with hours per worker for hourly workers, salaried workers, or an hours
series adjusted for compositional changes over the business cycle, changing the estimated decline
in consumption upon unemployment, using an alternative model of UI take-up, and introducing
fixed time and utility costs associated with working.
In Section 6 we extend our framework to allow for heterogeneity across workers with different educational attainments. While this exercise reveals interesting variation in the level
and composition of z across skill groups, each of the skill-specific z’s is procyclical. The same
economic forces that cause fluctuations in the aggregate z over the business cycle also influence
the skill-specific z’s. Quantitatively, the lowest skill groups exhibit a more elastic z over the
business cycle than the highest skill groups.
Section 7 turns to the implications of our estimated z for models of unemployment fluctuations. We start with models in the MP class. As emphasized in influential work by Shimer
(2005), the standard MP model with wages set according to Nash bargaining fails to account

4

quantitatively for the observed volatility of unemployment. Some of the leading solutions to this
unemployment volatility puzzle rely on a constant z to reduce the procyclicality of wages. The
cyclicality of z dampens unemployment fluctuations in these models. The logic of this result
is quite general and does not depend on the set of primitive shocks driving the business cycle.
Relative to the constant z case, a procyclical z increases the surplus from accepting a job at a
given wage during a recession, which puts downward pressure on equilibrium wages and ameliorates the increase in unemployment. The extent to which actual wages vary cyclically remains
an open and important question. Our results suggest that any such wage rigidity cannot be
justified by mechanisms that appeal to aspects of the opportunity cost.
We illustrate the consequences of a procyclical z in the context of two leading proposed solutions to the unemployment volatility puzzle which rely on endogenous wage rigidity. Hagedorn
and Manovskii (2008) show that a large and constant z allows the MP model with Nash wage
bargaining to generate realistic unemployment fluctuations. Intuitively, a level of z close to
the tax-adjusted p makes the total surplus from an employment relationship small on average.
Then even modest increases in p generate large percent increases in the surplus, incentivizing
firms to significantly increase their job creation.2 However, if z and p move proportionally,
then the surplus from a new hire remains relatively stable over the business cycle. As a result,
fluctuations in unemployment are essentially neutral with respect to the level of z.
Hall and Milgrom (2008) generate volatile unemployment fluctuations by replacing the assumption of Nash bargaining over match surplus with an alternating-offer wage setting mechanism. With Nash bargaining, the threat point of an unemployed depends on the wage other
jobs would offer in case of bargaining termination. In the alternating-offer bargaining game, the
threat point depends instead mostly on the flow value z if bargaining continues. With constant
z, wages respond weakly to increases in p. Allowing instead z to comove with p as in the data
undoes this endogenous wage rigidity, thereby reducing the volatility of unemployment.
2

A number of papers have followed this reasoning to set a relatively high level of z. Hagedorn and Manovskii
(2008) use a value of z = 0.955. Examples of papers before Hagedorn and Manovskii (2008) include Mortensen
and Pissarides (1999), Mortensen and Pissarides (2001), Hall (2005), and Shimer (2005), which set z at 0.42, 0.51,
0.40, and 0.40. Examples of papers after Hagedorn and Manovskii (2008) include Mortensen and Nagypal (2007),
Costain and Reiter (2008), Hall and Milgrom (2008), and Bils, Chang, and Kim (2012), which set z at 0.73, 0.745,
0.71, and 0.82. See Hornstein, Krusell, and Violante (2005) for a useful summary of this literature.

5

Finally, we show that z plays an important role in equilibrium models outside of the MP
class. We discuss models with directed search and indivisible labor. The same expression for z
enters into the opportunity cost of employment in each of these models and, therefore, plays an
important role in determining unemployment fluctuations.

2

The Opportunity Cost of Employment

We develop an expression for the opportunity cost of employment z within a widely studied
framework that borrows elements from the search and matching model and the real business
cycle model with concave preferences and an explicit value of non-working time. In Section 7.1,
we show that z is a key object for understanding equilibrium unemployment within this standard
MP/RBC model. However, as we discuss below, the same z arises in alternative models that
relax many of the baseline assumptions embedded in the MP/RBC model.

2.1

Household Problem

Time is discrete and the horizon is infinite, t = 0, 1, 2, .... We denote the vector of exogenous
aggregate shocks by Zt . All values are expressed in terms of a numeraire good with a price of
one.
A representative household consists of a continuum of ex-ante identical individuals of measure
one. At the beginning of each period t, there are et employed who produce output and ut = 1−et
unemployed who search for jobs. After production occurs, unemployed find a job in the next
period with probability ft and employed separate and become unemployed with probability st .
Therefore, employment evolves according to the law of motion:
et+1 = (1 − st )et + ft ut .

(1)

Household members treat ft and st as exogenous processes.
The household takes as given employment et at the beginning of each period and the outcome
of any process that determines the wage wt and hours per worker Nt . Household members pool
perfectly their risks and, therefore, the marginal utility of consumption λt is equalized between
the employed and the unemployed. The household owns the economy’s capital stock Kt and
6

rents it to firms in a perfect capital market at a rate rt + δ, where rt denotes the real interest
rate and δ denotes the depreciation rate. Capital Kt accumulates as Kt+1 = (1 − δ)Kt + It .
The household chooses consumption of the employed and the unemployed, Cte and Ctu ,
purchases of investment goods It , and the share of eligible unemployed to take up UI benefits,
ζt , to maximize the expected sum of discounted utility flows of its members:
h

W (e0 , ω0 , K0 , Z0 ) = max E0

∞
X

β t [et U (Cte , Nt ) + (1 − et )U (Ctu , 0) − (1 − et )ωt ψ(ζt )] ,

(2)

t=0

where U (Cte , Nt ) is the flow utility of an employed member, U (Ctu , 0) is the flow utility of
an unemployed member excluding costs associated with taking up benefits, ωt is the share of
unemployed who are eligible for UI benefits, and ψ(ζt ) denotes the household’s costs per eligible
unemployed from taking up UI benefits.
The budget constraint of the household is given by:

1 + τtC (et Cte + (1 − et )Ctu ) + It + Πt = (1 − τtw ) wt et Nt + (1 − et )Bt + (rt + δ) Kt ,

(3)

where Bt denotes after-tax benefits received per unemployed, τtC is the tax rate on consumption,
and τtw is the tax rate on labor income. We denote by Πt the sum of lump sum taxes and the
consumption of individuals out of the labor force net of dividends from ownership of the firms
and other transfers.
2.1.1

Benefits

Benefits Bt received from the government may include after-tax UI benefits as well as other
transfers such as supplemental nutritional assistance, welfare assistance, and health care. Bt
includes only the part of the benefit that an unemployed loses upon moving to employment.3
We split Bt into two components. Non-UI benefits per unemployed, Bn,t , do not involve take-up
costs in our model because the decision and timing of take-up does not generally coincide with
the timing of an unemployment spell. Additionally, non-UI benefits do not generally generate
tax liabilities. UI benefits per unemployed, Bu,t , have a relevant take-up margin and have been
3

Benefits that do not depend on labor force status do not affect the value of unemployment relative to employment and are included in the variable Πt .

7

taxed at the federal level since 1979. We write after-tax benefits per unemployed as:


Bt = 1 + τtC Bn,t + 1 − τtB Bu,t ,

(4)

where τtB is the tax rate on UI benefits. We multiply non-UI benefits by 1 + τtC because
most of Bn,t , including nutrition assistance and Medicaid, is not subject to consumption taxes.
Therefore, a unit of these benefits is worth 1 + τtC units of (taxable) consumption.
We introduce utility costs of UI take-up into the objective function (2) of the household in
order to account for a take-up rate ζt that in the data is significantly below one, volatile, and
comoves with the benefit level.4 The fact that some of those eligible forgo their UI entitlement
indicates either an informational friction or a take-up cost. The correlation between take-up
and benefits suggests that informational frictions cannot fully explain the low take-up rate. We
interpret these utility costs as foregone time and effort associated with searching for a job and
providing information to the UI agency. We consider an alternative model of take-up without
utility costs in our robustness exercises.
The household’s total cost per eligible unemployed ψt depends on the fraction of those
eligible that take up UI benefits ζt . To see how such a dependence may arise, let ψ m (i) denote
the cost of UI take-up by the i ∈ [0, 1] eligible unemployed. We order the heterogeneous costs
as dψ m /di > 0. If a fraction ζt of eligible unemployed chooses to take up benefits, then the
total utility cost of taking up benefits per eligible unemployed is:
ζt

Z

ψ m (i) di.

ψ(ζt ) =

(5)

0

The cost function ψ(ζt ) is increasing and convex because as ζt increases the marginal recipient
has a higher utility cost. A convex cost function ψ(ζt ) guarantees an interior solution for ζt . In
the empirical analysis below, we find evidence of convexity in the data.
Pre-tax benefits per unemployed from UI, Bu,t , are the product of the fraction of unemployed
who are eligible for benefits ωt , the fraction of eligible unemployed who take up benefits ζt , and
4
Blank and Card (1991) find that roughly one-third of unemployed eligible for UI do not claim benefits and
provide state-level evidence that the take-up rate responds to benefit levels (see also Anderson and Meyer, 1997). We
find significant fluctuations in the take-up rate over the business cycle and that these fluctuations are systematically
related to fluctuations in the utility value of benefits.

8

benefits per recipient unemployed B̃t , Bu,t = ωt ζt B̃t = φt B̃t , where φt = ωt ζt is the fraction
of unemployed receiving UI. The fraction of eligible unemployed ωt is a state variable that
depends on past eligibility, expiration policies, and the composition of the newly unemployed.
In the U.S., UI eligibility depends on sufficient earnings during previous employment (monetary
eligibility), the reason for employment separation (non-monetary eligibility), and the number
of weeks of UI already claimed (expiration eligibility). We model expiration eligibility with a
simple process under which eligible unemployed who do not find a job in period t maintain their
u
eligibility in period t + 1 with an exogenous probability ωt+1
. We combine monetary and none
monetary eligibility into a single term ωt+1
which gives the exogenous probability that a newly

unemployed in period t is eligible for UI in the next period. The stock of eligible unemployed in
u
E
e
period t + 1 is uE
t+1 = ωt+1 (1 − ft )ut + ωt+1 st et . Therefore, the fraction of eligible unemployed

ωt+1 = uE
t+1 /ut+1 follows the law of motion:
ωt+1
2.1.2



ut
et
u
e
= ωt+1 (1 − ft )
ωt + ωt+1
st
.
ut+1
ut+1

(6)

First-Order Conditions


Denoting by λt / 1 + τtC the multiplier on the budget constraint, the first-order conditions for
household optimization are:
∂Ute
∂Utu
=
,
∂Cte
∂Ctu


λt+1
λt
= Et β
(1 + rt+1 ) ,
C
1 + τtC
1 + τt+1


1 − τtB
0
λt B̃t .
ψ (ζt ) =
1 + τtC
λt =

(7)
(8)
(9)

Equation (7) is the risk-sharing condition, requiring that the household allocates consumption
to different members to equate their marginal utilities. Equation (8) is the Euler equation.
Equation (9) is the first-order condition for the optimal take-up rate ζt . Eligible unemployed
claim benefits up to the point where the marginal cost ψ 0 (ζt ) equals the utility value of after-tax


benefits 1 − τtB / 1 + τtC λt B̃t . From equation (5), the marginal cost for the household ψ 0 (ζt )
equals the utility cost of the marginal recipient ψ m (ζt ). If ψ 00 (ζt ) > 0, then a higher utility value

9

of after-tax benefits incentivizes eligible unemployed with higher utility costs to take up benefits
and ζt increases.

2.2

Derivation of the Opportunity Cost of Employment

A key object in models of equilibrium unemployment is the marginal value that the household
attaches to an additional employed, Jth = ∂W h (et , ωt , Kt , Zt ) /∂et . This value reflects the
willingness of the household to supply labor along the extensive margin. We express the marginal
value in consumption units by dividing it by the marginal utility of consumption λt :
Jth
=
λt



1 − τtw
1 + τtC




 h


βλt+1 Jt+1
Ute − Utu
e
u
. (10)
wt Nt − bt + (Ct − Ct ) −
+(1 − st − ft )Et
λt
λt
λt+1
|
{z
}
zt =bt +ξt

Appendix A.1 presents details underlying the derivation of equation (10) and other results in
this section.
The marginal value of an employed in terms of consumption consists of a flow value plus the
expected discounted marginal value in the next period. The expected discounted marginal value
appears in equation (10) because employment is a state variable and, therefore, an employment
relationship created in period t is expected to also yield value in future periods.
The flow component of Jth consists of a flow gain from increased after-tax wage income,

wt Nt (1 − τtw ) / 1 + τtC , and a flow loss, zt , associated with moving an individual from unemployment to employment. Following Hall and Milgrom (2008), we define the (flow) opportunity
cost of employment, zt , as the bracketed term in equation (10). We split zt into two components, with bt denoting the component related to foregone benefits and ξt = zt − bt denoting the
component related to the foregone value of non-working time.
Before discussing each component of z in further detail, we pause to make two comments.
First, the z defined in equation (10) is an average across unemployed individuals. Heterogeneity
in benefit eligibility and take-up costs generates dispersion in the opportunity cost of individual
unemployed. We follow Mortensen and Nagypal (2007) and justify the aggregation by assuming that employers cannot discriminate ex-ante in choosing a potential worker with whom to
bargain. Therefore, even if unemployed have heterogeneous opportunity costs, the vacancy cre10

ation decision of firms depends on the average opportunity cost over the set of unemployed.
This makes the average z the relevant object for labor market fluctuations.
Second, our measurement of z proceeds directly from the bracketed term in equation (10)
without imposing any additional structure. That is, our approach imposes the minimum structure necessary to derive z as a function of observable variables in the data (for example, consumption, hours, benefits, and take-up rates). Measurement of z then does not require specifying what model generates these variables. We take this minimalist approach because z is an
important object in many models of the labor market.
2.2.1

Opportunity Cost of Employment: Benefits

The opportunity cost of employment related to benefits is given by:

bt = Bn,t + Bu,t

0

1−
1+

τtB
τtC






B 
1−τt+1




e
βλ
B̃
ζ
t+1 t+1
C
1 
 t+1 1+τt+1

 ωt+1
u

1−
− ωt+1
Γt+1  , (11)
1 − Et 

B
1−τt
α
ω
t
λ
B̃ ζ

where α = ψ (ζt )ζt /ψ(ζt ) > 1 and Γt+1 =

t



st (1−ft )
1−et+1

1+τtC


1−

t t

βλt+1 (1+τtC )
C
λt (1+τt+1
)

u
ωt+1
(1

−

t
ft ) uut+1

−1
> 0.

The first term in equation (11) for bt is simply non-UI benefits per unemployed, Bn,t . The
second term consists of pre-tax UI benefits per unemployed Bu,t , multiplied by the tax wedge


1 − τtB / 1 + τtC , an adjustment for the disutility of take-up (1 − 1/α), and an adjustment
for benefits expiration (the bracketed term).
The term (1 − 1/α) < 1 in equation (11) captures the fact that, because of take-up costs,
the utility value from receiving UI benefits is lower than the monetary value of UI benefits. The
average utility value per recipient equals the benefit per recipient less the average utility cost per


recipient, 1 − τtB λt B̃t / 1 + τtC − ψ(ζt )/ζt . Using the first-order condition (9), the average
utility value is equivalently given by the difference between the marginal and the average cost,
ψ 0 (ζt )−ψ(ζt )/ζt . This difference depends on the elasticity of the cost function α = ψ 0 (ζt )ζt /ψ(ζt ).
With a convex ψ(ζt ) function, we have α > 1. If the elasticity α is close to one, average cost
per recipient is roughly constant and there is a small utility value from receiving benefits as the
household always incurs a cost per recipient that approximately equals the benefit per recipient.
The greater is the elasticity α, the lower is the average relative to the marginal cost per recipient
11

and the larger is the utility value that the household receives from benefits.
The term in brackets in equation (11) captures an adjustment for the expiration of UI benefits. This term is less than one when the probability that newly separated workers receive
e
benefits, ωt+1
, exceeds the probability that previously eligible workers continue to receive beneu
fits, ωt+1
ωt . Intuitively, increasing employment in the current period entitles workers to future

benefits which lowers the opportunity cost of employment. The term Γt+1 partly captures the
dynamics of this effect over time, since increasing employment in the current period affects the
whole path of future eligibility.
2.2.2

Opportunity Cost of Employment: Value of Non-Working Time

The second component of the opportunity cost of employment, ξ, results from consumption and
work differences between employed and unemployed. It is useful to write it as:
ξt =

[U (Ctu , 0) − λt Ctu ] − [U (Cte , Nt ) − λt Cte ]
.
λt

(12)

The first term in the numerator, Utu − λt Ctu , is the total utility of the unemployed less the utility
of the unemployed from consumption. It has the interpretation of the utility the unemployed
derive solely from non-working time. Similarly, the term Ute − λt Cte represents the utility of
the employed from non-working time. The difference between the two terms represents the
additional utility the household obtains from non-working time when moving an individual
from employment to unemployment. The denominator of ξt is the common marginal utility of
consumption. Therefore, ξt represents the value of non-working time in units of consumption.
The expression for ξt resembles the marginal rate of substitution between non-working time
and consumption in the RBC model, with the difference being that the additional value of nonworking time is calculated along the extensive margin. As in the RBC model, ξt is procyclical.
First, when λt rises in recessions, the value of earning income that can be used for consumption
rises relative to the value of non-working time. Second, Nt gives the difference in non-working
time between the unemployed and the employed. When Nt falls in recessions, the contribution
of the unemployed relative to the employed to household utility declines. In sum, the household
values more the contribution of the employed (who generate higher wage income) relative to that
12

of the unemployed (who have higher non-working time) during recessions, when consumption is
lower and the difference in non-working time between employed and unemployed is smaller.
2.2.3

Comparison to the MP Literature

The MP literature typically assumes a constant zt = z. If the value of benefits does not fluctuate,
bt = b, then zt is constant if ξt is constant. We describe two sets of restrictions on utility which
generate a constant ξ:
1. No disutility from hours worked and utility functions that do not depend on employment
status (for example, Shimer, 2005):
Uts = U (Cts ) , s ∈ {e, u} =⇒ Cte = Ctu , Ute = Utu =⇒ ξt = 0 =⇒ zt = b.
2. Linearity in consumption, separability, and constant hours per worker N (for example,
Hagedorn and Manovskii, 2008):
Ute = Cte − v (N ) , Utu = Ctu =⇒ ξt = v (N ) =⇒ zt = b + v (N ) .
In general, the component ξt will vary over time if Nt enters as an argument into the utility
function and either (i) Nt varies over time or (ii) utility is not linear in consumption.

2.3

Comparison to Other Models

Our baseline model adopts assumptions from the household block of the standard MP/RBC
model. The broad popularity of this model as well as its analytical elegance make it the natural
starting point for analyzing z.5 However, the same z defined in equation (10) arises in other
contexts. To make this point clear, we highlight four assumptions of the benchmark model
which we later relax or change:
1. Ex-ante homogeneous workers. Section 6 applies our measurement exercise to heterogeneous groups defined along observable characteristics.
5

Our model follows much of the literature in abstracting from the labor force participation margin. This
abstraction omits potentially important flows into and out of participation and affects our measurement insofar
as people move directly from non-participation to employment. Allowing for endogenous labor force participation
would not, however, affect our expression for z. For example, allowing non-employed workers to choose between
unemployment and non-participation would add a first-order condition to the model requiring indifference between
the two states. The marginal value of adding an employed would still be given by equation (10).

13

2. Wage setting mechanism. Sections 7.1 and 7.2 illustrate how z affects equilibrium
unemployment under Nash bargaining and alternating-offer wage bargaining respectively.
3. Random search. Section 7.3 shows that z plays an equivalent role in a model with
directed search and wage posting.
4. Employment as a state variable. Section 7.4 derives the same z in the indivisible
labor model of Hansen (1985) and Rogerson (1988) in which households can freely adjust
employment at any point of time.
Finally, in Appendix C we derive a closely related measure of the opportunity cost in a model
with incomplete asset markets.

3

Measurement of the b Component

In this section we use equation (11) to generate a time series of b. We depart from the literature
in three significant ways. First, following the aggregation logic outlined above, we measure
the average benefit across all unemployed, rather than statutory benefit rates. This matters
because, on average, only about 40 percent of unemployed actually receive UI. Second, the
social safety net includes a number of other programs such as supplemental nutritional assistance
payments (SNAP, formerly known as food stamps), welfare assistance (TANF, formerly AFDC),
and health care (Medicaid). Income from all of these programs belongs in Bn,t to the extent
that unemployment status correlates with receipt of these benefits. Third, for UI benefits we
differentiate between monetary benefits per unemployed Bu,t and the part of these benefits
associated with the opportunity cost of employment. As equation (11) shows, the latter deviate
from Bu,t because of taxes, utility costs associated with taking up benefits, and expiration.
For our measurement of b we require time series of variables such as benefits, eligibility and
take-up rates, separation and job finding rates, and taxes. We construct such a dataset drawing
on microdata from the CPS, SIPP, and IRS Public Use Files, published series from the NIPA,
BLS, and various other government agencies, and historical data collected from print issues of
the Economic Report of the President. Appendix B.1 provides greater detail on the source data.
14

3.1

Benefits Per Unemployed

We begin by measuring non-UI benefits per unemployed, Bn,t , and UI benefits per unemployed,
Bu,t , in equation (11). Our empirical approach to measuring the monetary value of benefits
combines micro survey data with program administrative data. Let Bk,t denote benefits per
unemployed in each program k ∈ {UI, SNAP, AFDC/TANF, Medicaid}.6 We measure Bk,t as:

Bk,t =

(survey dollars tied to unemployment status)k,t
(total survey dollars)k,t

!

(total administrative dollars)k,t
(number of unemployed)t


. (13)

We use the micro data to estimate the term in the first parentheses in equation (13), the fraction
of total program spending in the survey that depends on unemployment status, and call this
share
share
ratio Bk,t
. We then multiply Bk,t
by the ratio of dollars from program administrative data

to the number of unemployed (the term in the second parentheses). We adjust the survey
estimate of dollars tied to unemployment status by the ratio of administrative to survey dollars
to correct for the fact that program benefits in surveys are underreported (Meyer, Mok, and
Sullivan, 2009).
share
We now explain and implement our procedure to estimate Bk,t
. Define yk,i,t as income from

category k received by household or person i. We use the microdata to estimate the change in
yk,i,t following an employment status change. To solve the time aggregation problem that arises
because an individual may spend part of the reporting period employed and part unemployed,
we model directly the instantaneous income of type k for an individual with labor force status
s ∈ {e, u}. This is given by:
s
e
yk,i,t
= φk Xi + yk,t
+ βk,t I {si,t = u} + k,i,t ,

(14)

e
where Xi denotes a vector of individual characteristics, yk,t
is a base income level of an employed,

and I {si,t = u} is an indicator function taking the value of one if the individual is unemployed
at time t. According to this process, income from program k increases discretely by βk,t during
an unemployment spell. Integrating over the reporting period and taking first differences to
6

We also investigated the importance of housing subsidies. We found their importance quantitatively trivial
and, therefore, omit them from the analysis.

15

eliminate the individual fixed effect yields:
0
u
u
∆yk,i,t = βk,t
+ βk,t ∆Di,t
+ ∆βk,t Di,t−1
+ ∆k,i,t ,

(15)

0
e
u
where βk,t
= ∆yk,t
and the variable Di,t
measures the fraction of the reporting period that an

individual spends as unemployed.
share
By definition, Bk,t
is:
share
Bk,t
=

(survey dollars tied to unemployment status)k,t
(total survey dollars)k,t

P
u
i ωi,t Di,t
= βk,t P
,
i ωi,t yk,i,t

(16)

where ωi,t is the survey sampling weight for individual i in period t. Substituting equation (16)
share
from the regression:
into equation (15) gives a direct estimate of Bk,t
0
share
u
∆yk,i,t = βk,t
+ Bk,t
∆D̃i,t + ∆βk,t Di,t−1
+ ∆k,i,t ,

u
where ∆D̃i,t = ∆Di,t

P

i ωi,t yk,i,t /

(17)

u
i ωi,t Di,t .

P

We implement equation (17) using both the March CPS with households matched across
consecutive years starting in 1989 and the SIPP starting in 1996. Appendix B.1 describes the
surveys and our sample construction. In each survey, we construct a measure of unemployment
at the individual level that mimics the BLS U-3 definition. The U-3 definition of unemployment
counts an individual as working if he had a job during the week containing the 12th of the month
(the survey reference week) and as in the labor force if he worked during the reference week,
spent the week on temporary layoff, or had any search in the previous four weeks.7
We aggregate unemployment and income up to the level at which the benefits program is
administered. In particular, in the regressions with UI income as the dependent variable, the
unit of observation is the individual and we cluster standard errors at the household level. In
7

In the March Supplement, we count an individual as in the labor force during the previous year only for those
weeks where the individual reports working, being on temporary layoff, or actually searching. In the SIPP, we
count an individual as employed if he worked in any week of the month, rather than only if he worked during the
BLS survey reference week. Accordingly, we define the fraction of time an individual is unemployed as:


weeks searching or on temporary layoff in year t
u,CPS
Di,t
=
,
weeks in the labor force in year t
i
4
o
1 X n
u,SIPP
Di,t
=
I [non-employed, at least 1 week of search or layoff]i,t−m .
4 m=1

16

Table 1: Share of Government Program Benefits Belonging to B

UI

SNAP

TANF

Medicaid

CPS (1989-2013)
B share
Standard error
Observations

0.909
(0.020)
483,686

0.064
(0.005)
273,731

0.065
(0.011)
318,611

0.021
(0.003)
268,689

SIPP (1996-2013)
B share
Standard error
Observations

0.923
(0.015)
1,560,244

0.048
(0.002)
1,000,913

0.033
(0.005)
1,027,544

0.916

0.056

0.049

Mean of B share (CPS and SIPP)

0.021

The table reports summary statistics based on OLS regressions of equation (17), where B share is defined in equation
(16). The regressions exclude observations with imputed income in the category and are weighted using sampling
weights in each year, with the weights normalized such that all years receive equal weight. Standard errors are
based on heteroskedastic robust (CPS, non-UI), heteroskedastic robust and clustered by family (CPS, UI), or
heteroskedastic robust and clustered by household (SIPP) variance matrix.

regressions for SNAP, TANF, and Medicaid, the unit of observation is the family average of
unemployment and the family total of income. Finally, for each benefit category we exclude
observations with imputed benefit amounts in that category.
share
Table 1 reports results based on OLS regressions of equation (17) that constrain Bk,t
to be

constant over time.8 For UI, the average B share is 0.916. If only unemployed persons received UI,
then this share would have been equal to one. In fact, in many states individuals with part-time
unemployment can retain eligibility for UI and some individuals report claiming UI without
exerting any search effort. Our estimate of the share of UI income accruing to non-unemployed
is 8.4 percent. This estimate accords well with audits conducted by the Department of Labor
which find that roughly 10 percent of UI payments go to ineligible recipients.
Only roughly five percent of SNAP and TANF and two percent of Medicaid spending appear
in Bn,t . We find these estimates reasonable. Roughly two-thirds of Medicaid payments accrue
to persons who are over 65, blind, or disabled (Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services,
8

share
We find that the correlation between the cyclical component of an estimated time-varying Bk,t
and the
cyclical component of the unemployment rate is on average (across programs k and surveys) equal to 0.07.

17

10000
Benefits Per Unemployed
2000
4000
6000
8000
0
1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

Non-UI

1995

2000

2005

2010

UI

Figure 1: Time Series of Benefits Per Unemployed

2011, Table II.4). Moreover, even prior to implementation of the Affordable Care Act, all states
had income limits for coverage of children of at least 100 percent of the poverty line and half
of states provided at least partial coverage to working adults with incomes at the poverty line
(Kaiser Family Foundation, 2013). For SNAP, tabulations from the monthly quality control
files provided by Mathematica indicate that no more than one-quarter of SNAP benefits go
to households with at least one member unemployed. Given statutory phase-out rates and
deductions, 5 percent appears as a reasonable estimate.
To summarize, in order to measure Bn,t and Bu,t we first use micro survey data to estimate
the share of each program’s total spending associated with unemployment, Bkshare . We then
apply this share to the total spending observed in administrative data. As a result, Bn,t and
Bu,t inherit directly the cyclical properties of the program administrative data. Although the
Bkshare ’s for the non-UI programs are small, the standard errors strongly indicate that they are
not zero. We plot the resulting time series of Bn,t and Bu,t in constant 2009 dollars in Figure 1.

3.2

Eligibility, Take-Up Rate, and UI Recipients

We continue our analysis by constructing other terms that enter b in equation (11). Consistent
with our unemployment variable (BLS series LNS13000000), the number of employed comes
18

from the monthly CPS (BLS series LNS12000000). With a constant labor force, the number of
newly unemployed workers equals the product of the previous period’s separation rate st−1 and
stock of employed workers et−1 . We therefore define the separation rate st at quarterly frequency
as the ratio of the number of workers unemployed for fewer than 15 weeks in quarter t + 1 (using
the sum of BLS series LNS13008397 and LNS13025701) to the number of employed workers in
t. The separation rate and the unemployment rate allow us to calculate the job-finding rate ft
from the law of motion for unemployment ut+1 = ut (1 − ft ) + st (1 − ut ).9
We next construct estimates of UI benefits per recipient B̃t , the fraction of unemployed
receiving UI benefits φt , the fraction of eligible unemployed ωt , and the fraction of eligible who
take up benefits ζt . The Department of Labor provides data on the number of UI recipients
in all tiers (state regular benefits, extended benefits, and federal emergency benefits) beginning
in 1986. We extend this series back to 1961 using data from Statistical Appendix B of the
Economic Report of the President. Dividing the NIPA total of UI benefits paid (Table 2.6,
line 21) by the number of UI recipients gives a time series of UI benefits per recipient B̃t . The
fraction of unemployed receiving benefits is φt = Bu,t /B̃t , where Bu,t is our estimate of UI
benefits per unemployed from Section 3.1.
We estimate ωt from its law of motion in equation (6) and data on ut , st , ft , ωte , and ωtu .
We measure the probability that a newly unemployed is eligible for UI, ωte , using the fact that
workers who quit their jobs and new labor force entrants are ineligible for UI. From the CPS
basic monthly microdata, we measure the unemployed for less than five weeks who report “job
loser” as their reason for unemployment. We add to this total the product of the number of
re-entrants who have worked in the past 12 months and the 6 month lag of the fraction of job
losers among those moving from employment to unemployment. Dividing by the total number
of unemployed for less than five weeks gives an estimate of the fraction of the newly unemployed
that satisfy non-monetary eligibility. We tie cyclical movements in ωte to cyclical movements in
9

We recognize the point of Shimer (2012) that this procedure understates the amount of gross flows between
unemployment and employment because some workers separate and find a new job within period. A discrete time
calibration must accept this shortcoming if both the law of motion for unemployment holds and the share of newly
unemployed matches the data. For our purposes, matching the share of newly unemployed matters more than
matching the level of gross flows. Estimating st and ft at a monthly frequency, which should substantially mitigate
the bias from within-period flows, makes little difference for our results.

19

this fraction.10 We center ωte around 0.75 to target a mean take-up rate ζt of 0.65.
We set ωtu , the probability that an unemployed remains eligible, such that the expected
potential duration of eligibility equals the national maximum of weeks eligible, adjusted for the
fact that not every unemployed individual has the maximal potential duration (see Appendix
B.1 for further details). Evaluating equation (6) using the time series of ut , st , ft , ωte , and ωtu
gives our time series of eligibility ωt . The take-up rate equals ζt = φt /ωt .

3.3

Taxes

Our next step is to construct time series for the three tax rates, τtw , τtB , and τtC . We measure
the tax rates τtw and τtB as the population average of effective tax rates on labor compensation
and UI benefits, respectively. For tax unit i, let income yi,t = ys,i,t + yn,i,t + yB,i,t + yo,i,t be the
sum of taxable income from wages and salaries ys,i,t , non-taxable labor compensation (such as
health insurance) yn,i,t , income from UI yB,i,t , and other income (such as capital income) yo,i,t .
Let TL(yi,t ) be the total tax liability in period t of household i with income yi,t . We measure
the effective marginal tax rate on income source k ∈ {s, B} as:
k
τi,t
=

TL(yi,t − yn,i,t ) − TL(yi,t − yn,i,t − yk,i,t )
.
yk,i,t

(18)

k
In equation (18), τi,t
captures the effective tax rate faced by a household making an extensive

margin decision regarding either working or taking up benefits, holding constant other income
sources. We implement equation (18) using IRS Public Use Files in conjunction with NBER
TAXSIM. The files contain a nationally representative sample of approximately 140,000 tax
filing units per year in 1960, 1962, 1964, and 1966-2008. Our measure of tax liability TL
includes federal income taxes, state income taxes, and FICA taxes. We construct τts and τtB as
the average in the population of households with positive wage and salary income and positive
UI income, respectively. Because taxes apply on a calendar year basis, we set the tax rate in
10

We do not have information on monetary eligibility at cyclical frequencies. We conjecture that monetary
eligibility is procyclical, as newly unemployed transition from weaker labor markets during recessions. In that case,
ignoring monetary eligibility leads us to understate the volatility of the take-up rate and ultimately of z. Prior to
1968, we impute the share of newly unemployed that satisfy non-monetary eligibility using the fitted values from
a regression of the share on leads and lags of the unemployment rate and of the fraction of job losers among all
durations of unemployed.

20

each quarter of a calendar year to the tax rate estimated for the whole calendar year.11
To estimate the effective tax rate on total labor income, τtw , we adjust τts to take into


s,t
account non-taxable compensation, τtw = ys,ty+y
τts . In the adjustment factor, taxable labor
n,t
compensation ys,t is the difference between total labor compensation (NIPA Table 2.1, line 2)
and the sum of employer provided health insurance (NIPA Table 7.8, line 12) and life insurance
(NIPA Table 7.8, line 18). Total labor income ys,t + yn,t in the denominator of the adjustment
is total labor compensation (NIPA Table 2.1, line 2).
We use data on net taxes on production and imports (NIPA Table 1.12, lines 19 and 20) to
measure consumption taxes τtC . These indirect taxes include items such as federal excise taxes,
state sale taxes, and property taxes and, therefore, affect both consumption and investment
spending. We calculate consumption taxes as a fraction of net taxes on production and imports.
The fraction equals the ratio of personal consumption expenditures to the sum of personal
consumption expenditures and gross private domestic investment from NIPA Table 1.1.5. We
estimate τtC by dividing the fraction of these indirect taxes by the difference between personal
consumption expenditure and the fraction of these indirect taxes.
Figure 2 shows our estimated tax series τtw , τtB , and τtC . The series exhibit sharp movements
around legislated tax changes. For example, UI benefits become partially federally taxable in
1979 and fully taxable as part of the Tax Reform Act of 1986. The sharp drop in τtB in 2009
reflects the exemption of the first $2,400 of UI income from federal adjusted gross income in
that year. The secular increase in τtw until 2000 reflects mostly the increase in FICA tax rates.
Both τtw and τtB decline as a result of the Bush tax cuts in the early 2000s.12

3.4

Benefit Take-Up Cost Function

Our final input into equation (11) is the elasticity of the cost of take-up ψ(ζt ) with respect to
the take-up rate ζt , which we denote by α = ψ 0 (ζt )ζt /ψ(ζt ). We estimate α using the first-order
11

Following the availability of tax law in TAXSIM, we include state taxes beginning in 1977. We extrapolate
both τts and τtB for 2009-2012 using the fitted values from a regression of the tax rates as computed using the IRS
Public Use Files on the tax rates computed using the same methodology but with the March CPS as the micro
data.
12
Our series for τtw correlates highly with an effective labor income tax rate series calculated from NIPA sources.
After extending the methodology of Mendoza, Razin, and Tesar (1994) to our longer sample, the R-squared from
a regression of the one series on the other exceeds 85 percent.

21

.25
.2
Tax Rate
.1
.15
.05
0
1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

Labor Income

1990

1995

UI Benefits

2000

2005

2010

Consumption

Figure 2: Tax Rates

condition for the take-up rate (9). Using a circumflex to denote percent deviations of variables
from their trends, the first-order condition yields:

ζbt =

1
α−1



 c̃
λbt + 1\
− τtB − 1\
+ τtC + B
t .

(19)

We have described the measurement of all variables that enter equation (19) with the exception of the marginal utility of consumption λ̂t . The marginal utility depends on the underlying
utility function. In this section we show results under the case of separable preferences between
log consumption and the disutility of non-working time. In this case we obtain λ̂t = −Ĉt , where
Ct denotes NIPA consumption of non-durable and non-housing services per person 16 years or
older.
Under this measure of the marginal utility we estimate a value of α = 1.87 with a standard
error of 0.15. The take-up rate in the data comoves positively with the utility value of aftertax benefits per recipient, generating an estimate of α > 1. In Section 4 we present three
additional preference specifications together with the separable case. While each of the four
specifications implies a different λ̂t series, the estimates of α are stable across the different
preference specifications.
22

Opportunity Cost Related to Value of Benefits
.02
.04
.06
.08
.1
.12
0
1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

Figure 3: Time Series of b Component of Opportunity Cost

3.5

Results

We now combine our measurements of the various components to calculate a time series of b
using equation (11).13 We normalize b and other variables by expressing them relative to the
mean level of the after-tax marginal product of employment pτ . Denoting total output by Yt and
the pre-tax marginal product of employment by pt = ∂Yt /∂et , we define the after-tax marginal

product of employment as pτt = pt (1 − τtw ) / 1 + τtC , where τtw is the labor income tax rate
and τtC is the tax rate on consumption. We normalize its mean value to pτ = 1.14
In Figure 3 we present the time series of b relative to the mean after-tax marginal product
of employment pτ = 1. Our estimated b is countercyclical and very volatile, mostly reflecting
the significant increase in UI eligibility and take-up during recessions. The correlation between
the cyclical component of b and the cyclical component of real GDP per capita is -0.45. The
standard deviation of the cyclical component of b is roughly 6 times larger than the standard
13

To make this equation operational in the data, we drop the expectations operator and substitute

1
1+rt+1 .
14

βλt+1 (1+τtC )
C
λt (1+τt+1
)

=

We measure rt+1 using the interest rate on 10-year U.S. Treasuries less a measure of expected inflation.
Let Yt = Ft (Kt , et Nt ) be a constant returns to scale aggregate production function. We set to ν = 0.333 the
elasticity of output with respect to capital. We measure the pre-tax marginal product of employment, pt , as 1 − ν
multiplied by real GDP and then divided by the number of employed. The marginal product of total labor hours is
given by xt = ∂Yt /∂(et Nt ) = pt /N
 t . We use a superscript τ to also denote the after-tax marginal product of total
labor xτt = xt (1 − τtw ) / 1 + τtC . We normalize mean hours per worker to N = 1 and therefore xτ = 1.

23

deviation of the cyclical component of real GDP per capita.
A key finding that emerges from our analysis is that the mean level of b is small. We find that
the mean b in our sample is roughly 6 percent of the after-tax marginal product of employment
pτ . This estimated level of b is much smaller than the values typically used in calibrated versions
of the MP model.15
What explains our estimate? Beginning with the UI component of b, the sample mean of
pre-tax benefits per recipient, B̃, is 21.5 percent of the pre-tax marginal product p and 30
percent of the after-tax marginal product pτ .16 However, on average only about φ = ωζ = 40%
of unemployed actually receive benefits. Therefore, pre-tax benefits per unemployed Bu =
φB̃ equal 12 percent of the after-tax marginal product. After-tax benefits per unemployed,
(1−τ B )Bu /(1+τ C ), equal roughly 10 percent of the after-tax marginal product. The expiration
of benefits reduces the value of UI benefits to 8 percent of the after-tax marginal product and
take-up disutility costs further reduce the value of UI benefits to 4 percent of the after-tax
marginal product. Finally, adding the Bn component yields b = 0.06. To summarize our
calculations for the mean level of b, we show in equation (20) how each term contributes to our
estimate:


1
1 − τB
b = Bn + Bu
[bracket in eq. (11)] = 0.06.
1−
|{z} |{z} 1 + τ C
{z
}
α |
{z } | {z }
0.02
0.12 |
0.83


0.83

4

(20)

0.47

Measurement of the ξ Component

We now turn to the value of non-working time relative to consumption ξ. To measure ξ we
use equation (12) and proceed in three steps. First, we specify utility functions. Second, we
15

The sensitivity of reported reservation wages to UI benefits suggests one respect in which our b may still be
too large. In our model, the increase in the reservation wage for individuals already receiving UI is given by the
tax-adjusted bracketed term in equation (11), which has a sample average value of roughly 0.69. Estimates of the
increase in reservation wages when UI benefits increase range from zero (Krueger and Mueller, 2013) to as large as
0.42 (Feldstein and Poterba, 1984).
16
A rate of 21.5 percent accords well with the benefit levels used by Mortensen and Nagypal (2007) and Hall
and Milgrom (2008) and the rate suggested by Hornstein, Krusell, and Violante (2005). The Department of Labor
estimates a wage replacement rate of about 45 percent (http://workforcesecurity.doleta.gov/unemploy/ui_
replacement_rates.asp, accessed 2/15/2015). Converting a wage replacement rate of 45 percent to a total
compensation replacement rate requires multiplying by the ratio of wages to total compensation, or a factor of
about 0.8. The remaining difference can be explained by the gap between compensation and the marginal product
and from differences in productivity and compensation between those receiving UI and the economy-wide average.
We address the issue of heterogeneity in Section 6.

24

measure in the data the consumption of the employed and unemployed and hours per worker.
Third, we use our estimates of consumptions and hours to calibrate preference parameters and
time endowments, which are used as inputs into the measurement of ξ.

4.1

Preferences and Time Endowments

Flow utility is a function of a bundle of consumption and working time, U s (C s , N s ), for each
employment status s ∈ {e, u}. We let Nte = Nt denote hours worked by the employed and
Ntu = 0 denote hours worked by the unemployed. Denote by Lu the (constant) endowment of
time that unemployed spend on leisure and home production activities. Denote by T any fixed
time cost associated with working. Time spent on leisure and home production by the employed
is, therefore, given by Let = Lu − T − Nte .
We measure the ξ component of the opportunity cost for each of three widely-used utility
functions:
SEP:
CFE:
CD:

1
χ
(Nts + T )1+  ,
Uts = log (Cts ) −
 1 + 
ρ

1
χ
1+ 1
s
s 1−ρ
s
Ut =
(Ct )
1 − (1 − ρ)
(N + T )
−1 ,
1−ρ
1+ t
1 − χ s 1−ρ s χ(1−ρ)
Uts =
(C )
(Lt ) 1−χ .
1−ρ t

(21)
(22)
(23)

The first two utility functions feature a constant Frisch elasticity of labor supply along the
intensive margin, , in the absence of fixed time costs T = 0. The utility function in equation
(21), denoted by “SEP,” is separable between consumption and hours. The preferences defined
in equation (22), labeled “CFE,” allow for non-separability between consumption and hours
worked.17 CFE preferences nest SEP preferences when ρ = 1. With ρ > 1, consumption and
non-working time are substitutes and the consumption of the employed exceeds the consumption of the unemployed. The Cobb-Douglas (“CD”) utility function in equation (23) explicitly
introduces leisure and home production time in the utility function of the unemployed. CD
preferences feature a non-separability between consumption and non-working time, but they do
not admit a constant Frisch elasticity even when T = 0.
17

See Shimer (2010) and Trabandt and Uhlig (2011) for further discussion of these preferences.

25

4.2

Consumption

For non-separable preferences, the measurement of ξ requires time series of consumptions of the
employed Cte and the unemployed Ctu . Let s ∈ {e, u, n, r} denote persons 16 years or older who
are employed, unemployed, out of the labor force but of working age (16-64), and older than 65
years old, respectively. Let πts be the fraction of the population belonging in each group. Time
series of πts come directly from published tabulations by the BLS.
Denote by Cts consumption expenditure on nondurable goods and non-housing services per
member of group s. We have the adding-up identity:
πte Cte + πtu Ctu + πtn Ctn + πtr Ctr = CtNIPA ,

(24)

where CtNIPA is NIPA consumption of nondurable goods and non-housing services per person
16 years or older. Defining γts = Cts /Cte as the ratio of consumption in status s to consumption
when employed, we solve equation (24) for the consumption of an employed:
Cte

CtNIPA
P
=
s s.
s π t γt

(25)

Equation (25) together with estimates of the consumption ratios γts provide the basis for deriving
the time series of consumptions for the employed and unemployed and for calibrating the utility
functions in Section 4.4.
s
denote the instantaWe now turn to our estimates of the consumption ratios γts . Let Ci,k,t

neous expenditure on consumption category k of an individual i in group s at time t. When
e
employed, individual i has expenditure Ci,k,t
= exp {φk,t Xi,t + k,i,t } C̃k,t , where Xi,t denotes a

vector of demographic characteristics, φk,t a vector of parameters, k,i,t a mean zero idiosyncratic component uncorrelated with employment status, and C̃k,t a base level of consumption.
s
For every s ∈ {e, u, n, r}, we use the definition of γk,t
and obtain:
s
s
Ck,i,t
= γk,t
exp {φk,t Xi,t + k,i,t } C̃k,t .

(26)

For a working age individual with potential status e, u, or n, we integrate over the reporting
period and take logs to obtain:
 u
 n
0
u
n
− 1 Di,t
+ γ̃k,t
− 1 Di,t
+ k,i,t ,
ln Ck,i,t = γk,t
+ φk,t Xi,t + γ̃k,t
26

(27)

0
u
n
where γk,t
= ln C̃k,t and the variables Di,t
and Di,t
measure the fraction of time an individual
s
spends as unemployed and out of the labor force, respectively.18 In equation (27), γ̃k,t
−1

denotes the difference between the log consumption of an individual in group s and the log
s
consumption of an employed. Therefore, to recover the actual consumption ratios γk,t
from the


s
s
log point differences we use the formula γk,t
= exp γ̃k,t
−1 .

We begin by estimating equation (27) using the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CE). The
CE asks respondents for the number of weeks worked over the previous year, but does not ask
n
questions about search activity while not working. We set Di,t
= 1 if the respondent reports

zero weeks worked over the previous year and does not give “unable to find job” as the reason
u
for not working. For the rest of the respondents, we define Di,t
= 1 − (weeks worked)i,t /52.
n
u
and Di,t
at the household level. To minimize inclusion of households with
We average Di,t

adults transitioning out of the labor force within the reporting year, we restrict the sample to
households with a head age 30 to 55 at the time of the final interview. We include a rich set of
controls in Xi,t to control for taste shocks and ex-ante permanent income that potentially could
correlate with an individual’s employment status.19
We focus our discussion of results on the unemployment margin because γ u will directly
inform our calibration of preferences. Figure 4 reports γ u by year, for the aggregate category
of nondurable goods and services, less housing, health, and education. The mean of γ u implies
a 21 percent decline in expenditure on nondurable goods and services during unemployment.
The series does not exhibit any apparent cyclicality, with a correlation between the cyclical
components of γ u and the unemployment rate of -0.03. We also test for cyclicality parametrically
i

h

P 
P s  s
s
s
with s Di,t
γ̃k,t − 1 ,
In deriving our estimating equation we replace the term ln 1 − s 1 − γk,t
Di,t
s
s
where the coefficients γ̃k,t
are related to the coefficients γk,t
and to terms of order higher than one in the linear
s
approximation of the left-hand side around γk,t = 1, ∀s. Derivations for the estimating equation for γtr proceed
u
u
analogously. The derivation of equation (27) assumes that γ̃k,t
does not vary with unemployment duration Di,t
.
u
In unreported regressions, we have estimated γ̃k,t non-parametrically by grouping households into bins of weeks
u
u
unemployed. Our estimated γ̃k,t
for each bin indicates a duration-independent γ̃k,t
. This finding supports the
assumption in the model that the instantaneous consumption of the unemployed does not depend on duration.
19
These controls include: the mean age of the household head and spouse; the mean age squared; the marital
status; an indicator variable for Caucasian or not; indicator variables for four categories of education of the
household head (less than high school, high school diploma, some college, college degree) interacted with year;
indicator variables for owning a house without a mortgage, owning a house with a mortgage, or renting a house,
interacted with year; indicator variables for quantiles of the value of the home conditional on owning, by region
and year, interacted with year; a binary variable for having positive financial assets; family size; and family size
squared.
18

27

1
.8
e

.4

.6

u

Ct / Ct

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

Figure 4: Decline in Nondurables and Services Upon Unemployment
Notes: The solid line reports the estimates of γtu = exp(γ̃u,t − 1), where γ̃u,t is estimated from equation (27) using
data from the CE. The dotted lines give 95 percent confidence interval bands based on robust standard errors.
Regressions are weighted using survey sampling weights. See footnote 19 for included covariates.
u
by interacting Di,t
in equation (27) with both the state and national unemployment rates and

again cannot reject the hypothesis that the consumption ratio is acyclical (see Table 2).
The cross-sectional identification in equation (27) relies on the richness of the control variables to absorb differences in ex-ante permanent income. We complement this approach with
panel regressions relying on within household changes in consumption. First differencing equation (27) to remove the individual fixed effect we obtain:20
0
∆ ln Ck,i,t = ∆γk,t
+

X 



s
s
s
s
γ̃k,t
− 1 ∆Di,t
+ ∆γ̃k,t
Di,t−1
+ ∆i,k,t ,

(28)

s∈{u,n}

We use the panel dimension of the PSID to estimate equation (28).21 Table 2 reports estimates of γ̃ku from equation (27) for the CE and from equation (28) for the PSID. For total food,
the PSID suggests a somewhat larger γ̃ku than the CE, but this may reflect an upward bias in
20

In deriving equation (28), we impose that φk,t = φk . In unreported results, we have also estimated equation
(28) by interacting a set of controls with year categorical variables and find that the PSID results in Table 2 remain
essentially unchanged.
21
The PSID asks detailed questions about labor force status.
We use these to construct the fracu
tion of the reporting period in unemployment in a manner analogous to the BLS U-3 definition, Di,t
=
h
i
weeks searching or on temporary layoff in year t
. This more precise definition of unemployment constitutes an additional
weeks in the labor force in year t
i
dimension along which the PSID provides robustness for the CE results.

28

Table 2: Relative Expenditure of the Unemployed γ̃ u

Total food

γ̃

u

pval (γ̃ u ⊥ U state , U nat. )
Observations

CE
0.79
(0.013)
0.88
53,413

Food, clothing
recreation, vacation

PSID
0.86
(0.045)
0.42
31,616

CE
0.72
(0.015)
0.89
53,413

PSID
0.73
(0.096)
0.25
4,871

Nondurables
and services
CE
0.77
(0.012)
0.63
53,413

Notes: The parameter γ̃ u gives the log point difference between the expenditure of an unemployed and the expenditure of an employed. The CE columns cover reporting years 1983-2012. The category nondurables and services
in the last column excludes expenditures on housing, health care, and education. The PSID columns cover reporting years 1983-86, 1989-1996, 1998, 2000, 2002, 2004, 2006, 2008, and 2010 for food and years 2004, 2006,
2008, and 2010 for clothing, recreation, and vacations. Equation (27) is used for the CE and equation (28) is
used for the PSID. Regressions are weighted using sampling weights. Standard errors are in parentheses and are
based on heteroskedastic robust (CE) or heteroskedastic robust and clustered by household head (PSID) variance
u
matrix. pval (γ̃ u ⊥ U state , U nat. ) reports the p-value of a joint test that interacting Di,t
with the state and national
unemployment rates in equation (27) or (28) yields coefficients equal to zero.

the PSID.22 We also exploit the new questions in the PSID covering broader measures of consumption expenditure. Here the estimated γ̃ku from the PSID appears nearly indistinguishable
from the γ̃ku from the CE for the same set of categories. The overall similarity between the
CE and the PSID results suggest that the control variables in Xi,t proxy well for differences in
ex-ante permanent income. Because of non-homotheticities across consumption categories, our
preferred results come from the CE for total nondurable goods and services less housing, health,
and education, reported in the last column of the table.
Our estimate of the consumption drop upon unemployment lies comfortably within the range
of those found in previous studies. In an early assessment, Burgess, Kingston, St. Louis, and
Sloane (1981) report in a survey of UI recipients after five weeks of unemployment that expendi22

The PSID asks about “usual” weekly expenditure on food at home and then about food away from home without
prompting a frequency. These questions leave some ambiguity as to whether the food expenditure questions apply
to the time of the interview or to the previous year. We follow the recent literature in mapping the questions to
the previous year’s expenditure (Blundell, Pistaferri, and Preston, 2008). However, if some respondents’ interpret
the question as referencing food expenditure at the time of the interview, the resulting measurement error in
unemployment status would bias the estimated γ̃k in the PSID regressions upward. Additionally, while the CE
asks about detailed categories every three months, the PSID asks about the broad categories of food at home
and food away and over a longer recall period. Hence even if respondents interpret the question as referring to
the previous year, recall bias may cause their response to partly reflect their current consumption patterns. The
newer PSID expenditure questions on clothing, recreation, and vacation explicitly reference the previous year as
the reporting period. The smaller difference between CE and PSID for these categories is consistent with reference
period ambiguity introducing a bias into the PSID food results.

29

ture on the categories of food, clothing, entertainment, and travel fell by 25.7 percent relative to
before the unemployment spell. Gruber (1997) reports a decline in food expenditure of 6.8 percent in the PSID for the period up to 1987. The difference between his results and ours mostly
stems from the removal of households with a threefold change in consumption from his sample.
Using a survey of Canadians unemployed for six months that asks about total expenditure over
the previous month as well as expenditure in the month before unemployment, Browning and
Crossley (2001) find a mean decline of 14 percent. Aguiar and Hurst (2005) report a 19 percent decline in food expenditure among the unemployed using scanner data. Stephens (2004)
conducts an analysis of the effects of job loss on consumption in the Health and Retirement
Survey (HRS) and the PSID and finds a decline in food expenditure between 12 (PSID) and
15 (HRS) percent when an individual experiences a job loss between interviews. Finally, using
cross-sectional variation in the PSID, Saporta-Eksten (2014) estimates an 8 percent decline in
consumption expenditure on selected categories in the year in which a job loss occurs. However,
Saporta-Eksten (2014) does not condition on the fraction of the year spent out of work. To
convert the 8 percent estimate into an instantaneous consumption decline requires adjusting by
the fraction of the year spent jobless. Assuming an average unemployment duration of 17 weeks
would imply a consumption decline of roughly 24 percent, in line with our estimate. A similar
type of adjustment applies to the Stephens (2004) estimate.
We apply our estimates of the consumption ratios in two steps. First, the calibration of
preference parameters in Section 4.4 requires data on the mean level of Cte (denoted by C e )
and the mean level of Ctu (denoted by C u ). For these means, we impose constancy of the
consumption ratios γts = γ s in equation (25) and obtain a time series for Cte and Ctu = γ u Cte .23
P
P
We then define C e = (1/T ) t Cte and C u = (1/T ) t Ctu . Second, obtaining a time series of
ξt requires a time series of Cte and Ctu . We jointly impose the adding-up constraint for total
consumption in equation (24) and the risk-sharing condition in equation (7) to solve for the
time series of Cte and Ctu . This approach ensures the internal consistency of our estimated
23

We set γ u = 0.793, the value from estimating equation (27) for a constant γ u . For the other categories, we
estimate γ n = 0.743 and γ r = 0.940. Similarly to our estimates of γ u , we cannot reject acyclicality of these
consumption ratios. We also use the same time-invariant γ n = 0.743 and γ r = 0.940 when estimating the time
series of Cte and Ctu .

30

41
40
39
38

Hours per Worker

1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

CRK

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

Official CPS

Figure 5: Hours Per Worker

parameters with the model’s analog of the first-order condition for risk sharing in the data. The
time-varying consumption ratio Ctu /Cte implied by this procedure is extremely smooth, falling
comfortably in the confidence interval of the estimated γtu .24

4.3

Hours Per Worker

The next input for the measurement of ξ is hours per worker Nt . We measure Nt as the average
weekly hours reported in the basic monthly CPS microdata by the employed. These data start
in 1968. We extend the series back to 1961 and fill in some missing months between 1968
and 1975 using data from Cociuba, Prescott, and Ueberfeldt (2012). We seasonally adjust the
series by first estimating an ARMA model including categorical variables for each month of the
year and months in which each of Good Friday, Easter Monday, Labor Day, Columbus Day, or
Veteran’s Day occurred during the CPS reference week. Then we apply a multi-step moving
average filter similar to that contained in X-11. Appendix B.1 provides further details on the
seasonal adjustment.
24

The model-generated consumption ratio is mildly countercyclical because hours per worker are procyclical and
consumption and non-working time are substitutes in the utility functions we consider. Alternatively, imposing
constancy of the ratio Ctu /Ctu = γ u = 0.793 and using this constant ratio and equation (24) to solve for the time
paths of Cte and Ctu does not change our results.

31

Figure 5 shows the resulting hours series (“CRK”). Hours per worker are procyclical. The
figure also shows the official BLS series from the CPS for comparison. During the overlapping
period 1976-2012, the cyclical component of our CRK series displays a correlation of 0.96 with
the “Official CPS” series.25

4.4

Parameterization

We now use our estimates of consumptions and hours to calibrate four models. The first model
features SEP preferences and has no fixed time costs (T = 0). The second model features CFE
preferences and also has T = 0. The third model features CD preferences, a definition of nonworking time of unemployed Lu that excludes some time uses, and T = 0. The fourth model
also features CD preferences, but adopts the most extreme view of what could be considered
utility-enhancing leisure of unemployed Lu and allows for fixed time costs T > 0. The purpose
of the fourth model is to try to rationalize the level of the opportunity cost z = 0.955 advocated
by Hagedorn and Manovskii (2008).
In general, our calibration strategy involves choosing two parameters to make two firstorder conditions hold exactly at the mean values of the variables in the sample. The first
condition is the risk-sharing condition (7) requiring the equalization of the marginal utility of
consumption between the employed and unemployed. For this condition, we use the mean values
of consumptions estimated in Section 4.2, C e = 0.681 and C u = 0.540. The second condition is
an efficiency condition for the choice of hours per worker, evaluated at mean sample values:
∂U (C e , N )
=λ
−
∂N



1 − τw
1 + τC


x,

(29)

where x denotes the marginal product of total labor hours. In equation (29) we use the mean
sample values of τ C = 0.096 and τ w = 0.209 and we have normalized N = 1.26
25

The “Official CPS” series used in the above figure is the BLS seasonally adjusted hours per worker series
LNS12005054. The BLS also offers a seasonally unadjusted series of hours per worker for nonagricultural industries
that starts in 1948 (LNU02033120). After applying our seasonal adjustment to this alternative series, we find a
correlation of 0.98 between the cyclical component of our CRK series and the cyclical component of this alternative series. We prefer using the CRK series as a baseline for comparability with our later analyses that require
measurement of hours per worker by educational group.
26
Our measurement of ξ does not require equation (29) to hold in any particular period. We require equation
(29) only in the steady state of the model in order to calibrate preference parameters. This equation arises as a
first-order condition, for example, under Nash bargaining. We view such an equilibrium as a desirable outcome in

32

Table 3: Parameterization of Preferences
Parameters
Preferences

Lu

T



χ

SEP

0.00

0.70

1.48

CFE

0.00

0.70

1.22

Elasticities
α

SE(α)

−1/λC

N w

N λ

−N C

1.87

0.15

1.00

0.70

0.70

0.70

1.52

1.86

0.14

0.66

0.70

0.46

0.70

ρ

CD1

2.64

0.00

0.71 1.25

1.86

0.15

0.80

1.10

3.07

3.85

CD2

4.33

0.19

0.82 1.19

1.86

0.15

0.84

1.82

6.43

7.63

The left panel of Table 3 presents our parameterization. For the SEP preferences, the
risk-sharing condition always implies Cte = Ctu = Ct . Thus, with perfect risk sharing, these
preferences cannot match the consumption decline at unemployment. We follow Pistaferri
(2003) and Hall (2009) and set the Frisch elasticity of labor supply to  = 0.7. We then choose
χ = 1.48 to make equation (29) hold exactly at the mean values of the variables in the sample.
The right panel shows the elasticities implied by our parameterization. The intertemporal
elasticity of substitution in consumption is −1/λC = 1 and the Frisch elasticity of labor supply
is N w =  = 0.7. The elasticity of hours with respect to the marginal utility (holding the
wage constant) is N λ = 0.7. Finally, the elasticity of hours with respect to consumption is also
−N C = −N λ λC = 0.7. The latter two elasticities measure wealth effects on hours along the
intensive margin.27
For the CFE preferences we again set  = N w = 0.7. The solution of equations (7) and
(29) gives values of χ = 1.22 and ρ = 1.52. The intertemporal elasticity of substitution in
consumption is −1/λC = 1/ρ = 0.66. The elasticity of hours with respect to the marginal
the long run, as any other equilibrium would imply that firms and workers coordinate at an inefficient allocation.
See Shimer (2010) for a similar argument in a model without taxes (page 53, footnote 6).
27
The mapping of the elasticities N λ and N C into the elasticity of hours with respect to income N Y (which
has a more direct mapping to empirical studies) requires specifying the income process and structure of the capital
markets. For example, if shocks are relatively transitory and workers can access capital markets to smooth such
shocks, then consumption and λ will not change much in response to income shocks, making N Y small. The
opposite holds if shocks are permanent or borrowing possibilities are restricted.

33

utility of wealth is N λ = /ρ = 0.46 and with respect to consumption is N C = 0.70.28
For CD preferences, we additionally need an estimate of the time endowment of the unemployed Lu . Using the American Time Use Survey (ATUS, 2003-2012), we find that unemployed
spend 47.6 hours per week on leisure activities (for example, watching TV, listening to music,
and socializing with friends), 16.5 hours per week on discretionary sleeping time (defined as
the excess sleeping time over 49 hours), 24.6 hours per week on home production (for example,
cooking, home ownership activities, and shopping), 6.9 hours per week on child care, and 7 hours
per week on activities such as education, religious activities, and own medical care. Dividing
the sum of these hours (102.6) by hours per worker (38.8), we obtain Lu = 2.64 relative to a
mean value of N = 1.
In Table 3, the row labeled “CD1” presents our parameterization when Lu = 2.64 and there
are no fixed time costs associated with working (T = 0). The row labeled “CD2” presents an
alternative parameterization of CD preferences which yields the level of z = 0.955 advocated by
Hagedorn and Manovskii (2008). This parameterization sets Lu = 4.33, corresponding to the
broadest view that all 168 hours per week potentially constitute utility-enhancing non-working
time. It also requires fixed time costs of working equal to 19 percent of average hours per
worker.29 As Table 3 shows, both sets of CD preferences feature a higher Frisch elasticity of
labor supply than the SEP and CFE calibrations. The CD preferences also imply much stronger
wealth effects on hours than SEP and CFE preferences.
Table 3 also presents estimates of the elasticity of the cost function with respect to take up,
α, from an OLS regression of equation (19), along with Newey-West standard errors with four
lags. The four preference specifications imply different λ̂t series. However, the estimates of α
are stable across the different preference specifications.
28

These values are close to the values used in Hall (2009), with the small difference mostly reflecting that our
estimated ρ is lower than the ρ implicit in Hall’s formulation. See Hall’s Appendix for a summary of evidence on
these elasticities. In general, the CFE calibration comes closer to matching the evidence cited in Hall than the
SEP, CD1, and CD2 calibrations.
29
A value of T = 0.19, implying fixed costs of more than 7 hours per week, appears quite large relative to typical
estimates of commuting time. Rogerson and Wallenius (2013) review evidence on commuting time and find that
T is approximately 0.1. Rogerson and Wallenius (2013) also point out that commuting time does not constitute a
fixed cost if individuals adjust the number of days at work rather than hours per day, making T = 0.1 an upper
bound under this interpretation of the fixed cost. In our robustness checks we consider an alternative model in
which fixed costs are denominated directly in terms of utility rather than time.

34

4.5

Results

Combining our estimates of consumption by labor force status and hours per worker with our
calibrated utility functions, we now estimate a time series of ξ according to equation (12). For
each of the four calibrated models, we first discuss the estimated levels of ξ. Then, we discuss
the cyclicality of ξ.
We obtain the following levels of ξ (relative to an after-tax marginal product of employment
pτ = 1):
ξ SEP = 0.41,

ξ CFE = 0.41,

ξ CD1 = 0.70,

ξ CD2 = 0.90.

(30)

We begin our analysis by considering the steady state value of ξ under the SEP and CFE
specifications:30
ξ

SEP

=ξ

CFE


=


1+



pτ .

(31)

For a value of  = 0.7, we obtain ξ SEP = ξ CFE = 0.41 relative to the after-tax marginal product
of pτ = 1. A higher Frisch elasticity of labor supply results in a higher level of opportunity
cost. However, using these utility specifications, one would need to assume a Frisch elasticity
of 9 to rationalize a level of ξ equal to 0.90. Could, alternatively, fixed time costs explain such
a high level of ξ under SEP or CFE preferences? Introducing fixed time costs changes the level
to ξ SEP = ξ CFE = pτ (1 + T /N )/(1 + ). It also changes the Frisch elasticity to (1 + T /N ). For
T roughly equal to 120 percent of N , one would estimate ξ = 0.90 with a less extreme Frisch
elasticity of 1.54. However, the magnitude of these fixed costs is implausible.
In the absence of fixed time costs (T = 0), we can write ξ under CD preferences as a function
of the endowment of non-working time of the unemployed Lu :
ξ

CD


=

1 − γu
− log(γ u )



u

(L − 1) log



Lu
Lu − 1



pτ ,

(32)

where γ u = 0.793 is the consumption of the unemployed relative to the employed. We obtain


u
τ
that limLu →1 ξ CD = 0, limLu →∞ ξ CD = − 1−γ
log(γ u ) p = 0.89, and that between these limiting
30

The Appendix to Hall (2014) first derives this equation for SEP preferences. The equation results from substituting the condition for hours in equation (29) into the expression for ξ in equation (12). Because our measurement
exercise does not require that equation (29) holds in any particular period, equation (31) need not hold period-byperiod.

35

cases ξ CD is an increasing function of the endowment of time Lu . Our estimate of Lu = 2.64
under calibration CD1 yields ξ CD = 0.70. Model CD2 implies a higher value of ξ both because we
calibrate the endowment of time at the higher level of Lu = 4.33 and because we introduce fixed
time costs associated with working T = 0.19. Without fixed time costs but with Lu = 4.33,
we would have estimated ξ = 0.78. Therefore, of the 20 percentage point difference in ξ
between calibration CD2 and calibration CD1, 12 percentage points are due to fixed costs and
8 percentage points are due to the higher level of the time endowment.31
To summarize, our estimated levels of ξ differ substantially across specifications. We show
how the level of ξ depends on the underlying utility function, the estimated time endowment of
the unemployed, and fixed costs associated with working.32 Despite these meaningful differences,
we now show that the cyclicality of ξ is quite stable across different specifications.
Figure 6 shows the percent deviation of ξ from its trend. We compute trends of variables
using the HP filter with a smoothing parameter of 1,600. We see that all four specifications
result in highly similar cyclical components of ξ. In particular, all four specifications imply a
procyclical and volatile ξ.
To develop intuition about the cyclicality of ξ, it is useful to consider the SEP utility function.
Under SEP we obtain:
ξtSEP


=

χ
1+



1+ 1

Nt

Ct .

(33)

The ξ component of the opportunity cost is procyclical because in the data both hours per
worker and consumption are procyclical.33 The intuition for the cyclicality of ξ in the SEP
31

Using a narrower definition of leisure and home production that roughly corresponds to the time uses defined
in Aguiar, Hurst, and Karabarbounis (2013) we obtain Lu = 2.00 and ξ = 0.62. Our inference about the cyclicality
of z in this case is not very different than in the CD1 and CD2 cases. For example, we obtain an elasticity
 (ẑ, p̂) = 0.87 as opposed to values of 0.85 and 0.83 under CD1 and CD2 respectively.
32
If flow utilities were equalized, U u = U e , then we would have obtained ξ = C e − C u . In this case, our estimates
of consumption differences imply that ξ = 0.14. A higher level of ξ requires (U u − U e )/λ > 0. The interpretation
of (U u − U e )/λ > 0 is that non-working time is valued at a sufficiently high level relative to consumption, which is
a standard assumption in the literature (see Rogerson and Wright, 1988). In the model with incomplete markets
discussed in Appendix C, the unemployed’s expected sum of discounted utility flows V u is lower than the employed’s
expected sum of discounted utility flows V e , even when flow utilities satisfy U u > U e .
33
Our preferred measure of consumption CtNIPA in this paper excludes durables and housing services. At quarterly
frequency and using a HP filter with smoothing parameter of 1,600 to detrend variables, the volatility of the cyclical
component of CtNIPA relative to the volatility of the cyclical component of real GDP per person 16 years or older
is 0.66. However, the stock of durables is also volatile over the business cycle. The relative volatility of the cyclical
component of the real stock of durables is 0.73.

36

.04
Percent Deviation from Trend
-.02
0
.02
-.04
1960

1965

1970
ξ SEP

1975

1980

1985

ξ CFE

1990

1995

2000

ξ CD1

2005

2010
ξ CD2

Figure 6: Cyclical Components of ξ
Notes: Variables are logged and HP filtered with a smoothing parameter of 1,600.

case carries over to the other preference specifications. In all cases, procyclical hours and
consumption imply a procyclical ξ component of the opportunity cost. Quantitatively, ξ is less
volatile in the non-separable specifications because, with procyclical hours, the complementarity
in preferences between consumption and hours ameliorates the cyclicality of the marginal utility
of consumption λ.

5

The Opportunity Cost of Employment in the Data

We now combine our measurements of the two components, b and ξ, and describe the properties
of the opportunity cost of employment z = b + ξ.

5.1

Baseline Results

Table 4 presents summary statistics for the period 1961(1) to 2012(4) for each set of preferences.
The level of z ranges between 0.47 and 0.96 of the after-tax marginal product of employment
pτ . The variation in the average level of z across preferences reflects the variation in the average
level of the component of the opportunity cost associated with the value of non-working time
ξ. In all cases, ξ constitutes the largest part of z, ranging between 0.41 and 0.90.
37

Table 4: Summary Statistics, 1961(1) to 2012(4)

Statistic

SEP

CFE

CD1

CD2

pτ
p
z
ξ
b  
sd Ŷ
sd (p̂)
sd 
(ẑ)
sd ξˆ
 
sd b̂


corr ẑ, Ŷ


ˆ
corr ξ, Ŷ


corr b̂, Ŷ
 (ẑ, p̂)
CI

1.00
1.39
0.47
0.41
0.06

1.00
1.39
0.47
0.41
0.06

1.00
1.39
0.75
0.70
0.06

1.00
1.39
0.96
0.90
0.06

1.50
0.89
1.66

1.50
0.89
1.52

1.50
0.89
1.19

1.50
0.89
1.10

1.92

1.63

1.29

1.20

8.97

8.95

8.96

8.96

0.52

0.42

0.55

0.61

0.87

0.87

0.86

0.86

−0.45
1.11
[0.74,1.49]

−0.45
0.92
[0.56,1.28]

−0.45
0.85
[0.59,1.11]

−0.45
0.83
[0.60,1.06]

Notes: We denote the percent deviation of some variable xt from its trend by x̂t . We compute trends of variables
using the HP filter with smoothing parameter of 1,600. The elasticity  (x̂1 , x̂2 ) is the regression coefficient of x̂1
on x̂2 . Newey-West standard errors with four lags are in parentheses.

Turning to the cyclicality of the opportunity cost, Figure 7 plots the percent deviation of z
from its trend for each of the four parameterizations. The four series track each other closely.
All appear to be procyclical, falling during each recession in our sample. Table 4 confirms that
z comoves positively with real GDP per capita Y over the business cycle. It also shows that z
is quite volatile over the business cycle, with the standard deviation of its cyclical component
exceeding the standard deviation of the cyclical component of the marginal product p.
The procyclical movement of z reflects the dominance of the ξ component in the sum z = b+ξ.
As discussed before and summarized in Table 4, the b component is countercyclical and very
volatile. However, the small level of b makes its fluctuations relatively unimportant for z.
Table 4 also reports the elasticity of ẑ with respect to p̂ as a metric that takes into account
both the correlation between the two variables and the relative volatilities. As we show below,

38

.04
Percent Deviation from Trend
-.04
-.02
0
.02
-.06
1960

1965

1970
z SEP

1975

1980

1985

z CFE

1990

1995

2000

2005

z CD1

2010
z CD2

Figure 7: Cyclicality of Opportunity Cost of Employment
Notes: Variables are logged and HP filtered with a smoothing parameter of 1,600.

this elasticity is an informative statistic for the magnitude of unemployment fluctuations in a
wide class of models. For consistency with prior literature that focuses on TFP shocks as the
driving force in business cycle models and to correct for measurement error in p̂, we instrument
p̂ with the cyclical component of the Fernald (2012) unadjusted TFP series.34 The resulting
elasticities of ẑ with respect to p̂ range between 0.83 and 1.11. The elasticity declines when
moving from SEP to other preferences, reflecting the non-separability embedded in the other
specifications. We cannot reject the null hypothesis that the elasticity equals 1 for any of the
preference specifications. We conclude that the opportunity cost of employment moves roughly
proportionally with the marginal product of employment over the business cycle.

5.2

Sensitivity Analysis

We assess the sensitivity of the cyclicality of z to a number of modelling assumptions and use
of data moments. In Table 5, each row reports the elasticity (ẑ, p̂) under a different alternative
scenario for each of the four preference specifications indicated in the column headings. Row
34

We motivate our focus on p instead of pτ by appealing to prior literature in which productivity shocks are
treated as exogenous. Empirically, the elasticity of the cyclical component of the tax wedge (1 − τ w )/(1 + τ C ) with
respect to the cyclical component of p in our data is 0.014 (instrumented) and 0.067 (not instrumented). That is,
taxes respond very little to cyclical movements in p.

39

Table 5: Sensitivity of Elasticity  (ẑ, p̂)

Case

SEP

CFE

CD1

CD2

0. Baseline Results

1.11

0.92

0.85

0.83

1. Benefit Component bt Equal to Trend

1.32

1.13

0.98

0.93

2. Non-Working Time Component ξt Equal to Trend

-0.06

-0.09

-0.02

0.00

3. Consumption CtNIPA Equal to Trend

0.52

0.33

0.22

0.19

4. Hours Nt Equal to Trend

0.54

0.46

0.57

0.60

5. Smaller Consumption Decline (γ u = 0.9)

1.11

1.02

0.92

0.90

6. Hours Nt of Salary Workers

1.03

0.85

0.81

0.80

7. Hours Nt of Hourly Workers

1.21

1.00

0.90

0.87

8. Hours Nt Adjusted for Composition

1.19

0.98

0.89

0.86

9. Higher Frisch Elasticity ( = 2)

1.01

0.86

N/A

N/A

10. Alternative Model of Take-Up (ζ = 1.00)

1.01

0.85

0.82

0.82

11. No Taxes (τ w = τ C = τ B = 0)

1.20

1.01

0.91

0.87

12. Fixed Utility Costs of Working for z = 0.96

0.96

0.91

0.85

0.84

13. Baxter-King Filter

1.17

0.97

0.91

0.88

14. No Instrumenting

1.01

0.87

0.78

0.75

15. No Instrumenting and Baxter-King Filter

1.15

0.98

0.89

0.86

0 provides the baseline elasticities. Unless otherwise noted, in each sensitivity exercise we
recalibrate all model parameters whenever necessary in order to achieve the same targets as in
our baseline procedure.
The rows in the middle panel provide further intuition for the cyclicality of z by selectively
shutting off the cyclicality of various inputs. The first row reports elasticities  (ẑ, p̂) in the
counterfactual in which the b component of z always equals its trend. The estimated elasticities
increase, reflecting the fact that b is countercyclical. However, these increases are relatively
small because b constitutes a small part of the opportunity cost. To assess the contribution of
the ξ component for z fluctuations, in the second row we set the ξ component equal to its trend.
We find that the elasticities  (ẑ, p̂) become slightly negative or zero. None of the four estimated

40

elasticities is statistically significant at the 10 percent level. Setting ξ equal to its trend implies
an acyclical z because the level of b is much smaller than the level of ξ.
Row 3 reports elasticities  (ẑ, p̂) when our underlying measure of consumption CtNIPA equals
its trend. In this counterfactual scenario, all of the elasticities decline substantially. We conclude
that the procyclicality of consumption is a major factor in generating the procyclical behavior of
z. In row 4 we set hours per worker Nt equal to its trend. The elasticities decrease, but by less
than in the scenario in which consumption equals its trend. We conclude that the procyclicality
of hours contributes to the procyclicality of z but that, quantitatively, cyclical movements in
hours per worker matter less than cyclical movements in consumption.
The bottom panel explores robustness to using other plausible data moments or modelling
assumptions. Row 5 assesses the sensitivity of the estimated elasticities to the value of the
ratio of the consumption of the unemployed relative to the employed. Our baseline calibration
of preference parameters uses the value of γ u = 0.793. Row 5 instead sets γ u = 0.9. With
procyclical hours, the complementarity between hours and consumption makes the marginal
utility λ less cyclical, which in turn ameliorates the procyclicality of ξ. The complementarity
in preferences becomes stronger when the consumption ratio γ u is lower. Therefore, increasing
γ u increases all estimated elasticities for non-separable preferences.35
Rows 6 and 7 replace Nt with series for hours per worker constructed separately for salaried
and hourly workers respectively. Hourly workers experience more procyclical hours per worker
than salary workers, explaining the larger elasticities in row 7 than in row 6. However, both types
of workers have quite volatile and procyclical hours series, leading to significant procyclicality
in z in both cases.36
In row 8 we adjust our measure of hours for compositional changes. In principle, hours
per worker could decline in recessions because economic activity reallocates toward industries
35
Our baseline SEP preferences imply a unitary elasticity of intertemporal substitution. Using separable but
non-balanced growth preferences of the form U = C 1−ρ − 1 /(1 − ρ) − (χ/(1 + ))N 1+1/ allows us to decouple
ρ from the consumption decline upon unemployment and examine the sensitivity of our results to the assumed
elasticity of intertemporal substitution. With ρ = 2, which implies an intertemporal elasticity of 1/2, we find
 (ẑ, p̂) = 1.77. Intuitively, for given cyclical component of consumption, increasing ρ makes λ more cyclical.
36
We construct hours per worker for hourly and salary workers from the CPS monthly files. The identification
of the type of worker is possible on a continual basis only starting in 1982. Before then we impute hours for these
two groups based on a projection on aggregate hours.

41

or demographic groups with lower average hours. To adjust for such compositional shifts, we
regress hours of employed on industry, gender, education, and age bracket categorical variables.
We then construct hours for each worker as the sum of the regression residual and a sample
mean, aggregate these hours, and apply our seasonal adjustment procedure. The elasticities
 (ẑ, p̂) increase slightly as a result of this compositional adjustment. In practice, compositional
changes dampen rather than exacerbate cyclical movements in hours per worker.
In row 9 we increase the Frisch elasticity of labor supply for SEP and CFE preferences to
 = 2 and recalibrate the remaining preference parameters to match the same targets as in our
baseline results. A larger  implies a smaller effect from fluctuations of hours per worker on
fluctuations of the ξ component of the opportunity cost. However, even for  = 2 the estimated
elasticities  (ẑ, p̂) remain close to one. We view the value of 2 as an upper bound of reasonable
values of the Frisch elasticity, given that our model has an extensive margin of labor supply.
Row 10 examines the sensitivity of our results to the assumed model of UI take-up. Motivated
by the evidence in Blank and Card (1991) and Anderson and Meyer (1997) that take-up rates are
significantly below one and respond to benefit levels, in our baseline model eligible unemployed
take up benefits when the utility value of after-tax UI benefits exceeds the utility cost of takeup. We now consider an alternative model in which the opportunity cost of eligible unemployed
always includes the full value of their UI entitlement with no disutility. Thus, in equation (11)
we set α to infinity and ζt = 1. With this modification, the level of b increases. However, the
estimated elasticities  (ẑ, p̂) do not change much because without a take-up margin b fluctuates
much less.
In row 11, we set all taxes to zero and recalibrate all parameters in the model without taxes.
For all preference specifications we obtain larger elasticities. Taxes increase the level of b relative
to the after-tax marginal product because the tax rate on UI benefits τ B is lower than the tax
rate on labor income τ w . Because the b component is countercyclical, reducing its importance
in the model without taxes generates larger elasticities.
In our baseline model, under calibration CD2, we introduced fixed time costs in order to
achieve a high level of z. We now consider an alternative model in which fixed costs asso-

42

ciated with working are denominated directly in terms of utility rather than in units of time.
Specifically, each individual incurs a fixed cost FC when moving from unemployment to employment which, for simplicity, enters additively into the utility function. With this modification,
ξt is given by equation (12) plus the additive term FC/λt . For each preference specification,
we choose FC such that we obtain the mean value of z = 0.955 suggested by Hagedorn and
Manovskii (2008). As row 12 of Table 5 shows, the elasticity  (ẑ, p̂) declines somewhat relative
to our baseline results only for the SEP case.
Finally, rows 13 to 15 report the sensitivity of our results to our procedure for estimating
the elasticities  (ẑ, p̂). Row 13 uses the Baxter-King (BK) filter to separate the trend from
the cycle, using a bandwidth of 6 to 32 quarters. All elasticities increase slightly. Row 14
reports elasticities using the HP filter but without instrumenting for the marginal product.
Here the elasticities decline by 0.05 to 0.1. Finally, row 15 shows that our results remain largely
unchanged when we use the BK filter and we do not instrument for the marginal product.
To summarize, the combination of procyclical hours per worker, procyclical consumption,
and a small level of benefits b imply a procyclical and volatile opportunity cost z. Further, we
estimate that a one percent increase in p is associated with an increase in z of at least 0.8 percent
and we cannot reject the hypothesis that z and p move proportionally over the business cycle.
This result appears robust to various preference specifications, alternative data definitions, and
modeling choices.

6

Heterogeneity Across Skills

Our measurement of z for the average unemployed followed from the assumption that all unemployed search for the same jobs and employers cannot discriminate ex-ante in choosing a
potential worker with whom to bargain. We now relax this assumption and allow workers to
differ along observable characteristics that may be correlated with their opportunity costs.
The economy consists of J heterogeneous households. In our empirical implementation
we separate workers into four educational attainment categories. Each household j contains
fraction lj of the population. Within each group j, a fraction ejt are employed and a fraction
43

ujt are unemployed. There are J segmented labor markets. We denote by fjt the job finding
rate in market j and by sjt the separation rate. Employment for group j evolves as ejt+1 =
(1 − sjt )ejt + fjt ujt .
The problem of each household j is:
Wjh

= max E0

∞
X



e
u
β t lj ejt Uj (Cjt
, Njt ) + lj (1 − ejt )Uj (Cjt
, 0) − lj (1 − ejt )ωjt ψ(ζjt ) ,

(34)

t=0

subject to the budget constraint:
1 + τtC




u
w
e
)wjt lj ejt Njt +lj (1−ejt )Bjt +(rt + δ) Kjt , (35)
+ lj (1 − ejt )Cjt
+Ijt +Πjt = (1−τjt
lj ejt Cjt

and the law of motion for eligibility:

ωjt+1 =

u
ωjt+1
(1

ujt
− fjt )
ujt+1



e
ωjt + ωjt+1
sjt

ejt
.
ujt+1

(36)

We note that flow utilities Uj are allowed to vary by j. In the budget constraint, after-tax

benefits per unemployed of type j are given by Bjt = 1 + τtC Bn,jt + (1 − τtjB )Bu,jt , where
Bn,jt denotes non-UI benefits per unemployed, Bu,jt denotes UI benefits per unemployed, and
τtjB denotes the UI tax rate in group j.
To derive the opportunity cost of employment by group j, we proceed analogously to the
aggregate case analyzed in Section 2. We first derive the marginal value of employment for
h
= ∂Wjth /∂ (lj ejt ), as the sum of a flow payoff (after-tax wages minus opportunity
household j, Jjt

cost) and a continuation value. Then, we define the opportunity cost of employment similarly
to the aggregate case:
e
u
zjt = bjt + (Cjt
− Cjt
)−

e
u
Ujt
− Ujt
= bjt + ξjt ,
λjt

(37)

where bjt is given by equation (11) taking into account j-specific values of variables. The thrust
of our procedure for constructing zjt follows that for the aggregate described in Section 3. Here
we sketch briefly our estimation and refer the reader to Appendix B.2 for more details.
For our estimates of the benefits per unemployed Bn,jt and Bu,jt , we use the March CPS to
measure the fraction of survey dollars in each program accruing to the unemployed of category
j and the CPS basic monthly files to measure the fraction of unemployed belonging in group
44

Table 6: Heterogeneity Statistics: 1969(1)–2012(4)
Case

SEP

CFE

CD1

CD2

Statistic

Less than High School

High School

Some College

College or More

Bn,j

0.03

0.02

0.01

0.01

Bu,j

0.06

0.14

0.15

0.18

γju

0.77

0.80

0.79

0.80

Cje

0.55

0.63

0.71

0.85

Nj

0.90

1.01

0.99

1.07

sj

0.10

0.05

0.04

0.02

fj

0.70

0.66

0.69

0.64

τjw

0.18

0.21

0.22

0.25

τjB

0.07

0.10

0.10

0.14

pτj

0.69

0.92

1.03

1.49

zj /pτj

0.49

0.49

0.47

0.45

ξj /pτj

0.42

0.41

0.41

0.41

bj /pτj

0.07

0.07

0.06

0.04

 (ẑj , p̂)

1.71

1.30

0.97

0.67

zj /pτj

0.49

0.49

0.47

0.45

ξj /pτj

0.42

0.41

0.41

0.41

bj /pτj

0.07

0.07

0.06

0.04

 (ẑj , p̂)

1.43

1.08

0.76

0.54

zj /pτj

0.79

0.78

0.75

0.72

ξj /pτj

0.72

0.70

0.70

0.68

bj /pτj

0.07

0.07

0.06

0.04

 (ẑj , p̂)

1.19

0.98

0.77

0.64

zj /pτj

0.96

0.95

0.92

0.89

ξj /pτj

0.89

0.87

0.86

0.85

bj /pτj

0.07

0.07

0.06

0.04

 (ẑj , p̂)

1.13

0.95

0.78

0.67

Notes: Bn,j , Bu,j , Cje , and pτj are expressed as a fraction of the mean aggregate marginal product of employment
in the sample. Nj is expressed as a fraction of the mean aggregate hours per worker in the sample.

45

j. The first two rows of Table 6 report the sample averages of Bn,j and Bu,j , expressed relative
to a mean aggregate after-tax aggregate marginal product of employment of pτ = 1. The
opportunity cost of low skilled workers contains higher non-UI benefits than that of high skilled
workers. This difference reflects the existence of asset and income tests for non-UI benefits,
which disqualify many high skilled workers. By contrast, UI benefits per unemployed increase
monotonically with skill level. The average benefit more than doubles for workers with a high
school diploma relative to those without. The statutory linking of UI benefits to previous wages
explains the positive relationship between skill level and UI benefits per unemployed.
e
u
For our estimates of consumptions of employed Cjt
and unemployed Cjt
, we use the CE to

measure the consumption declines upon unemployment by group γju and the relative consumpe
= Cje /Cie . Applying these consumption ratios to an
tions of employed of different skills γji

appropriately modified version of the adding-up identity (24), we obtain times series for consumptions. Table 6 shows that the consumption declines upon unemployment γju are quite stable
across different skill groups. It also shows large differences across groups in the consumption of
the employed, with consumption increasing monotonically with skill.
We measure hours per worker Njt , the separation rate sjt , the job finding rate fjt , and taxes
τjtw and τjtB in an analogous way to the aggregate.37 Hours per worker Njt are the lowest for
workers without high school diploma and the highest for college educated workers. The job
finding rate fjt appears relatively stable across groups, whereas the separation rate sjt declines
sharply with skill level. Reflecting the progressivity of the income tax system, taxes on both
labor and UI income increase monotonically with skill. Table 6 also reports the mean aftertax marginal product of each group pτj = pj (1 − τjw )/(1 + τ C ), where pj denotes the pre-tax
marginal product. We construct pjt using a CES aggregator of the J different labor inputs
and calibrate parameters such that, in the steady state of our model, the ratio of marginal
e
u
products across groups equals the ratio of labor earnings. Given estimates of Cjt
, Cjt
, Njt , and

pτjt , we proceed as in Section 4.1 and calibrate group-specific preference parameters using the
risk-sharing condition (7) and the efficiency condition for hours (29) for each group j.
37

w
B
For τjt
and τjt
, we apply the procedure described in Section 3.3 to micro data from the March CPS and then
benchmark the resulting estimates such that the mean tax rate equals the rate using the IRS Public Use Files.

46

.04
.02
0
-.02
-.04
-.06

Opportunity Cost (Percent Deviation from Trend)

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

Less than High School
Some College

1995

2000

2005

2010

High School
College or More

Figure 8: Opportunity Costs Across Skills (CFE Preferences)

Figure 8 plots the cyclical components of zj for the CFE preferences. The zj ’s are highly
synchronized across groups. Table 6 reports various statistics across groups for the SEP, CFE,
CD1, and CD2 calibrations.38 The level of zj relative to pτj is relatively stable across groups.
Table 6 also reports the elasticities  (ẑj , p̂) by group and utility function. All elasticities appear
well above zero, but low skilled groups exhibit much larger cyclicality than high skilled groups.
The difference partly reflects the larger share of procyclical non-UI benefits in the bj of the low
skilled. It also reflects the lower procyclicality of hours per worker Njt for the high skilled.
To summarize, the procyclicality of the opportunity cost is present in each group after
we disaggregate individuals by educational attainment. While there are interesting differences
across groups, the same economic forces that drive the aggregate z to fluctuate over the business
cycle also influence the skill-specific zj ’s.

7

Implications for Unemployment Fluctuations

In this section we discuss the importance of z for unemployment fluctuations. Section 7.1
demonstrates the implications of the cyclicality of z in the standard MP model in which wages
are set according to Nash bargaining. Section 7.2 shows that the same implications hold in the
38

In the CD2 specification we set the fixed time cost at T = 0.13 such that the mean zj /pτj for the lowest skill
group is 0.96. We use the same T and the same Lu for all groups.

47

alternating-offer wage bargaining model. Section 7.3 extends the analysis to an environment
with directed search and wage posting. Section 7.4 shows the relevance of z in an indivisible
labor model.

7.1

Canonical Search and Matching Model

We begin by showing the importance of a cyclical z within the context of the labor market
search and matching framework of Mortensen and Pissarides (1994) and Pissarides (2000). We
present details underlying the derivations of this section in Appendix A.2. The behavior of the
household is given by the model described in Section 2.1. A representative firm operates the
production function Yt = Ft (Kt , et Nt ). The marginal value of employment for the firm, Jtf , is:
f
,
Jtf = pt − wt Nt + (1 − st )Et β̃t+1 Jt+1

(38)

where β̃t+1 denotes the stochastic discount factor of the household.
The labor market is subject to search and matching frictions. The firm posts vacancies vt
to increase employment in the next period. Each vacancy costs κ units of the numeraire good.
Trade in the labor market is facilitated by a constant returns to scale matching technology
that converts searching by the unemployed and vacancies by the firm into new matches, mt =
mt (vt , ut ). Market tightness is θt = vt /ut . An unemployed matches with a firm with probability
ft (θt ) = mt /ut and the firm fills a vacancy with probability qt (θt ) = mt /vt = ft (θt )/θt . We
denote by η the (constant) elasticity of the matching function with respect to vacancies.
The firm and the household split the surplus from an additional match according to the
generalized Nash bargaining solution. The household’s value of an additional match is given
by equation (10) and the firm’s value of an additional match is given by equation (38). The
firm and the household bargain over the wage per hour worked wt and hours per worker Nt .
Denoting by µ the bargaining power of workers, we obtain a standard wage equation augmented
to take into account taxes:

wt Nt = µpt + (1 − µ)

1 + τtC
1 − τtw


zt + µκθt .

(39)

The Nash-bargained compensation depends on the marginal product of employment, the taxadjusted opportunity cost of employment, and a term related to labor market tightness. With
48

Table 7: Steady State Elasticity of Unemployment With Respect to the Marginal Product

(z, p) = 0.00
(z, p) = 0.50
(z, p) = 0.80
(z, p) = 1.00

z = 0.47

z = 0.75

z = 0.96

-0.74
-0.57
-0.46
-0.39

-1.60
-1.00
-0.64
-0.39

-8.76
-4.58
-2.07
-0.39

Nash bargaining, hours per worker are chosen to maximize the joint surplus according to equation (29).
We begin our analysis by following much of the literature in treating steady state movements in the marginal product of employment p and the opportunity cost of employment z as
exogenous. Appendix A.2 derives an expression for the elasticity of labor market tightness θ
with respect to changes in the marginal product p:
 w 
(θ, p) = B 


p − z(z, p)
,


1−τ w
p−z
1+τ C

1−τ
1+τ C

(40)

where B is a constant and (z, p) denotes the elasticity of z with respect to p. The response
of unemployment is then given by (u, p) = −η(1 − u)(θ, p). Equation (40) generalizes the expressions given in Shimer (2005), Mortensen and Nagypal (2007), and Hagedorn and Manovskii
(2008) to allow z to change in response to changes in p.
Table 7 presents the elasticity of unemployment with respect to the marginal product of
employment (u, p) as a function of the level z and the cyclicality of the opportunity cost
(z, p). Each column corresponds to the levels of z that we estimated in Section 5.1 for different
utility functions.39 As a benchmark against which to evaluate the model, we estimate that
the elasticity (ut+1 , pt ) is roughly -9.5 in the data. In the first row of the table, z is fixed as
we vary p. The response of unemployment to changes in the marginal product is small when
39

The other parameters for this exercise are calibrated as follows. Over our sample we estimate an average
separation rate of s = 0.045 and an average job-finding probability of f = 0.704. Following Mortensen and Nagypal
(2007), we set the elasticity in the matching function to η = 0.40. We set the worker’s bargaining power to µ = 0.60
and the discount factor to β = 0.99. Finally, we use the sample averages of τ w = 0.209, τ C = 0.096, and p = 1.386,
such that the after-tax marginal product equals pτ = p(1 − τ w )/(1 + τ C ) = 1. Under these parameters we obtain
B = 1.05.

49

the calibrated value of z is small, consistent with the result in Shimer (2005). The response of
unemployment rises across columns, as the level of z increases. As pointed out by Hagedorn and
Manovskii (2008), a higher z reduces firm’s steady state profits. An increase in the productivity
of a match then causes a larger percent increase in profits which strongly incentivizes the firm
to create vacancies. Therefore, unemployment is more volatile.
The consequences of a cyclical z can be seen by moving down the rows of Table 7. A
positive value of (z, p) means that z increases in response to increases in p. The higher is the
responsiveness of z, the smaller is the increase in the net flow surplus of the match, pτ − z, and
the weaker is the firm’s incentive to create vacancies. As a result, holding constant the level of
z, the response of unemployment becomes smaller when (z, p) is higher.
Equation (40) shows analytically that if (z, p) = 1, so that both z and p change by the
same percent, the elasticities of θ and u with respect to p are independent of the level of z.40
Table 7 shows that when (z, p) = 0.8, the elasticity of unemployment with respect to the
marginal product is 63 percent of the elasticity obtained under a constant z = 0.47, 40 percent
of the elasticity obtained under a constant z = 0.71, and 24 percent of the elasticity obtained
under a constant z = 0.96. We note that the role of cyclical movements in z for unemployment
fluctuations is quite general and does not rest on productivity shocks driving fluctuations in the
model. The crucial determinant of unemployment volatility is the responsiveness of z relative
to the responsiveness of p when some shock hits the economy, with the relative responsiveness
given by (z, p).
We reach a similar conclusion when we conduct business cycle analysis in the MP/RBC
model. In Appendix A.2 we present results from simulations of the MP/RBC model driven
by exogenous TFP shocks. We show that, under a high level of z = 0.96 that is restricted
to be constant over time because there is no disutility from working, the model generates
40
In a model with labor market frictions, concave utility over consumption, and an explicit value of time, Blanchard and Gali (2010) show that unemployment is neutral with respect to fluctuations in productivity. In their
model consumption moves one-to-one with productivity due to the lack of capital. Because they do not consider
benefits and fluctuations in hours per worker, their z also moves one-to-one with productivity. In our case unemployment fluctuations are small but not zero when (z, p) = 1. The difference is explained by the fact that in
equation (40) we have assumed that vacancy costs κ are constant. Blanchard and Gali instead assume that hiring
costs scale one-to-one with productivity.

50

volatile unemployment fluctuations (with an elasticity (ut+1 , pt ) of around -6.5). This result is
consistent with the analysis of Hagedorn and Manovskii (2008) who find volatile unemployment
fluctuations in a model in which z is high but constant. When there is disutility from working,
z varies endogenously over time (see Section 2.2.3). We show that with disutility from working,
the model generates cyclical movements in z similar to those documented in the data, with the
elasticity  (zt , pt ) being around 0.8. The model with time varying z generates a significantly
lower unemployment volatility, with the elasticity (ut+1 , pt ) ranging from -1.7 to -0.3. These
results hold for various levels of z that range from 0.47 to 0.96.

7.2

Alternating Offers Bargaining Model

Hall and Milgrom (2008) replace Nash bargaining with an alternative wage setting mechanism.
In their alternating-offer bargaining game, when a firm with a vacancy meets an unemployed,
the firm offers a compensation package w̃. The unemployed can accept the offer and commence
work, or prolong the bargaining and make a counteroffer w̃0 . Crucially, z parameterizes the flow
opportunity cost of prolonging the bargaining and hence the threat point if the unemployed
deems the employer’s initial offer too low.41 With a constant z, wages therefore respond weakly
to increases in p. The rigidity of wages incentivizes firms to significantly increase their job
creation.42 Allowing instead z to comove with p in the alternating-offer bargaining model
makes the unemployed’s threat point again sensitive to aggregate conditions. This increases the
flexibility of wages and reduces the volatility of unemployment.
We illustrate this point using the linear search and matching model presented in Hall and
Milgrom (2008). We first replicate their results for three linear models, the Nash bargaining
model with z = 0.71 (“Standard MP”), the Nash bargaining model with z = 0.93 (“HagedornManovskii”), and the alternating-offer bargaining model with z = 0.71 (“Hall-Milgrom”). Then,
we introduce in these models a cyclical z with (z, p) = 1. Appendix A.3 presents the equations
41

Another important parameter is the probability (denoted by δ in Hall and Milgrom, 2008) that the bargaining
exogenously falls apart and the unemployed returns to the general search pool. This probability governs the extent
to which the wage depends on z rather than on wage offers at other firms.
42
Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Trabandt (2013) embed the Hall and Milgrom (2008) model of wage bargaining
into a New-Keynesian dynamic general equilibrium model and show that the estimated model outperforms the
standard MP model in several dimensions including volatility in the labor market.

51

Table 8: Cyclicality of Wages and Unemployment Fluctuations

Standard MP

Hagedorn-Manovskii

Hall-Milgrom

Statistic

Constant z

Cyclical z

Constant z

Cyclical z

Constant z

Cyclical z

Slope dŨ u /dp̃
Slope dw̃/dp̃
Elasticity (u, p)

1.14
0.93
−1.51

1.30
0.98
−0.44

0.87
0.71
−5.87

1.32
0.98
−0.40

1.19
0.69
−6.02

1.31
0.91
−1.75

and parameters of Hall and Milgrom (2008), which we adopt here.
Table 8 summarizes our results. We begin with the cases of a constant z. The first row shows
the slope of the expected present value of utility flows for the unemployed Ũ u with respect to
the expected present value of a newly hired worker’s product p̃. With Nash bargaining, Ũ u is
the outside option of the unemployed while bargaining. It helps to separate Ũ u into the sum of
two components, the expected present value from receiving z discounted by the probability the
individual remains unemployed, and the value of obtaining a job in a future period discounted by
the probability of exiting unemployment in that period. In the Standard MP model with Nash
bargaining and a constant z, Ũ u responds substantially when p̃ increases (with dŨ u /dp̃ = 1.14).
Intuitively, a low z means that future job prospects contribute relatively more to Ũ u , and a
higher p̃ increases the probability of an unemployed finding a high-wage job. In the HagedornManovskii model with Nash bargaining and a high z, the expected present value of z’s is a more
important component of Ũ u . Because z is constant, Ũ u responds less to the better job prospects
created by a higher p̃ (with a dŨ u /dp̃ = 0.87).
The second row shows the slope of the expected present value of wage payments w̃ with
respect to p̃. In the Standard MP model, the significant increase in the unemployed’s outside
option makes wages respond flexibly to productivity changes (with dw̃/dp̃ = 0.93). In the
Hagedorn-Manovskii model, the smaller increase in the outside option makes the wage more
rigid (with dw̃/dp̃ = 0.71). As shown in the third row of Table 8, the lower response of wages
to productivity changes in the Hagedorn-Manovskii calibration is associated with significantly
larger responses of unemployment than the ones obtained in the Standard MP model.
52

Turning to the Hall and Milgrom model with constant z, here too the change in job prospects
of an unemployed makes Ũ u sensitive to variations in p̃. However, with alternating-offer bargaining, returning to the general search pool with value Ũ u no longer constitutes the unemployed’s
outside option. Instead, the unemployed’s threat point is to continue to bargain, in which
case he receives a flow value z. Because z is constant, wages do not respond significantly to
productivity changes (with dw̃/dp̃ = 0.69) and unemployment responds significantly.
To summarize, both the Hagedorn and Manovskii (2008) calibration and the Hall and Milgrom (2008) alternating-offers model achieve significant unemployment responses in part by
generating endogenous wage rigidity. In both cases, the wage rigidity comes from increasing
the importance of z to the unemployed’s outside option, in Hagedorn and Manovskii (2008)
by calibrating a higher z and in Hall and Milgrom (2008) by changing the bargaining game
to increase the weight of z in the outside option. This logic makes clear why both models no
longer generate volatile unemployment if z moves cyclically. In that event, the outside option in
both models again becomes sensitive to productivity, wages become responsive, and the firm’s
incentive to increase employment following a positive shock to p̃ becomes weaker. The columns
labeled Cyclical z in Table 8 illustrate this point quantitatively.43

7.3

Directed Search and Wage Posting Model

The role of z in the random search and matching framework extends into the environment
pioneered in Moen (1997) and Shimer (1996) with directed search and wage posting. Here we
summarize the argument and defer to Appendix A.4 a more detailed presentation of the model
as well as the derivations underlying our analysis.
We augment the basic environment described in Section 2 to have M distinct employment
submarkets indexed by i = 1, 2, . . . , M . All submarkets have the same matching technology,
production technology, and job separation rate. In each submarket, a triplet {w(i), N (i), θ(i)}
describes the posted wage, posted hours per worker, and the vacancy-unemployment ratio.
43

With cyclicality in z, the Hall-Milgrom model performs better than the Hagedorn-Manovskii model. This is
because in the Hall-Milgrom model wages partly depend on a firm-specific cost of continuing bargaining (denoted
by γ) which is assumed to be constant over time. Making γ comove with the aggregate state ameliorates even more
the unemployment fluctuations generated by the model.

53

The household maximizes the objective function (2), augmented to allow hours and consumption of employed to vary across submarkets. Similarly, the budget constraint of the household is given by equation (3) but with labor income wt Nt et replaced by the sum of income
P
earned in M submarkets
i wt (i)Nt (i)et (i). There are M laws of motion for employment,
et+1 (i) = (1 − st )et (i) + ft (i)ut (i). The household chooses the allocation of consumption across
its members and, additionally, how to optimally allocate searchers across submarkets. The
marginal value to the household of an additional employed in submarket i is:
Jth (i)
=
λt



1 − τtw
1 + τtC


wt (i)Nt (i) − zt (i) + Et

J h (i)
βλt+1
(1 − st − ft (i)) t+1 .
λt
λt+1

(41)

In the Appendix we solve for a symmetric equilibrium in which all firms post the same wage
and hours and θt (i) = θt is the same in all submarkets. With symmetric hours, consumption
bundles also do not differ across submarkets. As a result, we obtain zt (i) = zt in equation (41),
where zt is again defined as in equation (10). Therefore, the same measure of opportunity cost
also appears in the model with directed search and wage posting.
The steady state elasticity of overall market tightness θ with respect to shocks to the marginal
product p is given by:

(θ, p) = B̄ 




p − z(z, p)
,


1−τ w
p−z
1+τ C

1−τ w
1+τ C

(42)

where B̄ is a constant. The elasticities (θ, p) defined in equation (42) for the directed search
model and in equation (40) for the Nash bargaining model are identical up to the constants B̄
and B. As a result, the implications of a cyclical z in the Nash bargaining environment also apply
to an environment with directed search. The constants B̄ and B in the two models coincide
exactly when the bargaining power of workers µ equals the absolute value of the elasticity of
the job-filling rate q with respect to market tightness θ.

7.4

Indivisible Labor Model

In the models considered so far employment is a state variable. We now discuss the indivisible
labor model of Hansen (1985) and Rogerson (1988). The household maximizes the objective
function in equation (2) subject to the budget constraint in equation (3). The key difference
54

relative to the search and matching model is that, instead of facing the exogenous law of motion
for employment in equation (1), the household now chooses freely the number of employed et
in each period.44
The marginal value of employment in this model is simply:
Jth
=
λt



1 − τtw
1 + τtC


wt Nt − zt ,

(43)

where zt is still defined as in equation (10). Thus, the same measure of the opportunity cost
also arises in the indivisible labor model. Equation (43) implies a step function for the supply
of labor along the extensive margin. If the after-tax labor income is below the opportunity
cost (i.e. Jth < 0), then et = 0. If the after-tax labor income exceeds the opportunity cost
(i.e. Jth > 0), then et = 1. If the after-tax labor income equals the opportunity cost (Jth = 0),
then the household supplies any employment et ∈ [0, 1]. To close the model, one can assume
a downward sloping labor demand function relating wt Nt to et . In an interior equilibrium,

wt Nt (1 − τtw ) / 1 + τtC = zt .
The consequences of a procyclical z for employment fluctuations apply equally well to the
indivisible labor model. To see this, suppose that z is constant (for instance, because b is
constant and there is no disutility from labor). A given decrease in labor demand with constant
z causes a large drop in equilibrium employment e without any change in the equilibrium wage
w. Next, in response to the same decrease in labor demand, suppose that z also falls. The drop
in the equilibrium e is now smaller and the equilibrium w also declines.

8

Conclusion

The flow value of the opportunity cost of employment falls during recessions. The key mechanism is that the household values most the contribution of the employed (through higher wage
income) relative to that of the unemployed (through higher non-working time) when market
consumption is low and non-working time is high. This more than offsets the effect of the
44

As in Hansen (1985) and Rogerson (1988), this problem can be microfounded in a model in which many ex-ante
similar individuals choose the probability et of employment. A lottery then determines which individuals actually
work. Individuals have access to an insurance market which provides consumption equal to Cte when employed and
Ctu when unemployed. Only if preferences are separable in hours Nt , then Cte = Ctu .

55

increase in government benefits.
A procyclical opportunity cost reduces unemployment volatility in models where z affects
the wage bargain. Our preferred estimate of the elasticity of the opportunity cost with respect
to the marginal product of employment is close to unity. With this value and Nash bargaining,
fluctuations in unemployment generated by the model are essentially neutral with respect to
the level of z and remain far smaller than unemployment fluctuations in the data. We reach
a similar outcome in a model in which wages are determined by alternating offers or when the
labor market has directed search and wage posting.
An interpretation of our results is that endogenous forms of wage rigidity, such as accomplished by Hagedorn and Manovskii (2008) and by Hall and Milgrom (2008), do not survive
the introduction of a cyclical flow opportunity cost. Without rigid wages, these models cannot
generate volatile unemployment. This pessimistic conclusion does not apply to models where
wages are exogenously sticky or selected according to some process that does not depend on
the opportunity cost of employment. Alternatively, using the Brugemann and Moscarini (2010)
decomposition of wages into payments covering opportunity costs and rents due to frictions,
the procyclicality of z implies that wage rigidity requires substantial countercyclicality in rents.
The extent to which actual wages vary cyclically remains an open and important question (see
Pissarides (2009) and Hall and Milgrom (2008) for contrasting views).
Our results also bear on recent work emphasizing the role of social safety net expansions
in propagating the increase in unemployment during the Great Recession (Hagedorn, Karahan,
Manovskii, and Mitman, 2013). We find, contrary to this hypothesis, that fluctuations in the
value of benefits have only a small effect on the opportunity cost of employment. However, we
have not modeled the complicated set of benefit phase-out schedules, considered in Mulligan
(2012), that can give rise to high implicit marginal tax rates along the intensive margin or affect
the decision to move out of the labor force.

56

References
Aguiar, M., and E. Hurst (2005): “Consumption versus Expenditure,” Journal of Political
Economy, 113(5), 919–48.
Aguiar, M., E. Hurst, and L. Karabarbounis (2013): “Time Use During the Great
Recession,” American Economic Review, 103(5), 1964–96.
Anderson, P., and B. Meyer (1997): “Unemployment Insurance Takeup Rates and the
After-Tax Value of Benefits,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(3), 913–37.
Bils, M., Y. Chang, and S.-B. Kim (2012): “Comparative Advantage and Unemployment,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, 59, 150–65.
Blanchard, O., and J. Gali (2010): “Labor Markets and Monetary Policy: A New Keynesian Model with Unemployment,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2(2), 1–30.
Blank, R., and D. Card (1991): “Recent Trends in Insured and Uninsured Unemployment:
Is There an Explanation?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106(4), 1157–89.
Blundell, R., L. Pistaferri, and I. Preston (2008): “Consumption Inequality and Partial
Insurance,” American Economic Review, 98(5), 1887–921.
Browning, M., and T. Crossley (2001): “Unemployment Insurance Benefit Levels and
Consumption Changes,” Journal of Public Economics, 80(1), 1–23.
Brugemann, B., and G. Moscarini (2010): “Rent Rigidity, Asymmetric Information, and
Volatility Bounds in Labor Markets,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 13(3), 575–96.
Burgess, P., J. Kingston, R. St. Louis, and J. Sloane (1981): “Changes in Spending
Patterns Following Unemployment,” U.S. Department of Labor Employment and Training
Administration Occasional Paper 81-3.
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (2011): “Data Compendium 2011 Edition,” Online Data.
Christiano, L., M. Eichenbaum, and M. Trabandt (2013): “Unemployment and Business Cycles,” NBER Working Paper No. 19265.
Cociuba, S., E. Prescott, and A. Ueberfeldt (2012): “U.S. Hours and Productivity
Behavior Using CPS Hours,” Arizona State University Working Paper.
Costain, J., and M. Reiter (2008): “Business Cycles, Unemployment Insurance, and the
Calibration of Matching Models,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 32, 1120–55.

57

Feldstein, M., and J. Poterba (1984): “Unemployment Insurance and Reservation Wages,”
Journal of Public Economics, 23(12), 141–67.
Fernald, J. (2012): “A Quarterly, Utilization-Adjusted Series on Total Factor Productivity,”
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper No. 2012-19.
Gruber, J. (1997): “The Consumption Smoothing Benefits of Unemployment Insurance,”
American Economic Review, 87(1), 192–205.
Hagedorn, M., F. Karahan, I. Manovskii, and K. Mitman (2013): “Unemployment
Benefits and Unemployment in the Great Recession: The Role of Macro Effects,” NBER
Working Paper No. 19499.
Hagedorn, M., and I. Manovskii (2008): “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and Vacancies Revisited,” American Economic Review, 98(4), 1692–706.
Hall, R. (2005): “Employment Fluctuations with Equilibrium Wage Stickiness,” American
Economic Review, 95(1), 50–65.
(2009): “Reconciling Cyclical Movements in the Marginal Value of Time and the
Marginal Product of Labor,” Journal of Political Economy, 117(2), 281–323.
(2014): “High Discounts and High Unemployment,” Stanford University Working
Paper.
Hall, R., and P. Milgrom (2008): “The Limited Influence of Unemployment on the Wage
Bargain,” American Economic Review, 98(4), 1653–74.
Hall, R., and A. Mueller (2013): “Wage Dispersion and Search Behavior,” Stanford University Working Paper.
Hansen, G. D. (1985): “Indivisible Labor and the Business Cycle,” Journal of Monetary
Economics, 16(3), 309–27.
Hornstein, A., P. Krusell, and G. Violante (2005): “Unemployment and Vacancy
Fluctuations in the Matching Model: Inspecting the Mechanism,” Federal Reserve Bank of
Richmond Economic Quarterly, 91(3), 19–51.
Kaiser Family Foundation (2013): “Where Are States Today?,” Online Data.
Krueger, A., and A. Mueller (2013): “A Contribution to the Empirics of Reservation
Wages,” Columbia University Working Paper.
Mendoza, E., A. Razin, and L. Tesar (1994): “Effective Tax Rates in Macroeconomics:
Cross-Country Estimates of Tax Rates on Factor Incomes and Consumption,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, 34, 297–323.
58

Meyer, B., W. Mok, and J. Sullivan (2009): “The Under-Reporting of Transfers in Household Surveys: Its Nature and Consequences,” NBER Working Paper No. 15181.
Moen, E. R. (1997): “Competitive Search Equilibrium,” Journal of Political Economy, 105(2),
385–411.
Mortensen, D., and C. Pissarides (1994): “Job Creation and Job Destruction in the
Theory of Unemployment,” Review of Economic Studies, 61(3), 397–415.
(1999): “Unemployment Responses to ’Skill-Biased’ Technology Shocks: The Role of
Labour Market Policy,” Economic Journal, 109(455), 242–65.
(2001): “Taxes, Subsidies and Equilibrium Labor Market Outcomes,” CEP Discussion
Papers No. 519.
Mortensen, D. T., and E. Nagypal (2007): “More on Unemployment and Vacancy Fluctuations,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 10(3), 327–47.
Mulligan, C. (2012): The Redistribution Recession. Oxford University Press.
Pissarides, C. (1985): “Short-Run Equilibrium Dynamics of Unemployment, Vacancies, and
Real Wages,” American Economic Review, 75(4), 676–90.
(2000): Equilibrium Unemployment Theory. MIT Press.
Pissarides, C. A. (2009): “The Unemployment Volatility Puzzle: Is Wage Stickiness the
Answer?,” Econometrica, 77(5), 1339–69.
Pistaferri, L. (2003): “Anticipated and Unanticipated Wage Changes, Wage Risk, and Intertemporal Labor Supply,” Journal of Labor Economics, 21(3), 729–54.
Rogerson, R. (1988): “Indivisible Labor, Lotteries, and Equilibrium,” Journal of Monetary
Economics, 21(1), 3–16.
Rogerson, R., and J. Wallenius (2013): “Nonconvexities, Retirement, and the Elasticity
of Labor Supply,” American Economic Review, 103(4), 1445–62.
Rogerson, R., and R. Wright (1988): “Involuntary Unemployment in Economies with
Efficient Risk Sharing,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 22, 501–15.
Saporta-Eksten, I. (2014): “Job Loss, Consumption, and Unemployment Insurance,” Stanford University Working Paper.
Shimer, R. (1996): “Contracts in Frictional Labor Markets,” MIT Working Paper.
(2005): “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and Vacancies,” American Economic Review, 95(1), 25–49.
59

(2010): Labor Markets and Business Cycles. Princeton University Press.
(2012): “Reassessing the Ins and Outs of Unemployment,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 15, 127–48.
Stephens, M. (2004): “Job Loss Expectations, Realizations, and Household Consumption
Behavior,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 86(1), 253–69.
Trabandt, M., and H. Uhlig (2011): “The Laffer Curve Revisited,” Journal of Monetary
Economics, 58(4), 305–27.

60

