                                       NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               REINVENTING THE WHEEL:
THE ECONOMIC BENEFITS OF WHEELED TRANSPORTATION IN EARLY BRITISH COLONIAL WEST AFRICA

                                                 Isaías N. Chaves
                                               Stanley L. Engerman
                                                James A. Robinson

                                                Working Paper 19673
                                        http://www.nber.org/papers/w19673


                              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                       1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                                            November 2013




         We are particularly grateful to Gareth Austin, Emmanuel Akyeampong and Bill Summerhill for their
         detailed comments and suggestions. We also thank seminar participants at the WCFIA Conference
         on African Development in the Longue Durée at Akwapim, Ghana, and the Harvard Economic History
         Seminar, particularly Toke Aidt, Joseph Inikori, Noel Maurer, Joseph Miller, and Peter Temin. We
         also thank María Angélica Baustista and Leander Heldring for their invaluable research assistance.
         We thank the WCFIA for their financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
         and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

         NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
         reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
         NBER publications.

         © 2013 by Isaías N. Chaves, Stanley L. Engerman, and James A. Robinson. All rights reserved. Short
         sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
         that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Reinventing the Wheel: The Economic Benefits of Wheeled Transportation in Early British
Colonial West Africa
Isaías N. Chaves, Stanley L. Engerman, and James A. Robinson
NBER Working Paper No. 19673
November 2013
JEL No. N77,O33,R40

                                              ABSTRACT

One of the great puzzles of Sub-Saharan African economic history is that wheeled transportation was
barely used prior to the colonial period. Instead, head porterage was the main method of transportation.
The consensus among historians is that this was a rational adaption to the underlying conditions and
factor endowments. In this paper we undertake the first systematic investigation of the relative costs
of the different forms of wheeled transportation in Africa. We focus on calculating the social savings
and social rate of return associated with the introduction of the railway into colonial British West Africa.
We provide more speculative estimates of the social savings of other forms of wheeled transportation.
We find that all forms of wheeled transportation were economically efficient in the sense that they
increased national income, though the estimated social savings of railways were modest when compared
to GDP. However, we also find that the social rate of return of railways was exceedingly high, with
annual social returns being equivalent to the entire capital outlays in Nigeria, i.e., railways there had
a social rate of return of around 100%. Contrary to the conventional wisdom, railways appear to have
been a very good social investment in West Africa because they were cheap to build. We discuss some
alternative hypotheses that may nevertheless account for why they were not adopted.


Isaías N. Chaves                                     James A. Robinson
Stanford University                                  Harvard University
Department of Economics                              Department of Government
579 Serra Mall.                                      N309, 1737 Cambridge Street
Stanford, CA 94305                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
isa.chaves.v@gmail.com                               and NBER
                                                     jrobinson@gov.harvard.edu
Stanley L. Engerman
Department of Economics
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627-0156
and NBER
s.engerman@rochester.edu
1        Introduction

Today Sub-Saharan Africa is the poorest part of the planet. Though it is debated just when
the gap between Africa and the rest of the World developed it is clear that Africa lagged behind
Eurasia in terms of many of the key building blocks of economic growth. One can see this
in the factors that go to determine income, for example literacy and human capital, but it is
perhaps most evident in technology. The basis of the modern economic growth which emerged
in Britain in the late 18th century was technological innovation and the Industrial Revolution
had itself built on a long incremental series of innovations in agriculture, transportation and
elsewhere in the economy which had made it possible. Many of these innovations did not take
place in Africa. For example, outside of Ethiopia, no African country innovated the plow and
systems of writing were also restricted to the same region, though also encompassing the Sudan
and Somalia. Also absent was the wheel.
        The fact that wheeled transportation was not used in Sub-Saharan Africa until the early
colonial period is paradoxical because it is well established that African societies knew about
the wheel from the early modern period onwards.1 They did not have to reinvent the wheel,
only adopt it. Law (1980) documents many cases where Europeans gave gifts of wheeled
transportation to different African kings and wheeled carriages were in use in Dahomey from
at least the 18th century and were even produced there. Nevertheless, wheeled vehicles did
not spread out of ceremonial uses with the exception of a small amount of military use.
        Why did African societies not adopt a technology which seems to promise huge economic
benefits in terms of reduced costs of transportation?2 That such cost savings existed was
certainly believed by early colonial officials and Europeans in the 19th century who noted this
failure to adopt the wheel. In the absence of wheeled transportation the majority of goods
were transported by head poterage. British colonial diplomat Sir Gerald Portal noted in 1903

             “As an animal of burden man is out and out the worst. He eats more, carries
          less, is more liable to sickness, gets over less ground, is more expensive, more trou-
          blesome, and in every way less satisfactory than the meanest four-footed creature
          that can be trained, induced, or forced to carry a load.” (quoted in Clifford, 1920,
    1
     See Piggott (1983) for a history of the use of wheeled transportation and Bulliet (1975) for how the intro-
duction of the camel into the trans-Saharan trade led to the abandonment of the use of wheeled transportation
on that route.
   2
     As Goody (1971) and Austen and Headrick (1983) point out this does not exhaust the puzzles surround the
non-adoption of the wheel in Africa since neither potter’s wheels nor spinning wheels were adopted either.


                                                       1
     p. 151)

   The consensus view about the absence of wheeled transportation on the development of
West Africa is well summed up by the report that the then Secretary of State for the Colonies
Ormsby-Gore made to Parliament in 1926. For instance commenting on transportation diffi-
culties in various parts of Nigeria where he went he notes (1926, pp. 24-25)

         “The Province of Ogoja contains an estimated population of between 600,000
     and 700,000 people who are producing little or nothing for export, and a low stan-
     dard of life obtains. Until Ogoja is opened up by a network of roads ... there can be
     little trade with its consequent stimulus to production, and the real development
     of the Province has not yet begun.”

   Later he comments (p. 29)

         “In British West Africa there is still too much of the most obsolete and expensive
     form of transport. I refer to the wide use of head porterage.”

   Indeed, as late as 1980 one could read in a textbook treatment

         “At first, head porterage had to be used for carrying imports; and palm oil was
     sent to the coast by the curious and expensive method of barrel-rolling. Porterage
     was a social evil, a political danger and an economic waste.” (Church, 1980, p.
     152).

   The fact that such an incredibly labor intensive system of transportation should be used
in a continent widely argued to be ‘labor scarce’ (Herbst, 2000, Austin, 2008) only deepens
the puzzle. Portal’s view was widely shared by early colonial officials who not only took it
for granted that the absence of wheeled transportation was disastrously inefficient but they
produced numbers to prove it.
   Most of these officials gave no explanation for why African’s chose not to adopt a technology
which they regarded as massively superior to the alternatives in use. The first attempt to
provide such an explanation appears to be McPhee (1926). Though Portal notes how unhealthy
human porters were, McPhee in essence argued that at least in the forest zone of Africa, the
presence of the Tsetse fly meant that draught animals could not be used. This, he claimed,


                                               2
made wheeled transportation uneconomical. His argument is rather equivocal however since the
relevant chapter of his book attempts to show in some detail that road and rail transportation
were far superior to head porterage. He seems to take it for granted that Africans could not
have built motorable roads or railways. He also explicitly points out that on the basis of
Lugard’s 1919 report on the amalgamation of Northern and Southern Nigeria for Northern
Nigeria

            “Strangely enough, although there are over 3,000,000 cattle, 176,000 donkeys,
         113,000 horses and 4,000 cattle, yet such a thing as a cart may be said to be
         unknown.” (McPhee, 1926, p. 121)

       Therefore, though the argument about the Tsetse fly is obviously relevant, it can at best
only be a very partial solution to the puzzle. McPhee’s discussion was augmented by Hopkins
(1973) who in addition argued that the cost of building roads through the forest zones was so
high that this also made wheeled transportation uneconomical. Ogunremi (1975) also claims
that head porterage was economically efficient since labor was not really scarce and he claims
that the calculations made by Lugard and others are misleading because they ignore the huge
capital costs involved in constructing railways. In essence McPhee to an extent, but certainly
Hopkins and Ogunremi respond to the puzzle of the non-adoption of wheeled transportation
by asserting that it is not a puzzle and that in fact it was an economically rational decision
given the circumstances.3
       There are some obvious problems with these existing explanations. First, and most obvi-
ously, none of them is based on any real calculation or what was or what was not economically
rational. Second, while it is obviously correct that the impact of the Tsetse fly made it difficult
to use draught animals in large parts of central Africa,4 wheeled transportation was not used
in areas where there was no Tsetse. This is true not just in Southern Africa but also in the
Sahel or Northern Nigeria. Third, as Portal’s remark notes, humans were very unhealthy as
well, so what is relevant is the relative health of animals compared to humans not the absolute
health of animals in the Tsetse zone. Finally, Hopkins’s claim that wheeled transportation
was not adopted in the forest zone because roads were uneconomical to build runs into the
problem that African polities in the forest zone did indeed build such roads. Most notably,
   3
     See Basu and Weil (1998) and Acemoglu and Zilibotti (2001) for formalizations of the idea of appropriate
technology.
   4
     Witness the enormous and costly lengths which the Oyo Empire had to go to to keep thier cavalry safe from
the ravages of Tsetse (see Law, 1977).


                                                      3
Wilks (1989) discusses in detail the great roads of the Asante Empire in the Gold Coast in
the first half of the 19th century,5 and Reid (2002) does the same for the roads built by the
Buganda state. Yet neither the Asante nor the Buganda states used wheeled transportation.
       In this paper we conduct to our knowledge the first attempt to bring systematic evidence
to bear on the question of whether wheeled transportation was economically rational in Sub-
Saharan Africa. We focus on the three British West Africa colonies of the Gold Coast, Nigeria
and Sierra Leone because the British colonial state recorded in great detail the costs of con-
structing and maintaining different transportation systems. Though we examine the efficiency
of various types of wheeled transportation, including carts and motor vehicles, the bulk of
our analysis focuses on railways. Railways of course embody not just wheels, but also other
technologies, such as iron smelting and casting and steam engines. Our focus is motivated by
the fact that we have very comprehensive information for the amount of goods and passengers
which the railways carried, which we do not have for any other method of transportation. We
also know a great deal about the capital expenditures, the neglect of which has been used as a
critique of earlier estimates that head porterage was inefficient. In addition, this focus allows
us to make comparisons with the rich literature in economic history which has examined the
economic impact of railways. Our methodology is the canonical one based on that of Fogel
(1964).6
       Our basic findings are very contrary to the conventional wisdom. First, all forms of wheeled
transportation were economically rational in the sense that they generated positive social
savings, implying that their adoption would have increased national income. In the case of
railways the social savings for goods traffic as a % of GDP range from a low of 0.8% in the
Gold Coast in 1909 to a high 12.5% for Nigeria in the same year. For passenger traffic the
numbers are smaller, basically zero. Second, and more important, the social rate of return
on railway construction was incredibly high. This calculation explicitly takes into account the
capital expenditures, one the bones of contention in the existing literature. We find that social
rates of return were uniformly high averaging over 100% in Nigeria, implying that the social
   5
      The early colonial officials who deplored the backward state of transportation in Africa seem not to have
been aware of these roads. In his discussion McPhee (1926, pp. 106-107) for example notes “At the beginning
of the last century no proper roads existed anywhere in West Africa ... The earliest roads, not much better than
rough tracks which were liable to be obliterated within a year by forest growths, were military roads. Thus Sir
Garnet ... Wolsley constructed a road into the heart of Ashanti during the War of 1873-1974. Throughout the
whole century very little progress was made.”
    6
      Tsey (1986) in his analysis of the expansion of railways in the colonial Gold Coast observed that one could
undertake such an exercise but he chose not to do so.



                                                       4
savings in any year were equivalent to the entire capital outlays up until then. Elsewhere they
were lower but were close to 50% for both the Gold Coast and Sierra Leone for much of the
period. Our estimates therefore provide no support for the idea that wheeled transportation
was not adopted in Sub-Saharan Africa because it was not an appropriate technology.7 Indeed,
far from it being the case that railways were not appropriate because they were expensive to
build in African conditions, in fact they were cheap to build, and this is why the social rates
of return are so high. This is consistent with the recent findings of Jedwab and Moradi (2011)
who find that colonial railway construction in the Gold Coast had a powerful effect on exports
and development.
       If wheeled transportation was economically efficient and generated very high social rates
of return, why was it not adopted? In the case of railways at least we can identify three types
of explanation. The first is the obvious one that it was very difficult to construct such large
public works as railways without sufficient political centralization. We illustrate this argument
in Sierra Leone. The second, comes from thwarted attempts by a mission from the Asante state
in Ghana to contract British engineers in London to build a railway in 1895. This attempt,
part of a larger program of modernization in Asante after 1874 was blocked by the British
colonial secretary Joseph Chamberlain. The likely explanation is that Britain did not want
autonomous modernization of African polities. African states considering adopting railways
needed to rely on foreign capital, engineers and expertise. This was normal in the 19th century,
railways in Latin American and the Middle East were built with foreign capital and expertise.
But at the time of the scramble for Africa European powers wished to control this type of
technology adoption, whereas they had much less interest in doing so in Latin America and
the Middle East. The third explanation comes from the rich evidence on the one independent
African polity which actually built a railway, Ethiopia. Here the evidence clearly shows that
the Ethiopians were very concerned that the construction of the railways from Djibouti up to
Addis Ababa ran the risk of precipitating a process of colonial domination and conquest.
       The paper proceeds as follows. In the next section we discuss some of the estimates of the
costs of transportation made by colonial officials and administrators in the early 20th century.
This evidence, which certainly suggests that head porterage was inefficient, is typically very
incomplete since it is not clear exactly what is involved in the calculation or how representative
   7
    At some level this is not very surprising. Technological differences today, as captured by total factor
productivity, are at the heart of differences in income per-capita between Africa and the rest of the world (Hall
and Jones, 1999, Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson, 2001) and few believe that such differences are efficient.



                                                       5
any of the information is. In section 3 we discuss what data is available to undertake this
calculations in the British colonies of the Gold Coast, Nigeria and Sierra Leone. Section 4 then
uses this data to provide estimates of the social savings from the introduction of the railways in
these three colonies and we also provide some more speculative estimates of the social savings
associated with other simpler forms of wheeled transportation. Section 5 then focuses on the
social rate of return of the railways. Section 6 then discusses in more detail the evidence for
why African states in the 19th Century did not adopted economically superior transportation
technology. Section 7 concludes.


2    Contemporary Discussion and Existing Evidence

British colonial officials were in little doubt that the lack of wheeled transportation was a
major impediment to economic progress in West Africa. To demonstrate this they produced
a whole range of different numbers which were then constantly repeated over the years. Some
of these are summarized in Table 1.
    Unfortunately, in all the cases we have found it is never clear exactly how these estimates
were constructed and therefore what went into them. Ormsby-Gore’s numbers, for example,
are introduced by noting that (1926, pp. 29-30)

          “At Zaria, in Northern Nigeria, I was provided with some carefully compiled
      figures regarding the cost of different forms of transportation per ton mile. Head
      porterage in an area where labour is plentiful and cheap works out at 2/6 per ton
      mile; motor transport at 1/- per ton mile; donkey transport at 11d; camel transport
      at between 9d and 10d; while the railway takes baled cotton from Zaria to Lagos
      at under 2d per ton mile.”8

    These numbers were widely reproduced, for example Hailey (1938, p. 1540). Yet Ormsby-
Gore gives no further information about who gave him these figures or what sources they used
to calculate them. Clearly, taken at face value, these numbers suggest that head porterage
was extremely inefficient. According to these numbers, while the cost of shipping freight by
railway was 2 pence per ton mile, head porterage cost 2 shillings and 6 pence, or was 15 times
more costly!
  8
    The notation d. means pence, s. means shillings, there were 12 pence in a shilling and 20 shillings in a
pound.



                                                     6
       Sir Frederick Lugard (1922, p. 461) similarly regarded head porterage as extremely ineffi-
cient

            “For uncounted centuries the African has been his own beast of burden, and
         a simple calculation shows that the cost of land transport by such means with a
         wage rate of 9d. per day is about 3 shillings per ton mile.”

       This number is also very widely reproduced. In a footnote Lugard notes that this calculation
is based on assuming that a porter carried 65lbs and could walk 12 miles a day and is then
adjusted upwards to allow for sickness and supervision. He also observes that “for bulky loads
the cost is much more”. Elsewhere Lugard (1922, pp. 462-463) remarks that “a railway train
of average capacity and engine power will do the work of 13,000 carriers at one twentieth of
the cost.”
       Other calculations suggest similar things about the relative efficiency of different forms of
transportation. For example, the numbers taken from House of Commons (1909) come from an
extensive survey of methods of transportation in the entire British empire undertaken by the
Secretary of State for the Colonies. In this survey, undertaken in 1907, the Governors of the
different colonies were requested to provide information to a standardized set of questions about
the nature of transportation in their colonies. The information provided for the Gold Coast,
presented by E.F.W. Wilkinson, acting director of public works suggests that transportation by
head porterage cost 3 shillings and one pence to 5 shillings per ton mile (House of Commons,
1909, p. 43). These figures are as much as twice those for Zaria, perhaps indicating the
relatively labor scarcity of the Gold Coast in that period. They are however consistent with
Lugard’s numbers.
       For our purposes at the moment the most interesting comparison is between head porterage
and the railways.9 These oft quoted numbers suggest that head porterage was about 15 to 20
times as costly as the railway. Yet it is not clear how these numbers were constructed. Most
crucially, it is not clear whether they factor in the large fixed cost of constructing the railway
or whether they are based just on the variable cost. Since it is precisely the large cost of
constructing modern transportation systems in West African conditions which Hopkins (1973)
argued made them economically irrational we need to assess the efficiency of different systems
   9
    Forms of transportation other than head porterage were very important in different pre-colonial contexts.
For instance Hill (1972) describes how tobacco produced in Katsina in Northern Nigeria was shipped as far
south as Ilorin using donkeys and the great kola trade between Nigeria and Ghana was carried out mostly by
donkey (Lovejoy, 1982).


                                                     7
of transportation taking these costs into account - something we will do by calculating the
social rate of return.


3         The Data
3.1         Railways

The survey for a railway was carried out in 1893-94 in Sierra Leone and during the tour of
Governor Sir Gilbert Carter in Lagos in early 1893. Both the Sierra Leone and Lagos railways
were started in 1896 and construction on the Gold Coast railway was begun in 1898. The
Sierra Leone railway ran Southeast from Freetown and reached Pendembu in 1908. The first
railway in the Gold Coast went inland from the port of Sekondi towards the Asante goldfields
and reached Kumase in 1903. The second line, linking Kumase and Accra was started in 1909
and completed in 1923. The first railway in Nigeria was from Lagos and reached Jebba on the
Niger river in 1909. The second railway liked Kano to the port of Baro on the Niger and was
completed in 1911. All the lines were build and operated by the colonial government.10
         Our main source of data on the costs of constructing, maintaining and running the railway,
the amount of freight hauled, the number of passengers carried, and the revenues generated
from freight and passengers are the various reports of the colonial governments, particularly
the reports of the railways and transportation departments. We focus on three dates, 1909
(1911 for Sierra Leone because earlier reports did not present the appropriate data), 1924/25
and 1934/35. The financial year for all colonies started on January 1 for 1909/11 but for the
Gold Coast and Nigeria it switched to April 1 in the 1920s and 1930s hence the fact that for
our latter two colonies and dates the data on railways straddles two years. Our basic data on
railways for the Gold Coast comes from the 1909 “Report of the General Manager upon the
Government Railways,” and the Gold Coast Railway Administrative Reports for 1924-1925
and 1934-35. For Nigeria we have the “Lagos Railway Annual Report 1909,” the “Nigerian
Railway and Udi Coalmines Administrative Report for the Year ending 31st March 1925,” and
for 1934/35 the “Annual Report on the Government Railway and Colliery of Nigeria for the
Financial Year ending 31st March 1935.” Finally for Sierra Leone we have the “Report on the
Transport Department for the Year 1911,” and the Administrative Reports of the Railway for
1925 and 1935.
         These sources of information gives us extensive data to calculate the amount of freight and
    10
         For a contemporary discussion of the pros and cons see House of Commons (1924).


                                                         8
passengers which was carried on the railways in these three years. They also report information
on current receipts and expenditures as well as capital outlays to date on railway construction
and maintenance.
   An important advantage of the railway is that it moved people much faster than they could
have moved by walking. We can estimate the social savings associated with this since for most
years the railway reports tell us the total number of passenger miles travelled. We can estimate
how long it took to travel this amount of miles if we know how fast the trains went and also
how fast it took to walk. Unfortunately so far we have been unable to discover a railway
timetable for either the Gold Coast, Nigeria or Sierra Leone and the reports of the Railway
Department never mention how long it took trains to travel between stations (though they do
assiduously report the percentage that were late). For a rough calculation of the speed of the
trains we rely on the travel account of Alldridge (1910) who visited Sierra Leone. Alldridge
travelled on the train from Freetown to Bo leaving at 7 in the morning and arriving at 5 in
the evening. Since the distance between the stations is 136 miles we can say that the average
speed in Sierra Leone was 13.6 miles per hour. This appears to be very slow but the Sierra
Leone railway was a narrow gauge one which possibly meant that it had to go slower than
one would have expected. We have no comparable account of travel from the Gold Coast or
Nigerian railways. These used broader gauges so presumably could have gone faster and we
choose 15 miles per hour as a conservative estimate. In terms of how fast someone could walk
Wilks (1989, Chapter 1) has an extensive discussion of travel times between different parts of
Asante in the 19th Century. All his estimates are close to 15 miles per-day, which is the modal
estimate of how far a head porter could walk so we shall take this as the relevant travel speed
of a passenger who had to walk implying a speed of 2 miles per hour.
   To value the time saved in being able to travel on the railway it is natural to take the wage
rate as the opportunity cost of time. Exactly which is the correct wage to take depends on who
the traveller is. For example, in 1924-25 in the Gold Coast, of the 1,487,164 passengers who
travelled by train, 14,851 travelled first class, 21,988 second class, while the rest travelled in
third class. We do not have the information necessary to decompose the total passenger miles
into components of different groups so we could assume that this happens in proportion to the
numbers of each class (i.e. on average each type of person travelled the same distance). This
implies that of the 41,751,573 total passenger miles, 416,936 (1%), were first class passenger
miles, 617,305 (1.5%) were second class passenger miles, and the rest (97.5%) were third class



                                                9
passenger miles. To value the time saved by the introduction of the railway we need to impute
some opportunity cost to these different groups. For third class passengers we could choose
the unskilled wage rate of 9d. per-day or 1d. per hour assuming a 9 hour work day. Skilled
wages in the Blue Books range from 2s.6d. to 5s. To calculate the value of time we value that
hours saved for people travelling in second and first class at 5s. per day. Unfortunately, this
is the only year for which our sources document the breakdown between the different classes
of passengers. However, as will be evident from the above, since first and second class travel
was relatively so unimportant this is unlikely to really generate a lot of bias in our results.
Therefore we proceed with the simple assumption that time can be valued at the unskilled
wage rate. This is 9d. per day for all the colonies for the first two dates and then 12.d., 8.d.
and 11.d. for the Gold Coast, Nigeria and Sierra Leone respectively for the mid 1930s.

3.2   Head Porters

To compare it to the cost of using head porters we need data on how much a head porter
could carry and the rate of pay. Though information on this is much less systematic than the
data from the railways, there seems to be a lot of consensus on what the right numbers are.
Ormsby-Gore (1926, p. 133) notes

         “there is a considerable body of labour temporarily employed on road and rail-
      way construction. The supply of voluntary labour for the latter purposes has always
      provided inadequate in Nigeria, and recourse is had to compulsory or “enlisted” -
      sometimes called “political” - labour for these essential public works and services.
      All the railways and most of the roads in Nigeria have involved the use of this com-
      pulsory labour ... Such compulsory labour is recruited by the native authorities. It
      is only called upon to work for a definite period, usually, and never more than, one
      month at a time. It is paid, usually at a rate of 9d. per day ... Unpaid compulsory
      labour legalized under the Roads and Rivers Ordinance of Northern Nigeria is only
      used for keeping clean roads and rivers within local boundaries when called upon
      to do so by the Resident.”

   9d. a day is the figure which is widely quoted from all over British West Africa for the
cost of a head porter from around 1910 right through to the middle of the 1920s, though head
porterage was surely much less prevalent in 1925. In Sierra Leone Ormsby-Gore (1926, p. 58)


                                              10
reports from his visit a higher number which was 1s.3d. per day in the Colony (the capital
Freetown and its environs) and 1s. per day in the Protectorate (the hinterland and interior of
what is now Sierra Leone).
   Just as there is a consensus on wages, there is also a consensus that a head porter could
carry seems to be 60 pounds. Indeed, this seems to have been more or less the official load
used by colonial officials when they hired porters (Ogunremi, 1975, p. 47). In terms of how
far a porter could walk in a day the numbers vary, with perhaps 15 miles being the consensus.
In Sierra Leone Ormsby-Gore (1926, p. 58) reports that a porter usually carried 45 to 50lb of
weight and could walk 12-15 miles per day. House of Commons (1909, p. 42) suggests that in
the Gold Coast

         “The motor lorries carry about 1 ton to 2 1/2 tons; a cask of palm oil weighs
      17 3/4 cwt.; a cask of cocoa weighs about 12 cwt.’ a hand truck carries from 15 to
      20 cwt with 6 to 8 men to a truck; head loads are about 60 lbs.”

   Moreover “casks, hand trucks and head loads get over 20 miles per day”. The chief com-
missioner for the Northern Territories of the Gold Coasts reported that although “native rates
impossible to gauge” the government paid “10d. a day for loads of 50 to 60 lbs., 1d. a day of
which goes to the chief who provided the carriers.” In terms of how far a porter walked, the
commissioner noted “At present natives are content to do 10 to 15 miles a day.” For Northern
Nigeria (pp. 22-23) the situation was similar with 60 lbs being mentioned as the normal head
load and wages for hammock men being 9d. and for a laborer 9d. to 1 shilling per day. In
Sierra Leone “Head loads 60 to 100 lbs. Hand carts 1 ton to 30 cwts.” (House of Commons,
1909, p. 102). Though no information is provided on the wage paid to head porters in Sierra
Leone in this report it is noted that a barrel roller, a similarly unskilled job, is paid 1 shilling
per day, identical to the wage Ormsby-Gore recorded for a head porter.
   To judge if these wage rates are reasonable we can compare them to other information
which is readily available. For example, Oyemakinde (1974, p. 318) notes that workers who
were recruited by compulsion to build the railways in Northern Nigeria between 1911 and 1915
were paid 9 d. per day, while in Yorubaland, where workers freely took up such employment,
they were usually paid 1s. per day. The report detailing the costs of railway construction in
the Gold Coast, Nigeria and Sierra Leone (House of Commons, 1904) reports information of
the daily wage rate of unskilled workers who were used in railway construction. These were
10d. a day in Sierra Leone, 1s. a day in Lagos and 1s. 3d. a day in the Gold Coast.

                                                11
   All in all these scattered numbers are quite consistent with each other and for the period
around 1909 they suggest that Lugard’s number of 3 shillings per ton mile is a reasonable figure
for the cost of head porterage. Ormsby-Gore’s 1926 figures suggest that this number is rea-
sonable for 1924-25 as well. For our 1935 estimates we do not have contemporary information
on the rates of pay of head porters. However, the Blue Books for the colonies report unskilled
workers wages. Since the wage rates we have for head porters in earlier periods correspond
closely to the wages for unskilled workers as stated in Blue Books, we can use the latter data to
get a counterfactual wage for head porterage in 1935. In the Gold Coast these ranged from 9d
to 15d, in Nigeria the range 3d. to 1s. per day is given, and in Sierra Leone unskilled workers
wages are reported as being 11d. We therefore used the wage rates of 12d. for the Gold Coast,
and 8d. for Nigeria and 11d. for Sierra Leone.
   Rather than use Lugard’s 3 shilling estimate we assume in our calculations for 1909/11 and
1924/25 that head porters could walk 15 miles in a day, carry 60 lbs. and were paid 9d in all
the colonies. These numbers imply a cost of 1s. and 10d. per ton mile for head porterage. For
1934/35 this cost increases by one third in the Gold Coast to 2s. and 6d. per ton mile, falls
to 1s. and 8d. per ton mile for Nigeria and increases to 2s. and 3d. per ton mile for Sierra
Leone.
   An important issue to be considered in thinking about the applicability of the social savings
approach to colonial Africa is the nature of the labor market. Coerced, or ‘political’ labor was
used to build roads and railways and slaves were also extensively used for head porters and no
doubt supplied by chiefs to help railway and road construction as well. In the Gold Coast in
particular there appears to have been a great labor shortage and the supply of Africans which
were forthcoming at the wages that the British were prepared to pay was insufficient to get
the work done. Colonial officials therefore induced local chiefs to provide labor (see Thomas,
1973, Mann, 1995, and Akurang-Parry, 2000, for studies of forced labor and Mason, 1978 and
Swindell, 1992, for specific studies in the context of railway construction all in the context
of British West Africa). One could argue that since labor could be coerced either to build
and run railways or work as porters this should not influence the relative benefits of the two
methods of transportation. Nevertheless, since head porterage is much more labor intensive
compared to the railways a natural conjecture would be that the ability to repress labor would
bias downwards the social savings from railways. We return to this when we discuss the West
African colonies in comparative perspective. We note however, that coerced labor was not



                                               12
everywhere used for head porterage, for example in East Africa Rockel (2006) shows that there
was a basically free labor market for head porterage, so this issue may be much more important
there (see Coquery-Vidrovitch and Lovejoy eds., 1985, for comparative studies)

3.3   GDP Estimates

To get some sense of how big the cost differences between different methods of transportation
were it is useful to have something to compare the costs to. The most obvious normalization is
with respect to GDP and this is the standard approach in the social savings literature. However,
to our knowledge, with the exception of Szereszewski’s (1965) pioneering construction of GDP
estimates for the Gold Coast in 1891, 1901 and 1911, no estimates of GDP for the colonies
of interest exist for this period. Szereszewski’s approach was based on colonial Blue Books
which contain extensive information about imports and exports and the public sector. He
used a number of assumptions to construct estimates of consumption and capital formation.
Most speculatively, he also constructed estimates of the consumption and investment made
by the ‘native economy’ of which there are only population estimates during this period.
Nevertheless, Szereszewski’s approach uses the existing information in a very creative way and
produces quite believable estimates. We therefore used it to construct from the Blue Books for
the three colonies estimates of nominal GDP for all of the relevant periods. These calculations
may be of independent interest and we discuss them in detail in the appendix to the paper.


4     Were the Railways Economically Efficient? A Social Savings
      Approach

Though the calculations discussed previously are interesting, they fall very far short of a sys-
tematic treatment of the issue. Moreover, one could easily imagine that colonial officers, anx-
ious to legitimize their ‘civilizing mission’ in Africa, may have been inclined to over-emphasize
the technological backwardness of Africa and therefore the advantages of ‘modern’ methods of
transportation.
    The conventional method for tackling the issues broached in this paper is that of social
savings introduced by Fogel (1964) and Fishlow (1965). The social savings of a given method
of transportation, such as the railways, is the difference between the actual cost of shipping
the goods and people by that method of transportation and the cost of shipping them without
that method of transportation. As Fogel (1979) points out the social savings associated with


                                               13
a particular efficient method of transportation is the loss of national income associated with
the substitution of an inefficient method of transportation for the efficient one. In our case
we focus on the social savings associated with using railways to move goods and people rather
than head porterage.
       This approach has been heavily criticized, requires strong assumptions about the nature
of the economy, and fails to capture important impacts of transportation innovations (see
O’Brien, 1977, Fogel, 1979, Summerhill, 2003, Crafts, 2004 and Leunig, 2010, for extensive
discussions of the pros and cons of the approach). From our point of view, one central problem
with the method is that it requires the assumption that we are studying a perfectly competitive
industry in long-run equilibrium so that price (average revenue) is equal to long-run average
cost. Obviously, railways which involved a huge fixed cost, cannot be in such an equilibrium.
Moreover, in all the West African colonies the prices charged for freight and passengers were not
determined by competition but were set by the colonial administration.11 Furthermore, basic
social savings calculations cannot incorporate the potentially large externalities created by the
construction of the railways. That colonial officials believed that these existed is evident from
contemporary discussion. Harry Johnston, an avid colonizer of Africa noted in 1889 (quoted
in McPhee, 1936, p. 111)

            “There is no civiliser like the railway, and to build a railway through an uncivi-
         lized country is to centuple its existing trade, or to create commerce if none exists:
         the railway saps race prejudices and dissolves fanaticism.”

       His views are echoed in many places and McPhee (1926, pp. 126-127) even argues that

            “Slavery in Northern Nigeria found its chief buttress in the demand for cheap
         transport in a region where animal transport was not feasible on account of the
         tse-tse fly .. the Government built railways, and slave carriage died a natural death,
         because it became uneconomical.”

       Lugard (1922, p. 463) also observed about the construction of the railway in Nigeria that “it
has killed the slave trade” and Knowles (1928, pp. 138-152) extensively discusses externalities
flowing from railway construction.
  11
    Indeed, it is not just that the colonial administration regulated prices, they also regulated other activities in
ways which heavily influenced the profitability of the railways. For example in 1936 the Gold Coast government
passed Ordinance 38 which prevented the carriage by roads of key export goods, such as cocoa and also key
imports because road transportation was competing with the railways. Sierra Leone adopted a similar measure
the following year (Ordinance 6 of 1937) (see Hailey, 1938, pp. 1559-1560 and Church, 1956).


                                                         14
   Nevertheless, despite these caveats, in the absence of sufficient data to calibrate a general
equilibrium model, the social savings methodology does present us with a simple method of
looking at the economic impact of the railways and since these caveats apply to all such
studies the comparison between our results and those of others is interesting. To apply this
methodology we also follow the simplest approach of Fogel (1964) in assuming a zero elasticity
of demand for transportation services. Maybe more important in the present context we assume
that in the counter factual scenario where the freight hauled by the railways was carried by
head porter we assume that there was no impact on the labor market so that we can use
the observed wages to calculate the counter-factual cost of moving the freight by head porter
(hence we are assuming that labor supply is completely inelastic).

4.1   Results from the Gold Coast

Table 2 presents some basic data on the Gold Coast railways for the three dates of interest. In
1909 there was just 168 miles of track open from Secondi on the coast up to the Asante capital
of Kumase. By 1924-25 this had expanded to 394 miles since there was now a railway linking
Kumase to the colonial capital Accra and by 1934-35 there were 500 miles as the grid had
been extended to a number of smaller feeder railways (Gould, 1959, gives a good overview).
Between 1909 and 1924-25 there was a dramatic expansion of the amount of freight hauled
with the number of ton miles expanding by over 1,000%. From there until 1934-35 there was
a contraction however, no doubt representing the impact of the great depression since the
economic collapse in Britain and elsewhere severely restricted the demand for tropical exports.
The data for total passenger miles in less complete unfortunately and does not exist for the
earlier date (or those near it) and we only have the breakdown into different classes for the year
1924-25. We also record here total freight and passenger receipts, which rose sharply but then
fell quite significantly between 1924-25 and 1934-35. Finally we record total capital outlays to
date for the three dates.
   Table 3 contains our three sets of estimates of social savings from freight for 1909, 1924-
1925 and 1934-35. In all columns the first set of calculations relate to our direct measure of the
relative costs of the different methods of transportation. The first row reports total ton miles
of freight transported in the different years taken from Table 2. The second row contains the
information from Table 2 on total freight revenues. The third row shows how much it would
have cost to move the observed ton miles of freight by head porters, given our assumptions that



                                               15
a head porter walked 15miles a day and could carry 60lbs (there are 2,240 lbs in a British ton).
As discussed above for the first two columns we assume a wage rate of 9d. per day increasing
to 2s. 6d. a day in 1934-35. The social savings are then simply the difference between lines
3 and 2. In all cases these are positive, suggesting that the introduction of the railways did
indeed increase national income. To get some sense of how big quantitatively these numbers
are in row 5 we record our estimates of nominal GDP and the final row shows the measured
social savings as a % of GDP. In 1909 as the railway was getting underway this was negligible,
but by 1924-25 it was up to 5.9% with the number increasing further, mostly as a consequence
of the assumed rise in head porter wages, to 7.8% of GDP. The numbers are not enormously
large but are nevertheless significant.
   In Table 4 we calculate the social savings from passenger transportation. For 1924-25 and
1934-35 the colonial sources record the total passenger miles travelled. The second row then
calculates the total time that was used up in moving these passengers by rail based on the
assumption that trains moved at 15 miles per hour. We then compare this to the amount of
time it would have taken for passengers to walk this far on foot, rather than by train, on the
assumption that they could walk at 2 miles per-hour. The third row shows how long it would
have taken by foot, clearly much longer than it would have taken by rail. To calculate the
social savings we then value the time difference using different wage rates, 1d. per hour for
1909 and 1924-25 and 1.33d. per hour for 1934-35, as we mentioned above. Row 5 shows the
value of the time saved by being able to move people by rail instead of them having to walk.
To calculate the social savings we compare this to total passenger revenues in the next line. It
is clear that revenues were actually greater than the value of the time saved suggesting that
the benefit of moving the people by rail did not compensate for the extra cost of doing so,
hence the social savings are negative.

4.2   Results from Sierra Leone

Table 5 mimics for Sierra Leone the structure of Table 2 above. By 1911 the railway in Sierra
Leone was 211 miles, longer than the amount of track open in the Gold Coast, but then it
grew much slower. Row 3 also shows that the growth in freight haulage was also much lower.
Though in 1911 the Sierra Leone railway hauled more freight than the Gold Coast railway
by 1925 it was hauling less than 1/4 of the Gold Coast railway. This is a reflection of the
rapid expansion of the cocoa economy in the Gold Coast over this period a development which



                                              16
had no analogy in Sierra Leone. The railway also moved far fewer passengers, about 1/3 by
the mid 1920s a pattern which, like the relative freight haulage, continued into the 1930s.
Unsurprisingly, freight revenues were far lower in Sierra Leone.
   These differences partially show up in Table 6 in the sense that total social savings in
pounds are considerably lower by the mid 1920s in Sierra Leone and also round about one half
the size relative to GDP (we do not have estimates for GDP in Sierra Leone in 1911).
   In Table 7 we move to the social savings for passengers in Sierra Leone. The findings here
are very similar to those for the Gold Coast. Social savings are negative but basically zero,
as they were in Table 4. The methodology is identical except that we apply the wage rate of
1.22d. per hour to the last column to reflect the increase in nominal wages between the mid
1920s and the mid 1930s.

4.3   Results from Nigeria

Table 8 then records the basic data from Nigeria. Though in 1909 the length of track open
in Nigeria was a bit more than Sierra Leone and around 2/3 greater than in the Gold Coast,
it is already evident that Nigerian railways were much more active. The freight ton millage
compared to Sierra Leone, for example, is about 3 times as great and freight revenues about
double. This divergence becomes even greater by 1924-25. The amount of tons miles of freight
is over 20 times that of Sierra Leone and over 5 times that of the Gold Coast and this gap is
even bigger by 1934-35. By this time there were 2,184 miles of track open in Nigeria, over 4
times the amount in the Gold Coast and about 6 1/2 times the track length of Sierra Leone.
   Table 9 reports the basic social savings calculations for freight. In absolute value these are
much larger than those of either the Gold Coast or Sierra Leone and are 12.7% of GDP in
1909. Nevertheless, after that they drop to very similar levels to those we have seen in Sierra
Leone.
   Table 10 then examines the social savings associated with passenger travel. The findings
here are very similar to those from the Gold Coast and Sierra Leone, though for 1934-35 we
do actually find positive, though very small, social savings on passenger transportation.
   Finally to give some comparative context, Table 11, adapted from Leunig (2010, Table 1, p.
791) records some benchmark estimates of the social savings of railways in different countries
of the world using the same methodology that we have used here (particularly assuming zero
elasticity of demand for transportation services so that the actual amount of passengers and



                                              17
freight moved by the railways is what is moved by the less efficient method of transportation).
This shows that the types of numbers we have found are quite normal in this literature though
actually much less than the numbers Summerhill himself calculated for Brazil where social
savings were not less than 18% of GDP and quite likely more. Similarly, Coatsworth (1979)
found even larger numbers for Mexico in 1910. Both scholars attributed the size of these
numbers to the very inefficient alternative means of transport. Since neither Mexico nor Brazil
had a canal system like the US freight had to be moved by very inefficient (according to
their calculations) mule cart. Fogel himself argued that in the US social savings might be
as high as 30% of GDP were it not for the canal system. Hence one might have anticipated
that head porterage would have been even less efficient than mule pulled carts so perhaps the
relatively small size of our numbers is quite surprising. One likely reason is that the ability of
both pre-colonial African rulers and colonial governments to coerce labor into head porterage
at below market prices (something strongly suggested by the evidence) made head porterage
cheaper than it would have been if wages had been at market clearing levels. There were no
mechanisms of this type of keep down the costs of alternative methods of transportation in
Brazil and Mexico.

4.4   Social Savings from other Forms of Transportation

Having made these calculations for the railways we can make some simpler calculations for other
forms of transportation. From Table 12 we do have some estimates of the cost per ton mile of
using simpler methods of transportation, in particular barrel rolling, hand cart and motor lorry.
Using the data from the 1909 Parliamentary Report on these issues we can investigate the social
savings of using these other methods of transportation compared to head porterage. We do
this just for the Gold Coast. To calculate the social savings associated with barrel rolling, for
example, we take the mid-point of the estimate presented in the Parliamentary Report on the
cost per-ton mile of barrel rolling and assume that all of the freight moved by the railway was
moved by barrel rolling (with the usual zero elasticity of demand for freight and zero supply of
labor assumptions). These simple calculations suggest that all forms of wheeled transportation
created positive social savings though the numbers are modest expressed relative to GDP.




                                               18
5    The Social Rate of Return

We now turn to a different way of looking at this issue. Instead of asking what the social
savings associated with the construction of railways was we ask what the social rate of return
was. We can do this in the case of railway construction since we have detailed knowledge of the
capital expenditures involved in building the railways. This methodology has the advantage
that it explicitly takes into account the capital expenditures associated with the construction
of the railways, a bone of contention in the literature. The construction of these numbers is
straightforward since the social rate of return of the railways in any particular year is simply
the social savings in that year plus the net railway revenues distressed as a percentage of the
capital outlays to date. The findings of this calculation are reported in Table 13 and are
very striking. They show that the social rate of return was remarkably high in these West
African colonies, around 100% in Nigeria suggesting that the social savings in a single year
were sufficient to cover the entire capital outlays until then. To give some sense of how large
this is Summerhill (2003) found social rates of return of Brazilian railways of between 17 and
23% depending on various assumptions about the extent of social savings while Maurer and
Yu (2011) recently calculated the social rate of return on the construction of the Panama canal
to be between 3 and 16% depending on the year.
    How could it be that while social savings are so modest, the social rate of return is so high?
The obvious answer to this is that quite contrary to the argument that it was expensive to build
railways in the forest zone of West Africa, in fact it was remarkably cheap by international
standards. Possibly this is not that surprising. Though one did have to cut down trees, West
Africa is mostly very flat and in all the three cases we consider there was not the problem of
bridging large rivers (the railways skirted or went around what large rivers there were, such as
the Volta or Niger). This topic deserves further investigation.


6    What Stopped Technology Adoption?

If wheeled transportation, particularly railways, was economically efficient, why did Africa
societies not adopt it? Part of the explanation for this stems from the nature of Africa polities.
In Sierra Leone, for example, Abraham (2003) shows how the south of the country, Mendeland,
was divided into a system of nine competing and warring states in the second half of the 19th
Century. He makes a distinction between territorial states, which had well defined territories,



                                               19
such as the Sherbro, Lugbu, Gallinas, Bumpeh and Kpaa-Mende states, and which were not
identified with a single person, and the Hegemonies, such as the Tikongoh state of Makavoray
and the Luawa state of Kai Londo, which were. Nevertheless, even the territorial states were
not bureaucratized and did not collect systematic taxes from their inhabitants, though they did
collect tribute and organize compulsory labor and armies. It is difficult to imagine that these
states could have cooperated sufficiently to create a large scale public works like a railway,
even had they been able to raise the capital and attract the expertise. This lack of political
centralization in much of Sub-Saharan Africa is plausibly part of the explanation for why
railways were not built (though it does not explain the lack of use of much simpler wheeled
technologies).
   Nevertheless, this explanation can hardly apply to larger more bureaucratized and consol-
idated African states such as Asante and Ethiopia (see Warner, 1999, Hopkins, 2000a,b). In
both these cases we have direct evidence relevant to the issue since Asante made a belated
attempt to construct a railway to Kumase, and Ethiopia did build a railway.
   In the case of Asante Wilks notes “ from the reign of Mensa Bonsu onwards, the Asante
government began to explore the possibilities of utilizing European capital and skills to create
a railroad system in Asante” (1989, p. 41). Asantehene Mensa Bonsu came to the throne
in 1874 and ruled until being deposed in 1883 being replaced by Agyeman Prempe in 1888.
Prempe’s chief of his ‘foreign affairs bureau’ was John Owusu Ansa who took up the task of
developing a railway. To this aim he proposed setting up the ‘Ashanti and Prah mining and
Trading Company’. On April 26 1892 the Asantehene signed an agreement with Dr. J.W.
Herivel to start the company which was to finance and manage the construction of railroads in
cooperation with the Asante government which even agreed to immediately supply 400 laborers
to begin laying track. As Wilks notes

         “Governor Griffith of the Gold Coast viewed the project with considerable
     alarm, and deemed it expedient to deter Herivel from pressing forward with a
     scheme which might greatly have strengthened the Asante economy. In 1893 the
     actual agreement between the Asantehene and Herivel was impounded by the High
     Court of the Gold Coast, and Herivel was harassed by the Customs Department
     until finally in 1894 he was obliged to abandon the scheme,” (1989, p. 636).

   This set-back did not deter the Asantahene however. In early 1895 he sent and embassy
headed by Ansa to London. In October they entered into an agreement with George Reckless

                                              20
giving him “a Charter for the opening up of Ashantee to British enterprise and skill” (Wilks,
1989, p. 650). Part of what Reckless agreed to do was to build a railway from the coast to
Kumase. As Wilks puts it “Chamberlain’s reaction was to refuse to accept the validity of the
concession” (!989, p. 652). Ansa responded by hiring a barrister and Chamberlain was forced
to concede the Charter was legal. Nevertheless, before Ansa was even on the boat back to West
Africa Chamberlain cabled Governor Maxwell to inform him “expedition must go Kumasi at
all events” (Wilks, 1989, p. 655). British military intervention blocked any last chance of
autonomous adoption of the railway.
   The evidence from Asante suggests that one reason that African states did not adopt
railways in the 19th century was perhaps precisely because they were economically efficient.
European powers, embarked on colonial expansion had an interest in blocking the diffusion of
technology to places they considered might be valuable colonies. The modernization of Asante
would have made it more difficult to colonize and so was opposed by the British colonial office.
This mechanism seems likely to have operated quite widely in the 19th century.
   The case of Ethiopia is just as revealing about the mechanisms which stopped African
states building railways in the 19th century and independently paints a picture which is very
consistent with the evidence from Asante (see Gilmour, 1906, for an entertaining contemporary
account). Plans to build a railway from the coast to the capital city of Addis Ababa moved
forward the moment that Menelik II came to the throne in 1889. In February 1893 Menelik
empowered one of his advisers to create a company and Leon Chefneux, a French trader who
had been living in Ethiopia since 1882 was sent to Europe to look for capital to build a railway
between Djibouti, in French Somaliland, and Addis Ababa. By this time the Italians has
already declared Ethiopia to be a protectorate of Italy, which made it difficult to raise capital
and which also made the French government reluctant to allow the railway to be constructed
across French territory. However, the military defeat of the Italians by the Ethiopians at the
battle of Adowa in 1896 solved these problems. There was a great deal of internal opposition
to the railways however. Ras Makonnen, a leading aristocrat told Menelik “When the railway
reaches Harar, Harar will no longer be yours and when it reaches Addis Ababa, Shoa will no
longer be yours” (Pankhurst, 1968, p. 307). A British diplomat Gleichen recorded that “a large
number of the chiefs ... strongly object to such a new fangled idea ...on the grounds that it would
introduce into the country the all-pervading white man” (Pankhurst, 1968, p. 308). Work
began on the line in October of 1897 though it took until July 22, 1901 for the first train to run.



                                                21
At that point the track going inland from Djibouti was 106 kilometers long and had just passed
into Ethiopian territory at Dire Dawa. The fact that the railway was being run by a French
private company was not to the liking of the British, whose colony of Somaliland was just next
to Djibouti. With the encouragement of the colonial office British investors began buying up
shares in the company and in response in 1902 the French government effectively nationalized
it. In the process they unilaterally re-wrote the concessions violating both the original details
and spirit. Menelik was incensed and “the Emperor, arguing that his original concession had
been violated, withdrew various priviledges ... [and he] refused to grant permission to start
on construction of the line between Dire Dawa and the capital” (Pankhurst, 1968, p. 323).
Menelik announced that while he still wanted the railway “he would not permit the line to be
built by a foreign government or by a company controlled by a foreign government” (quoted in
Pankhurst, 1968, p. 323). In response to this various schemes were proposed, for example the
internationalization of the railway and Menelik himself attempted to raise the needed capital
directly. The reasoning behind the French take-over of 1902 surfaced in a remarkably frank
debate in the French Senate on April 1, 1905 when the Comte d’Aunay remarked

         “we were able to cherish the finest hopes for our position in Abyssinia. We had
      the monopoly of the railway which gave us a precious instrument of penetration;
      one could say that the Empire of Menelik would become a colony for us from which
      we could gather the benefits without assuming any of the responsibilities.” (quoted
      in Pankhurst, 1968, p. 327)

   In exasperation in mid 1906 Menelik himself began the construction of the railway from
Addis Ababa to Dire Dawa. In 1908 Chefneux’s company finally went bankrupt. Menelik,
being unable to really build the railway himself gave a second concession to the French and
the French conceded that this could be again a private company run through the Banque de
l’Indo-Chine. The new company was charged with extending the line up to Addis which it
reached in 1917 after the death of Menelik and during the regency of Ras Tafai (later to become
Haile Selassie).
   The evidence from the Ethiopian case is pretty clear that a real problem for African polities
in adopting the modern technology of the railway was that they feared it would accelerate
colonization.




                                               22
7    Conclusions

In this paper we have undertaken some preliminary calculations to examine the economic
benefits of introducing modern methods of transportation into the British West African colonies
of the Gold Coast, Nigeria and Sierra Leone in the early 20th century. We did this in the context
of an academic literature that has argued that the reason that Africans did not adopt modern
technologies, such as wheeled transportation, was that they were not appropriate technologies
given the underlying factor endowments and circumstances. The bulk of the paper focused on
the introduction of railways. Though this is not the cleanest case for examining the economic
rationality of wheeled transportation, it is facilitated by the very rich data which the British
colonial state collected on the construction and operation of the railways. The main question
we ask is whether or not constructing the railways was economically rational compared to
moving goods by head porterage and moving passengers by foot. We tackle this issue in two
ways, first using the social savings approach of Fogel (1964) and secondly by calculating the
social rate of return. Our results are very contrary to the conventional wisdom. Though it is
true that the social savings created by railways were modest compared to estimates of national
income, the more interesting concept, the social rate of return on capital, was very high. In
the case of Nigeria it reached around 100% per annum suggesting that the social savings in
one year were sufficient to cover the entire capital expenditures up until then.
    Moreover, we would argue that in a sense these calculations almost certainly underestimate
the economic impact of the adoption of the railway. This is for the simple reason that the
British colonial government built the railways not simply as an economic activity, but also as
part of a strategy of extending colonial rule. For instance Tsey (1986) points out that the
first railway to be built in the Gold Coast, though it headed north into the Asante goldfields,
which seems economically sensible, was extended to Kumase to allow the British to extent its
military domination into the heart of the Asante state, not from any obvious economic motive.
Similarly in the case of Sierra Leone, when construction of the first railway was started it was
intended to run from Freetown to the north of the country. In 1898 however a massive rebellion
“The Hut Tax Rebellion” (known in modern Sierra Leone as the Bai Bureh War) broke out.
Though it started in the north it was most intense and started longest in Mendeland in the
south. When the rebellion was defeated the British changed the route of the railway line and
instead of going north it went south right into the heart of Mendeland. To the extent that
military and strategic factors were important in determining the routes the railways took, and


                                               23
to the extent that the relevant economic fundamentals were not perfectly correlated with the
political fundamentals that made some places harder to govern, this implies that the railways
could not have been built in the most sensible places from an economic point of view. Therefore
our findings surely underestimate the economic potential for railway construction.
    Nevertheless, the fact that railways were economically efficient but not adopted by Africans
does not imply in any sense that Africans were irrational or not able to calculate according
to the relevant costs and benefits. In fact, in the case of railways, we showed that there were
three circumstances which inhibited African polities from adopting such technologies. First,
when there was little political centralization (so that private costs and benefits diverged from
social costs and benefits); second, when technology adoption was blocked by potential colonial
powers who did not want autonomous African development; third, when the African polity
itself feared that railway construction would itself accelerate colonization.


8    References

Abraham, Arthur (2003) An Introduction to the Pre-Colonial History of the Mende of
Sierra Leone, Lewiston: The Edwin Mellor Press.
    Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James A. Robinson (2001) “The Colo-
nial Origins of Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation,” American Economic
Review, December, 91, 5, 1369-1401.
    Acemoglu, Daron and Fabrizio Zilibotti (2001) “Productivity Differences,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 116, 563-606.
    Akurang-Parry, Kwabena O. (2000) “Colonial Forced Labor Policies for Road-Building
in Southern Ghana and International Anti-Forced Labor Pressures, 1900-1940,” African Eco-
nomic History, 28, 1-25.
    Alldridge, T.J. (1910) A Transformed Colony: Sierra Leone as it was, and as it is, its
progress, peoples, native customs and undeveloped wealth, London: Seeley and Co. Limited.
    Austen, Ralph A. and Daniel Headrick (1983) “The Role of Technology in the
African past,” African Studies Review, 26, 163-184.
    Austin, Gareth (2008) “Resources, techniques, and strategies south of the Sahara: re-
vising the factor endowments perspective on African economic development, 1500–2000,” Eco-
nomic History Review, 61, 587-624.
    Basu, Susanto and David N. Weil (1998) “Appropriate Technology and Growth,”


                                               24
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113, 1025-1054.
   Bulliet, Richard W. (1975) The Camel and the Wheel, Cambridge: Harvard University
Press.
   Church, R. J. Harrison (1956) “The transport pattern of British West Africa,” in R.
W. Steel and C. A. Fisher eds. Geographical essays on British tropical lands, London: G.
Philip.
   Church, R. J. Harrison (1980) West Africa : a study of the environment and of man’s
use of it, Edition: 8th ed. New York: Longman.
   Clifford, Sir Hugh (1920) The Gold Coast Regiment in the East African campaign,
London: J. Murray.
   Coatsworth, John H. (1979) “Indispensable railroads in a backward economy: the case
of Mexico,” Journal of Economic History, 39(4), 939–960.
   Coquery-Vidrovitch, Catherine and Paul E. Lovejoy eds. (1985) The Workers of
African Trade, Beverly Hills: Sage Publications.
   Crafts, Nicholas F.R. (2004) “Social Savings as a Measure of The Contribution of a
New Technology to Economic Growth,” London School of Economics, Department of Economic
History, Working Paper No. 06/04
   Fishlow, Albert (1965) American Railroads and the Transformation of the Antebellum
Economy, Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
   Fogel, Robert W. (1964) Railroads and American Economic Growth: Essays in Econo-
metric History, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
   Fogel, Robert W. (1979) “Notes on the Social Saving Controversy,” Journal of Economic
History, 39, 1-54.
   Gilmour, T. Lennox (1906) Abyssinia: The Ethiopian Railway and the Powers, London:
Alston Rivers Ltd..
   Government of the Gold Coast (1909) “Report of the General Manager upon the
Government Railways,” Accra: Government Printers.
   Government of the Gold Coast (1926) “Gold Coast Railway Administrative Report
for the Year 1924-1925,” Accra: Government Printers.
   Government of the Gold Coast (1935) “Gold Coast Railway Administrative Report
for the Year 1934-1935, Accra: Government Printers.
   Government of Nigeria (1909) “Lagos Railway Annual Report 1909,” Lagos: Govern-



                                             25
ment Printers.
   Government of Nigeria (1925) “Nigerian Railway and Udi Coalmines Administrative
Report for the Year ending 31st March 1925,” Lagos: Government Printers.
   Government of Nigeria (1935) “Annual Report on the Government Railway and Col-
liery of Nigeria for the Financial Year ending 31st March 1935,” Lagos: Government Printers.
   Government of Sierra Leone (1911) “Report on the Transport Department for the
Year 1911,” Freetown: Government Printers.
   Government of Sierra Leone (1925) “Sierra Leone Railway Administrative Report for
the Year 1925,” Freetown: Government Printers.
   Government of Sierra Leone (1935) “Sierra Leone Railway Administrative Report for
the Year 1935,” Freetown: Government Printers.
   Gould, Peter R. (1959) Transportation in Ghana, Northwestern University, Studies in
Geography No. 5.
   Hailey, Lord (1938) An African Survey, London: Oxford University Press.
   Hall, Robert E. and Charles I. Jones (1999) “Why Do Some Countries Produce So
Much More Output per Worker than Others?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114, 83-116.
   Herbst, Jeffrey I. (2000) States and Power in Africa, Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
   Hill, Polly (1972) Rural Hausa: a Village and a Setting, New York: Cambridge University
Press.
   Hopkins, Anthony G. (1973) An Economic History of West Africa, New York; Addison
Wesley Longman.
   Hopkins, Anthony G. (2000a) “Asante and the Victorians: Transition and Partition
on the Gold Coast,” in Roy Bridges ed., Imperialism, Decolonization, and Africa (London),
25-64.
   Hopkins, Anthony G. (2000b) “Quasi-States, Weak States, and the Partition of Africa,”
Review of International Studies, 26, 311-20.
   House of Commons (1904) “Papers Relating to the Construction of the Railways in
Sierra Leone, Lagos and the Gold Coast, Cd. 2325.
   House of Commons (1909) “Mechanical Transport in the Colonies,” Cd. 4589.
   House of Commons (1924) “Private Enterprise in British Tropical Africa,” Cmd. 2016.
   Jedwab, Remi and Alexander Moradi (2011) “Revolutionizing Transport: Modern



                                               26
Infrastructure, Agriculture and Development in Ghana,” Unpublished.
    Knowles, Lilian C.A. (1928) The Economic Development of the British Overseas Em-
pire, London: George Routledge & Sons Ltd.
    Law, Robin C. (1980) “Wheeled Transportation in Pre-Colonial West Africa,” Africa,
50, 249-262.
    Leunig, Timothy (2010) “Social Savings,” Journal of Economic Surveys, 24(5), 775–800.
    Lovejoy, Paul E. (1980) Caravans of kola: the Hausa kola trade, 1700-1900, Zaria:
Ahmadu Bello University Press Ltd.
    Lugard, Frederick (1922) The Dual Mandate in British Tropical Africa, London: William
Blackwood and Sons.
    Mann, Kristin (1995) “Owners, Slaves and the Struggle for Labour in the commercial
transition at Lagos,” in Robin C. Law ed. From Slave Trade to ‘Legitimate’ Commerce: The
Commercial Transition in Nineteenth-Century Africa, New York: Cambridge University Press.
    Mason, Michael (1978) “Working on the Railway: Forced Labor in Northern Nigeria,”
in Peter C.W. Gutkind, Robin Cohen and Jean Copans eds. African Labor History, Beverly
Hills.
    Maurer, Noel and Carlos Yu (2011) The Big Ditch: How America Took, Built, Ran
and Ultimately Gave Away the Panama Canal, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
    McPhee, Allan (1926) The Economic Revolution in British West Africa, London: George
Routledge & Sons.
    O’Brien, Patrick K. (1977) The new economic history of the railways, London: Croom
Helm.
    Ogunremi, Deji (1975) “Human Porterage in Nigeria in the Nineteenth Century,” Jour-
nal of the Historical Society of Nigeria, 8, 37-45.
    Ogunremi, Gabriel (1982) Counting the Camels: The Economics of Transportation in
Pre-Industrial Nigeria, New York: Nok Publishers International.
    Ormsby-Gore, W.G.A. (1926) Report by The Hon. W.G.A. Ormsby-Gore, M.P. on
his Visit to West Africa during the Year 1926, London: H.M. Stationary Office.
    Oyemakinde, Wale (1974) “Railways Construction and Operation in Nigeria, 1895-1911:
Labour Problems and Socio-Economic Impact,” Journal of the Historical Society of Nigeria,
7, 303-324.
    Pankhurst, Richard (1968) Economic History of Ethiopia 1800-1935, Addis Ababa:



                                               27
Haile Selassie I University Press.
   Piggott, Stuart (1983) The Earliest Wheeled Transport from the Atlantic Coast to the
Caspian Sea, Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
   Reid, Richard J. (2002) Political Power Pre Colonial Buganda: Economy Society And
Warfare, Oxford: James Currey.
   Rockel, Stephen J. (2006) Carriers of culture: labor on the road in nineteenth-century
East Africa, Portsmouth: Heinemann.
   Shelford, F. (1920) “Transport in Africa by Road, Rail, Air and Water,” Journal of the
African Society, 19, 165-175.
   Summerhill, William R. (2003) Order Against Progress: Government, Foreign Invest-
ment, and railroads in Brazil, 1854-1913, Stanford: Stanford University Press.
   Swindell, Ken (1992) “The Struggle for Transport Labor in Northern Nigeria, 1900-1912:
A Conflict of Interests,” African Economic History, 20, 137-159.
   Szereszewski, R. (1965) Structural Changes in the Economy of Ghana, 1891-1911, Lon-
don: Weidenfeld and Nicholson.
   Thomas, Roger G. (1973) “Forced Labour in British West Africa: The Case of the
Northern Territories of the Gold Coast 1906-1927, Journal of African History, 14, 79-103.
   Tsey, Christian E. (1986) Gold Coast Railways: the Making of a Colonial Economy,
1879-1929, (University of Glasgow PhD thesis, 1986).
   Warner, Carolyn M. (1999) “The Political Economy of ‘Quasi-Statehood’ and the
Demise of 19th-Century African Politics,” Review of International Studies, 25, 233-55.
   Wilks, Ivor (1989) Asante in the Nineteenth Century, 2nd Edition, New York: Cam-
bridge University Press.




                                             28
   Table 1: Some Contemporary Estimates of the Relative Cost of
 different methods of transportation (cost in shillings and pence per
                               ton mile)
                       House of         Ormsby-Gore        Ogunremi
                 Commons (1909)             (1926)           (1982)
Cask Rolling    1s.21/2 d. – 1s.11d.
Hand Trucks                   1s. 10d
Head Porterage            3s.1d – 5s.           2s.6d.     1s.10d. – 2s.
Motor Lorry                     1s.8d.                1s.
Railway                                              2d.
Donkey                                              11d.      9d. – 10d.
          Table 2: Some Basic Data on the Gold Coast Railways
                                    1909       1924-25     1934-1935

Mile of Track open                 168          394          500

Total freight hauled (tons)      56, 454      796,888      730,382

Total freight in ton miles      3,763,552   43,170,885   42,952,026

Total Passengers moved           215,729     1,487,164    1,822,093

First Class                                   14,851

Second Class                                  21,988

Third Class                                  1,450,325

Total passenger miles                       41,751,573   44,704,654

Total Freight Revenues (₤)       146,845      850,238      633,525

Total Passenger Revenues ₤)       38,565      214,703      150,840

Total Expenditures (₤)            73,914      568,012      487,530

Total Capital Outlays (₤)       1,808,323    7,419,086    9,241,698
     Table 3: Estimates of Social Savings from Freight in the Gold Coast
                                         1909        1924-25       1934-35

Total Freight ton miles              3,763,552    43,170,885    42,952,026

Total Freight Revenues (₤)            146,845       850,238       633,525

Total cost of Head Porterage (₤)      344,992      3,957,331     5,369,003

Social Saving (₤)                     198,147      3,107,093     4,735,478

GDP (in current ₤)                  26,266,269    53,108,142    61,068,569

Freight Social Saving                   0.8           5.9           7.8
(as a % of GDP)
Table 4: Estimates of the Social Savings from Passengers in the Gold Coast
                                                1909 1924-25 1934-35

Total passenger miles                                 41,751,573    44,704,654

Total time required to travel by rail                  2,783,438     2,980,310
(at 15 miles per-hour) (hours)

Total time required to travel by foot                 20,875,786    22,352,327
(at 2 miles per hour) (hours)

Travel time saved (hours)                             18,092,348    19,372,017

Value of Time Saved (₤)                                   85,939       118,653

Total Passenger Revenues (₤)                 38,565      214,703       150,840

Passenger Social Saving (₤)                             -128,764       -32,186

GDP (in current ₤)                      26,266,269    53,108,142    61,068,569

Passenger Social Saving                                     -0.24        -0.05
(as a % of GDP)
            Table 5: Some Basic Data on the Sierra Leone Railways
                                     1911            1925         1935

Mile of Track open                      255.5           338              341

Total freight hauled (tons)            55,540        72,298         71,628

Total freight in ton miles          5,971,693     9,437,472     10,569,611

Total Passengers moved                339,332       587,944       450,707

Total passenger miles                            11,047,266     11,377,080

Total Freight Revenues (₤)             82,086       167,687       107,868

Total Passenger Revenues (₤)           22,644        52,305         28,383

Total Expenditures (₤)                 69,503       176,482       128,862

Total Capital Outlays (₤)             989,194     1,359,680      6,994,715
     Table 6: Estimates of the Social Savings from Freight in Sierra Leone
                                       1911           1925            1935

Total Freight ton miles            5,971,693       9,437,472      10,569,611

Total Freight Revenues (₤)           82,086         167,687        107,868

Total cost of Head Porterage (₤)    547,405         865,102       1,189,081

Social Saving (₤)                   474,774         697,415       1,081,213

GDP (in current ₤)                                25,444,186     32,818,287

Social Saving as a % of GDP                           2.7            3.3
     Table 7: Estimates of the Social Savings from Passengers in Sierra Leone
                                             1911         1925           1935

Total passenger miles                                  11,047,266    11,377,080

Total time required to travel by rail                      736,484       758,472
(at 15 miles per-hour) (hours)

Total time required to travel by foot                  5,523,633     5,688,540
(at 2 miles per hour) (hours)

Travel time saved (hours)                                4,787,149   4,930,068

Value of Time Saved (₤)                                  19,946        25,061

Total Passenger Revenues (₤)               22,644        52,305        28,383

Passenger Social Saving (₤)                             -32,359        -3,321

GDP (in current ₤)                                     25,444,186    32,818,287

Passenger Social Saving                                   -0.13        -0.001
(as a % of GDP)
                Table 8: Some Basic Data on Nigerian Railways
                                          1909    1924-25       1934-35

Mile of Track open                        272          1,220          2,184

Total freight hauled (tons)           165,150        680,107       866,681

Total freight in ton miles         16,024,024    218,427,093    293,186,018

Total Passengers moved                285,202      1,922,580      5,080,016

Total passenger miles              13,353,158     92,283,840    148,165,399

Total Freight Revenues (₤)            154,126      1,736,194      1,721,825

Total Passenger Revenues (₤)           46,387        290,639       230,270

Total Expenditures (₤)                131,820        970,446      1,038,758

Total Capital Outlays (₤)           1,377,284     14,978,225     23,014,851
          Table 9: Estimates of the Social Savings from Freight in Nigeria
                                                1909    1924-25         1934-35

Total Freight ton miles               16,024,024     218,427,093    293,186,018

Total Freight Revenues (₤)              154,126       1,736,194       1,721,825

Total cost of Head Porterage (₤)       1,468,869      20,022,480     24,432,170

Social Saving (₤)                      1,314,743      18,286,286     22,710,340

GDP (in current ₤)                    105,316,616    300,260,499    300,859,733

Social Saving as a % of GDP               1.2             6.1            7.5
         Table 10: Estimates of the Social Savings from Passengers in Nigeria
                                              1909         1924-25        1934-35

Total passenger miles                     13,353,158      92,283,840    148,165,399

Total time required to travel by rail         890,211      6,152,256      9,877,693
(at 15 miles per hour) (hours)

Total time required to travel by foot       6,676,579     46,141,920     74,082,699
(at 2 miles per hour) (hours)

Travel time saved (hours)                   5,786,368     39,989,664     64,205,006

Value of Time Saved (₤)                        24,109        166,624        238,094

Total Passenger Revenues (₤)                   46,387        290,639        230,270

Passenger Social Saving (₤)                   -22,277       -124,015          7,824

GDP (in current ₤)                       105,316,616    300,260,499     300,859,733

Passenger Social Saving                         -0.02          -0.04          0.003
(as a % of GDP)
           Table 11: Estimates of Social Savings for Various Countries
Belgium
             1846          Freight and passenger          1%
             1865          Freight and passenger          2.5%
             1912          Freight and passenger          4.5%
Brazil
             1913                 Freight                 18%-38%
                                 Passengers               4.6%
China
             1933          Freight and passenger          0.5%
Colombia
             1924                 Freight                 4.8%
England and Wales
             1865                 Freight                 4.1%
             1890                 Freight                 29.1%-31.6%
        1843-1913                Passengers               1.5%-14%
France
             1872                 Freight                 5.8%
                                 Passengers               1.7%
Germany
            c1900                 Freight                 <5%
Mexico
             1910                 Freight                 24.9%-38.5%
Russia
             1907                 Freight                 4.6%
                                 Passengers               1.6%
Spain
             1878                 Freight                 7.5%
             1912                 Freight                 11%
USA
             1859                 Freight                 3.7%
             1859                Passengers               1.6%
             1890                 Freight                 4.9%
             1890                Passengers               4.8%
  Table 12: Implied Social Savings relative to Head
  Porterage of different methods of transportation in
                1909 in the Gold Coast
Total freight carried by the railways       3,763,552
(in ton miles)

GDP (in current ₤)                       26,266,269

Total cost of Head Porterage (₤)            760,551

Total Cost of Cask Rolling (£)              258,744

Social Savings of Cask Rolling (£)          501,807

Relative to GDP (%)                              1.9

Total cost of Hand Trucks (₤)               344,992

Social Savings of Hand Trucks (₤)           415,559

Relative to GDP (%)                              1.6

Total cost of Motor Lorry (₤)               313,629

Social Savings of Motor Lorry (₤)           446,922

Relative to GDP (%)                              1.7
               Table 13: Social Rates of Return %
                   1909/1911        1924-25       1934-1935

Gold Coast            11.0           41.9          51.2

Sierra Leone          48.0           51.3          15.5

Nigeria               95.5          122.0          98.7
         Table 14: Estimates of Social Rates of Return (%) for Various Countries
   Country/year       Social Rate of Return (%)                     Source
Brazil
       1913a                  17.9-23.1           Summerhill (2005, p. 87, Table 7).
England and Wales
                                                  Constructed from Hawke (1970, p. 406,
                                                  Table XV.01, column 5) and Kenwood
       1854b                     13.58            (1965, p. 322, column 1).
       1855                      13.68            ibid.
       1856                      14.61            .
       1857                      14.54            .
       1858                      13.98            .
       1859                      15.15            .
       1860                      16.07            .
       1861                      15.77            .
       1862                      15.51            .
       1863                      15.98            .
       1864                      16.67            .
       1865                      16.46            .
       1866                      17.18            .
       1867                      17.62            .
       1868                      17.91            .
       1869                      18.43            .
       1870                      19.68            .
Mexico
       1881c                      1.8             Coatsworth (1972, p. 141, Table IV.12).
       1882                      10.4             ibid.
       1883                      14.2             .
       1884                       9.7             .
       1885                      18.8             .
       1886                       14              .
       1887                      15.3             .
       1888                      18.9             .
       1889                      20.3             .
        1890                        26.6               .
        1891                        35.9               .
        1892                        34.9               .
        1893                        27.2               .

        1894                        25.3               .
        1895                        29.1               .
        1896                        30.3               .
        1897                        31.6               .
        1898                        33.4               .
        1899                         52
USA
        1859                         15                Fishlow (1965)
                                                       David (1969, p. 522-523), social savings
        1890d                    12.3-15.8             from Fogel (1964)
        1890e                    15.8-20.4             ibid.
Notes: a) Uses demand elasticity of -1. b) See text. c)Refers only to the largest railroad
company. d) Returns net of maintenance expenditures. e) Returns gross of maintenance
expenditures.
Appendix: reconstructing colonial GDP

This appendix describes the procedure we followed to reconstruct the GDP for the Gold Coast,
Sierra Leone and Nigeria. To the best of our knowledge, no other systematic attempts to
reconstruct GDP for the pre-war era have been constructed for these countries, except for the
pioneering work of Szerezsewski (1965). We largely follow his method, which we outline below
for the Gold Coast together with our deviations from his method. We present a full result for
the Gold Coast in 1909 in table A2. Finally, we briefly discuss diffences between reconstructing
Gold Coast GPD and GDP for Sierra Leona and Nigeria.

Szereszewskis work

Szereszewski (1965) tries to understand the structure of the Ghanaian economy to investigate
the process that transformed the Gold Coast from an agricultural society into the largest
cocoa exporter in the world in 1911 . For 1891, 1901, 1911 (coinciding with census years), he
constructs three

     ”...successive accounting models which would assess quantitatively the structural
     changes of the economy over the two decades and the magnitude of its growth” (p.
     128)

He considers an introduced and an indigenous sector, broadly corresponding to the coastal area
and the hinterland in Ghana (and the Colony and Protectorate in Nigeria and Sierra Leone).

Data and methodology

All data are taken from the so-called Blue Books, which are colonial reports submitted to the
British Government (British Government, 1909;1925;1935). These reports contain, aside from
a short descriptive part, data on imports and exports and on government activity. From these
data we constructed an estimate of GDP following a standard GDP from expenditure formula:




                                   Y =C +G+I +E−M                                            (1)

   where Y stands for GDP, C for consumption, G for government expenditure, I for invest-
ment, E for exports and M for imports. We break this formula down into two building blocks,
the introduced part of the economy (G, I, (E − M ) and the introduced part of C) and the

                                              29
                           Table A1: Components of colonial GDP

             Symbol from (1)                         Category
             C                   (2) Private consumption of Imported Goods
                                 (4) Consumption of Public and Related Services
                                 (6) Traditional Consumption
             G                   (3) Consumption of Government Services
             I                   (5) Gross Capital Formation
             E                   (1) Export Production
             M                   (7) Imports of Goods and Non-factor Services


traditional (indigenous) consumption (the indigenous part of C). The letters in equation one
correspond to categories in our GDP calculation (see table A2). Table A1 lists the inputs in
equation one and their equivalents in our calculation. The names of the equivalents have been
chosen to conform to Szereszewski (1965) and to match closely to the Blue Books.
   The indigenous consumption part (category (6)) accounts for the contribution of the in-
digenous population to GDP. Szereszewski computes a typical consumption basket for the
Gold Coast and multiplies this by the population to arrive at the money value of traditional
consumption. This measure is hard to replicate and it isn’t easily transferable across countries.
Therefore, we assume that the minimum unskilled labor daily wage rate is set such that the
population was made indifferent between subsistence farming and unskilled day labor. We then
find the minimum day labor wage from the Blue Books and multiply this with the population
to arrive at a measure of the traditional expenditure on GDP. The other components of our
analysis, the categories in table A1, will be dealt with below.



Export Production

Since exports are paid for from abroad, they add to GDP. The total figures for exports,
including imports duties and c.i.f. (cost, insurance and freight) costs, in one particular year
can be taken directly from the blue books. Overland exports were usually not measured in
any coherent way. Therefore, we confine ourselves to seaborne exports.

Private Consumption of Imported Goods

Szerezsewski computed ratios between the import and the consumption of different classes of
goods. With these ratios and the import figures from the Blue Books we can compute domes-

                                               30
tic consumption of these goods. In the Blue Books, all imported commodities are listed with
their respective import value and are taken from the home consumption categories in the Blue
Books. We have aggregated the individual commodities into five categories; Spirits, Textiles,
Tobacco, Provisions (food, paper, candles etc.) and Miscellaneous (tools, fuel, medicine etc).
From Szerezsewski we take the following conversion factors.


 Spirits, 1.7
 Textiles, 1.6
 Tobacco, 1.6
 Provisions, 1.5
 Miscellaneous, 1.4


   This means that, for instance, in the Gold Coast in 1909 total spirit imports were worth
456.000 pounds and total consumption of spirits was worth 775.200 pounds.

Consumption of Government Services

This category records the expenditures of the government, given directly in the Blue Books.
To this have been added the expenditures of the local governments such as, in the case of the
Gold Coast, the governments in Accra, Cape Coast and Secondi. Traditional government is
not included. Also, government expenditure on construction is considered separately below.

Consumption of Public and Related Services

This category records consumption of the services offered by the Postal Service and the Railway
services. Both quantities can be recorded directly from the blue books. For the Gold Coast in
1909, we were able to include to expenditure on missionary schools as well.

Gross capital formation

As a means of accounting for investment, several capital formation categories are computed.


   Buildings and construction. We have used government expenditure on construction works
as a measure of the capital investment in building and construction. Szereszewski uses the
money value of the imports of building and construction materials times a construction coeffi-
cient meant to capture the relation between the money value of the imports and the eventual
investment value for GDP. He estimates this coefficient at 4. We have used this methodology


                                              31
only for the Gold Coast in 1909, lacking detailed government expenditure data. To the gov-
ernment expenditure on buildings and construction, the government expenditure on railway
plant and rolling stock is added.


   Equipment. Spending on equipment is constructed from the import lists in the Blue Books.
However, only for the Gold Coast in 1909 and Sierra Leone in 1925 could detailed figures on
equipment import be found. For the other country/years the ratio between the construction
spending and equipment spending (0.26) for the Gold Coast in 1909 has been assumed con-
stant and has subsequently been applied to the construction figures to generate the data for
the equipment category.


   Agriculture. Although all agricultural output was created by labor inputs, there is one
category, the establishment of new cocoa farms, that deserves attention. We measure the in-
vestment/expenditure on GDP by the extra acreage of Cocoa planted. The acreage we get
from the tonnage of cocoa exported which is mentioned in the Blue Books. Using the aver-
age yield formula from Szereszewski of 420 lbs. per acre we can compute the total acreage
that was used for growing the exported tonnage of cocoa. This is subsequently multiplied by
the number of days it takes to bring an acre of cocoa to bearing age (170 days, sources are
in Szerezsewski). Finally, we use the unskilled labor wage rate to assign a money value to
these days worked. This gives the money value of the investment needed to grow the exported
quantity of cocoa. This investment is recorded in the year of export, although it was actually
invested seven years before, which is the time it takes for cocoa to grow to maturity. However,
we record expenditures as they enter output, so the data of the year of inquiry can be used to
trace the original investment and assign it to the current year. No other crops or agricultural
investment can be assessed in a similar way.


   Accumulation of specie. The category records the difference between the imports and ex-
ports of specie (foreign currency).


   Changes in stocks of imported goods. This category records the difference between total
imports and the imports cleared through consumption (in the home consumption categories
in the Blue Books). The difference represents the goods stock in warehouses in the ports and



                                               32
includes mainly spirits and textiles and can be seen as an stockpiling investment.



Traditional Consumption

This category records the traditional consumption as outlined above. It uses the population
figures and unskilled wage figures from the Blue Books to assess the money value of the
traditional consumption. We assume that the unskilled wage rate was set such that people
were made indifferent between (subsistence) farming and unskilled labor.

Imports of Goods and non-Factor Services

This category records the money value of imports which are to be deducted from total GDP
since the money to pay for the imports in added to the exporting countrys GDP. Also, the im-
ports of specie are deducted here since they domestic currency to pay for the foreign currency
accrues to the other nations GDP. As a last element, the remunerations for services performed
by firms abroad are added here (f.i. the treatment of soldiers/officers in hospitals in England).


   Table A2 gives a complete reconstruction using the above methodology for the GDP of the
Gold Coast for the fiscal year 1909. This same methodology can be applied, mutatis mutandis,
to Sierra Leone and Nigeria. Their total GDP figures, together with the remaining figures for
the Gold Coast, are given in Table A3.

Nigeria and Sierra Leone

The main differences between the analysis for the gold coast and Sierra Leone and Nigeria
come from two sources. The first source, that applies only to Nigeria, is that Nigeria was
for administrative purposes split in Northern and Southern Nigeria in 1909. GDP figures for
both colonies plus a total are given in Table A3. In 1925 the colonies have merged. The
second source, that applies to both countries, has to do with population figures. In 1909 the
population figures in the Blue Books give only the population figures for the Colony and not
for the protectorate causing an underestimation of total GDP.




                                               33
       Table A2: Estimated Expenditures on GDP - Gold Coast 1909 - in pounds

               Category from Table A1                                           Total
(1) Export Production                                                                2.656.000
Sea-borne                                                   2.656.000
(2) Private Consumption of Imported Goods                                            3.490.178
Spirits                                                       775.200
Textiles                                                    1.048.000
Tobaccos                                                      158.400
Provisions                                                    779.850
Miscellaneous                                                 728.728
(3) Consumption of Government Services                                                  746.000
(4) Consumption of Public and Related Services                                          199.000
Post and Telegraph                                             5.000
Education                                                     12.000
Railway                                                      182.000
(5) Gross Capital Formation                                                             746.240
Buildings and construction                                   820.000
Equipment                                                    512.400
Cocoa                                                              0
Net accumulation of specie                                   133.000
Changes in stock of imported goods                             8.000
(6) Traditional Consumption                                                         20.646.650
(7) Imports of Good and Non-factor Services                                          2.217.800
Sea-borne                                                   2.205.000
Services other than insurance and freight                      12.800
New imports of specie                                         133.000


GDP is the total of categories 1-5 minus 7.
GDP                                                                                 26.266.270
including (6)
GDP                                                                                  5.619.618
excluding (6)


                                                     Total Population   Unskilled wage (pence)
                                                            1.696.985                        8




                                              34
     Table A3: Colonial GDP for the Gold Coast, Nigeria and Sierra Leone, in pounds

                    (Fiscal) Year    GDP with traditional       GDP without    Population   Unskilled wage
                                     consumption                                            rate (pence)
Gold Coast                   1909                  26.266.270      5.619.620    1.696.985               8
Sierra Leone                 1909                   2.330.890      1.398.250      76.655*               8
Nigeria (North)              1909                  94.832.020     29.336.230    6.714.038               9
Nigeria (South)              1909                  10.484.600      9.937.100      60.000*               6
Nigeria (Total)              1909                 105.316.620      39.27.330    6.774.038
Gold Coast                1924/25                  53.108.140     21.913.280    2.279.077               9
Sierra Leone              1924/25                 25.444.1890      4.419.280    1.536.066               9
Nigeria                   1924/25                  300.26.500     14.561.340   18.900.391               9
Gold Coast                1934/35                  61.068.570     17.969.230    3.163.568               9
Sierra Leone              1934/35                  32.818.270      3.233.090    1.768.480              11
Nigeria                   1934/35                 300.859.730     28.225.050   19.918.516               9
*Population without Protectorate (Colony only)




                                                 35
