                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        MONEY AND THE OPEN
                      ECONOMY BUSINESS CYCLE:
                      A FLEXIBLE PRICE MODEL




                         Robert P. Flood


                        Robert J. Hodrick




                      Working Paper No. 1967




                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                             June 1986




We are grateful to the National Science Foundation for its support
of this research through grant #SES-8319460. We also thank the
participants of the 1983 NBER Summer Institute for useful
discussions, especially Robert G. King and Alan C. Stockman, and we
thank the participants in seminars at the University of Chicago,
the University of Western Ontario, the University of Iowa, the
University of California, San Diego, the State University of New
York at Albany, Princeton University, and Northwestern University
for their comments. We are very grateful to Jim Clouse for his
efficient research assistance. The research reported here is part
of the NBER's research program in International Studies. Any opin—
ions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                 Working Paper #1967
                                                 June 1986




                   Money and the Open Economy Business Cycle:
                             A Flexible Price Model




                                    ABSTRACT




       This paper develops an open-economy model of the business cycle. The

  nominal prices in the model are flexible and monetary nonneutrality is

  developed using information confusion about the sources of disturbances to

  demand coupled with differential persistence of demand shocks. Firms use

  inventories to smooth their production, and consumers follow a stochastic

  permanent income expenditure function. The major implication of the model

  is that unperceived monetary disturbances improve the terms of trade and

  increase real output in contrast to sticky price models in which the terms

  of trade deteriorates. This implication of the model is examined

  empirically.




Robert P. Flood                                 Robert 3. Hodrick
Department of Economics                         Kellogg Graduate School
Northwestern University                           of Management
Evanston, IL 60201                              Northwestern University
                                                Evanston, IL 60201
                                    —1—

     This paper develops an open—economy model of the business cycle that may

be useful for distinguishing among the competing explanations of cyclical

fluctuations. As is common with all modern theories of cyclical fluctuations,

we seek an explanation of the observed fluctuations in real income and the

comovements of real income and other aggregate time series that is based on

rational behavior. The main advantage of our framework is its ability to

encompass stylized versions of the most popular business cycle models in a

common framework. This facilitates testing of the implications of the

theories and highlights the additional implications that arise from

development of the model in an open economy setting.

    Most current explanations of business cycles that allow for

nonneutralities of money are of one of two types: (a) the information—

confusion models developed by Lucas (1972, 1975) and based on the Phelps

(1969) "islands" paradigm and (b) the nominal precommitment models based on

the work of Gray (1976), Fischer (1977), and Taylor (1979).1 Although these

models were developed for analysis of hypothetical closed economies,

extensions of the models to open economies followed quite directly. The

information—confusion models were first extended by Leiderman (1979) and early

extensions of the nominal—precommitment models include Turnovsky (1976) and

Flood (1979).2 Unfortunately, the substantive differences between the two

types of models occur in many dimensions other than ,information confusion

versus nominal precommitment. Because the sets of models are not derived from

the same underlying framework but are designed to explain the same set of

empirical regularities, it is difficult to develop a test that can reject one

set of models while failing to reject the other set.

     For this reason our strategy in this paper is to develop an open economy

business cycle model within a class of models capable of encompassing both the
information—confusion models and the nominal—precommitment models. The model

developed here is a flexible price model that is very much in the spirit of

the information—confusion models but without the islands paradigm. The basic

structure of the model, though, is similar to that of Flood and Hodrick (1985)

where nominal precommitments are essential to the monetary portion of the

business cycle. In this paper we develop a model that has monetary

nonneutrality with flexible prices, but it can also he solved with nominal

precommitments. Our goal is to derive restrictions on data that differ across

the models, where the reason for the differing implications is essentially

related to information confusion versus nominal precommitment.




I.   An Informal Preview

     Our model owes much to several recent studies. We use the cost—smoothing

inventor model popularized by Blinder and Fischer (1981) and others as the

center piece of the production side of the model.3 The influence of money on

real economic activity is modeled using information confusion about the

sources of disturbances to demand coupled with the persistence of demand

shocks as suggested by Lucas (1977). The importance of the persistence of

demand shocks arises quite naturally in the cost—smoothing inventory model.

Since firms must meet demand either out of inventories or out of new

production, the persistence of a perceived shock to demand influences the

firms' optimal responses. The more persistent is the perceived disturbance to

demand, the more a firm   responds   with increases in Its relative price and its

output

     The consumer side of the model draws on work by Flavin (1981) on the

permanent income model of consumption. Flavin introduced a transitory
                                    —3--


component to the permanent income consumption function, and this aggregate

disturbance in consumers' tastes between expenditure and saving plays an

important role in our model. As Flavin noted, a disturbance today that causes

consumption to be higher than permanent income depletes assets resulting in

lower permanent income in the future and lower expected future consumption.5

     In addition to the exDenditure shock, we assume that aggregate demand for

the home good contains a random disturbance that shifts demand between home

and foreign goods. In our framework both shocks are white noise, but because

the expenditure shock alters permanent income directly while the relative

demand shock does not, the response of firms to an observed demand shock

composed of the two unobserved disturbances depends on their perceptions of

the composition of the shock. In particular, since a positive expenditure

shock is expected to lower future expenditure and demand directly while a

positive relative demand shock has no direct influence on expected future

demand, the relative demand shock is more persistent than is the expenditure

shock. Consequently, firms react more strdngly with relative prices and

output to a shock perceived to be a relative change in demand between home and

foreign goods than to a shock perceived to he a disturbance to saving and

expenditure.

     Firms are assumed to know actual demand when they make their decisions

for the period, but they do not know the composition of the stochastic

component of demand. They use the information in their environment to infer

values of the two disturbances. In addition to actual demand, firms are

assumed to be able to observe all prices being charged by other firms, both

foreign and domestic, and the quantities being produced by other firms.

     Firms gain additional information from the economy—wide asset markets

that are represented here by an economy—wide money market. There is useful
                                    —4—

additional information in the money market because the demand for money

depends on the total level of expenditure by domestic residents, which in turn

depends on the expenditure shock. Therefore, by combining their observations

on interest rates and prices with the other variables in their information

set, firms obtain a second signal concerning the expenditure disturbance.

     This second signal is not, however, a direct observation of the

expenditure disturbance because it is contaminated with other money market

disturbances——most importantly the money—supply disturbance. Since we assume

that firms do not see the actual money supply used by agents for transactions

immediately, the asset—market signal is known to contain both the expenditure

disturbance and a money—supply disturbance. Both a positive money—supply

disturbance and a negative expenditure disturbance generate incipient excess

supply in the money market and require equilibrating movements in observable

interest rates and prices to bring the money market back to equilibrium.

Since firms do not know the sources of the observed equilibrating movements,

they remain less than completely informed about the expenditure disturbance.

     An unperceived shock to the supply of money has real effects in our model

because firms confuse the movements in interest rates and prices that are due

to the money—supply disturbance with the unobservable expenditure shock. To

understand the effect in more detail, suppose that the three disturbances, the

expenditure shock, the relative demand shock, and the money—supply shock, are

all uncorrelated white noises with zero means and finite variances. In a

typical period some finite value of each disturbance will occur, but for

illustration consider a hypothetical period where the realization of the

expenditure and relative demand disturbances are both zero and the realization

of the money—supply disturbance is positive. From the money market, the firms
                                       —5—

see a signal indicating a corrected excess supply of money. Because rational

agents know that money—supply and expenditure disturbances normally both

occur, the firms attribute part of the signal to a positive money supply

disturbance and part of the signal to a negative expenditure disturbance.

Since both the expenditure and relative demand shocks are actually zero in

this example, the firms also observe that the composite demand shock is

zero. Since the firms believe that the expenditure shock is negative, they

perceive a positive relative demand shock toward the home good that exactly

offsets the perceived negative expenditure shock.

     Because firms respond more with relative price and output the more

persistent is the demand shock, the firms' positive output and price responses

to the comparatively persistent relative demand shock are larger than their

negative relative price and output responses to the perceived negative

expenditure shock. Thus, the firms' overall responses to their perceptIons

are positive relative price and output movements resulting front a positive

money supply disturbance.

    A formal presentation of our results follows in the next three sections

and in the Appendix. In Section II we develop the real side of the model, and

in Section III we present the monetary side of the model and combine the real

and monetary sides of the model to give a complete reduced form solution for

real aggregates. In Section IV we explore empirically the new implication of

our model —   that   monetary shocks are positively correlated with an economy's

terms of trade. This implication stands in contrast to the implication of

sticky—price models such as Dornbusch (1976) and Mussa (1982) and wage

indexing models such as Flood and Marion (1982), where monetary shocks are

negatively correlated with an economy's terms of trade. We present in the
                                       —6—

text only what is required to follow the argument. Most of the formalities

are presented in the Appendix.




II • The Real Side

        Our model is of a medium—sized open economy. The country is large in the

markets for Its own output and' its own money, hut the country is small in the

markets for goods produced abroad. Domestic currency prices of all goods are

endogenous as is the domestic nominal rate of interest and the exchange rate.6

        We assume that J firms in the domestic economy produce output and hold

Inventories of that output. The goods of the firms are slightly

differentiated from each other but possess a meaningful dimension along which

they may be aggregated.7

        The problem facing an individual firm is to maximize the discounted

expected value of its real profits:


                max        E     fRev(t+I) —   Cost(t+i)}o1
             {R
              t+i,Nt+i
                     } i=O                                              (1)


where      is the relative price of the goods produced by firm j at time t In

terms of the domestic price level,           is firm j's stock of inventory at

time t and a is the discount factor.8 The expectation operator conditional on

period t information is Et(.). The revenue of firm j at time t is equal to

the firm's relative price times the demand for its product,

Rev1(t) =          Demand for firm l's product, D, is equal to that firm's

proportionate share of aggregate demand plus a term reflecting a negative

(positive) response by consumers to higher (lower) than average relative price

at firm j:
                                                      —7—



                     =          —            —
                         J'Dt        Jp3(R       R)   ,
                                                          p3< 0,
                                                                                   (2)




where Dt is total demand for domestic output, and R is the average relative
                                                                      t
                                                                               J
price of home goods in terms of the price level,
                                                         i=1
     The total demand for domestic output, Dt, is the sum of domestic demand

and foreign demand. We assume a linar form for aggregate demand,




            Dt
                     Po —      "1t   + )2Xt+ dt ,          > 0, 1 =   0,1,2,       (3)




where X is aggregate real expenditure by domestic residents on all goods and

dt is a white noise demand disturbance between home and foreign goods. It is

assumed that             is determined in accord with Flavin's (1981) development of

Friedman's (1957) permanent income model.9 Flavin (1981) defined permanent

income at time t to be the constant resource. flow that can be expected to be

maintained for the remainder of the individual consumer's infinite horizon

given time t information. If expenditure is set equal to permanent income

plus a disturbance to the expenditure decision, Flavin (1981) demonstrated

that the real expenditure process satisfies




            x x_1 + Ut —               au1 +                                       (4)




where u is the expenditure disturbance at time t which is assumed to be white

noise and        is the revision at time t in the discounted value of real income,



                 =         —
                     (E        E1)(                                                (5)
                                     —8—

Aggregate output at time t is     and we assume that consumers use the same

discount factor as firms, a.

     Notice in (4) that last period's expenditure shock,         lowers current
                                                           U1,
expenditure at the rate a1 as compared with last period's expenditure. If a

positive u1 occurred last period, then expenditure was raised over permanent

income by the amount of that disturbance which lowers future wealth by the

amount of the disturbance. This lowers permanent Income by the real rate of

Interest times the disturbance. Since a' is equal to one plus the real rate

of interest, the period t—1 expendlture• disturbance causes expenditure at t to

be lower than expenditure at t1 by

     The two consumption shocks discussed earlier, the expenditure disturbance

and the relative demand disturbance, are represented by the Ut and the d

shocks, respectively. Notice that when both shocks have the same time series

properties, the dt shock will have a more persistent effect on demand than the

Ut shock because the latter is "corrected" through a uniformly lower expected

future level of expenditure.

     The revision in discounted real income,    in equation (5), is inherently

nonlinear in R and Y. To keep the model linear we use the following

approximation:



          RY
           tt
              =   K
                      0
                          +KR
                            it+KY.
                               2t                                     (6)




     No foreign elements appear explicitly in the demand for home goods. The

relative price term in the demand function should, however, be interpreted as

including both domestic and foreign responses to relative price. The relative

demand disturbance may also be interpreted as including foreign influences.
                                                  —9—

     Each firm's costs in each period consist of two elements, production

costs and inventory—holding costs. Production costs for firm 1 are given by



          C(t) =          +
                              kt   +               +
                                                       (y3/2)(Y)2
                                                                    •
                                                                                    (7)


Inventory—holding costs are




          C'(t)
                  =
                      lNt....lN_l      +
                                           (62/2)(_1)2      •
                                                                                    (8)


The cost entering the firm's problem in (1) is the sum of the two costs in (7)

and (8). The cost in (7) is a quadratic production cost function where the

linear coefficient on firm output,                     depends on a constant, 1' on an

economy—wide cost shock, kt, which we assume to be white noise and to be known

by firms at t, and on aggregate output, Y. The cost shock is related through

duality to the productivity shock popular in many macroeconomic models. Cost

shocks allow the model to be consistent with the observed positive correlation

of output and inventories documented by Blinder (1981).10 The presence of
                              J
aggregate output, Y =             Y, in the firm's cost function is intended to
                           j=1
capture a presumed positive correlation of production costs with the business

cycle. For example, if real wages rise with aggregate output, then this term

would capture such correlation. The cost term in (8) is a quadratic inventory

holding cost function. Holding costs at time t depend on beginning of period

inventories,t &.         Further,      the linear term in this function depends on
                                           J
aggregate inventories, Ntl =                   N_1, to reflect the presumed increase in
                                       :1=1
storage—space rents when aggregate inventories are high. We allow negative

inventories and interpret them as backlogged orders as in Blinder and Fischer

(1981), Blinder (1982) and Eichenbaum (1983, 1984).h1.
                                    — 10 —



     Since sales are equal to demand in this framework, firms face the

intertemporal constraint



                                                                       (9)




which states that output either fills demand or is used for inventory

accumulation. We use (9) to eliminate     as a decision variable in the firm's

problem. Hence, in the firm's maximization problem (1) the choice variables

are current values and planned sequences of relative prices and inventories,

R+j and N+j, i = 0,1,..., with the initial inventory stock, N1, as a

predetermined state variable.

     The solution of (1) can be characterized by a sequence of Euler equations

having an intuitive interpretation. Maximization of (1) with respect

to R and all expected future values of R+i yields the condition that in any

period marginal revenue from sales should be equal to the marginal cost of

production (hut sales need not equal production). Maximization with respect

to     and the sequence of expected future values of      yields the

intertemporal condition that the marginal cost of production at time t+i plus

the discounted cost of storage from time t+i until time t+i+1 must equal the

expected discounted marginal cost of production at time t+i+1. Hence, the

firm is indifferent at the margin between producing a unit and selling it this

period or storing the unit, incurring the cost of storage, and expecting to

sell the unit next period. In Appendix A we record these Euler equations for

a typical firm.

     Since our concern is with the aggregate of all firms, we assume that the

cost coefficients are identical across firms. The linear demand functions

combined with quadratic costs yield linear Euler equations that may be summed
                                        — 11 —



 across firms to get the "aggregate Euler equations" reported below. The

 algebra involved in our problem is greatly simplified if we work with the

 special case of the aggregate Euler equations resulting when J +       (i.e., the
 number of firms becomes indefinitely large).12

       The aggregate Euler equations at time t for urn J +    are the following:



                   + k +                                                 (10)



 and




                + k + yY) + a6N          Ea(â + k     + 2+1•             (11)




Equation (10) sets marginal revenue from sales equal to marginal cost of

production and equation (11) equates marginal cost of production plus

discounted marginal storage cost to expected discounted future marginal

cost. Since we assumed particular time series processes for the model's real

disturbances, u,         and k, we may use the method of undetermined

coefficients to obtain quasi—reduced form solutions for the real side

variables, R,      and         These solutions are linear functions of the firms'

"state variables", Ne_i, X1, u_1, kt, Eut, Etdt, and Eiui.
The functions we report now are not full reduced forms because they contain

endogenous variables, the conditional expectations of disturbances. The

determination of the expected values of these shocks requires the explicit

treatment of the inference problem described above involving the money market,

which is addressed in the next section.
                                          — 12   —




        We    define these quasi—reduced—form functions to be the following:

                Nt =t   N      +t 12X t—1+r u
                                          13 t—1
                                                +r 14kt +1 15Eu
                                                              t t
                                                                                (12a)
                     ÷11 t—1
                                          +T16Ed
                                               t t
                                                   +t E u
                                                      17 t—1 t—1


               Rt =1 21N t—1+1 X +r23u t—1+T24k t +1
                             22 t—1
                                                      Eu
                                                   25 t t                       (12b)

                                           +r26Ed   +rt—1
                                               t t 27   E t—1
                                                           U




               Yt =t 31
                     N t—1+132Xt—1+1
                                   _33ut—1+T_34kt +T Eu  tt                     (12c)
                                     +r36Ed
                                          t t +T÷37Et—1ut—1
The signs of the coefficients in the quasi—reduced—forms are recorded below
them.        Expressions for these coefficients in   terms of the behavioral
parameters       are reported in Appendix C. The appearance of three of the right—

hand—side variables in these expressions requires some additional

explanation. The terms Etu and Ed enter the decision rules for Nt,Rt and

   because firms make their decisions about inventories, pricing and

production based on their beliefs about u and dt. The term E_iui enters

because of the permanent income expenditure function. Recall that              is the

revision in beliefs about the discounted sum of future values of real

income. This revision is across the time t—1 and the time t information

sets. The perception of the value of discounted real income based on t—1

information depends on Etiuti, which in turn must enter the quasi—reduced

forms. Once we reach the level of full reduced forms in the next section, we

will interpret the coefficients.
                                             — 13 —



III.   The Monetary Side and the Agents' Inference Problem

       In the last section we derived quasi—reduced—form functions for the

aggregate of firms' decisions concerning Nt,            and Y. These functions are

not reduced forms because they depend on the currently determined endogenous

variables Eu and                  To derive the reduced form decision rules we must

solve for Eu and Ed using all of the information available to the

agents. That information consists of observations of demand and observations

of the variables that appear in the money—market equilibrium.

       We assume that only domestic agents hold domestic money, and aggregate

money demand is given by the conventional specification



               —                         +
                   Pt   a0 —   a1i              a1, a2 > 0,                (13)



where m is the logarithm of money demand, Pt is the logarithm of the domestic

price level and i is the level of the domestic interest rate. The logarithm

of the money supply is given by



               =         +
                             Vt      '                                     (14)


where f(I) is a function relating current money to variables in the agents'

information set and Vt is the unsystematic portion of the money supply which

may include shocks to a money muliplier.13 The v shock is assumed to be a

white noise disturbance with finite variance which is uncorrelated with the

other disturbances in the model.

       The agents know everything in I, which includes p,           and part of

X. The part of X they do not know exactly is ut.'4 The agents do know that
                                    — 14 —



the money market is in equilibrium each period, and they use their information
to observe the signal



          at =vt —eu.
                   2t                                                 (15)




This Is the incipient excess supply of money that is corrected by movements of

the endogenous variables to keep the money market in equilibrium.'5

     In addition, the agents see actual demand In the goods market, given in

(3). Since the agents.see     and the information set includes    and all

components of X other than the exact value of u, the observation of demand

gives the agents an observation of the signal




          bt p2u + d.                                                 (16)



The inference problem of firms is to form Etut and Etdt from information on at

and bt. We assume that the agents use linear least squares projections to

form Eut and Ed.'6 Therefore,


          Eu
           tt     a + ubt
                uat    b                                              (17a)



         and


          Ed daat + dbbt .                                            (17b)


Reduced form expressions for Etut and Etdt are obtained by substituting from

(15) and (16) into (17a) and (17b) to yield
                                              — 15 —



              Eu
               tt   =    u       +Ü) v +w d
                                  _uvt +udt
                                                                                             (18a)




              Ed = :dU           + (UdVt + (idddt ,                                          (18b)


where the signs of the w's are recorded below them and their expressions in

terms of the underlying parameters are recorded in Appendix D. Notice

that       is negative implying that a positive monetary shock, v > 0,

contributes toward the perception of a negative Ut shock, as discussed above.

       Full reduced form.expresslons for N, R and                     are obtained by

substituting from (18a) and (18b) into (12a) —               (12c).    Also, use (18a) dated

t—1 to substitute for Et_iut_i. We write these final reduced forms in the

following way:
               =             + N2Xt_l +                + XN4kt + ANSdtl
                   NlNt_l                   N3Ut.1


                                              + AN6v        + AN7u + )tN8dt +                   (19a)
                                                        1
                                                                                     N9't

          R                  +            + Au1 +              +
                                                        R4kt       R5dt_l


                                              + R617t_1 +             +          +              (19b)
                                                                          R8dt       R9!)t


                   AY1Nt_l +              + Ay3u_i + Ay4k + AySdt_l



                                              + A6v_i + )ty7u + Ay8d + Ay9v .                   (19c)


The signs of the A coefficients are recorded below them, and the expressions

for the A's in terms of the underlying parameters are recorded in Appendix
                                             16 —




E.         We turn now to an intuitive interpretation of the reduced form

coefficients.


N
    t— 1



           The aggregate Euler equations can be expressed as a second order

difference equation in Nt. Therefore, two possible solutions arise for AN1,

one greater than one and the other between zero and one. The solution we have

chosen for AN1 is the one between zero and one implying that inventories

evolve as a stable autoregression. All of the other coefficients we report

are predicated on this choice. Relative price and output are both higher for

lower values of Nti (i.e. AR1, A < 0) since firms try to replenish

inventory stocks when they are low by limiting demand and increasing

production.



xt—1


           An increase in X_1 raises demand today and expected demand in all future

periods. An increase in X_j lowers inventory at t (AN2 < 0), since the

inventory is used to meet part of the demand, and it increases relative price

and output (AR2 ÀY2 > 0) to offset the increase in demand and to meet the

remaining demand with current production of goods.



U
    t— 1

           A positive value of last period's expenditure disturbance has its primary

impact through reducing expenditure and demand in the current period and in

all future periods. Such a disturbance causes consumers to run down their

asset stocks thereby lowering permanent income. There are other effects of

Ut_i that arise because only the inferred value of u_1 is available at time
                                              — 17   —




t—1, but these effects do not offset the primary impact. Consequently., u_1
enters each of the reduced forms with coefficients whose signs are opposite to

the signs due to X l(AN3 > 0; AR3, Ày3 < 0).



k
 t
     The primary effect of a positive cost shock is to make production

relatively expensive in the period when such a shock occurs. There are other

effects of the shock through the revision in permanent income, but these do

not offset the primary.effect. A positive cost shock will cause firms to

lower current output (A4 < 0) and to try to limit some of current demand by

raising their average relative price (AR4 > 0).              It is not optimal, however,

to raise prices so high that demand falls by as much as does production.

Firms therefore meet some of the discrepancy between production and demand by

reducing inventories (AN4 < 0).




di, v1
     We work with a time—differenced version of the permanent income

expenditure function in order to eliminate agents' asset stocks from explicit

consideration. This differencing greatly simplifies some calculations, but at

the cost of removing a relevant state variable, real asset stocks, from the

final reduced forms. We were able to replace this state variable in the quasi

reduced form with                  X_1, and the innovation in permanent income. This

innovation is between the time t and the time t—1 information sets. Since the

disturbances v, Ut and d are not known precisely at t and v1, u1, and dtl

are not known precisely at t—1, the innovation in permanent income involves

the term u         — E      u      •   The disturbances dt.L and vti. enter the reduced
             t—1         t—1 t—1
form only through their roles in forming E_iu_1)7
                                       18




     and d
      The primary effects of positive values of the two demand shocks, Ut, the

expenditure shock, and dt, the relative demand shock, are to increase demand

directly. Secondary effects of these shocks work through the revision in

permanent income and through the firms' inference problem. Since the

secondary effects never offset the primary effects, positive demand shocks

cause higher output (A7, ÀY8 > 0) ,   higher   relative prices

(AR7, AR8 > 0), and lower inventories (AN7, ANS < 0).       It   is optimal to meet

some of the demand shock with higher production, to limit some of the demand

with higher relative prices, and to meet some of the demand out of inventory

stocks.



V
 t
      The net money supply shock is Vt• It may be composed of a shock to high—

powered money plus a money multiplier shock less a money demand shock. Its

real effects are due entirely to agents' use of information in the money

market to sharpen perceptions about the two real demand shocks, Ut and dt.         A

positive value of vt makes agents believe that u is negative and that dt is

positive, with the direct effects of the two on demand being equal but

opposite in sign. Since dt is more persistent than is u, the net effect on

firms' perceptions of the u and dt shocks is an increase output (A9 > 0).

      The aggregated first order conditions equating marginal revenue from

sales to marginal cost of production is (10). Therefore, when a positive      v
results in increased      it must also result in increased R (A9 > 0).

Since marginal cost of production rises with Y,       must rise along with        to

give increased marginal revenue. Intuitively, when       rises and       rises,

cutting back demand, one would expect the difference between output and
                                     — 19



demand, the inventory change to be positive. We were never able to prove this

result in our model. The problem, of course, is the very complex expenditure

effect in demand. Once this effect is included, we cannot say what happens to

inventories 'N9 ?).

     An interesting result in our model is AR9 > 0.    A monetary shock raises

the price of domestic goods in terms of the price level. Sticky—price and

sticky—wage open economy models contain the opposite prediction. For example,

an important feature of the Dornbusch (1976) model is that nominal prices of

goads are predetermined in units of the currency of the producing country.

Unanticipated movements in exchange rates therefore change the relative prices

of home and foreign goods. In the Dornbusch model a money shock depreciates

the domestic currency raising the nominal and relative prices of foreign

goods.

     In open economy sticky wage models such as Flood and Marion (1982) a

positive domestic money supply shock raises domestic output creating an

incipient excess supply of the home good and requiring a deterioration in the

domestic country's terms of trade. Therefore such models predict AR9 < 0.

     In our model the money shock raises the relative price of domestic goods

in terms of the domestic price index. We assume the domestic price index, P,

is a linear homogeneous function of the average domestic currency price of

domestic goods, '     and the average domestic currency price of foreign

goods, StHt , where S is the exchange rate quoted as the domestic currency

price of foreign currency, and     is the average foreign currency price of

foreign goods,


               —          31'        31'
          P = P(Ht, SH) , —,                > 0.                     (23)
                              3H 3StHt
                                         — 20 —



It    follows that



                =
                    /P(i, Sii) = r(i/Si)          ,                      (24)


with ar/a(/S) > 0.             Therefore, our model produces a potentially testable

difference between models with nominal precommitments and flexible—price

models.

       The problem with producing convincing versions of such tests is that the

results from the nominal precoinmitment models are predicated on money not

feeding back from currently determined endogenous variables while our results

are robust to such feedback as long as agents understand the nature of the

feedback. In the next section we present some empirical work designed to shed

light on the issue of the correlation between the terms of trade and a money

shock under the strong condition that money does not feedback on currently

determined endogenous variables.18




IV.    Empirical    Investigation

       In this section we conduct a limited empirical investigation of the

predictions of the model. As the previous section indicated, our

investigation focuses on the prediction of our model that an innovation in the

money supply is positively correlated with the relative price of the domestic

product in terms of a basket of domestic and imported consumption goods while

the other models predict a negative correlation.'9 All of the models predict

that innovations in output will be positively correlated with innovations in

the money supply.
                                    — 21 —




     Our investigation of these issues is in the context of a four variable

unconstrained vector autoregression.20 The four variables are the logarithm

of real gross domestic product, the logarithm of real expenditure, a relative

price measure, and the rate of growth of the monetary base. We use two

alternative measures of the relative price, the export price index divided by

the consumer price index, which is denoted R, and the export price index

divided by the import price index, which is denoted R. As always,

interpretation of residual correlations from vector autoregressions is

difficult when contemporaneous values of the variables being studied are

simultaneously determined. Consequently, we assume that no contemporaneous

variables, other than the monetary disturbance, enter the money supply

equation. Under this assumption we can interpret the residual from the money

supply equation as the monetary innovation, and the correlations of the

monetary innovation with the other innovations provide evidence concerning our

model.

     The results of our tests are presented in Table 1 for eight industrial

countries. The sample period for each dependent variable spans the last

quarter of 1973 to the last quartet of 1983. Each regression contains a

constant, two lags of each of the four variables, and quarterly dummy

variables. The statistical significance of the correlations is determined

from Fisher's Transform test. See Kendall and Stuart (1977, p. 419) for

details.

     The overall impression from the contemporaneous correlations is the lack

of statistically significant correlations across all variables. Of the eighty

reported correlations other than between GDP and expenditure only sixteen have

marginal levels of significance as low as 0.10. This represents twenty

percent which is only slightly more than the ten percent that would be
                                    — 22 —



expected by chance from data that were uncorrelated. Consequently, these
results provide very little evidence that can be used to differentiate between

alternative explanations of. business cycles. In terms of support for the

nominal precommitment models versus our flexible price model, the results are

somewhat mixed. The only residual correlations between the relative price

variables and the monetary base that are statistically significant at the ten

percent level are found in the cases of Japan and Germany, and they are

positive as is predicted by our model. The same correlations are negative

though for France and the United Kingdom at the twelve and fourteen percent

levels of significance, respectively. Such mixed results do not lend strong

support to either viewpoint.

     If the demand shocks are predominate relative to supply or cost shocks in

inducing variability In the data, the two types of models also give opposite

predictions regarding the residual correlation between the terms of trade and

real output. Our model predicts a positive correlation while the nominal

preconimitment models predict a negative correlation. Interpretation of these

results is complicated though by the fact that cost shocks tend to produce

negative correlation In both models. Hence, we present the contemporaneous

correlations between    and    merely in an effort to develop some potential

stylized facts for future research. The only really strong result is the

positive correlation between the terms of trade and output in Japan. The

Italian case is particularly perplexing since the correlation changes sign and

is significantly different from zero for the two alternative definitions of

the terms of trade.

    As we noted before, both sets of models predict significant positive

correlation between the monetary base and real output. Since these

correlations are generally insignificantly different from zero, only the
                                    — 23



results for the United Kingdom provide some weak support for this

hypothesis. Such a finding may represent contemporaneous feedback from the

real economy to the money supply that would cast doubt on the validity of the

other interpretations as well.




V. Conclusions

     In this paper we developed a model of the open—economy business cycle

that may someday prove useful in distinguishing between alternative

explanations of the transmission mechanism of monetary policy. The model is

general enough to be solved in alternative ways which are representative of

the information—confusion models and the nominal precommitment models that are

the chief explanations of nonneutrality of money.

     Our initial empirical investigation with relatively short quarterly time

series suggested that there is not strong statistical significance between

ihnovations In the monetary base and innovations in the terms of trade. This

is unfortunate because the two types of models predict alternative signs for

this correlation. One potential problem in conducting the empirical analysis

is the need to make strong a priori restrictions on the lack of

contemporaneous feedback from the real economy to the money supply. Relaxing

this assumption is a difficult and challenging area for future empirical

research.

     Theoretical extensions of this analysis are somewhat more

straightforward. Extension to a two country model can he accomplished by

Including foreign expenditure in domestic demand and domestic expenditure in

foreign demand. Such an extension would add two disturbances to the model,

the foreign expenditure disturbance and the foreign money supply
                                    — 24 —



disturbance.   It would also add two markets to the model, the market for

foreign money and the market for foreign goods. Consequently, while agents

would observe additional informative aggregates, there would be additional

disturbances added to the inference problem making the results of inference

problems roughly similar to those in the text.
                                                                 Table   1


Country                 Contemporaneous Correlations                                                 R2
                                             R,X       M,Y     MX            YX      R         M              Y


tInited                          —.19       —.26       —.18    —.15           .97
States            1                                                                  .92       .53            .98   .98
                      (.43)      (.23)      (.10)      (.25)   (.36)         (.00)



United                —.02       —.05       —.07       —.10     .—10          .97
States            2                                                                  .96       .61            .98   .98
                      (.89)      (.77)      (.64)      (.55)   (.55)         (.00)


                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                           '
                       .09       —.22       —.16        .06     .11           .78
Germany       1                                                                      .88       .80            .99   .98
                      (.60)      (.17)      (.31)      (.73)   (.50)         (.00)


                       .28       —45        —.07        .09     .08           .81
Germany       2                                                                      .92       .81            .99   .98
                      (.08)      (.36)      (.68)      (.57)   (.64)         (.00)



                       .03       —.25       —.12        .15     .27           .76
Japan     1                                                                          .96       .96            .99   .98
                      (.86)      (.14)      (.46)      (.37)   (.10)         (.00)



                       .39        .52        .28        .22     .20           .86
Japan     2                                                                          .94       .97            .99   .99
                      (.02)      (.001)     (.09)      (.19)   (.23)         (.00)


                      —.22        .36        .26        .02    —.02           .72
Italy     1                                                                          .80       .78            .99   .96
                      (.19)      (.03)      (.12)      (.93)   (.89)         (.00)


                      —.19       —.55       —.71        .19     .16           .73
Italy     2                                                                          .86       .77            .99   .96
                      (.27)      (.00)      (.00)      (.26)   (.34)         (.00)
                                                      Table   I   (COntd.)

                      —.25    .,07             .05       .30            .65
France    1                                                                    .94   .58   .99   .99
                      (.12)   (.67)   (.52)   (.76)     (.06)          (.00)


                      —.21     .16    —.26     .18       .44            .68
France   2                                                                     .82   .57   .99   .99
                      (.19)   (.32)   (.11)   (.26)     (.01)          (.00)


                       .22    —.09    —.15    —.06      —.08            .72
Canada   1                                                                     .91   .93   .99   .98
                      (.15)   (.58)   (.35)   (.73)     (.61)          (.00)


                       .06    —.19     .22    —.13      —.02            .78
Canada   2                                                                     .80   .93   .99   .98
                      (.69)   (.23)   (.17)   (.43)     (.93)          (.00)


                      —.12     .08     .26              —.08            .85
Switzerland       1                                                            .78   .73   .91   .92
                      (.46)   (.64)   (.10)   (.69)     (.65)          (.00)


                       .11    —.07            —.03      —.08            .83
Switzerland       2                                                            .71   .70   .90   .91
                      (.49)   (.66)   (.37)   (.86)     (.64)          (.00)


                       .22     .15     .29    •.25       .32            .83
United                                                                         .86   .74   .93   .81
Kingdom       1       (.17)   (.35)   (.07)   (.12)     (.04)          (.00)


                      —.23    —.19    —.37     .20       .29            .85
United                                                                         .96   .74   .92   .81
Kingdom      2        (.14)   (.23)   (.02)   (.22)     (.07)          (.00)


Notes: Numbers in parenthesis represent marginal levels of significance of a test that the estimated
correlation coefficient is                                                        are reported for each country.
                            s}gnificantly different from zero. Two sets of
The first set (1) uses the R definition, and the second set (2) uses the esults
                                                                            definition. Descriptions of the
data are given in the AppendEx. There was no evidence of residual serial correlation in any of the regressions
as judged by standard Q—tests.
                                   — 27



                                 Footnotes
    The information—confusion models are often referred to as equilibrium
    theories whereas the nominal precommitment models are sometimes labeled
    disequilibrium. Both types of models are abstractions since they impose
    some assumptions about the opportunities available for mutually
    advantageous trade and postulate constraints faced by economic agents.
    The assumption that certain types of markets for transmitting information
    fail to exist seems to us no more fundamental than assuming what type of
    contractual structure agents employ in labor markets.
2
    Other open—economy business cycle models employing the islands paradigm
    include Saidi (1980) and Kimbrough (1983). Other nominal—precommitment
    models include Weber (1981), Flood and Marion (1982), Marston (1982), and
    Aizenman and Frenkel (1983). Stockman and Koh (1984) examine the open—
    economy implications of the two types of models in a nonnested framework
    in an attempt to differentiate between the competing paradigms.

    The cost smoothing inventory model was developed by Holt, et. al. (1960)
    and Lovell (1961). Recently, it has been used in industry analysis by
    Blanchard (1983) and Eichenbaum (1983, 1984). Blinder (1982) examines
    the microeconomics of the model in detail claiming that it serves as a
    basis for nominal price stickiness, but there is no money in his model.
    Hence, his analysis applies only to relative prices. A similar mistake
    plagues the analysis in Amihud and Mendelson (1982). Brunner, Cukierman,
    and Meltzer (1983) consider a complete macroeconomic framework that
    includes inventory holding by firms who are motivated to avoid
    stockouts. They also stress the importance of the permanence of shocks
    as an explanation of macroeconomic fluctuations. We note that the
    inventory mechanism per se is not crucial to the economics here. Very
    similar results could have been obtained with output adjustment costs or
    with investment in capital goods.

    Our definition of persistence is given in Appendix B where we generalize
    Blinder's (1982) Theorem 1. Blinder demonstrated that a cost smoothing
    inventory holding firm responds more strongly with its price and output,
    the larger is the coefficient, p, in the first order autoregressive
    process for the demand shock,    =
                                       —1 V, +     where Vt is white noise.

    Unlike Flavin who treated the real income process as exogenous, our model
    treats real income as an endogenous variable.
6
    In this paper we are only concerned with the determination of real
    variables. Consequently, we do not need to make many assumptions about
    the exogeneity of foreign variables in order to obtain our results. In
    solving the- model for its nominal variables, such assumptions are
    crucial. The only important exogenity assumption in our model is that
    the level of foreign expenditure is exogenous to domestic disturbances.

    As a trivial example, consider each firm as producing goods of a color
    particular to that firm. Demand for a particular color of goods depends
    on the relative price of that color and may be identified with a
    particular firm, yet it is meaningful to discuss the total number of
    goods produced in the economy.
                                            — 28 —



8    The domestic price level is a function of.domestic currency prices of
     domestic and foreign goods. Therefore, R, for example, is a function
     of the relative price of firm j's output n terms of foreign goods.

     We assume that each agent sets his expenditure from the permanent income

     model, knows his own   expenditure       shock and knows his own   relative   demand

     shock. At the individual level, however, each of these shocks is

     composed of two elements: an individual specific element and a

     contribution to the aggregate. Let e be individual i's expenditure

     shock, and let f be the individual i's relative demand shock.

     Suppose there are N domestic agents and N* foreign agents
                 *                        .    —
     where N and N are very large. We set e = N u + w , and we impose                          w= 0.
                                                           *                             i=l

     We also set    = (N+N )        +         with
                                                     N+N       0,   It follows for large
                               dt                    1=1
     N and N* and finite variances of all the disturbanëes that the

     individuals observations of e and f yield no useful information about

     the aggregate disturbances, Ut and dt. This set of assumptions is, we

     think, not essential to the results of this paper. Our results follow

     without differential information across agents, and it seems unlikley to

     us that including differential information would reverse anything.
10   Since aggregate inventories include goods—in—process as well as final
     goods, one must be careful in interpreting the implications of this
     positive correlation as evidence for or against particular models.
     McCallum (1984) provides a simple demonstration that cost disturbances
     allow output and changes in final goods inventories to be positively
     correlated.

     The cost structure Implies that firms find backlogs to be optimal in a
     steady state. Since both firm and aggregate inventories can be negative,
     the cost structure also implies an incentive for each firm's inventory
     stock to be opposite in sign from average inventories, Nt_i =            Nti/J,
                                        +                             Because a firm's
     since 51N1 Ni = d1j                    1J i(Ni_
     costs also increase with (N_1)2, the firm's choice of N1 is well
     defined.
12   The special case of J +    is in fact the only situation where our
     equilibrium Is entirely satisfactory. The problem with a finite J is
                                    — 29 —




     that we neither have explicit costs of entry nor do we allow firms to
     account for reactions by other firms in their decision problem. Our set
     up with J +   is a competitive solution to the model. It is not
     surprising, however, that with linear demand and identical quadratic
     costs across firms, the reduced form equations for aggregates are
     essentially the same across a number of equilibrium concepts. In a
     problem much like ours, Eichenbaum (1983) has shown that decision rules
     at the industry level of an unknown number, J, of firms acting as (i)
     perfect competitors, (ii) a J—plant monopolist and (iii) Nash competitors
     are equivalent up to a term whose coefficient depends only on J.
     Consequently, we expect the qualitative properties of our results to be
     robust to a variety of industrial organizations of which the competitive
     case we examine should not be a very special case.
13
     The Vt shock can also be interpreted as including a disturbance to money
     demand. Hence, it may be interpreted as the unsystematic part of the
     excess supply of money.
14
     Examine (4) and recall that agents know X1, u   and   by
     construction. The only potential part of X no n the agents'
     information set is some part of Ut.
15   Since we are unconcerned in this paper with the determination of nominal
     variables, we do not specify the exact functional relationship between
     and the underlying nominal goods prices. All that is required to derive
     (15) is that agents know i, know how to form t from their observations
     on nominal prices, and know the parameters of the money demand function
     and f(I).
16   See Sargent (1979) for a discussion of signal extraction and linear least
     squares projections. The • coefficients in (17a) and (17b) are recorded
     in the Appendix.
17   Our model is classical in the terminology of McCallum (1979). McCallum
     argues that only the innovation In the money supply will affect real
     variables in a classical model. The fact that        appears in the
     reduced forms is attributable to the fact that we hive eliminated a state
     variable. This effect is analyzed by McCallum.
18
     Our empirical work is conditioned strongly not just to be consistent with
     the nominal precommitment models. If we were to allow feedback from
     current endogenous variables to money, we would have to model the money
     supply process with much more care in each of countries studied.
19
     In our model only the unperceived part of the money shock has real
     effects whereas the full unanticipated shock has real effects In models
     with nominal precommitments. The empirical work of Barro and Hercowitz
     (1980) and Boschen and Grossman (1982) is addressed to this issue, and
     the evidence is interpreted as unfavorable to the unperceived money
     hypothesis. See Flood and Hodrick (1985 Section V) for a discussion of
     the issues and some criticisms of the methodology.
                                   — 30 -



20   Although the solution of the model is a constrained vector
     autoregression, we were unable to estimate it because of lack of data on
     final goods inventories across countries. Elimination of Nt_i as a state
     variable induces the entire past history of the other endogenous
     variables as the new state. Estimation and inference require truncation
     of the AR process.
                                                       — 31 —




                                                  Appendixes


A.       The Firm's Problem

         The individual firm solves the problem stated in text (1) using the

revenue definitions contained in (2)—(6) and the cost function definitions in

(7) and (8), subject to an initial condition on N1. When (9) is used to

remove YP from the firm's problem, a pair of sequences of Euler

equations result from the maximization of (1) with respect to the choice

variables,                  i =   0,         and N1, I = 0,                    These Euler equations

are the following:

          I = 0, 1,'•'



                                             +         +        +
E{J'D+1— 2Jp3R1 + JP3Rt.fi                       (Y1



     + T3JP3[J'D — Jp3(R1 —                                + N1— N-÷1111
                                                                              = 0      (Al)




          i   =   0,1,•'.

           +          + '2+1 — Y3{JD+j_ Jp3(R —                         Ri)
     +            — N11J      +
                                  (y1    +
                                             k1        +



+ ai3fJ    1D1 — Jp3(R11                 —
                                             Rt+i+i)       +        —




     — a(51N1 +                        = 0                                            (A2)
                       2N1)}                 .
                                               — 32 —



These equations hold for each of the firms, j             = i,2,.''J.       Equations (10) and

(11) are obtained from (Al) and (A2) in two steps. First, since the

information sets are identical across firms, we add the equations across

firms. Second, we have reported the limiting versions (J + o)                      of our

aggregate Euler equations for date t.



B.   A Generalization of Blinder's Theorem

     Since the generalization of Blinder's theorem does not involve cost

shocks and does not require explicit treatment of the expenditure term in the

demand function, we specialize our model by setting k+i                      0, 1 =   0, 1,' and
by letting the demand for home goods have the simple form



      D =—p +z                                                                        (A3)




where z Includes all elements of equation (3) except the relative price

term. Using (A3) in the aggregated Euler equations for J +                       we obtain



                       +                                                              (A4)
     EtRt+i =    (yl       Y2EY÷±),

                              +          +               —              =   0,        (A5)
      E{_(y1 +                    a(y1       'r2EY+÷1)       7dINt+i}


     for I =    0,1,2,''

By substituting the demand function (A3) into the transition law for

inventories, we obtain

         =             + z+   N_ Nt_i •
                                                                                      (A6)
                                                  — 33 —



Use (A6) to eliminate y÷i from (A4) and (A5), and use the revised (A4) to

eliminate ER+j and                   from the revised (A5). The result is a second

order linear difference equation involving N at three dates and z at two

dates. The solution of this equation is



        Nt =r 10+ir 11Nt—1   + AEz                                                    (A7)
                               1=0


where         is a constant, 0 <              < 1, (ir is reported more fully in Appendix

C) and




     A0 = — 121(1 + y2p1)                ,
                                                           —1 <      < 0




                                         +
     A1        [ay2/(1 +   y2p11(1           A0), 0 < A1 < 1


                      +
                          y2p1)JA1   1
                                              j    2,3,•••


     where 1 +                 (1
                                     11)y2a]/(1 + y2p1)


It follows that



          =      +                                                              ))i
                     iiNi + A0z + A1
                                   i—i
                                       Ez÷i(2I(1 +


Therefore, using equation (A6) obtain



           (1 + Pi12)'{z + ÷ -                             +                    Ez+j(12/(1 +
                                                               A0z + A1
                                                                          1=1
                                                  — 34 —



A demand disturbance will alter z and the expected future values of the

z's. In particular
                                                  3Ez
                   =        +
                       (1               1 + A0+ A1 :÷1            i2/(1+i21))j.

Since —    1       < A0 < 0, (1 + A0) > 0.        Further, A1 > 0. Therefore, larger values


           aE z
of                              (.r/(l+Yt))1 will magnify the effect of z                and

it is reasonable to define a z disturbance to be more persistent, the larger

is its impact on this Infinite sum.




C.      Solutions to the Firms' Problems

        When we solved the firm—level problem for the set of quasi—reduced forms

(12a) —    (12c) we accomplished the solution in two steps. First, we treated
the permanent income Innovation, (E —                         —
                                                                         —          I
                                                     Ei)(1        a)
                                                                       1=0
                                                                          R÷1Y+1a
as a white noise disturbance,                     Second, we solved for £ using the

underlying disturbances. When solving for c, we used the linearization (6)

for real income,                           For the convenience of readers we duplicate our

two step solution procedure here.



Step One



        Nt = T iiN 1 + ffi2Xt_i + ii 13u            +
                                                             + i5E u + it 16E d + r17c(A8)


where



               =       {A   -
                                {A2 - (4/a)J112}, 0 <      < 1, A       fi   + (1/a) +
                                                  — 35 —




           — — (1 — a)p2,r11/(1 —                       —
                                                                  < "12 <       '

        "13 = —                                         0 < "13




    "15          12(1 — "I — 2'll                          '15 < 0


    ,n16                                          "15 < P21T16 < 0,



    "17      "12'                                      "17 <


            2iN_i+ 22Xj +                          + T24k +       25Eu      +
                                                                                26Etdt+ 27c   (A9)


where



    '21      'U        1)121(1 +     2'1'                   "21 < 0



    '22 22 + 12)h'(1                 +   yp1) ,               0 < '22


             —    a                                               < 0
    '23                                                     '23

           = (1 —               +                             0 < '24
    "24               1ri)/(l       y2p1)


    '25 = 12(1 —       'l12 + T12)/(1         +    i21), 0 < '25
                                                       — 36 —



                      —                +
    26
           =
               12(1       7r)/(l           y2p1)
                                                                   0

    27 = "'22'                                                     < "27



    Yt =r 31Nt•-1          +71    X        +71 u         +r k +71 35Eu
                                                                     t t
                                                                                 +71    Ed +7137 (A10)
                                                                                       36 t t    t
                                 32 t—1       33 t—1        34 t



    31 =                  1)1(1 +             '
                                                                "31
                                                                       <




    32 =              +                                         0 < 32
                          7112)/(1 + 12p1)



           =   —                                                       < 0
                                                                1133




    1134        14    —
                           p1)/(1     + 12P1)                   34 < 0

           =          + 1112X1 —                   +            0 <
    "35                                1ri)/(1

    1136 =      (l — 11ii)/(1 + 12P1) ,                            <
                                                                       36

                                                                0 < 1137
    "37        "32'



Step Two

Recall   that                                                                .     Since        is a
                          (Es— Et 1)(K0+ K1Rt+j + K2Y+i)a
function only of the innovations in the time t information set, we postulate:



                      +               + *3Ed + 7j4(u            Eiui) .                     (All)


The values of the i          coefficients          may he obtained by the method of undetermined

coefficients using the intermediate solutions (A8), (A9) and (AlO) in the
                                                             — 37 —



definition        of £          with   (All) everywhere replacing                       This results in



          =
                  (y2*)(1          —   )(1 — 11a)H2(1                      ilu +             +



            2      (K1—         K2p1)(l — ir11)J,      *     < 0




       *2 = — (1 —           2(1 — 11)p2*(K2                       + y2K1) ,            <0


              (1        c)(1                     11)(K2            +                '    >O


              —(1       —
                            a)a'(l       —
                                             ii)(l   -   2) 22 + y2K1)*1                     *4 < 0



where         {(i       —
                                  2      —
                                             11a)2(1     +
                                                             y2p1)
                                                                       +
                                                                           K2p2(l
                                                                                    -   )2(I     +
                                                                                                     y2p1)


                  -(K1
                            —
                                Kti)y2P2(l
                                                —
                                                    ii)(1      —




To sign these coefficients we imposed two conditions: (i) that the

demand curve be downward sloping with respect to                                    (the Marshall—Lerner

condition) and (ii) that the marginal propensity to consume the home good be

between zero and one. At the point of linearization income is equal to

expenditure. Therefore the demand function may be written as

D p0—              + p2(K0 + K1R +                       The Marshall—Lerner condition requires
          p1R                      c2Y).

(p2K1 —   p1) < 0 or (K2p2) K1 — K2p1 < 0. Since K2p2 is the marginal propensity
to   consume the home good, we impose 0                                    (   1.   It follows

that K1 —               < 0.           To sign the expression for
              K2p1
* we needed to know the sign of 1 —                      K22, which             is non—negative by

0
     K2
              (    1,       and the sign of K1—          K21, which             is negative.
                                              — 38 —



Step Three

    The next step in obtaining a solution is to use (All) in (A8)—(Al0) to

obtain text equations (12a) —        (12c).    The following coefficients result from

this substitution:


   equation (12a)




    111 =             > 0 ,                       0 <       21< 1



    112 = 1112 < 0 ,                              P    2<     12< 0



    113      1113 +11l74 >0



    114      1114 + 1117)1 < 0




    115      1115 +   11 l72   < 0



    116      1116 + 1117*3     < 0


    117 =      1117*4
                         <0


   equation (12b)




    121
             1121 < 0



    122
             1122 > 0
                                                   — 39 —



                       +
  T23 =      23               274          <



                       +              >
  124 =      24                                0



  T         11         +71            'S
      25         25           27'2

                      +
  126 =                    273        > 0


 I
      27
           =—ir274
                4, -'                 Cl




— equation            (12c)




                          <    0
 T317131


 132 32 >

 1          11        +71       Ill
     33          33           37V4



 134 _7134            37i                  < 0



 135 = 7135           + 372            > 0



 136       = 36       +
                           71374?3
                                       > 0


 137 = _71374?4                > O.
                                    — 40 —




For the coefficients T13 114, 115, 124 125 and 135 the terms involving the

qs are of opposite signs than the original (e.g., it13 > 0, iT17 i4 < 0).     In

every case, however, the terms with iv's attached do not influence the sign of

the t coefficients. (Proofs available on request.)



D. Signal Extraction

     Agents in our model see two pieces of data, at and bt, which are useful

in forming beliefs about Ut and d. As defined in the text, a =      v   —
                                                                            a2u    and

bt =p 2t
      u          t

     Linear least squares projections of Ut and dt onto a and bt result in



     Eu
      tt =w uut
             u +uiuvt
                    v +wudt
                         d


     Ed
      tt =w dut
             u +w dvt+
                   v wudt
                       d


     where



     cu  =2—1(paa   222 >0,
              222 +cza)
      uu      2uv   2ud

                      22
     Ci)
           uv
                2—1 (—7)
                     2ud <0,

                —1     22 > 0
                     2'ud
     Wd

     du =
                —1
                     (2) > 0
                       2 2



                —1       22 > 0
                     2a2Uad)
     dv =
                                                        — 41 —




      Wdd =
                      —1    22 + 222             > 0


      c
          —1           222 22 222—1
                    ={p 2uv vd 2ud                  J




and         is the variance of j for j =                  u, d, v. Recall also that u, d, and v
are assumed to be mutually and serially uncorrelated.



E.    Final Reduced Forms

      The final reduced form                  solutions   of the model are given in equations

(19a) —         (19c).      They are obtained by substituting the results of the inference

problem for Etut, Etdt and Et_iut_i in the semi—reduced forms given in

equations (12a) —              (12c).    The reduced form coefficients are given by the

following:


                —   equation    (19a)



      AN1 1L >0                 ,        0 < AN1 < 1



                           < 0 ,         —       < AN2 < 0
      XN2             12




      AN3 h13 +1117414(1
                                                  > 0


      AN4 = 1114 +          1117411
                                        < 0


                                        < 0
      ANS             1t17414Wud




      A
          •N6
                =—1t        41w
                           174uv      >0,
                                                                    42 —




                          +                 + (ir    +               I, )du      <
AN7               15          17'2 uu             16
                                                               11
                                                                    173
                                                                                      0




AN8 15                                      +
                                                 16                 173dd < 0


                                                                     17I, 3)dv
A          =               + ir             + (ii             + 71               <        0
     N9        (71
                     15           17T 2)wuv       16


          —   equation             (19b)




A
     Ri              Ri
                              <0

           =               > 0
AR2            71R2




 A
     R3
           = IT
                  R3      + R741                uu
                                                     )   <     0




 AR4           71R4 R7'1 > 0


A
     R5
           =— R7'4''ud                    > 0



A                    71   R7*4Wuv < 0
     R6



A
     R7
           = (r R5         + it
                                  R7i )w
                                      2 uu
                                                + (ii
                                                      R6
                                                         + it TI, )w
                                                             R7 3 du
                                                                                     > 0



ARS
           = (it
                     R5
                           + it
                                  R72 )wud
                                    TI,         + (it R6 + it R73
                                                               iI, )wdd              >0

A          =Or R5          +71 27* )w
                                  2 uv
                                       +             (it R6   + itR7*3)d             > 0
     R9
                                              — 43 —


         — equation    (19c)




             (l/r2)AR1 < 0
         =




ÀY2 =        (l/12)AR2   >0

A
    Y3
         =(1 "'2R3       —
                               1)       < 0


I            (i/ \(I
"Y4 ''2'"R4. /
                                    r   n




A
    Y5   =(1 /'T2P5 > 0


AY6=(1 /12)AR6            > 0


AY7=(1 /Y2)AR7            > 0



AY8=(1 /Y2)A8            > 0


A
    Y9
         =(1 /r2)AR9 > 0
                                      44




                                Data Appendix



     All data were obtained from a magnetic tape of the International Monetary

Funds' International Financial Statistics. The tape provides nominal and real

(base 1980) figures for gross domestic product for four of our countries, the

United Kingdom, Italy, France, and Switzerland. For the United States,

Canada, Japan, and Germany only nominal GDP was available. Our output measure

(Y) was real GDP where available and was constructed to be nominal GDP

divided by the GNP deflator for the latter four countries. Real expenditure

is real CD? plus imports minus exports. Real expenditure (Xe) was constructed

by adding the nominal trade balance to nominal GDP and dividing by either the

nominal GDP or GNP deflator. The relative price (R) was constructed as

export prices divided by consumer prices while the alternative definition of

the relative price or terms of trade (R) was constructed as the export price

divided by the import price. All estimation uses the second quarter of 1973

as the earliest lag, and the final observation op the dependent variables is

the fourth quarter of 1983 for the U.S., the U.K., Germany, and Canada.

France and Switzerland end in 1983:3, Italy in 1982:4, and Japan in 1983:1.
                                    — 45 —



                                  References

Aizenman, Joshua and Frenkel, Jacob A. "Optimal Wage Indexation, Foreign
    Exchange Intervention, and Monetary Policy, "American Economic Review,
    June 1985, 75, 402—23.

Amihud, Yakov and Mendelson, Haim, "The Output—Inflation Relationship: An
    Inventory—Adjustment Approach," Journal of Monetary Economics, March 1982,
    9, 163—84.

Barro, Robert J. and Hercowitz, Zvi, "Money Stock Revisions and Unanticipated
    Money Growth," Journal of Monetary Economics, April 1980, 6, 257—67.

Blanchard, Olivier 3., "The Production and Inventory Behavior of the American
    Automobile Industry," Journal of Political Economy, June 1983, 91,
    365—400.

Blinder, Alan, "Retail Inventory Behavior and Business Fluctuations,"
    Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2:1981, 443—505.

__________________   "Inventories and Sticky Prices: More on the
    Microfoundations of Macroeconomics," American Economic Review, June 1982,
     72, 334—48.

Blinder, Alan and Fischer, Stanley, "Inventories, Rational Expectations, and
    the Business Cycles," Journal of Monetary Economics, November 1981,
    8, 227—304.

Boschen, John A. and Grossman, Herschel I., "Tests of Equilibrium
    Macroeconomics Using Contemporaneous Monetary Data, Journal of Monetary
    Economics, November 1982, 10, 309—34.

Brunner, Karl, Cukierman, Alex, and Meltzer, Allan H. "Money and Economic
    Activity, Inventories and Business Cycles, " Journal of Monetary
    Economics, May 1983, 11, 281—320.

Dornbusch, Rudiger, "Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics," Journal of
    Political Economy, December 1976, 84, 1161—76.

Eichenbaum, Martin S., "A Rational Expectations Model of the Cyclical Behavior
    of Inventories of Finished Goods and Employment," Journal of Mone,tary
    Economics, August 1983, 12, 259—78.

____________________"Rational Expectations and the Smoothing Properties of
    Inventories of Finished Goods," Journal of Monetary Economics,
    July 1984, 14, 71—96.

Fischer, Stanley, "Long—Term Contracts, Rational Expectations and the Optimal
    Money Supply Rule," Journal of Political Economy, February 1977,
    85, 191—205.

Flavin, Marjorie A., "The Adjustment of Consumption to Changing Expectations
    about Future Income," Journal of Political Economy, October 1981,
    89, 974—1009.
                                    — 46 —




Flood, Robert P., "Capital Mobility and the Choice of Exchange Rate System,"
    International Economic Review, June 1979, 20, 405—16.

Flood, Robert P. and Hodrick, Robert J. "Optimal Price and Inventory
    Adjustment in an Open—Economy Model of the Business Cycle",
    Quarter Journal of Economics, Supplement 1985, 100, 887—914.

Flood, Robert P. and Marion, Nancy P., "The Transmission of Disturbances Under
    Alternative Exchange—Rate Regimes with Optimal Indexing," Quarterly
    Journal of Economics, February 1982, 97, 43—66.

Friedman, Milton, A Theory of the Consumption Function, Princeton: Princeton
    University Press (for the National Bureau of Economic Research 157).

Gray, Jo Anna, "Wage Indexation: A Macroeconomic Approach," Journal of
    Monetary Economics, April 1976, 2, 221—36.

Holt, C., Modigliani, F. Muth, J., and Simon, H., Planning Production,
    Inventories, and Work Force, New York: Prentice Hall, 1960.

Kendall, Maurice and Alan Stuart, The Advanced Theory of Statistics,
    Vol. 1, London: Charles Griff en and Company, 1977.

Kimbrough, Kent P. •°Exchange—Rate Policy and Monetary Information,"
    Journal of International Money and Finance, December 1982, 2, 333—46.

Leiderman, Leonardo, "Expectations and Output—Inflation Tradeoffs in a Fixed—
    Exchange Rate Economy," Journal of Political Economy, December 1979, 87,
    1285—1306.

Lovell, Michael, "Manufacturer's Inventories, Sales Expectations and the
    Acceleration Principle," Econometrica, March 1961, 29, 293—314.

Lucas, Robert B. Jr., "Expectations and the Neutrality of Money," Journal of
    Economic Theory, April 1972, 4, 103—24.

__________________, "An Equilibrium Model of the Business Cycle, "   Journal
    of Political Economy, December 1975, 83, 1113—44.

_________________   "Understanding Business Cycles," in Karl Brummer and Allan
    H. Meltzer, editors, Stabilization of the Domestic and International
    Economy, Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 5,
    supplement to Journal of Monetary Economics, 1977, 7—30.

Marston, Richard . "Wages, Relative Prices and the Choice Between Fixed and
    Flexible Exchange Rates," Canadian Journal of Economics, February 1982,
    15—87—103.

NcCallum, Bennett T., "On the Observational Inequivalence of Classical and
    Keynesian Models," Journal of Political Economy, April 1979, 87, 395—402.

__________________ "Inventory Fluctuations and Macroeconomic Analysis:
    A Comment,' Carnegie—Mellon University, manuscript, 1984.
                                    — 47 —




Mussa, Michael, "A Model of Exchange Rate Dynamics," Journal of Political
    Economy, February 1982, 90, 74—104.

Phelps, Edmund S., Microeconomic Foundations of Employment and Inflation
    Theory, New York: Norton, 1969.

Saidi, Nasser H., "Fluctuating Exchange Rates and the International
    Transmission of Economic Disturbances," Journal of Money, Credit and
    Banking, November 1980 Pt. 1, 12, 575—91.

Stockman, Alan C. and Koh, Al Tee, "Open—Economy Implications of Two Models of
    Business Fluctuations," N.B.E.R. Working Paper No. 1317, March 1984.

Taylor, John B. "Estmation and Control of a Macroeconomic Model with Rational
    Expectations, "Econometrica, September 1979, 47, 1267—86.

Turnovsky, Stephen J., "The Relative Stability of AlternatIve Exchange Rate
    Systems in the Presence of Random Disturbances," Journal of Money, Credit
    and Banking February 1976, 8, 29—50.

Weber, Warren E., "Output Variability under Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate
    Rules," Journal of Political Economy August 1981, 89, 733—51.
