                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               CONSUMER CREDIT:
                      TOO MUCH OR TOO LITTLE (OR JUST RIGHT)?

                                         Jonathan Zinman

                                       Working Paper 19682
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w19682


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2013




Thanks to Neil Bhutta, David Laibson, Jialan Wang, Glenn Weyl, and audiences at the Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau and the Chicago Benefit-Cost Conference for helpful comments, and to
many co-authors (and especially Dean Karlan and Victor Stango) for shaping and sharpening my thinking
over the years The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Jonathan Zinman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Consumer Credit: Too Much or Too Little (or Just Right)?
Jonathan Zinman
NBER Working Paper No. 19682
November 2013
JEL No. D03,D14,D18,D82,E32,G21,G23,G28,R31

                                              ABSTRACT

The intersection of research and policy on consumer credit often has a Goldilocks feel. Some researchers
and policymakers posit that consumer credit markets produce too much credit. Other researchers and
policymakers posit that markets produce too little credit. I review theories and evidence on inefficient
consumer credit supply. For each of eight classes of theories I sketch some of the leading models and
summarize any convincing empirical tests of those models. I also discuss more “circumstantial” evidence
that does not map tightly into a particular model but has the potential to shed light on, or obscure, answers
to key questions. Overall there is a lack of convincing evidence on whether markets err, and in which
direction. We do not yet understand whether and under what conditions markets over-supply or under-supply
credit, much less why.


Jonathan Zinman
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
314 Rockefeller Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
jzinman@dartmouth.edu
I. Introduction

      The intersection of research and policy on consumer credit often has a Goldilocks feel.2
Some researchers and policymakers posit that consumer credit markets produce too much credit.
Other researchers and policymakers posit that markets produce too little credit.

      Do markets actually over- or under-supply credit? If yes, to what extent, and what is the
underlying source of the inefficiency- the underlying “market” failure (which, to be fair, also
include the possibilities of consumer decision, and policy, failures)? These are vital threshold
questions for policymaking. Without convincing answers we lack motivation for seriously
considering policy interventions, and we lack guidance for designing policy that might actually
improve outcomes and hence be worth subjecting to rigorous cost-benefit analyses. Yet
empirical evidence on these threshold questions is thin, and mixed. Perhaps more to the point,
links between theory, empirics, and welfare analysis are even thinner.

      This paper reviews theories and evidence on inefficient consumer credit supply. I sacrifice
depth for breadth and acknowledge the likelihood that my review may still lack some breadth. I
focus mostly on the U.S. and its largest markets—mortgage, auto, student, credit card, and
“small-dollar” (principally payday and bank overdraft)-- but reference other settings and markets
opportunistically. I do not cover the very short-term loans that are more the province of
literatures on money and payments. Nor do I explicitly consider lending to small businesses or
entrepreneurs, although the considerable overlap between these agents and “consumers” seems
noteworthy: most enterprises are closely held, particularly in their early stages. Indeed, there is
evidence that “consumer” credit is often used to finance business activities, while “commercial”
or “microenterprise” credit is often used to finance household activities.

      I start with three classes of theories of credit under-supply. Two are canonical: market power,
and regulations outlawing products that would be welfare-enhancing. The third is only slightly
less canonical: varieties of asymmetric information that can lead to rationing.

      Next I consider five classes of theories of credit over-supply (with “over-supply” being
loosely defined in some cases).3 The first considers varieties of asymmetric information that can


2
    A rhetorical nod to Gordon and Stock (1998).
lead to over-supply: advantageous selection, and moral hazard under competition (common pool
problems). A second class of theories focuses on externalities in the markets for assets used to
collateralize borrowing. A third class focuses on systemic risk introduced by collateralized
borrowing in concert with other factors. A fourth focuses on how deleveraging can slow or halt
recoveries if initial debt loads are high enough (arguably too high in some sense). A fifth focuses
on consumers who are “behavioral” in some way that makes them psychologically/cognitively
predisposed to borrow “too much”.4

    For each class of theory I sketch some of the leading models and summarize any convincing
empirical tests of those models. I also discuss more “circumstantial” evidence that does not map
tightly into a particular model but has the potential to shed light on, or obscure, answers to the
threshold questions.

    Speaking of circumstantial evidence, I also review the growing body of reduced-form
evidence on the impacts of credit supply shocks on consumers. This evidence is clearly related to
the threshold questions in the sense that it addresses the question of whether more or less access
to credit makes people better or worse off. But mapping this evidence into policy and welfare
analysis is complicated by possible non-linearities, coarse diagnosis, and equally coarse policy
treatments with limited enforcement.




3
   As I discuss below, many models of over-supply also have a key element of under-supply. More
precisely, they generate over-supply in the 2nd-best sense that, conditional on some friction that produces
binding credit constraints in some important state of the world (e.g., an economic crisis), we can end up
with too much credit entering that state of the world.
4
   I should also mention government subsidies, which have a long history of being blamed for falsely
operating under the assumption of under-supply, and instead inducing over-supply. In U.S. consumer
credit the main subsidies are for mortgages (via guarantees, and the interest deduction) and student loans.
Interestingly, Hoff and Stiglitz (1998) show that subsidies can lead to higher prices and undersupply
when there is monopolistic competition with endogenous enforcement costs. To my knowledge there is
little consensus on the direction or magnitude of any distortion, although Gale (1991) and Glaeser et al
(2010) find that subsidies induce nontrivial excess/inefficient supply in U.S..
II. Theories of Under-Supply

A. Market power
    The major consumer credit markets in the U.S. are each served by thousands or even tens of
thousands of lenders.5 For the most part significant entry restrictions have been absent for two
decades or more.6 I am not aware of any compelling evidence that lenders earn excess risk-
adjusted profits. In brief, I doubt that any sort of plain-vanilla market power meaningfully affects
equilibrium quantities in the mortgage, auto, credit card, or student loan markets.7 One exception
may be regulation-induced barriers to entry in the small-dollar credit market; e.g., Melzer and
Morgan (2012) find that banks reduce overdraft credit limits (but also fees) when state laws
restrict payday loans. See the next sub-section for further discussion of legal restrictions.
    There is however mounting evidence of substantial price dispersion in consumer credit,
conditional on product and consumer (risk) characteristics (see Section III-B). These patterns are
consistent with lenders enjoying market power due to search and/or switch costs. Whether this
leads to over- or under-supply on net remains to be identified, and presumably depends on
demand elasticities and more-primitive parameters (see Section III-A).


B. Regulatory Failure
    The U.S. market is missing several “rungs” in the “lending ladder” between credit cards
(which tend to top out around 30% APR for subprime borrowers)8 and payday loans or bank
overdrafts (which tend to cost >> 100% APR). The gaps are particularly striking if one focuses
on unsecured credit (ignoring pawn and auto title loans), and all the more striking if one




5
   The one exception is the student loan market, where presently direct and subsidized lending by the
government dominates.
6
  See Campbell (2006) for a review of the literature on credit market competition, including the extensive
literature on the effects of U.S. banking dregulation.
7
  I am quite open to the possibility, however, that this hypothesis is only true, or more true, in steady-
state. E.g., it would be interesting to explore whether there has been recent (geographic) variation in
financial institution failure or distress rates that could be used to test how competition affected prices,
quantities, and profits during- and post-crisis.
8
  The effective APR is > 30% for borrowers who incur penalty fees, but almost certainly still strictly less
than triple digits for nearly all borrowers.
considers maturity as well as interest rate.9 I have yet to see a convincing analysis of the missing
rungs.
    One possible explanation for gaps in the lending ladder is state regulations that outlaw the
very products that would fill the gaps. I have heard market participants make this argument, but
have yet to see a comprehensive accounting of the relevant laws or a convincing analysis of the
impacts of the laws on entry.10
    Another possible explanation for the missing rungs is asymmetric information. The recent
spate of “big-data”-driven entrants seeking to fill the gaps seems consistent with some sort of
asymmetric information problem. Forecasts of the extent to which such technological
innovations, broadly defined, will change credit supply are important inputs for policy analysis.11


C. Asymmetric Information

i. Overview

    Asymmetric information has been invoked for decades as a rationale for interventions to
expand credit supply, in the wake of Stiglitz and Weiss’ (1981) seminal theory of credit
rationing. Yet the impact of information theory on credit policy and practice far outstrips
empirical evidence on whether, how, and how much asymmetric information actually affects
market outcomes. The how is particularly important given that different varieties of asymmetric
information can have very different effects (with some even producing over-supply), and optimal
remedies (e.g., subsidies might improve efficiency if there is adverse selection but not if there is
moral hazard).



9
  Maturities can be quite long for credit cards, which tend to be structured as open-end lines of credit with
modest minimum monthly payments, and are nearly always quite short for payday loans (1-4 weeks).
10
   Generally speaking it does seem to be the case that state laws restricting high-cost consumer loans from
non-bank providers do have teeth (Carrell and Zinman 2013; McKernan, Ratcliffe, and Kuehn 2013). The
bank vs. non-bank distinction is legally significant because the Marquette Supreme Court decision in
1978 upheld the ability of national banks to “export” rates from states with more favorable regulation to
states with less favorable regulation. And the distinction is economically significant because banks have
tended to stay out of product markets with APRs higher than credit cards, presumably because they are
discouraged from doing so by their supervisors/regulators. (The one exception is checking account-linked
products like overdraft and cash advance, which are viewed differently by the law and by bank
supervisors for various reasons, some of which are more framing than substance.)
11
   For some related work see, e.g., Grodzicki (2012) and Einav et al (2013).
ii. Theories
   Models typically consider one (rarely more) of three varieties of asymmetric information.
One variety is ex-ante “hidden information”: contract terms can change the pool of borrowers by
inducing self-selection based on private information that is correlated with repayment likelihood
(or, more to the point, profitability). This variety includes the now-canonical adverse selection
and its lesser-known cousin, advantageous selection (see Section III-A). Sub-varieties include
selection on borrower “type” (good apples vs. bad apples) and selection on project risk (good
projects vs. bad projects). The second variety is ex-post “hidden action”: contract terms affect
borrower incentives to repay post-disbursement of loan proceeds. Sub-varieties here include
moral hazard in: project choice, project or repayment effort, and strategic (and sovereign)
default. The third variety considers the interaction of hidden information and hidden action
problems, where contract terms may induce borrowers to select on their tendency to engage in
moral hazard (i.e., on their sensitivity to ex-post incentives).

iii. Empirical Evidence: Testing Theory
   Empirical tests of asymmetric information theories remain rare, due in part to substantial
identification challenges. One type of test identifies whether there is economically important
asymmetric information in reduced-form, while remaining silent on the underlying variety of
problem. Karlan and Zinman (2008) and Adams et al (2009) develop tests in this vein and find
substantial effects of asymmetric information on default rates. Another type of test seeks to
separately identify one or more of three varieties. Adams et al (2009), Einav et al (2012), and
Dobbie and Skiba (2013) find evidence of substantial adverse selection in two U.S. markets, and
Karlan and Zinman (2009) and Bryan, Karlan, and Zinman (2013) find evidence of substantial
moral hazard in a South African market. Bryan et al also develops the only test I have seen for
selection on moral hazard in a credit market, and find no evidence of it, although the sample is
small and hence the estimate is imprecise. A growing literature attempts to identify the
importance of strategic default in the U.S. mortgage market, but this work has not reached a
consensus on the question of how many borrowers (with negative equity) default despite having
the ability to repay (see, e.g., Bhutta, Dokko, and Shan 2011; Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales
2013; Gerardi et al. 2013).
   At least three shortcomings of the empirical work summarized above are particularly
noteworthy. One is the limited scope: taken together the papers cover only a subset of important
product markets and asymmetric information (sub-)varieties. The second is the lack of empirical
evidence on the extent to which dynamic contracting mediates the effects of asymmetric
information (although Karlan and Zinman (2009) has some related evidence). The third is lack of
evidence on how competition mediates the effects of asymmetric information. This is partly a
reflection of the theory literatures’ focus on unilateral contracting, despite the fact that
multilateral contracting and lender competition seem more the norm than the exception in
today’s markets.

iv. Empirical Evidence: Circumstantial

     The influence of asymmetric information theory has been fueled more by circumstantial
evidence than by sharp tests of the theories themselves. The leading circumstantial evidence
takes the flavor of documenting liquidity constraints that bind for many consumers. For instance,
even secured loan markets have severe rationing episodes (see, e.g., Bhutta (2013) on the
mortgage origination slowdown). Many consumers report being rationed or unable to come up
with $2,000.12 When given the chance to borrow more, many people do, exhibiting strong
elasticities with respect to available credit (Gross and Souleles 2002; Mian and Sufi 2011; Bhutta
and Keys 2013; Dobbie and Skiba 2013) and maturities (Attanasio, Goldberg, and Kyriazidou
2008; Karlan and Zinman 2008). Such facts are indeed compelling evidence of the economic
importance of liquidity constraints. Documenting them often raises new questions; e.g., why do
people respond strongly to an increased credit line even when they have seemingly ample
available credit ex-ante (Gross and Souleles 2002)?
     Yet it is important to recognize that this evidence is reduced-form in the sense that it does not
identify the source or welfare impacts of the constraints. Indeed, these constraints may be
optimal, or closer-to-optimal, if there are underlying mechanisms that push markets in the
direction of over-supply. The revealed preference of consumers to borrow more need not be a
sufficient statistic for welfare analysis if consumers are “behavioral” in particular ways, or if
borrowing produces negative externalities. I consider such possibilities in Section III.


12
   E.g., an estimated 26% of U.S. households (not just would-be borrowers) report being rationed or
discouraged from apply during the last 5 years in the 2010 Survey of Consumer Finances (author’s
calculation). In the 2009 TNS Global Economic Crisis survey nearly one-half of Americans report being
certainly or probably not able to come up with $2,000 in 30 days to deal with an unexpected shock
(Lusardi, Schneider, and Tufano 2011).
v. Prospects for Better-Applying Research on Asymmetric Information to Policy
     There has been some noteworthy progress in simulating the effects of policy levers in
markets with an asymmetric problem.13 But given the influence of asymmetric information
theory on credit market policy and practice— ranging from government loan guarantees to
microcredit—there is relatively little empirical work that puts these theories to the test. This is an
area that cries out for greater interplay between theory and empirics, and across product markets
where there are clear complementarities (e.g., the credit literatures seem to be lagging a bit
behind comparable literatures on insurance). The need for a richer understanding of how
asymmetric information affects markets with multilateral contracting seems particularly pressing.


D. Assessment: Is Credit Under-Supplied?
     We do not know. It sure seems that the answer is “yes (sometimes)”. But the evidence that
leads to this inference is largely circumstantial: we still know remarkably little about the
underlying causes of credit constraints/rationing. Without such knowledge it is difficult to
formulate (constrained-)optimal policy interventions, or even to know whether such
interventions should seek to increase the supply of credit. Indeed, as discussed below, rationing
may also be consistent with over-supply (or constrained-optimal supply).




III. Theories of Over-Supply

A. Asymmetric Information Redux

     Asymmetric information can lead to over-supply instead of under-supply. One variety is
advantageous selection, where ex-ante willingness-to-pay is correlated with something
unobserved (e.g., risk aversion) that makes those selecting in at less favorable terms more likely
to repay ex-post (de Meza and Webb 1987; de Meza and Webb 2000). This phenomenon has
been empirically documented in insurance markets (L Einav and Finkelstein 2010). The one hint
of it I know of in consumer credit can be found in Einav et al (2012): the borrowers they identify
as marginal, when faced with higher downpayment requirements, are more likely to default.


13
 To my knowledge the focus thus far has been on bankruptcy rules (Livshits, MacGee, and Tertilt 2007;
Chatterjee et al. 2007). There are many other policy options worthy of comparable scrutiny.
     Another possibility in credit markets is that nonexclusive contracting generates negative
externalities wherein a marginal dollar lent to a consumer by Lender A reduces the likelihood
that the marginal dollar lent to the same consumer by Lender B gets repaid (Degryse, Ioannidou,
and von Schedvin 2012). This produces what are variously labeled common pool, common
agency, and/or coordination problems that have been the subject of extensive study in several
other literatures (Goldstein and Razin 2013), and that may have counter-intuitive solutions
(Hertzberg, Liberti, and Paravisini 2011). The link to asymmetric information problems
(particularly moral hazard) is richest when contract terms themselves (including but not limited
to workout situations) affect the likelihoods of repayment (Bisin and Guaitoli 2004).14 Consumer
credit-focused work on these questions is quite thin, and would likely benefit from trade with
literatures that are more focused on corporate finance, financial (in)stability, and international
finance.

B. Borrowing with Negative Externalities on Collateral: Fire Sales and 3L Effects

     Other models of negative externalities focus on the values of assets used to collateralize
borrowing. Models of fire sales examine the interaction between leverage and asset prices
following a bad shock (e.g., Shleifer and Vishny 1992; M. K. Brunnermeier 2009). Lenders get
concerned about collateral values, forcing borrowers to sell their collateral to (partially) repay
their loans. When too many borrowers (relative to market liquidity) are selling, the value of the
collateral can fall. If borrowers and lenders do not take this exeternality into account ex-ante—
the effect of my (forced) sale on the value of others’ assets—this can generate too much debt (in
a constrained 2nd-best sense, more on this below).15

     Another potential externality works through the “location, location, location” (3L) property
of real estate. Markets will generate too much debt if more debt leads to more foreclosures,
foreclosures destroy neighboring property value(s) as well as own-property value, and loan
contracts do not internalize this externality.




14
   Interestingly Dobbie and Skiba (2013) find evidence of what might be termed advantageous moral
hazard for a payday lender: a larger loan size reduces default, all else equal.
15
   See also Hart and Zingales (2011), where increasing collateralized debt increases the price of whatever
good is being financed with the debt, generating a negative externality on other borrowers/consumers.
     Related empirical evidence on mortgages does not sharply distinguish between fire sale and
3L effects. Mian and Sufi (2012a) emphasize the fire sale channel, and find little to support a
location effect.16 Campbell et al (2011) emphasizes a 3L effect and finds little to support a fire
sale effect.17

     It is important to emphasize that fire sale models generate “too much” debt “only” in a
constrained/2nd-best sense. The negative externality materializes only because there is actually
too little debt at critical junctures: asset markets lack sufficient liquidity to clear at fair prices.
The next two classes of models have a similar property. A critical question for welfare and
policy analysis is whether we should take those liquidity constraints—frictions that bind, at the
very least, during times of crisis-- as given.

C. Deleveraging Slows Recovery

     A new class of models highlights how deleveraging can slow recovery from an exogenous
macro shock given monetary policy that is constrained by a zero bound. In Eggertsson and
Krugman (2012), if leverage is high enough entering the shock, then the higher the initial
leverage (debt overhang), the larger the interest rate cut needed for output to stay at potential.18 If
the zero bound makes the required cuts infeasible, the contraction grows and recovery slows.
Hall’s (2011) model is similar, and emphasizes how shock-induced tightening of household
borrowing constraints can deepen and prolong a downturn.19 Mian and Sufi (2011; 2012b) find
empirical evidence consistent with these models: the drop in demand has been more pronounced
in U.S. counties and zip codes that entered the downturn with relatively high leverage. See


16
    p. 17: “While there may be other channels through which foreclosures affect house prices, the
evidence… suggests an important role for the foreclosure-induced expansion in the supply of
inventory…. The very large increase in supply in inventory can plausibly explain the entire decline in
house prices.” Note also their finding that inventory affects prices only during 2007-2009 but not 2010-
11, pushing against the location effect interpretation (unless the foreclosure process got more efficient,
destroying less value in the process).
17
    pp. 2110-2111: the prices of forced sales have relatively little predictive power for the prices of other
transactions at the zip code level, but there are spillover effects at more localized levels. Spillovers and
discounts are larger in low-priced neighborhoods. “Both results suggest that spillovers may reflect
physical damage to neighborhoods.”
18
   p. 1477: “The intuition is straightforward: the saver must be induced to make up for the reduction in
consumption by the borrower. For this to happen, the real interest rate must fall, and in the face of a large
deleveraging shock it must go negative to induce the saver to spend sufficiently more.”
19
    See also Guerrieri and Lorenzoni (2012), and Midrigan and Philippon (2011).
Justiniano et al (2013) for a contrary view based on results from a quantitative dynamic general
equilibrium model.

     Note again that these models have properties of both too much and too little credit. Credit is
oversupplied (or, to put it more mildly, one needs to be mindful of high leverage levels)
conditional on there being a bad shock that induces substantial deleveraging, and conditional on
frictions that make some agents liquidity constrained. Remove the liquidity constraints (or mute
the surprise, perhaps by mitigating asymmetric information) and high leverage is unlikely to
exacerbate downturns.20 Indeed, the findings in Mian et al (2013) suggest an important mediating
role for tightened credit constraints in the consumption collapse; e.g., the marginal effect of a
decline in home value on tighter constraints is significantly larger for zip codes that had a high
leverage ratio entering the mortgage crisis.

D. Systemic Risk

     Khandani et al (2012) shows that “the combination of rising home prices, declining interest
rates, and near-frictionless refinancing opportunities can create unintentional synchronization of
homeowner leverage” leading to correlated/systemic risk in the mortgage market. In particular,
“cash-out refinancing is like a ratchet. It incrementally increases homeowner leverage as real-
estate values appreciate without the ability to symmetrically decrease leverage by increments as
real-estate values decline.” The asymmetry comes from indivisibility of the collateral (the
house), and from the lack of an equity market for homeowners. Note that both of these frictions
could, in principle, be mitigated with financial innovations that addressed the underlying source
of the constraints (moral hazard?). So again we have a model that has too much debt entering a
downturn, and too little debt/liquidity during the downturn.

     Khandani et al conduct a calibrated simulation of their model and estimate that the ratchet
effect led house prices to decline $1.4 trillion more than if no equity had been extracted during
the boom. Bhutta and Keys (2013) find empirical support for the model in the form of evidence



20
   Despite the juxtaposition of too much and too little, Hall (2011, p. 468) infers that credit is over-
supplied on balance: “The most important policy lesson is to prevent the repetition of the poor oversight
of government-protected financial institutions that gave us too much housing, too many cars, and too
much debt during the past decade.”
that consumers who extracted home equity later in the housing boom have been more likely to
default on their mortgages than earlier extractors.



E. Behavioral Consumers (facing Neoclassical Suppliers)
i. Overview of Behavioral Explanations
     A growing body of work posits that consumers are “behavioral” in ways that predispose them
to over-borrow (under-save) relative to some benchmark. What is the benchmark? Generally
speaking I focus here on models where there consumers have some bias that can lead to
excessive borrowing.21 So the benchmark is “unbiased”, and hence often neoclassical.
     What sorts of behavioral biases are thought to matter, and how do economists model them?
One way of understanding behavioral economics, methodologically speaking, is economists
finding evidence (often lab-based, and from other social sciences) that motivates a different
specification of one or more pieces of an otherwise standard economic model. The pieces
themselves are what is standard: preferences, prices (and perceptions thereof, which can be
biased in a behavioral model), expectations about various future parameters (including
preferences and prices), and decision rules (i.e., whether/how someone solves a problem,
conditional on parameter values).
     Why don’t the standard forces of competition, delegation, and/or learning mitigate or
neutralize the effects of any behavioral biases? A growing literature models how behavioral
consumers contract with sophisticated firms, and finds equilibria where firms profit from
exploiting behavioral consumers rather than helping them overcome their biases (more on this
below).22 Casual empiricism suggests that the advice market for liabilities is limited in scope, of
dubious quality, and interacts in interesting ways with low consumer willingness to pay for




21
   In contrast, a lack of knowledge (e.g., a lack of financial literacy) seems to me unlikely to produce
overborrowing in the absence of biases. I suspect that a rational actor who lacks knowledge will in some
cases get her debt level right on average (making mistakes in both directions that cancel out), and in other
cases borrow less if a risk associated with borrowing leads her to opt-out of the market, a la Calvet et al
(2007) on financial asset markets.
22
   See also Ellison (2006) and DellaVigna (2009) for reviews of what is variously referred to as
behavioral or boundedly rational industrial organization.
unbiased advice.23 Opportunities for learning from one’s own experience may be limited; e.g.,
many households obtain a mortgage only at decennial frequencies. And new theories suggest that
consumers may not learn about their biases even when faced with ample opportunities to do so
(Ali 2011; Benjamin, Rabin, and Raymond 2013; Eil and Rao 2011; Schwartzstein 2012). Social
learning can produce herding and inefficient equilibria [Banerjee; Rabin and co-authors].


ii. Circumstantial evidence re: consumer borrowing behavior
     Before proceeding to a brief summary of different behavioral theories and evidence, I start
with some of the circumstantial evidence on borrowing behavior that helps to motivate
behavioral work and policy interest therein.24 One striking observation is that no extant model,
behavioral or otherwise, can generate even ½ of the credit card debt U.S. households hold in
steady-state (Angeletos et al. 2001). Other studies, on loans with triple-digit APRs, find that
consumers respond strongly to uninformative advertising (Marianne Bertrand et al. 2010),
substantially reduce borrowing when exposed to subtle shocks that draw their attention to high
fees (Stango and Zinman 2013a), and borrow repeatedly on expensive short-term loans before
defaulting (Skiba and Tobacman 2008). Descriptive evidence shows a lack of lender disclosure
of, and consumer shopping on, bank overdraft fees even when said fees constitute the lion’s
share of consumer checking account costs (Armstrong and Vickers 2012; General Accounting
Office 2008). “Overpaying” may be as important as “overspending”: there is substantial price
dispersion in mortgage and credit card markets, conditional on credit risk and other contract
terms (Woodward and Hall 2012; Stango and Zinman 2013b). Consumers behave as if search
and switch costs are quite substantial, which could of course be rationalized with a standard
time-cost explanation, but may ultimately be better explained by a behavioral model of (non-
)shopping.




23
   There has been much more work estimating the quality of financial advice on the asset side of the
household balance sheet, and the results are not encouraging. See, e.g., Malkiel (2013) and Inderst and
Ottaviani (2012).
24
   Re: policy interest, see e.g., Sunstein (2006) and Bar-Gill and Warren (2008) for two of the many law
review articles marshaling behavioral arguments for regulation.
iii. Preference-based models

     Perhaps the best-known class of behavioral model25 posits that consumers have a time-
inconsistent taste for immediate gratification. Following Laibson (1997) and O’Donoghue and
Rabin (1999), economists often parameterize this taste by adding an additional discounting
parameter (beta), capturing a relatively strong taste for current consumption, to a standard
intertemporal choice model. This parameterization can generate quasi-hyperbolic discounting
behavior, in contrast to the exponential discounting predicted by models with time-consistent
preferences.26

     Despite the influence of the beta-delta model on research output and policy discussions on
consumer credit, there is actually little sharp empirical evidence linking time-inconsistent
preferences to (over)borrowing. In fact I am not aware of any nationally representative evidence
other than the calibration exercise in Laibson et al (2003), which shows that beta-delta
preferences can rationalize the simultaneous holding of illiquid (retirement-savings) assets and
expensive (credit card) debt. The market for commitment devices that would help consumers
avoid overborrowing is thin (there are alternative explanations for this fact, including other
behavioral biases that dampen demand). There are some interesting findings that suggest a role
for beta-delta (Meier and Sprenger 2010; Skiba and Tobacman 2008), but overall empirical work
has only begun to scratch the surface of field-testing whether time-inconsistent preferences
actually drive (over-)borrowing.

     The lack of empirical evidence becomes less surprising upon close scrutiny of the now-
standard beta-delta model and its implications. Most financed purchases are durables, not
instantaneous consumption per se.27 Obtaining a loan often involves some unpleasant upfront
tasks (comparison shopping, paperwork) that many beta-delta consumers would procrastinate.

     But Heidhues and Koszegi (2010) show how an enriched version of the beta-delta model can
generate overborrowing. As long as consumers are not perfectly sophisticated about their self-

25
   No slight intended to loss aversion, which I also discuss below.
26
   Recent work on intra-household decision making shows that preference heterogeneity among time-
consistent household members can produce time-inconsistent behavior at the household level (Hertzberg
2012; Schaner 2013).
27
   The question of low long the “instantaneous” or “current” consumption period lasts is an important one
that has received little attention aside from Gine et al (2013).
control problems (specifically, as long as they underestimate their time-inconsistency by just a
little bit), firms will offer back-loaded credit contracts in equilibrium. These contracts exploit the
tendency of imperfectly sophisticated consumers to procrastinate repayment, thereby
underestimate the cost of borrowing, and overborrow relative to the benchmark of unbiased
forecasting of one’s behavior. I am not aware of any empirical tests of this model.

   The other canonical behavioral model—preference-based or otherwise—is loss aversion.
Loss aversion is sometimes invoked as potential obstacle to consumers reducing their debt loads
(Karlan and Zinman 2012)-- or, more broadly, to consumers increasing their savings rates
(Benartzi and Thaler 2004)-- but I have yet to see this intuition worked out theoretically, or
tested empirically.

   Another intriguing, preference-based model is Laibson’s (2001) theory of Pavlovian cues.
Some of the evidence in Bertrand et al (2010) is consistent with this model, but again field tests
of the model’s distinct predictions are lacking.

iv. Expectations about repayment
   There is growing concern in policy and “consumer advocacy” circles that consumers are, at
least functionally, overly optimistic about their likelihood of repaying debt. As discussed above,
Heidhues and Koszegi’s model generates this sort of overoptimism via over-optimism about self-
control. Brunnermeier and Parker (2005) rationalize overly optimistic expectations about income
with anticipatory utility, and show that this interaction between preferences and expectations can
produce more consumption (less saving) earlier in the life-cycle, but I have not seen this model
extended to flesh out implications for borrowing or debt contracts. Mullainathan, Shafir, and co-
authors (2012; 2013) suggest that scarcity in the budget constraint leads to consumers to pay
excessive attention to solving problems that alleviate that scarcity (such as obtaining cash,
perhaps via borrowing) and little attention to other problems (such as how they will repay the
loan).
   Empirical work has just begun exploring links between optimism and borrowing. Hyytinen
and Putkuri (2012) explore correlations between a survey-based measure of forecast errors about
financial condition and household borrowing; to me their most striking finding is that forecasts
are unbiased on average. Similarly, Mann (2013) finds that payday borrowers are roughly
unbiased in forecasting how long it will take them to repay.28 If we were focused on
entrepreneurial finance we would certainly consider the possibility of over-confidence in one’s
abilities (in absolute and/or relative terms); perhaps over-confidence is relevant in consumer
credit is well.29 But overall the empirical links between biased expectations of repayment
prospects and borrowing behavior are tenuous at best, and arguably non-existent.


v. Other forms of inattention

     Consumers may not attend to contingent fee schedules if they are overly optimistic about
avoiding such fees. Heidhus and Koszegi generate such optimism through naivete about
preferences for instant gratification. Gabaix and Laibson (2006) impose such optimism on
consumer expectations (“Me, overdraft? Nah.”), and show that the shrouding of such fees can
persist in competitive equilibrium, if, as seems plausible, a debiasing firm does not fully capture
the returns to debiasing (due, e.g., to switch costs). I am not aware of any sharp tests of the
shrouding model re: borrowing behavior, although the evidence in Bucks and Pence (2008) and
in Stango and Zinman (2013a) is consistent with it.

     Karlan et al (2012) explores how consumption v. savings behavior will respond if consumers
tend to forget “exceptional” (infrequent, and relatively large) expenditure needs/opportunities a
la Sussman and Alter (2012). Karlan et al speculates that debt may be “salience-privileged”
relative to saving because it is available on-demand, at the late moment the exceptional expense
becomes salient and it is too late to save up for it.

vi. Biased price perceptions

     As discussed above, consumers can end up underestimating the cost of borrowing due to
biased (overly optimistic) expectations about their self-control (Heidhues and Koszegi 2010) or


28
   Fritzdixon et al (2013) compare repayment expectations to a population average in their sample of auto
title loan borrowers, and find evidence of some, but “not severe” underestimation of repayment time. Of
course, this inference depends on their sample being representative of the comparison population, along
with other factors that are not explored in the paper. Lacking an individual-level measure of optimism, the
paper makes no attempt to directly estimate correlations between optimism and borrowing behavior.
29
   Grubb (2009) shows how consumer overconfidence in demand forecasts give firms incentives to offer
contracts with quantities at zero marginal cost (e.g., teaser rates) followed by steep marginal charges (e.g.,
penalty fees).
more generic underestimation of their demand for services that will incur costly “add-on” prices
(Gabaix and Laibson 2006).

   Consumers might also underestimate prices more directly, even when there is no uncertainty.
I.e., there may be a distinction between the vector of prices economists typically use to capture
the shadow cost of consumption in intertemporal choice models, and how the consumer
perceives that vector of prices. Stango and Zinman (2009) show that the flip side of the well-
known underestimation of compound growth is an underestimation of how quickly principal is
paid back on installment debt, with a more general exponential growth bias explaining both
tendencies. They also find some evidence that more-biased households do hold more installment
debt, and pay higher prices on it (Stango and Zinman 2011). Soll et al (2013) find that people
underestimate how long it takes to eliminate a debt when payments barely covered interest owed.
The latter two papers, and Bertrand and Morse (2011), find some evidence that disclosures
designed to debias consumer underestimates of finance charges (and/or borrowing likelihoods, in
the case of Bertrand and Morse) reduce loan demand.

   The empirical evidence that consumers tend to directly underestimate borrowing costs is
provocative, but comes with several caveats. The body of work lacks a unifying theoretical
framework that analyzes equilibrium consumption-savings and/or contracting outcomes.
Bertrand and Morse does not measure price perceptions directly, and Stango and Zinman (2009)
and Soll et al lack data on other behavioral factors, leaving open the question of whether price
perceptions might be correlated with some other bias that drives behavior. Stango and Zinman
(2011) does not observe disclosures directly. Bertrand and Morse measures borrowing from only
one payday lender providing out-of-equilibrium disclosures.

vii. Summary: The State of Behavioral Evidence on Over-Borrowing

   Links between behavioral biases, equilibrium contracts, and consumer debt levels are
intriguing but remain largely speculative. Overall the work is characterized by bias-/model-
proliferation, and a lack of empirical work testing distinct testable predictions of one or more of
the behavioral explanations.
F. Assessment: Is Credit Over-Supplied?

   My brief assessment here parallels the one re: under-supply. We do not know if credit is
over-supplied. Again, it sure seems that the answer is “yes (sometimes)”. But again the evidence
that leads to this inference is largely circumstantial: we still know remarkably little about the
drivers of any over-supply. The evidence is particularly limited if we restrict consideration to
models that potentially deliver unambiguous predictions of welfare-reducing over-supply—
asymmetric information (advantageous selection, common agency), behavioral consumers, and
location-based externalities in real estate.

   The other models—fire sales, deleveraging, ratcheting to systemic risk—share the property
that the optimal level of debt can depend on the state of the world. Specifically, debt can be too
high entering a downturn, yet too low during the downturn. As such these models have
implications for macroeconomic management—fiscal policy and monetary policy (see also Lippi
and Trachter (2012))—as well as for the regulation of specific credit markets. These models also
raise the question of which objective policymakers should adopt in calmer times: should they try
to reduce credit market frictions, in anticipation of the next downturn? Or should they assume
that frictions will always be severe enough to exacerbate downturns, and introduce frictions
during calmer times to keep leverage from being too high when the next downturn strikes?




IV. Reduced-Form Evidence on the Goldilocks Question

   Another approach to addressing the goldilocks question is to address the “impacts” question:
what happens to economic entities when credit access shifts (due to a plausibly exogenous shock
like a policy change or experiment that shifts credit supply)? Do economic conditions and overall
well-being improve, or deteriorate, as credit supply increases or decreases?

A. Effects of expanded consumer credit supply on consumers

   A growing literature seeks to identify the impacts of changes in “small-dollar” credit access
on the financial condition and well-being of consumers. I focus here on the U.S. studies, in part
because small-dollar credit in developing countries (“microcredit”), and studies thereof, has
focused on microentrepreneurs.30 Small-dollar credit markets in the U.S.—principally payday
loans—are attractive settings for addressing the impacts question for several reasons. First, the
stakes are large, particularly compared to the relatively low incomes of most borrowers. Loan
volumes are in the tens of billions of dollars each year, and APRs are typically in the triple digits.
Second, borrowing is prevalent among populations with relatively high social welfare weights:
there are more payday loan outlets than MacDonalds and Starbucks combined. Third, shocks to
the market itself are unlikely to have effects in the aggregate: the market is not that big, and most
small-dollar loans are uncollateralized (auto title loans being the key exception these days).
Fourth, there is substantial policy variation-- at the state, within-state, and federal levels—that
can help with identification.

     Results from the U.S. literature are quite mixed. Some prior studies find that, on average,
expensive consumer loans help borrowers smooth negative shocks (Morse 2011) or better
manage liquidity to alleviate financial distress (Zinman 2010; Morgan, Strain, and Seblani 2012).
Other studies find that increased access to expensive credit increases financial distress (Melzer
2011; D. Campbell, Tufano, and Martinez-Jerez 2012) and bankruptcy (Skiba and Tobacman
2011; Morgan, Strain, and Seblani 2012), and decrease job performance (Carrell and Zinman
2013). Two other studies find no impacts on credit scores (Bhutta 2012; Bhutta, Skiba, and
Tobacman 2012). It remains unclear how much of the variation in evidence is due to variation in
methodology vs. substance. Carrell and Zinman speculate the latter, and in particular variation in
consumer choice sets, is critical: given a pool of productive and counter-productive (perhaps
behavioral) borrowers, productive borrowers may be more likely to refrain from borrowing when
outside options are worse, leaving counter-productive borrowers to dominate the pool.31

     Besides the mixed bag of results and lingering questions about identification, the extant
impacts literature has several other limitations that limit its direct applicability to policy design.
There is not yet any generally accepted, directly measurable summary statistic for consumer
welfare (although in my view many of the approaches taken thus far are quite sensible). Existing


30
   Karlan and Zinman (2010) is an exception, and finds that expanded access to 4-month consumer loans
at 200% APR substantially increases job retention and well-being in South Africa. See Banerjee (2013)
for a summary of evidence on the impacts of credit targeted to microentrepreneurs.
31
   Carrell and Zinman’s finding that payday loan-induced job performances declines are larger in high
unemployment areas is consistent with this story.
methodologies have not been powerful enough to identify any non-linearities (e.g., perhaps the
relationship between welfare and credit supply is upside-down u-shaped).

     Perhaps the most important limitation of the existing impacts evidence is that it leaves us
without a diagnosis of the mechanism(s) underlying any failure in market allocations. Another
way of framing this issue is to consider the challenge of inferring even a policy objective (much
less a specific mechanism for achieving that objective) from a given qualitative result on
consumer impacts. Say the bulk of the evidence found that more credit makes consumers better-
off. This is consistent with credit being under-supplied of course. But it is also consistent with
credit being over-supplied, at least in a first-best sense, as it may be the case that the credit
expansion serves behavioral consumers who would otherwise borrow from inferior sources. This
is an important consideration if it is feasible to cost-effectively regulate certain types of credit
suppliers (e.g., large payday lenders) but not others (small payday lenders, loan sharks).32 Now
say instead that the bulk of the evidence found that credit expansions have null effects on
consumers. Besides the obvious interpretation, we should also consider the possibilities that
impacts are heterogeneous in ways that might invite targeting and screening, and that other
market failures interact with credit market failures in important ways (Emran and Stiglitz
2007).33

B. Long-run effects of expanded consumer credit supply on economies?

     In principle it would be informative to study more-aggregated impacts of access to consumer
credit as well. This sort of evidence would internalize some potential spillovers (Angelucci,
Karlan, and Zinman 2013), while providing an aggregate analog to the consumer-impacts
literatures (Section IV-A) and a long-run/steady-state analog to the leveraging and deleveraging
literatures (Section III-C). Despite the extensive literature on links between financial
development and growth, both across-country (e.g., Levine 1997), and within-country (e.g.,
Jayaratne and Strahan 1996), I am not aware of any evidence that sharply identifies the impacts



32
   See Stango and Zinman (2011) for some related evidence on disparate enforcement (across banks vs.
non-banks) of mandated disclosure in the auto loan market.
33
   The inferential challenge even extends to robust evidence of negative impacts, as it could be the case
that (enough) consumers are effectively risk-loving. This actually does not seem totally implausible given
limited liability, and/or the option value of changing industries in the labor market (Neumuller 2013).
of consumer credit per se. I suspect this is due in large part to the difficulty of disentangling the
impacts of consumer credit from other sorts of financial intermediation.



V. Conclusion

     Many policy questions regarding consumer credit begin with a presumption about whether,
and to what extent, markets fail to supply an efficient quantity of credit. Theories abound for
both over-supply and under-supply. Several classes of models have elements of both; in
particular, they predict that credit will be over-supplied heading into a downturn, and then under-
supplied during the downturn. If this inference about state-contingency is accurate then it further
complicates optimal policy design. E.g., it raises the question of which objective policymakers
should adopt in calmer times: should they try to reduce credit market frictions, in anticipation of
the next downturn? Or should they assume that frictions will always be severe enough to
exacerbate downturns, and introduce frictions during calmer times to keep leverage from being
too high when the next downturn strikes?

     These and other fundamental questions remain open ones because empirical evidence is
mixed, and limited. We are still a long way from diagnosing specific failures—market, decision,
governmental, etc.-- that could and should be treated with policy interventions.

     I suspect that diagnoses and treatments will vary substantially across product markets.
Different product markets may attract different (behavioral) types of borrowers, and the mix of
types can have important welfare and policy implications (e.g., J. Y. Campbell 2006). Variation
in opportunity sets might affect the mix of borrower types as well; e.g., productive borrowers
may opt-out of a market when productive investments in human capital or consumption
smoothing are lacking, leaving counter-productive borrowers to dominate the pool. The
contracting equilibrium also merits scrutiny; e.g., it seems more likely to me that an equilibrium
with symptoms of shrouded pricing (e.g., checking account overdrafts) is sub-optimal than an
equilibrium with more-transparent pricing (like payday loans).34 Finally, the distinction between
collateralized and uncollateralized loans seems likely to be important. To highlight just two

34
  Although see Bertrand and Morse (2011) for some evidence suggesting that one-off price disclosures
(“$15 per $100”, 400% APR, etc.) may not be sufficient, perhaps because some borrowers underestimate
the longer-term costs and/or likelihoods of borrowing.
distinctions among many, collateralized loans may be subject to more externalities (via
collateralized asset values), while unsecured debt interacts more strongly with bankruptcy rules.

     In short, policymakers should approach consumer credit markets with humility. There is a
lack of convincing evidence on whether markets err, and in which direction. We do not yet
understand whether and under what conditions markets over-supply or under-supply credit, much
less why. Under the current evidentiary conditions, traditional approaches to policymaking will
likely do more harm than good in many cases.

     To be clear, I am not positing a binary policy choice between doing something ill-conceived
and doing nothing. The opportunity set is richer is than that, and endogenous to regulator
choices. A key is to make choices that generate evidence while minimizing path-dependence.
This is relatively difficult for policies aimed at stabilization and systemic risk. But policymakers
concerned more with long-run and steady-state credit supply have viable options. E.g., as I have
argued elsewhere, it would behoove policymakers to do more “beta-testing” and less “ready, fire,
aim!”35




35
  http://www.dartmouth.edu/~jzinman/Papers/Evidence_Based_Policymaking_SDC.pptx . See also, e.g.,
Sunstein (2011).
                                          REFERENCES

Adams, William, Liran Einav, and Jonathan Levin. 2009. “Liquidity Constraints and Imperfect Information
         in Subprime Lending.” American Economic Review 99 (1) (March): 49–84.
Ali, S Nageeb. 2011. “Learning Self‐Control.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (2): 857–893.
Angeletos, George‐Marios, David Laibson, Jeremy Tobacman, Andrea Repetto, and Stephen Weinberg.
         2001. “The Hyperbolic Consumption Model: Calibration, Simulation, and Empirical Evaluation.”
         Journal of Economic Perspectives 15 (3): 47–68.
Angelucci, Manuela, Dean Karlan, and Jonathan Zinman. 2013. “Win Some Lose Some? Evidence from a
         Randomized Microcredit Program Placement Experiment by Compartamos Banco.” Working
         Paper.
Armstrong, Mark, and John Vickers. 2012. “Consumer Protection and Contingent Charges.” Journal of
         Economic Literature 50 (2): 477–493.
Attanasio, O.P., P.K. Goldberg, and E. Kyriazidou. 2008. “Credit Constraints in the Market for Consumer
         Durables: Evidence from Micro Data on Car Loans.” International Economic Review 49 (2) (May):
         401–436.
Banerjee, Abhijit. 2013. “Microcredit Under the Microscope: What Have We Learned in the Past Two
         Decades, and What Do We Need to Know?” Annual Review of Economics 5 (1): 487–519.
Bar‐Gill, Oren, and Elizabeth Warren. 2008. “Making Credit Safer.” University of Pennsylvania Law
         Review: 1–101.
Benartzi, Shlomo, and Richard Thaler. 2004. “Save More Tomorrow: Using Behavioral Economics to
         Increase Employee Saving.” Journal of Political Economy 112 (1, Part 2 Supplement): S164–S187.
Benjamin, Daniel J., Matthew Rabin, and Collin Raymond. 2013. “A Model of Non‐Belief in the Law of
         Large Numbers.”
Bertrand, M., and A. Morse. 2011. “Information Disclosure, Cognitive Biases, and Payday Borrowing.”
         Journal of Finance 66 (6): 1865–1893.
Bertrand, Marianne, Dean Karlan, Sendhil Mullainathan, Eldar Shafir, and Jonathan Zinman. 2010.
         “What’s Advertising Content Worth? Evidence from a Consumer Credit Marketing Field
         Experiment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 125 (1) (February): 263–305.
Bhutta, Neil. 2012. “Payday Credit Access and Household Financial Health: Evidence from Consumer
         Credit Records.”
———. 2013. “Mortgage Deleveraging: Evidence from Consumer Credit Record Data.”
Bhutta, Neil, Jane Dokko, and Hui Shan. 2011. “Consumer Ruthlessness and Strategic Default during the
         2007‐2009 Housing Bust”. FEDS Working Paper Forthcoming.
Bhutta, Neil, and Benjamin Keys. 2013. “Interest Rates and Equity Extraction During the Housing Boom.”
Bhutta, Neil, Paige Skiba, and Jeremy Tobacman. 2012. “Payday Loan Choices and Consequences.”
Bisin, Alberto, and Danilo Guaitoli. 2004. “Moral Hazard and Nonexclusive Contracts.” Rand Journal of
         Economics 35 (2): 306–328.
Brunnermeier, M., and J. Parker. 2005. “Optimal Expectations.” American Economic Review 94 (5):
         1092–1118.
Brunnermeier, Markus K. 2009. “Deciphering the Liquidity and Credit Crunch 2007–2008.” Journal of
         Economic Perspectives 23 (1) (January): 77–100. doi:10.1257/jep.23.1.77.
Bryan, Gharad, Dean Karlan, and Jonathan Zinman. 2013. “Referrals: Peer Screening and Enforcement in
         a Consumer Credit Field Experiment.”
Bucks, Brian, and Karen Pence. 2008. “Do Borrowers Know Their Mortgage Terms?” Journal of Urban
         Economics 64 (2): 218–233.
Calvet, L., J.Y. Campbell, and P. Sodini. 2007. “Down or out: Assessing the Welfare Costs of Household
         Investment Mistakes.” Journal of Political Economy 115 (5): 707–747.
Campbell, Dennis, Peter Tufano, and Asis Martinez‐Jerez. 2012. “Bouncing Out of the Banking System:
         An Empirical Analysis of Involuntary Bank Account Closures.” Journal of Banking & Finance 36
         (4): 1224–1235.
Campbell, John Y, Stefano Giglio, and Parag Pathak. 2011. “Forced Sales and House Prices.” American
         Economic Review 101 (5) (August): 2108–2131. doi:10.1257/aer.101.5.2108.
Campbell, John Y. 2006. “Household Finance.” Journal of Finance LXI (4): 1553–1604.
Carrell, Scott, and Jonathan Zinman. 2013. “In Harm’s Way? Payday Loan Access and Military Personnel
         Performance.”
Chatterjee, Satyajit, Dean Corbae, Makoto Nakajima, and José‐Víctor Ríos‐Rull. 2007. “A Quantitative
         Theory of Unsecured Consumer Credit with Risk of Default.” Econometrica 75 (6): 1525–1589.
De Meza, D., and D. Webb. 1987. “Too Much Investment: A Problem of Asymmetric Information.” The
         Quarterly Journal of Economics 102 (2) (May): 281–92.
———. 2000. “Does Credit Rationing Imply Insufficient Lending?” Journal of Public Economics 78 (3)
         (November): 215–34.
Degryse, Hans, Vasso Ioannidou, and Erik von Schedvin. 2012. “On the Non‐Exclusivity of Loan Contracts:
         An Empirical Investigation.”
DellaVigna, Stefano. 2009. “Psychology and Economics: Evidence from the Field.” Journal of Economic
         Literature 47 (2) (June): 315–372.
Dobbie, Will, and Paige Marta Skiba. 2013. “Information Asymmetries in Consumer Credit Markets:
         Evidence from Payday Lending.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 5 (4) (October):
         256–282. doi:10.1257/app.5.4.256.
Eggertsson, Gauti B, and Paul Krugman. 2012. “Debt, Deleveraging, and the Liquidity Trap: A Fisher‐
         Minsky‐Koo Approach*.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 127 (3): 1469–1513.
Eil, David, and Justin M Rao. 2011. “The Good News‐Bad News Effect: Asymmetric Processing of
         Objective Information about Yourself.” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 3 (2): 114–
         138.
Einav, L, and A Finkelstein. 2010. “Selection in Insurance Markets: Theory and Empirics in Pictures.” The
         Journal of Economic Perspectives: A Journal of the American Economic Association 25 (1): 115–
         138.
Einav, Liran, Mark Jenkins, and Jonathan Levin. 2012. “Contract Pricing in Consumer Credit Markets.”
         Econometrica 80 (4): 1387–1432.
———. 2013. “The Impact of Credit Scoring on Consumer Lending.” The RAND Journal of Economics 44
         (2): 249–274.
Ellison, G. 2006. “Bounded Rationality in Industrial Organization.” In Advances in Economics and
         Econometrics: Theory and Applications. Cambridge University Press.
Emran, Shahe, and Joseph Stiglitz. 2007. “Microfinance and Missing Markets.”
Fritzdixon, Kathryn, Jim Hawkins, and Paige Skiba. 2013. “Dude, Where’s My Car Title? The Law,
         Behavior, and Economics of Title Lending Markets.”
Gabaix, Xavier, and David Laibson. 2006. “Shrouded Attributes, Consumer Myopia, and Information
         Suppression in Competitive Markets.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 121 (2): 505–540.
Gale, William G. 1991. “Economic Effects of Federal Credit Programs.” The American Economic Review
         81 (1) (March 1): 133–152.
General Accounting Office. 2008. “Federal Banking Regulators Could Better Ensure That Consumers
         Have Required Disclosure Documents prior to Opening Checking or Savings Accounts.”
Gerardi, Kristopher, Kyle F Herkenhoff, Lee E Ohanian, and Paul S Willen. 2013. “Unemployment,
         Negative Equity, and Strategic Default.”
Gine, Xavier, Jessica Goldberg, Daniel Silverman, and Dean Yang. 2013. “Revising Commitments: Field
         Evidence on the Adjustment of Prior Choices.”
Glaeser, Edward L, Joshua Gottlieb, and Joseph Gyourko. 2010. “Did Credit Market Policies Cause the
         Housing Bubble?” Policy Briefs.
Goldstein, Itay, and Assaf Razin. 2013. “Three Branches of Theories of Financial Crises.”
Gordon, Robert J, and James H Stock. 1998. “Foundations of the Goldilocks Economy: Supply Shocks and
         the Time‐Varying NAIRU.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1998 (2): 297–346.
Grodzicki, Daniel. 2012. “The Evolution of Competition in the Credit Card Market.”
Gross, David, and Nicholas Souleles. 2002. “Do Liquidity Constraints and Interest Rates Matter for
         Consumer Behavior? Evidence from Credit Card Data.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117 (1)
         (February): 149–85.
Grubb, Michael D. 2009. “Selling to Overconfident Consumers.” The American Economic Review: 1770–
         1807.
Guerrieri, Veronica, and Guido Lorenzoni. 2012. “Credit Crises, Precautionary Savings, and the Liquidity
         Trap.”
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. 2013. “The Determinants of Attitudes towards Strategic
         Default on Mortgages.” The Journal of Finance.
Hall, Robert E. 2011. “The Long Slump.” American Economic Review 101 (2) (April): 431–469.
         doi:10.1257/aer.101.2.431.
Hart, Oliver, and Luigi Zingales. 2011. “Inefficient Provision of Liquidity.”
Heidhues, Paul, and Botond Koszegi. 2010. “Exploiting Naïvete about Self‐Control in the Credit Market.”
         American Economic Review 100 (5): 2279–2303.
Hertzberg, Andrew. 2012. “Exponential Individuals, Hyperbolic Households.”
Hertzberg, Andrew, Jose Liberti, and Daniel Paravisini. 2011. “Public Information and Coordination:
         Evidence from a Credit Registry Expansion.” The Journal of Finance 66 (2): 379–412.
Hoff, Karla, and Joseph E Stiglitz. 1998. “Moneylenders and Bankers: Price‐Increasing Subsidies in a
         Monopolistically Competitive Market.” Journal of Development Economics 55 (2): 485–518.
Hyytinen, A., and H. Putkuri. 2012. “Household Optimism and Borrowing.”
Inderst, Roman, and Marco Ottaviani. 2012. “Financial Advice.” Journal of Economic Literature 50 (2):
         494–512.
Jayaratne, Jith, and Philip E Strahan. 1996. “The Finance‐Growth Nexus: Evidence from Bank Branch
         Deregulation.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 111 (3): 639–670.
Justiniano, Alejandro, Giorgio E. Primiceri, and Andrea Tambalotti. 2013. “Household Leveraging and
         Deleveraging”. Working Paper 18941. National Bureau of Economic Research.
         http://www.nber.org/papers/w18941.
Karlan, Dean, Margaret McConnell, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Jonathan Zinman. 2012. “Getting to the
         Top of Mind: How Reminders Increase Saving”. Working Paper.
Karlan, Dean, and Jonathan Zinman. 2008. “Credit Elasticities in Less Developed Economies: Implications
         for Microfinance.” American Economic Review 98 (3) (June): 1040–1068.
———. 2009. “Observing Unobservables: Identifying Information Asymmetries with a Consumer Credit
         Field Experiment.” Econometrica 77 (6): 1993–2008.
———. 2010. “Expanding Credit Access: Using Randomized Supply Decisions to Estimate the Impacts.”
         Review of Financial Studies 23 (1): 433–464.
———. 2012. “Borrow Less Tomorrow: Behavioral Approaches to Debt Reduction.”
Khandani, Amir E, Andrew W Lo, and Robert C Merton. 2012. “Systemic Risk and the Refinancing Ratchet
         Effect.” Journal of Financial Economics.
Laibson, D. 1997. “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112 (2)
         (May): 443–477.
———. 2001. “A Cue‐Theory of Consumption.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (1) (February): 81–
         119.
Laibson, D., A. Repetto, and J. Tobacman. 2003. “A Debt Puzzle.” In Knowledge, Information, and
         Expectations in Modern Macroeconomics: In Honor of Edmund S. Phelps, edited by P. Aghion, R.
         Frydman, J. Stiglitz, and M. Woodford, 228–266. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Levine, Ross. 1997. “Financial Development and Economic Growth: Views and Agenda.” Journal of
         Economic Literature 35 (2): 688–726.
Lippi, Francesco, and Nicholas Trachter. 2012. “State Dependent Monetary Policy.”
         http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2034108.
Livshits, Igor, James MacGee, and Michele Tertilt. 2007. “Consumer Bankruptcy: A Fresh Start.” The
         American Economic Review 97 (1): 402–418.
Lusardi, Annamaria, Daniel J Schneider, and Peter Tufano. 2011. “Financially Fragile Households:
         Evidence and Implications”. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Malkiel, Burton G. 2013. “Asset Management Fees and the Growth of Finance.” The Journal of Economic
         Perspectives 27 (2): 97–108.
Mani, Anandi, Sendhil Mullainathan, Eldar Shafir, and Jiaying Zhao. 2013. “Poverty Impedes Cognitive
         Function.” Science 341 (6149): 976–980.
Mann, Ronald. 2013. “Assessing the Optimism of Payday Loan Borrowers.”
McKernan, Signe‐Mary, Caroline Ratcliffe, and Daniel Kuehn. 2013. “Prohibitions, Price Caps, and
         Disclosures: A Look at State Policies and Alternative Financial Product Use.” Journal of Economic
         Behavior & Organization.
Meier, Stephan, and Charles Sprenger. 2010. “Present‐Biased Preferences and Credit Card Borrowing.”
         American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2 (1): 193–210.
Melzer, Brian. 2011. “The Real Costs of Credit Access: Evidence from the Payday Lending Market.” The
         Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (1): 517–555.
Melzer, Brian, and Donald P. Morgan. 2012. “Competition in a Consumer Loan Market: Payday Loans
         and Overdraft Credit.”
Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi. 2011. “House Prices, Home Equity‐Based Borrowing, and the US Household
         Leverage Crisis.” American Economic Review 101 (5): 2132–56.
———. 2012a. “Forceclosures, House Prices, and the Real Economy.”
———. 2012b. “What Explains High Unemployment? The Aggregate Demand Channel.”
———. 2013. “Household Balance Sheets, Consumption, and the Economic Slump.”
Midrigan, Virgiliu, and Thomas Philippon. 2011. “Household Leverage and the Recession.”
Morgan, Donald P., M.R. Strain, and Ihab Seblani. 2012. “How Payday Credit Access Affects Overdrafts
         and Other Outcomes.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 44 (2‐3): 519–531.
Morse, Adair. 2011. “Payday Lenders: Heroes or Villains?” Journal of Financial Economics 102 (1): 28–44.
Neumuller, Seth. 2013. “Wage Volatility and the Option Value of Inter‐Industry Mobility.”
O’Donoghue, T., and M. Rabin. 1999. “Doing It Now or Later.” American Economic Review 89 (1): 103–
         24.
Schaner, Simone. 2013. “Do Opposites Detract? Intrahousehold Preference Heterogeneity,
         Commitment, and Inefficient Strategic Savings.”
Schwartzstein, Josh. 2012. “Selective Attention and Learning.”
Shah, Anuj K., Sendhil Mullainathan, and Eldar Shafir. 2012. “Some Consequences of Having Too Little.”
         Science 338 (6107) (November 2): 682–685.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W Vishny. 1992. “Liquidation Values and Debt Capacity: A Market
         Equilibrium Approach.” The Journal of Finance 47 (4): 1343–1366.
Skiba, Paige, and Jeremy Tobacman. 2008. “Payday Loans, Uncertainty, and Discounting: Explaining
         Patterns of Borrowing, Repayment, and Default.”
———. 2011. “Do Payday Loans Cause Bankruptcy?”
Soll, Jack B, Ralph L Keeney, and Richard P Larrick. 2013. “Consumer Misunderstanding of Credit Card
          Use, Payments, and Debt: Causes and Solutions.” Journal of Public Policy & Marketing 32 (1):
          66–81.
Stango, Victor, and Jonathan Zinman. 2009. “Exponential Growth Bias and Household Finance.” Journal
          of Finance 64 (6): 2807–2849.
———. 2011. “Fuzzy Math, Disclosure Regulation, and Credit Market Outcomes: Evidence from Truth‐in‐
          Lending Reform.” Review of Financial Studies 24 (2): 506–534.
———. 2013a. “Limited and Varying Consumer Attention: Evidence from Shocks to the Salience of Bank
          Overdraft Fees.”
———. 2013b. “Borrowing High vs. Borrowing Higher: Sources and Consequences of Dispersion in
          Individual Borrowing Costs.”
Stiglitz, J.E., and A. Weiss. 1981. “Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect Information.” American
          Economic Review 71 (3) (June): 393–410.
Sunstein, Cass R. 2006. “Boundedly Rational Borrowing.” The University of Chicago Law Review: 249–
          270.
———. 2011. “Empirically Informed Regulation.” U. Chi. L. Rev. 78: 1349.
Sussman, Abigail B, and Adam L Alter. 2012. “The Exception Is the Rule: Underestimating and
          Overspending on Exceptional Expenses.” Journal of Consumer Research 39 (4): 800–814.
Woodward, Susan E., and Robert E Hall. 2012. “Diagnosing Consumer Confusion and Sub‐Optimal
          Shopping Effort: Theory and Mortgage‐Market Evidence.” American Economic Review 102 (7):
          3249–3276.
Zinman, Jonathan. 2010. “Restricting Consumer Credit Access: Household Survey Evidence on Effects
          around the Oregon Rate Cap.” Journal of Banking & Finance 34 (3) (March): 546–556.
