                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    HOUSING COLLATERAL AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP

                                          Martin C. Schmalz
                                           David A. Sraer
                                           David Thesmar

                                        Working Paper 19680
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19680


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2013




For helpful comments and discussions we would like to thank Sugato Bhattacharyya, Markus Brunnermeier,
Denis Gromb, Antoinette Schoar, José Scheinkman, Philip Strahan, as well as seminar participants
at IDC, the University of Michigan, the University of Amsterdam, the 10th Annual Corporate Finance
Conference at Olin Business School, and the CEPR European Workshop on Entrepreneurship Economics.
All errors are our own. David Thesmar thanks the HEC foundation for financial support. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Martin C. Schmalz, David A. Sraer, and David Thesmar. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Housing Collateral and Entrepreneurship
Martin C. Schmalz, David A. Sraer, and David Thesmar
NBER Working Paper No. 19680
November 2013
JEL No. G3

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper shows that collateral constraints restrict entrepreneurial activity. Our empirical strategy
uses variations in local house prices as shocks to the value of collateral available to individuals owning
a house and controls for local demand shocks by comparing entrepreneurial activity of homeowners
and renters operating in the same region. We find that an increase in collateral value leads to a higher
probability of becoming an entrepreneur. Conditional on entry, entrepreneurs with access to more
valuable collateral create larger firms and more value added, and are more likely to survive, even in
the long run.


Martin C. Schmalz                                   David Thesmar
University of Michigan                              HEC Paris
701 Tappan St                                       1 rue de la libération
R5456                                               78351 Jouy-en-Josas cedex
Ann Arbor, MI 48109                                 France
schmalz@umich.edu                                   thesmar@hec.fr

David A. Sraer
Princeton University
Bendheim Center for Finance
26 Prospect Avenue
Princeton, NJ 08540
and NBER
dsraer@princeton.edu
      “Higher home prices can stoke the economy by providing owners with more valuable
collateral to borrow against for other purchases; many entrepreneurs fund their business this
way.” The Economist, Oct 19, 2013.



1.       Introduction

This paper provides evidence that entrepreneurs face credit constraints, which restrict firm
creation, post-entry growth, and survival, even over the long run. The existing literature
documents a strong correlation between entrepreneurial wealth and the propensity to start
or keep a business (Evans and Jovanovic, 1989; Evans and Leighton, 1989; Holtz-Eakin et al.,
1993). However, a considerable debate is waging about whether such a correlation constitutes
evidence of financial constraints. For instance, individuals who experience a wealth shock,
through personal accumulation or inheritance, may also experience an expansion of business
opportunities for reasons unrelated to their wealth (Hurst and Lusardi, 2004). In this case,
policies aimed at facilitating the financing of new businesses would not increase welfare.
Worse yet, in the absence of financial constraints, positive shocks to entrepreneurial wealth
may lead to excessive investment, provided that entrepreneurs derive private benefits from
remaining in business (Andersen and Nielsen, 2011; Nanda, 2011). On the other hand, if
financing frictions lead to underinvestment and fewer than optimal business starts, public
intervention in favor of small firm financing may be welfare improving. For these reasons,
the question of whether financing constraints significantly hinder firm creation and growth
carries important policy implications.
      To contribute to this debate, this paper uses variations in local house prices, combined
with micro-level data on home ownership by entrepreneurs.1 We employ a difference-in-
differences approach. We compare entrepreneurial outcomes of entrepreneurs owning a house
and entrepreneurs renting a house, and compare this difference across geographic regions with
different house price dynamics. The comparison between owners and non-owners allows us
  1
      We refer to all owners of newly created businesses as “entrepreneurs.”

                                                       1
to filter out local economic shocks that may drive the creation, growth, and survival of local
businesses. This approach is similar to Chaney et al. (2012), who document the effect of
collateral values on the investment of publicly traded corporations in the United States.
   We investigate both the extensive and intensive margin of entrepreneurship, that is, entry
decisions as well as post-entry growth. Our investigation starts with firm growth and survival,
conditional on entry. We construct a large cross section of French entrepreneurs starting a
businesses in 1998. Combining survey data and administrative data, we are able to observe
a variety of personal characteristics, in particular, the home location of the entrepreneurs, as
well as their home-ownership status. We match this information to firm-level accounting data
of the newly created firms for up to eight years following creation. We find that in regions
with greater house price growth in the 1990s, firms started by homeowners in 1998 are
significantly larger and more likely to survive than firms started by renters. In other words,
the difference in the size of businesses created by owners and renters is larger in regions
in which house prices have appreciated more in the past five years. This effect is robust to
controlling for a large set of entrepreneurial characteristics. It is also persistent: in 2005, firms
started by entrepreneurs with lower collateral values in 1998 remain significantly smaller in
terms of assets, sales, employment, or value added. Finally, this effect is economically large:
going from the 25th to the 75th percentile of house price growth in the five years preceding
creation allows homeowners to create firms that are 6.5% larger in terms of total assets.
   We then verify how collateral shocks affect the probability of starting a business, that is,
the extensive margin of entrepreneurship. To this end, we use a different dataset, the French
labor force survey, which is a rotating panel that tracks randomly selected individuals for
three consecutive years. Importantly, these data contain information on home ownership,
geographic location, and entrepreneurial activity. We find that homeowners located in re-
gions where house prices appreciate more are significantly more likely to create businesses,
relative to renters located in the same regions. In other words, the difference between owners
and renters in the propensity to start a business is larger in regions in which house prices


                                                 2
appreciated more in the past. Again, the effects are economically sizable. Going from the
25th to the 75th percentile of past house price growth increases the probability of firm cre-
ation by homeowners, relative to renters, by 9% in our preferred specification. We confirm
the importance of this result in the aggregate: total firm creation at the regional level is
more correlated with house prices in regions where the fraction of homeowners is larger.
   This paper contributes to the literature on financing constraints and entrepreneurship.
The extant literature focuses on the link between entrepreneurial wealth and firm creation,
growth, or survival. Robb and Robinson (2013) document that debt is a large source of
financing for start-ups (approximately 44%) and that its availability is related to the scarcity
—and therefore the value— of real estate collateral. Hurst and Lusardi (2004) and Adelino et
al. (2013) are closest to our paper, because they also investigate the role of housing wealth on
firm creation. However, our paper makes two significant advances relative to these papers:
(1) the information on individual homeownership allows us to control for local economic
shocks that might create a spurious correlation between entrepreneurial rate and local house
prices, and (2) the nature of our data allows us to track not only firm creation (the extensive
margin), but also post-entry growth and survival over a long horizon (the intensive margin).
   Several earlier papers focus on the role of inheritance shocks to firm quality and sur-
vival. Holtz-Eakin et al. (1993) find that firms started after a large inheritance are more
likely to survive, a finding they interpret as evidence of credit constraints. By contrast, us-
ing Danish data, Andersen and Nielsen (2011) find that businesses started following a large
inheritance have lower performance. This finding suggests the relationship between wealth
and entrepreneurship may be driven by private benefits of control, or in other words, that
business ownership has a luxury-good component (Hurst and Lusardi, 2004). The relation
between wealth shocks and post-entry growth/survival thus remains an open discussion. Our
paper contributes to this debate by looking at wealth shocks generated by local variations
in house prices for homeowners. Arguably, these shocks are much less likely to be correlated
with the unobserved heterogeneity in entrepreneurial outcome than inheritance shocks. Fra-


                                               3
cassi et al. (2012) also provide a clean identification on the role credit constraints play small
business survival, by exploiting a discontinuity in the attribution of loans to start-ups at a
small local bank. In a similar vein, Black and Strahan (2002) find that banking deregulations
in U.S. states led to a large increase in firm creations. Whereas these papers focus on the
effect credit supply on firm creation and survival, our paper focuses on credit demand via
the supply of collateral.
     Our paper also contributes to the emerging literature on the link between economic activ-
ity and collateral values (Black et al., 1996; Bernanke and Gertler, 1986; Kiyotaki and Moore,
1995), particularly real estate collateral. When house prices increase, firms and households
have more collateral to pledge, which raises borrowing capacity. On the credit-supply size,
banks, balance sheets become stronger, which allows them to lend more. Recent papers have
documented the link between house prices and household borrowing and consumption (Mian
et al., 2011; Gan, 2010), the link between real estate prices and corporate investment (Gan,
2007a; Chaney et al., 2012), and the link between real estate bubbles and bank lending (Gan,
2007b). Our paper shows that entrepreneurial activity also strongly reacts to changes in the
value of collateral available to potential entrepreneurs.
     The paper has four remaining sections. Section 2 describes the data we use. Section 3
lays out the empirical strategy. We describe and comment on the results in section 4. Section
5 concludes.



2.      Data

The paper uses three different sets of data. The first is a random sample of one sixth of
all entrepreneurs starting a firm in France in 1998, with detailed information on both the
entrepreneur herself and the firm she creates, every year until 2005 or firm exit. We use
this sample to investigate the impact of housing wealth on post-entry growth and survival.
We call this dataset the intensive-margin sample. The second dataset is a representative



                                               4
three-year rotating panel of French individuals, covering the 1990-2002 period, with detailed
information on occupation and personal characteristics, but no information on post-entry
growth. We use this sample to investigate how shocks to housing wealth affect the propensity
to start a business. We call this dataset the extensive margin sample. The third dataset
directly uses aggregate (e.g., regional and exhaustive) data on firm creation, homeownership
rate, and house price fluctuations. This last dataset allows us to confirm, using alternative
data sources, that our microeconomic findings on firm creations are still present at a more
aggregated level.


2.1.       Intensive-Margin Sample

We construct this first dataset from the 1998 wave of the SINE survey (see Landier and
Thesmar (2009) for a thorough description of this data source). The French statistical office
(INSEE) runs this survey every four years, sending questionnaires to the selected firms. Due
to its administrative nature, the survey response rate is high (85%). The survey contains
detailed information on the entrepreneur (age, education, work experience, etc.) and her
project (ambition, industry, scope, form of business, etc.). It selects a random sample of
approximately one third of all firms started in France during the first semester. It consists
of both “new” start-ups as well as existing firms taken over by new entrepreneurs. We focus
only on the first category. Importantly for our purpose, the survey asks the entrepreneur
whether she owns or rents her private home.2
       To measure post-entry growth, we use accounting information from the tax files from the
Finance Ministry. These files, available yearly from 1999 to 2005, cover all firms that are
subject to either the regular corporate tax regime (Bénéfice Réel Normal) or to the simplified
corporate tax regime (Régime Simplifié d’Imposition). Together, these data cover about 55%
of newly created firms. The remaining 45% correspond to very small firms. Indeed, firms
   2
    Other waves of this survey (1994, 2002, 2006) exist, but the 1998 wave is the only one that has information
on homeownership. This data limitation forces us to focus on a single cross section of data for the post-entry
growth analysis. Our analysis on the decision to start a business does not face such constraints.



                                                      5
with annual sales below 32,600 Euros (81,500 Euros in retail and wholesale trade) can opt
out and choose a simplified account reporting (Micro-Entreprise), in which case they do
not appear in the tax files. The tax files contain detailed accounting information. For the
purpose of this study, we retrieve information on location, total assets, total sales, financial
debt, number of employees, value added, and the wage bill. As in the SINE survey, each firm
in the tax file is uniquely identified by its SIREN number, a feature we exploit to match the
two datasets.
   We collect information on house prices from the office of French notaries. These data are
available annually from 1985 at the level of the “région.” France has 21 such districts, with an
average population of 3.1 million inhabitants. For each région, we calculate the cumulative
house price from 1992 to 1997 as our measure of housing capital gains for entrepreneurs that
are homeowners. This measure of the cross-sectional variability in housing wealth is clearly
noisy because unobserved variation exists in leverage and the date on which the house was
purchased. This measurement error may generate an attenuation bias so that our results
should be interpreted as lower bounds on the true effects.
   The 1998 wave of the SINE survey conveys a total of 21,871 new start-ups. From this
initial sample, we restrict our sample to firms for which we have accounting information in
the 1999 tax files. The sample size drops to 11,745 observations. Then, we restrict ourselves
to start-ups that have information on all the variables we include in our regression analysis:
homeownership (our key explanatory variable) and other control variables (prior occupation,
age, education, gender, business form, industry, and firm location). We end up with a sample
of 9,173 firms.
   Table I presents summary statistics of the intensive-margin dataset. Panel A reports the
distribution of house price growth from 1992 to 1997 across the 21 geographic regions. Over
the 1992 to 1997 period, real estate prices grew by 3% on average (median of 3% as well).
Importantly for our identification strategy, significant heterogeneity exists across régions,
from flat prices at the 25th percentile to +9% at the 75th percentile. Out of the 21 régions


                                               6
in France, two experienced house price declines in that period. In particular, Ile-de-France,
the région containing Paris, experienced a severe decline of house prices by more than 20%
over the period.
   Panel B reports the firm characteristics we use as controls in our regression analysis for
the first whole fiscal year after creation, that is, in 1999. The average firm has 131k euros
in assets, 208k euros in sales, 102k euros of debt, and close to two employees. Average value
added (revenue less outside purchases of materials and services) is 130k euros, of which
49k euros correspond to wage payments (total employee compensation). As expected, all
these variables have positive skewness: in the median firm, the owner is the firm’s only
employee. Table A.I compares characteristics of owners and renters. The differences in
observables are not economically large, but statistically significant, which is why we include
these observables as interacted controls in our regressions (see below). Table A.I shows
that homeowners run smaller businesses, create less value added, and are less educated
than renters. These unconditional comparisons of owners and renters reject the notion that
homeowners are richer, more educated, or otherwise more able to run a business.
   Panel C describes the personal characteristics of the entrepreneurs in our sample. In
this large, representative sample of entrepreneurs, we find that self-employment accounts for
a large fraction of the sample, which is consistent with U.S. studies (Hurst and Pugsley,
2012). Only 23% of the entrepreneurs in our sample have a university degree, and 41%
have vocational training comparable to an associate’s degree in the United States. Before
starting their business, 36% of respondents were unemployed and 10% were inactive. Many
of these businesses are not incorporated. Forty-two percent take the legal form of a sole
proprietorship, a number similar to Levine and Rubinstein (2013). Figure 1 reports the
industry distribution of the firms in our sample. As expected in a representative sample of
start-ups, construction, retail, and consulting are the most common industries in which new
businesses get started.
   Overall, because of the large fraction of uneducated, formerly unemployed individuals,


                                              7
the homeownership rate among entrepreneurs is relatively low. In this sample, only 29%
of these entrepreneurs are homeowners, whereas, in 2010, 58% of households in France own
their house.


2.2.       Extensive Margin Sample

Our second dataset uses the yearly waves of the French Labor Force Survey from 1990 to
2002 (“Enquête Emploi”), a three-year rotating panel, which is in many ways similar to the
US PSID. The unit of observation is the home address, so that the survey misses households
that move. However, conditional on respondents staying in the same home, this survey allows
us to observe transitions from employment to entrepreneurship/self-employment during the
three years in which an individual is surveyed. Importantly for our purpose, these data
also contain information on home ownership, as well as on the geographic location of the
respondent.
       We focus on observations corresponding to individuals that are surveyed for the second
time, that is, individuals who are staying in the sample for one more year. We also restrict
ourselves to household heads (“personne de référence”). Given that we are studying housing
collateral, only one person per household should be able to pledge the household’s house
to outside investors. This person is likely to be the head of the household. We also drop
retirees and students from the original sample, as well as individuals under 20 or older than
64. Because we are studying the transition into entrepreneurship, we also drop existing
entrepreneurs. Table II, panel B, presents summary statistics for this selected sample. Fifty-
seven percent of individuals surveyed own their house and 6% are unemployed. The median
respondent is 43 years old. Fifteen percent of respondents are women and 6% are foreigners.
Finally, 37% of the respondents have no diploma, whereas 10% have a college degree.3 For
each individual in this selected sample, we then create a dummy equal to 1 if the data show
   3
     Table A.II compares characteristics of owners and renters. While new entrepreneurs who own a house
are less educated and have smaller businesses, in the general population, wealth and education are correlated
with home ownership.



                                                     8
that the individual starts a business in the following year, which corresponds to year 3 for
this individual. The average probability of transition into entrepreneurship is 1.3%.
       We then merge this dataset with a sample of regional house prices. We use regional
house prices to calculate, each year t and within each region, the cumulative growth of
house prices between year t − 6 and year t − 1. As explained in the previous section, from
1990 to 1998, house price growth data are available at the région level. From 1998 onward,
house price growth data become available at a finer level — the level of the “département.”
A département is a French administrative district, with an average population of 600,000
inhabitants.4 To increase the precision of our measure of cumulative house price growth,
we use the finest level of granularity available. As an illustration, consider a département d
located in région r. To calculate the cumulative house price growth in département d from
1995 to 2000, we first compute house price growth in région r from 1995 to 1998, and then
use house price growth in département d from 1998 to 2000. This approach allows us to
make the most efficient use of our data but is not crucial for our results, which are robust to
using région-level prices throughout. In our regression analyses, we adopt the conservative
approach of including deṕartement fixed effects, while clustering error terms at the level
of the région.5 Table II reports summary statistics for cumulative house price growth. The
median rate of five-year regional house price growth in our sample period is 12%. Substantial
cross-regional heterogeneity exists: the standard deviation of five-year house price growth is
20%.


2.3.       Aggregate Data

As a complement to our individual-level results on the decision to start a business, we run
aggregate regressions at the département level. This alternative procedure is a useful double-
   4
     France has 90 département and 21 régions. Départements are roughly the same size as an MSA in the
United States.
   5
     The small number of clusters has the potential to create a downward bias in the estimation of standard
errors (Angrist and Pischke, 2008). In our case, however, clustering at the région level provides larger
standard errors than clustering at the dèpartement level. We thus report these more conservative standard
errors.

                                                    9
check of our results because (1) we expect our micro-economic results to be visible at a more
aggregated level and (2) we can use alternative, exhaustive datasets.
     In terms of variables, we compute the fraction of homeowners in 1990 using the (exhaus-
tive) 1990 census, defined as the fraction of first houses (as opposed to secondary houses) in
the département that are owned by their occupants. We measure firm creation at the dé-
partement level by aggregating information from the Business Creation Registry maintained
by the French statistical office (INSEE). This dataset contains the universe of firms created
in France with their precise date, location, legal form (limited liability corporation or sole
proprietorship), and employment at birth. To make results comparable with those from the
“extensive margin sample,” we focus on the 1990-2002 period. We also obtain information
from INSEE on the industry composition of the workforce, by département. We use this
last piece of information as a time-varying control. Table II, panel C, presents summary
statistics for this sample.



3.       Empirical Strategy

We perform three sets of empirical analyses. The first focuses on the intensive margin of
entrepreneurship, namely post-entry growth of newly created businesses conditional on entry,
at the individual level. The second focuses on the extensive margin of entrepreneurship,
namely the probability of entry into entrepreneurship at the individual level. The third
focuses on the extensive margin of entrepreneurship, but at the aggregate (département)
level.




                                             10
3.1.     Intensive Margin Regressions

To study post-entry growth and survival, we estimate the following regression, where i is an
entrepreneur/firm and j is the région of location of the entrepreneur:


Yij1999 = α+β ·D(owner)i ×∆p1992→1997
                            j         +θ ·D(Owner)i +γ ·Zi +τ ·Zi ×∆p1992→1997
                                                                     j         +δl +εi,j .
                                                                                            (1)
    The 1999 upper script denotes the fact that the outcome variable is measured in 1999, that
is, for the first whole fiscal year after creation, which occurs in 1998. The outcome variables
we consider are the logarithm of total assets, total sales, total debt, number of employees,
value added, and total wage bill. D(owner) is a dummy equal to 1 if the entrepreneur is
a homeowner. ∆p1992→1997
               j         is real estate price growth in région j from 1992 to 1997. δl are
département fixed effects. The Zi s are control variables for the business owner (occupation
previous to becoming an entrepreneur, age, education, gender) or for the firm she creates
(legal form of the business — sole proprietorship or limited liability corporation — industry,
whether the business is operated from the private home of the entrepreneur or elsewhere).
These controls are also interacted with ∆p1992→1997
                                          j         . We cluster error terms at the région
level.
    Equation (1) can be interpreted as a difference-in-difference strategy. The first difference
can be thought of as a comparison between the size of new businesses created by homeowners
in regions with high house price growth from 1993 to 1998 and regions with low house price
growth from 1993 to 1998. Intuitively, if entrepreneurs need real estate collateral in order to
access external financing, homeowners should be able to create larger firms in regions that
recently experienced large real estate inflation relative to regions with smaller house price
appreciation. Renters should be thought of as a “control” group: a group of entrepreneurs
who are not exposed to variations in collateral values (the treatment) but who are exposed to
similar local demand shocks / investment opportunities as homeowners (the “treated” group).
A positive β coefficient— our coefficient of interest— in equation (1) would indicate that,


                                               11
in regions with high house price growth, homeowners create larger firms than renters and
this relative to regions with smaller house price growth. The null hypothesis that collateral
values are irrelevant for entrepreneurial activity would lead to β = 0.
   The comparison between renters and homeowners is the key difference between our ap-
proach and what people have traditionally done in the literature (Hurst and Lusardi (2004)
and Adelino et al. (2013)). Our approach relies on the identifying assumption that the size
gap between firms created by homeowners and renters is independent of the local housing
market, except for the role played by collateral.
   Of course, this assumption is strong, because entrepreneurial characteristics might exist
that correlate both with the propensity to own a house and with the sensitivity of invest-
ment opportunities to the local market. For instance, older entrepreneurs could be more
likely to both own a house and start a business in industries that have greater exposure to
local economic activity, for example, in retail. If indeed the elasticity of size at creation to
past house price appreciation depended on unobserved characteristics that themselves deter-
mine ownership, this would invalidate our identifying assumption. Specifically, a correlation
between individuals’ tendency to own a home and to start businesses in more cyclical indus-
tries would introduce an upward bias in the estimation of β. Although we cannot test the
identifying assumption, we partially alleviate this concern by controlling in equation (1) for
a variety of personal/firm characteristics that might be correlated with the own-versus-rent
decision and might also be correlated with the sensitivity of investment opportunities to
local economic activity. Precisely, we include controls for the business owner (occupation
previous to becoming an entrepreneur, age, education, gender) and for the firm she creates
(legal form of the business — sole proprietorship or limited liability corporation — industry,
whether the business is operated from the private home of the entrepreneur or elsewhere).
By interacting these variables with our price growth variable in equation (1), we ensure our
effect is not driven by composition effects arising from renters having different observable
characteristics than homeowners.


                                              12
   In spite of these controls, one possible concern with the interpretation of equation (1)
is that renters may also be affected by changes in housing prices. If rents respond rapidly
to changes in house prices, rising house prices can generate a negative income shock to
renting households. In the presence of financial constraints, this may limit their ability to
start a business, and the coefficient β in equation (1) would reflect both the collateral shock
for owners, and the negative income shock for renters. Although both stories are to some
extent similar —they rely on some form of financing constraint— we believe the collateral
story is much more credible because empirically, rents fluctuate much less than house prices.
Although long-term data on rents are not available in France, the French statistical office has
shown in a recent study that from 1996 to 2010, real house prices have risen by some 85%,
while real rents have only risen by 8% over the same period (Gallot et al., 2011). To confirm
this result over a longer period and in the absence of French data, we use rent and house
price data for the United States from Davis et al. (2008) for the 1960-2013 period. We find
an average elasticity of the five-year real rent growth to the five-year real price growth of 0.15
(see Figure A.I). This estimate is slightly larger than what French data suggest, consistent
with the fact that in France, individual renting contracts have a five-year maturity during
which rents cannot be increased faster than inflation. Overall, because rent only weakly
responds to changes in house prices, even in the long run, we expect the collateral effect on
owners to largely dominate the effect on the cash flows of renters.
   We also investigate how access to valuable collateral affects entrepreneurial outcome
in the long run. To this end, we estimate equation (1) but replace the outcome variables
measured in 1999 with the same outcome variables measured in later years (up to 2005). This
analysis is conditional on the firm’s survival. We separately examine the role of financing
constraints on survival, by using a survival dummy for various horizons (2, 3, 4, and 5 years)
as a dependent variable in equation (1).




                                               13
3.2.      Extensive Margin Regressions

To study the decision to start a business, we estimate the following specification, for an
individual i, located in département j and year t:


       Pr[Ei,j,t+1 = 1|Ei,j,t = 0] = α + β · D(owner)i,t × ∆pj,t−6→t−1 + θ · D(Owner)i,t

                                          +γ · Zi,t + τ · Zi,t × ∆pj,t−6→t−1 + δj + εi,j,t ,        (2)


where Ei,j,s is a dummy variable equal to 1 if individual i living in département j is an
entrepreneur at date t. The rotating panel structure of our data allows us to observe these
transitions (see section 2.2 for details on the construction of the sample). β is the coefficient
of interest. ∆pj,t−6→t−1 is the cumulative house price growth in département j between year
t − 6 and year t − 1.6 Note that house price growth is now indexed with time t, because we
employ a panel dataset for this regression. Controls Zi are now: education dummies, gender,
foreign/national dummy, past-year wage (or unemployment insurance benefit if unemployed),
a dummy for past-year work status (employed vs. unemployed), and age. As before, standard
errors are clustered at the région level. Equation (2) is estimated using a probit model, but
we check the robustness of the results using a linear probability model. As in equation (1),
the coefficient β is the focus of our analysis. If the availability of housing collateral affects
the decision to start a business, we expect that β > 0.
      The identification of equation (2) follows a logic similar to equation (1), but a key dif-
ference is that we observe firm creations over 1990-2002, which brings additional identifying
power from the time series of house prices. To see how, notice that within each region and
for each year, we compare homeowners’ versus renters’ propensity to start a business. The
coefficient β is then identified both on the cross-sectional and time-series variations of this
difference. In the cross-section, the estimate of β is larger if regions with higher house price
growth experience more firm creation by owners than renters (this source of identification is
  6
    As explained in section 3.2, before 1998, we compute département-level house price growth, using the
corresponding région-level house price growth.


                                                  14
similar to that used in equation (1)). In the time-series, the estimate of β is larger when the
relative entrepreneurial activity of owners and renters co-moves with accelerations in house
prices. This second source of identification is specific to this “extensive” margin analysis.


3.3.      Aggregate Extensive-Margin Regressions

In this section, we investigate the aggregate effects of the collateral channel for entrepreneur-
ship. We estimate the following specification on our département-level dataset, where j is a
département and t is the year:

                 New Firmsj,t
                              =             α + β · %owners1990
                                                           j    × ∆pj,t−6→t−1
                   Popj,t
                                             + τ · Zj1990 × ∆pj,t−6→t−1 + δj + ηt εi,j .            (3)


%owners1990
       j    is the fraction of homeowners in département j in 1990, ∆pj,t−6→t−1 is house
price growth in the five years preceding year t, δj are département fixed effects, and ηt are
                      New Firmsj,t
year fixed-effects.     Popj,t
                                     is the ratio of newly created firms to a measure of population in
year t in département j. For the main regression, new firms consist only of limited liability
corporations and corporations, because data on creation of sole proprietorship are available
only from 1993 onward. In an unreported robustness check, we verify that our effect holds
when we consider all new firms, creation starting in 1993. In our preferred specification,
the normalization variable Popj,t consists of the number of “active households” in the region.
It corresponds to the number of households whose head is active in the labor force and
between 20 and 65 years old. We use this normalization —instead of total population— to
check that our aggregate results provide estimates that are consistent with our “extensive
margin” regressions, which are run on the sample of “active” households.7
      We also explore the employment effect of these collateral shocks. To do so, we exploit
the fact that the exhaustive registry of new firms contains information on the number of jobs
  7
    Our results are not sensitive to this normalization choice — they carry through if we normalize, for
instance, by total population instead.


                                                      15
at creation. We thus simply use, as an alternative dependent variable in equation (3), the
ratio of all jobs in newly created firms (at creation) in a region normalized by the number
of active households in this region.
     We control for the heterogeneity in the fraction of homeowners in a département by
including the following set of covariates: the fraction of the working population in 1990 in the
region working in Agriculture, Manufacturing, Construction, Service and non-profit Service
(measure available from the French statistical office INSEE), the size of the département
measured by its population from the 1990 census, and the logarithm of the median wage in
the département, obtained from the labor force survey in 1990. Error terms are clustered at
the région level.



4.     Results

Our results provide support for the notion that the collateral channel constrains entrepreneurial
activity, at both the intensive and extensive margins. We have three sets of results. First,
conditional on entrepreneurship, entrepreneurs who start after receiving large housing cap-
ital gains in the years prior to entry are able to start larger firms in terms of total assets,
employment, sales, value added, and wage bill. Second, employed individuals experiencing
large housing capital gains are more likely to start a business than non-homeowners or home-
owners living in regions with lower house price growth. Third, in the aggregate, the elasticity
of business starts to local house prices is stronger in regions with a higher ownership rate.


4.1.     Intensive Margin Individual-level Results

Table III reports the point estimates from the estimation of equation (1). The outcome
variables are log assets, log sales, log debt, log number of employees, log of value added, and
log of the wage bill. The variable of interest is the interaction of the owner dummy and house
price appreciation from 1992 to 1997 (Owner × ∆p). We control for characteristics of the


                                              16
business owner (occupation previous to becoming an entrepreneur, age, education, gender),
legal form of the business (sole proprietorship or corporation), industry, whether the firm is
located in the owner’s home or elsewhere, as well as all interactions of these controls with
∆p, which we do not report to clarify presentation. The regressions also include département
fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the région level.
   We find significant effects of collateral values on the size of newly created businesses,
conditional on business creation. Going from the 25th to the 75th percentile of house price
growth from 1992 to 1997 (i.e., a 9 percentage point increase in house price growth) leads
to a 15% (=1.7 × .09) increase in total assets, a 9% (=1 × .09) increase in total sales and
a 2.3% (=.26× .09) increase in employment. Consistent with the collateral channel, we find
this larger scale of operation following housing capital gains is accompanied by larger debt
levels: going again from the 25th to the 75th percentile of house price growth leads to a 12%
(=.81 × .09) increase in total debt. We also investigate how the access to more valuable
collateral affects the wages paid by the newly created firms, as well as the total valued added.
The estimated effect on the total compensation of employees is large (9% increase following
a 9-percentage-point increase in house price growth), but it is also noisy (t-stat of 1.6). The
imprecision of the estimate may reflect the fact that the owner has discretion over paying
herself a salary (which goes into compensation) or a dividend. Total Value Added, measured
as sales minus intermediary inputs, is immune to this issue, because value added is the sum
of labor and capital incomes (employee compensation, interest payments, retained earnings,
and dividends paid). The estimated effect on value added is also large : going from the 25th
to the 75th percentile of house price growth leads to a 7% (=.74 × .09) increase in value
added. All the results in Table III are significant at the 1% confidence level except for the
effect on total employee compensation. These effects reported in Table III correspond to
short-term effects, in the sense that we observe for the first whole fiscal year after creation.
   We now investigate the long-term impact of financing constraints. Although we have
provided evidence that firms are financially constrained at birth (they start smaller), this


                                              17
effect might disappear after a few years, as firms accumulate enough profits to self-finance
their growth. This possibility is at the heart of the debate on the macroeconomic impact
of financing constraints (see Moll (2013) or Midrigan and Xu (2013)). This literature asks
whether financing constraints have the power to induce misallocation of capital across firms.
One possibility is that financing constraints may induce little misallocation if (1) productivity
shocks are persistent and (2) firms can self-finance their growth. Our analysis suggests,
however, that financing constraints at birth (i.e., in 1998) have long-term effects (up to
2005).
   To establish this fact, we exploit the feature that house price growth from 1992 to 1997,
which we use as our measure of collateral gains for owners in 1998, is not correlated with
house price growth from 1999 to 2004. Figure 2 plots cumulative house price growth from
1999 to 2004 at the région level against cumulative house price growth from 1992 to 1997.
We find a slightly negative –but statistically insignificant– correlation of -.1. Hence firms
that we consider collateral rich at birth in 1998 are not the ones that are collateral rich after
their creation. We can thus investigate the long-run effects of financing constraints at birth
by regressing post-entry size in the 2000s on collateral gains in 1998.
   In Figure 3, we show that access to valuable collateral has a persistent effect on firm size,
sales, and the other outcome variables. To this end, we modify equation (1) by using Yijt as the
dependent variable; that is, the outcome variables are now measured in year t ∈ [2000, 2005]
and no longer in 1999. Importantly, house price appreciation is still measured from 1992
to 1997. Figure 3 shows that most of the effects reported in Table III for 1999 are still
observed later in the sample period. For instance, in 2005, firms created following larger
housing capital gains in the 1990s still have significantly larger sales, value added, and total
wage bill. For all outcome variables, the effects estimated throughout the early 2000s are
fairly stable and close to their 1999 value reported in Table III. In sum, Figure 3 shows that
collateral shocks have a persistent effect on the long-run behavior of newly created firms.
   One possible interpretation of results in Figure 3 is that collateral shocks make home-


                                               18
owners less risk averse, because risk aversion is a decreasing function of wealth. As a result,
homeowners would start larger and riskier firms. Because we observe firm growth conditional
on survival, the results of Table III and Figure 3 may be evidence of risk-taking: firms started
by entrepreneurs with larger housing capital gains are larger if they survive, but would be
less likely to survive.
       To test for this risk-shifting hypothesis, we estimate equation ((1)) but use as a dependent
variable the probability of exiting our accounting data in year t conditional on being in
operation in year t − 1.8 A positive coefficient on Owner × ∆p would indicate collateral-rich
firms are more likely to disappear from accounting data —consistently with the risk-taking
hypothesis. We report the marginal effects of these probit regressions for all horizons in Table
IV, as well as a cumulative probability of exiting the data before 2005. The results show
that collateral shocks are not related to subsequent firm exit. The one significant marginal
effect in column 5 is economically small, only significant at 10%, and in any case, negative.
The last column of Table IV looks at the effect on exit at some point before 2005, which is
the accumulation of all hazard rates shown in columns 1-6. Again, the relative availability
of collateral in 1999 is not statistically significant and has a negative effect on attrition.
Table IV is broadly inconsistent with the hypothesis that access to more valuable collateral
increases risk taking.


4.2.       Extensive Margin: Individual-level Results

The previous section discussed regressions that estimate the effect of house price apprecia-
tion on homeowners’ business success conditional on entry. This section looks at the entry
decision itself. To this end, we use the panel extracted from the French Labor Force Survey
and described in section 2.2. In this sample, the unconditional probability of becoming an
entrepreneur is about 1.3%. This section asks whether, relative to renters, this probability
is systematically different for homeowners who have experienced substantial housing cap-
   8
    To limit the number of independent variables and avoid the incidental-parameters problem, we use région
fixed effects instead of département fixed effects.

                                                    19
ital gains in the past five years relative to homeowners in regions with lower house price
appreciation.
       Table V presents the estimation of equation (2). Columns 1 and 2 report marginal
effects from a probit regression. Columns 3 and 4 report results from a linear probability
model. Columns 1 and 3 only include region and year fixed effects. Columns 2 and 4
include additional controls (education dummies, previous year income, age, sex, a foreign
nationality dummy, and the interaction of these controls with local house price appreciation
∆p). All specifications yield positive and statistically significant estimates for the interaction
of house price growth and the homeownership dummy.9 The effects we report are of a sizable
magnitude. Using the point estimates from column 4, we find that going from the 25th to
the 75th percentile of house price growth (an 18-percentage-point increase) leads to a .11-
percentage-point (.0065× .18) increase in the probability of starting up a business. Because
the unconditional probability of starting a business is 1.3%, the estimate corresponds to
a 9% increase in the probability of becoming an entrepreneur. Taken together with the
results from section 4.1, our results show that access to valuable collateral is a significant
determinant of both the decision to become an entrepreneur and the size of the business
created, conditional on entry.
       We finish this section by emphasizing the importance of controlling for the homeownership
status of the individual. In a seminal contribution, Hurst and Lusardi (2004) use data from
the PSID to regress the probability of starting a business on past house price appreciation,
without interacting the price appreciation with individual or average ownership rates. Hurst
and Lusardi (2004) fail to find a significant and positive effect of past house price growth
on the entrepreneurship decision and interpret this finding as a rejection of the hypothesis
that credit constraints significantly reduce entrepreneurial activity. In Table A.V, we report
   9
    Appendix Table A.IV introduces the controls consecutively to show the stability of the estimate to the
introduction of the controls. Even previous year income, a proxy for wealth other than housing wealth, leads
only to a modest decline in the point estimate, and significance, if anything, increases. The stability of the
estimate to the introduction of a plethora of observable controls increases our confidence in the robustness
of our main estimation.



                                                     20
results that are consistent with the results in Hurst and Lusardi (2004), that is, a weak,
negative relationship between recent past house price appreciation in the region where the
individual is located and the decision to become an entrepreneur. In addition to establishing
the comparability of our sample with the PSID sample used by Hurst and Lusardi (2004), this
table shows how omitting to interact past house price appreciation with the homeownership
status can affect the results significantly in our sample at least.
   Table A.V also helps rule out one alternative interpretation of our results, which would
rely on a form of a bank-lending channel. Assume banks are local and own local real estate.
Home price increases would then lead to an increase in credit supply, which might be chan-
neled in priority to collateral owners. This mechanism would be an alternative explanation
of our results. If such a story did hold, however, one would expect the point estimate for ∆p
in Table A.V to be positive and significant. The fact that it is significantly negative tends
to rule out this explanation.


4.3.    Extensive Margin: Aggregate Results

We have shown in the previous section that regions with lower house price growth experi-
ence lower entrepreneurial activity from homeowners living in that region. In this section,
we investigate whether these effects aggregate up at the département level using separate,
exhaustive census data. To this end, we estimate equation (3) and show that in départe-
ments with a larger fraction of homeowners, entrepreneurial activity depends more strongly
on past house price growth.
   Table VI presents the results of an OLS estimation of equation (3). In this equation,
we use two distinct measures of entrepreneurial activity at the département level: (1) the
number of firms created per active household (Panel A) and (2) the employment in newly
created firms in the département per active household (Panel B). We report both unweighted
results (columns 1 and 3) and results weighted by the number of active households in the
département (columns 2 and 4). Columns 1 and 2 only include year and département fixed


                                               21
effects as controls. Columns 3 and 4 also control for the interaction of a region’s industry
composition, size, and median wage with past house price appreciation. All specifications
yield positive and statistically significant coefficients. In our sample, entrepreneurial activity
responds significantly more to past increases in house prices in regions with a large fractions
of homeowners.
   First, we note that the point estimate we obtain in Panel A of Table VI is similar to the
point estimate obtained in individual-level regressions, despite the fact that (1) the data are
different (Labor Force Survey vs. census data) and (2) the set of control variables differs.
Another difference between the two approaches is that our aggregate regressions use 1990
ownership rates from the decennial census, instead of continuously updated information
on ownership as in the individual-level regressions of Table V. Without control variables,
the aggregate regressions yield a point estimate of .0064 (column 2, Panel A of Table VI),
whereas individual survey-based regressions yield .0095 (column 3 of Table V). For regressions
including control variables, we obtain .0041 (column 4, Panel A of Table VI) versus .0065
(column 4 of Table V).
   Second, the magnitudes we report in Table VI are large, both for the effect of collateral
values on business counts and induced job creation. Looking at the number of firms created,
column 3 of Panel A —the unweighted specification including the full set of controls— shows
that, taken at the median homeownership rate (.58%), a one-standard-deviation increase in
∆p leads to an increase in the number of newly created firms by .05 % of the number of active
households in the region (.0047×.58×.20). Given that the average region has some 150,000
such households, this percentage corresponds to an increase in the number of new firms by
about 80. This number should be compared with the average number of newly created firms
in the département, which is about 700 per year. Hence a one-standard-deviation increase
in house prices leads to an increase by 13% (= 80/700) of the number of newly created firms
in the département. To quantify the effect of collateral values on direct job creation induced
by newly created firms, we look at the unweighted estimate with the full set of controls


                                               22
of column 3, Panel B. At the average homeownership rate, a one-standard-deviation price
increase leads to an increase in jobs at newly created firms by 1.2% of the number of active
households in the département (= .011×.58×.20). This increase corresponds to about 1,900
jobs by region, or 1, 900 × 95 = 180, 000 jobs nationwide (some 1% of total employment). Of
course, highlighting that these estimates represent only partial equilibrium effects is crucial:
they do not take into account potential crowding out on incumbent firms or any other form
of general equilibrium effects.
     We can also quantify the effect of financing constraints on firm and job creation by
considering a fictitious economy where the homeownership rate is 100%. At the average
price growth rate, which is .15, the estimate from Panel A, column 3 of Table VI suggests
that in this counterfactual economy, the number of newly created firms would be higher by
about 150, 000 × .0047 × (1 − .58) × .15 = 44 new businesses by region, or a 6% increase.
From the results in Panel B, column 3 of Table VI, we infer that an economy with a 100%
homeownership rate would see an increase in aggregate employment of about 100,000 jobs.
Again, we stress that these counterfactual analyses are only partial equilibrium effects and
do not take into account general equilibrium effects that may arise in the counterfactual
economy. For instance, incumbent firms may grow less as a result of new firms’ entry (see
Johan Hombert and Thesmar (2013) for a reduced-form analysis of crowding-out effects).



5.     Conclusions

Using variations in local house prices, as well as variations in homeownership, this paper
shows that collateral frictions matter for the creation of new firms, as well as for the size of
newly created firms, both at the individual and regional level. Our paper highlights another
channel through which house prices can affect aggregate activity. This channel is different
from the one emphasized by Mian and Sufi (2012), who look at how declining house prices
impair the balance sheet of levered households, contributing significantly to a decline in



                                              23
employment. Our analysis shows that declining house prices will also affect the supply of
entrepreneurs, which may in turn deteriorate aggregate activity. Quantifying the relative
importance of these two channels is an important task that we leave for further research.




                                            24
References

Adelino, Manuel, Antoinette Schoar, and Felipe Severino, “House Prices, Collateral
  and Self-Employment,” Technical Report, Working Paper 2013.

Andersen, S. and K. Nielsen, “Ability or Finances as Constraints to Entrepreneurship?
  Evidence from Survival Rates in a Natural Experiment,” Evidence from Survival Rates in
  a Natural Experiment (June 2011), 2011.

Angrist, Joshua and Jorn-Steffen Pischke, Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Em-
  piricist’s Companion, Princeton University Press, 2008.

Bernanke, Ben S and Mark Gertler, “Agency costs, collateral, and business fluctua-
  tions,” Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research Cambridge, Mass., USA
  1986.

Black, Jane, David De Meza, and David Jeffreys, “House prices, the supply of collat-
  eral and the enterprise economy,” The Economic Journal, 1996, pp. 60–75.

Black, Sandra and Philip Strahan, “Entrepreneurship and Bank Credit Availability,”
  The Journal of Finance, 2002, pp. 2807–33.

Chaney, Thomas, David Sraer, and David Thesmar, “The Collateral Channel: How
  Real Estate Shocks affect Corporate Investment,” American Economic Review, 2012, 102
  (6), 2381–2409.

Davis, Morris, Andreas Lehnert, and Robert Martin, “The Rent-Price Ratio for the
  Aggregate Stock of Owner-Occupied Housing,” Review of Income and Wealth, 2008, 54
  (2), 279–284.

Evans, David S and Boyan Jovanovic, “An estimated model of entrepreneurial choice
  under liquidity constraints,” The Journal of Political Economy, 1989, pp. 808–827.



                                            25
   and Linda S Leighton, “Some empirical aspects of entrepreneurship,” The American
  Economic Review, 1989, 79 (3), 519–535.

Fracassi, Cesare, Mark Garmaise, Shimon Kogan, and Gabriel Natividad, “How
  Much Does Credit Matter for Entrepreneurial Success in the United States?,” Available at
  SSRN 2157707, 2012.

Gallot, Philippe, Elodie Leprévost, and Catherine Rougerie, “Les Logements An-
  ciens et Loyers entre 2000 et 2010,” Technical Report, INSEE Première 2011.

Gan, Jie, “Collateral, debt capacity, and corporate investment: Evidence from a natural
  experiment,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2007, 85 (3), 709–734.

  , “The real effects of asset market bubbles: Loan-and firm-level evidence of a lending
  channel,” Review of Financial Studies, 2007, 20 (6), 1941–1973.

  , “Housing Wealth and Consumption Growth: Evidence From a Large Panel of House-
  holds,” Review of Financial Studies, 2010, 23 (1), 2229–2267.

Holtz-Eakin, Douglas, David Joulfaian, and Harvey S Rosen, “Sticking it out: En-
  trepreneurial survival and liquidity constraints,” Technical Report, National Bureau of
  Economic Research 1993.

Hurst, E. and A. Lusardi, “Liquidity constraints, household wealth, and entrepreneur-
  ship,” Journal of Political Economy, 2004, 112 (2), 319–347.

Hurst, Erik and Benjamin Pugsley, “What Do Small Businesses Do ?,” Technical Re-
  port, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2012.

Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro and John Moore, “Credit cycles,” Technical Report, National Bu-
  reau of Economic Research 1995.

Landier, Augustin and David Thesmar, “Financial contracting with optimistic en-
  trepreneurs,” Review of financial studies, 2009, 22 (1), 117–150.

                                             26
Levine, Ross and Yona Rubinstein, “Does Entrepreneurship Pay?             The Michael
  Bloombergs, the Hot Dog Vendors, and the Returns to Self-Employment,” Technical Re-
  port, Working Paper, Berkeley and LSE 2013.

Mian, Atif, Kamalesh Rao, and Amir Sufi, “Household Balance Sheets, Consumption,
  and the Economic Slump,” Consumption, and the Economic Slump (November 17, 2011),
  2011.

Mian, Atif R. and Amir Sufi, “What explains high unemployment? The aggregate
  demand channel,” NBER Working Papers 17830, National Bureau of Economic Research,
  Inc February 2012.

Midrigan, Virgiliu and Daniel Xu, “Finance and Misallocation: Evidence from Plant-
  Level Data,” forthcoming American Economic Review, 2013.

Moll, Benjamin, “Productivity Losses from Financial Frictions: Can Self-Financing Undo
  Capital Misallocation?,” forthcoming American Economic Review, 2013.

Nanda, R., “Entrepreneurship and the discipline of external finance,” Technical Report
  11-098, Harvard Business School Entrepreneurial Management Working Paper 2011.

Robb, A.M. and D.T. Robinson, “The capital structure decisions of new firms,” Technical
  Report, forthcoming Review of Financial Studies 2013.

Schoar, David Sraer Johan Hombert Antoinette and David Thesmar, “Can Un-
  employment Insurance Spur Entrepreneurial Activity? Evidence From France,” Technical
  Report, Working Paper 2013.




                                          27
     3500	  


     3000	  


     2500	  


     2000	  


     1500	  


     1000	  


      500	  


          0	  
                             	                  	            )	                 g	                 	             t	            	                   n	              g	       	             g	                     	                	          l	                  y	           t	              	             n	               ir	                	           l	              n	             e	                      	            n	            g	                 s	                      	                   	                  	                d	         n	           	        r	  
                      try                     re            on                                       es            en             ve                                               IT            in                     ry                 er                                             en               es                                                   le           ai                                                        te                                                                     &D                      ts                  ts                                          re
                    es                  ltu                :                  :n                  tor                     o:                         c :o            u rin                    in                   u st                 ap             ica lurg                                       l i:               c:o               e pa             e sa          et                a :o            a nc                  s ta               a                               vic e                 R                    r  an                 por              d	  ai          a                       he
                                                        uc               in                                   em       m                                         c t                        M                     d               	  p             e m            a l                p m           :                  u             	  r              o l             R               r t              i n               	  E                 i c
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      :o u l : n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                s                e r                                       u                   	   s              o l                c
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         :o hca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  l t         Ot
              F   or         r      icu         d                      Pr                  g	  s                                         tru                                                             i	   n                d                 h           e t                   i             U               t r             r                  h                               o                F               a l                     n              n                s                                          a                   ,                   h                  u           a
                                             ro                          ru                       ov                to              ns                        fa                                   le                      an                    C                               qu                         ns                Ca                W                                p                                                         u            Co               s	                                         st                 re                    e                 Ed
                          Ag                                      ,	  d                      pr             Au                  co                      nu                                                           d	                                M                l	  e                                                                                             ns                                 Re                     m                              on                                      	  re                 ltu                 us                                He
                                    g 	  (p                    s                	   i m                                 d 	                         a                                        x:                                                                     ca                                Co                                                               ra                                                                                                                                                      cu                  Ho
                                  n                          ie                e                                                                 	  m                                      Te                     oo                                               r i                                                                                                 T                                                       c om                             r a:                                    and                ,	  
                               hi                         ac                m                                          oa                 g	  /                                                                W                                                 t                                                                                                                                                    le                                      e                                 ls 	  
                            ot                                                                                     ilr                                                                                                                                      ec                                                                                                                                                   Te                                     Op                                te                             on
                         Cl                          a rm              Ho                                  	   ra               e rin                                                                                                                   El                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       a:
                                                                                                        n ,                e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ho                     re
                                                  Ph                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       c
                                                                                                     :o                gin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Re
                                                                                                v ia              En
                                                                                         	   a




28
                                                                                      g,
                                                                               in
                                                                         u ild
                                                                       b
                                                                 ip
                                                            Sh


                                                                                 Figure 1: Industry Distribution of Newly Created Businesses.
                                                                                 The graph shows the industry distribution of the businesses created in the first half of 1998 that get selected
                                                                                 into our sample.
                                       1
   Cumulative Price Growth (1999-2004)
      .4          .6   .2    .8




                                           -.1                     0                .1               .2      .3
                                                                   Cumulative Price Growth (1992-1997)
                                           Note: Each point is a region. Spearman correlation = -.1


Figure 2: Correlation between Price Growth in 1992-1997 and Price Growth in 1999-2004
Each dot corresponds to one French region (“département”). The sample linear correlation is -.1 and is not
statistically significant.




                                                                                   29
                              Long−run effects of                                           Long−run effects of
                      D(owner) x price growth on LogAssets                           D(owner) x price growth on LogSales




                                                                  −.5 0 .5 1 1.5
    1
    .5
    −.5 0




                     1998     2000     2002     2004     2006                      1998    2000     2002     2004     2006


                               Long−run effects of                                      Long−run effects of
                        D(owner) x price growth on LogDebt                   D(owner) x price growth on LogEmployees
    −.5 0 .5 1 1.5




                                                                −.2 0 .2 .4 .6
                     1998     2000     2002     2004     2006                     1998     2000     2002     2004     2006


                    Long−run effects of                                                      Long−run effects of
         D(owner) x price growth on LogValueAdded                −.5 0 .5 1 1.5    D(owner) x price growth on LogWageBill
   1
   .5
   0




                 1998         2000     2002     2004     2006                      1998    2000     2002     2004     2006



Figure 3: Real Estate Capital Gains and Entrepreneurial Outcomes: Long-run Effects
The graphs plot coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from regressions of year-t entrepreneurial outcomes
on the interaction of an ownership dummy and region-level house price growth over the five years prior to
creating the firm (1992-1997), ∆p. t goes from 1999 to 2002. These regressions control for characteristics of
the business owner (occupation previous to becoming an entrepreneur, age, education, gender), legal form of
the business (sole proprietorship or corporation), industry, whether the firm is located in the owners home
or elsewhere, as well as all interactions of these controls with ∆p. The regressions also include region fixed
effects. Standard errors are clustered at the regional level.




                                                         30
Table I: Summary Statistics for the Intensive-Margin Analysis.
This table presents summary statistics for the sample we use in our analysis of the effect of real estate capital gains
on the size at creation, conditional on starting up a company. Panel A describes house price growth from 1992-1997
across the 21 French regions. Panel B describes the characteristics of firms created by entrepreneurs surveyed in
the SINE survey in 1998 and measured in 1999 in the tax file: total assets, total sales, total debt, number of
employees, value added, and total wage bill. Panel C describes the characteristics of the entrepreneurs surveyed
in the SINE survey in 1998: homeownership status, whether they are sole proprietors, whether they work from
home, age, gender, education measured by four dummies (No Diploma, Vocational Training, High School Diploma,
College Diploma), occupation previous to starting up a business (Employed, Unemployed, and Out-of-Workforce).

                                      Mean      Std. Dev.      p(10)    p(25)    p(50)     p(75)      p(90)     Obs.

    Panel A: House price growth 1992-1997
    p1997 /p1992 − 1       0.03    0.10   -0.03                          0.00     0.03      0.09       0.13       21

    Panel B: Firm characteristics (1999 book values, in thousand Euros)
    Asset                 131.42 1,069.30      7.01 18.45 40.86 96.35 221.66                                    9,173
    Sales                 208.63 1,281.65 14.48 35.06 73.18 171.51 395.15                                       9,173
    Debt                  102.24    968.09     3.20 11.28 29.88 76.22 179.43                                    9,173
    # Employees            1.84       6.69     0.00    0.00   0.00   2.00 4.00                                  9,173
    Value Added           130.17    615.05     9.45 23.78 48.78 112.51 248.80                                   9,173
    Total Wage             49.79     218.40    0.30    3.05 12.50 44.82 108.85                                  9,173

    Panel C: Entrepreneur            characteristics
    Home Owner                        0.29     0.45            0.00      0.00     0.00      1.00      1.00      9,173
    Sole Proprietor                   0.44     0.50             0.00    0.00      0.00     1.00       1.00      9,173
    Business at Home                  0.41     0.49            0.00      0.00     0.00      1.00      1.00      9,173
    Age                              37.51     9.34            26.00    30.00    36.00     44.00      50.00     9,173
    Gender (Male==1)                  0.77     0.42             0.00    1.00      1.00      1.00      1.00      9,173
    Education
       No Diploma                     0.18         0.39        0.00      0.00     0.00      0.00       1.00     9,173
       Vocational Training            0.41         0.49        0.00      0.00     0.00      1.00       1.00     9,173
       High School Diploma            0.18         0.39        0.00      0.00     0.00      0.00       1.00     9,173
       College Diploma                0.23         0.42        0.00      0.00     0.00      0.00       1.00     9,173
    Prior occupation
       Employed                       0.53         0.50        0.00      0.00     1.00      1.00       1.00     9,173
       Unemployed                     0.36         0.48        0.00      0.00     0.00      1.00       1.00     9,173
       Out-of-Workforce               0.10         0.30        0.00      0.00     0.00      0.00       1.00     9,173




                                                          31
      Table II: Summary Statistics for the Extensive-Margin Analysis.
      This table presents summary statistics for the sample we use in our analysis of the effect of real estate capital gains on the decision to start
      up a company. The sample period is 1990-2002. Panel A describes house price growth from year t-6 to year t-1 across the 89 French regions
      used in the analysis. Panel B describes personal characteristics of the individuals surveyed in the Labor Force Survey: a dummy equal to 1 if
      the individual starts a business, a dummy for homeownership, log of wage in the year previous to the decision to start a business (or the log
      of unemployment benefits if eligible), dummy if the individual is unemployed, age, gender (2 for male, 1 for female), a foreigner dummy, and
      education (dummies for College Degree, Some College, High School diploma, Technical Training).

                                                       Mean        Std. Dev.        p(10)         p(25)         p(50)         p(75)         p(90)        Obs.
     Panel A: House price growth
     pt−1 /pt−6 − 1                          0.15                      0.20         -0.01         0.04          0.12           0.22          0.32        1,027
     Panel B: Individual characteristics
     Entrepreneurship                        0.01                      0.11         0.00           0.00          0.00          0.00          0.00        87,104
     Homeowner                               0.57                      0.49          0.00          0.00          1.00          1.00          1.00        87,104
     log(wage)                               8.77                      1.72          8.41          8.78          9.04          9.34          9.67        87,104
     Unemployed                              0.06                      0.24          0.00          0.00          0.00          0.00          0.00        87,104
     Age                                    43.22                      8.81         31.00         36.00         43.00         50.00         55.00        87,104




32
     Gender                                  1.15                      0.36          1.00          1.00          1.00          1.00          2.00        87,104
     Foreigner                               0.06                      0.24         0.00           0.00         0.00           0.00          0.00        87,104
     Education
        College Degree                      0.10                       0.30          0.00         0.00          0.00           0.00          1.00        87,104
        Some College                        0.09                       0.28          0.00         0.00          0.00           0.00          0.00        87,104
        High School                         0.10                       0.31          0.00         0.00          0.00           0.00          1.00        87,104
        Technical Training                  0.33                       0.47          0.00         0.00          0.00           1.00          1.00        87,104
        No Diploma                          0.37                       0.48          0.00         0.00          0.00           1.00          1.00        87,104
     Panel C: Aggregate characteristics
     # Active households                 150596.42                 127364.37      39,809.00    62,860.00     111650.00     198347.00      316829.00      1,212
     # firms created / # AH (%)              0.38                     0.22           0.19          0.24         0.32          0.44            0.62       1,212
     # employees in new firms / # AH (%)    0.67                      0.38           0.33         0.44          0.57          0.80           1.09        1,212
     Fraction homeowners (%)                58.22                     7.12           49.84        55.48         58.51        63.03           66.66       1,212
     Median wage                          5,794.13                   580.75        5,200.00     5,450.00      5,747.50      6,000.00       6,500.00      1,212
     Workforce composition
        Agriculture                          0.08                      0.05          0.02         0.04          0.08           0.10          0.15        1,212
        Industry                             0.21                      0.07          0.12         0.17          0.22           0.26          0.31        1,212
        Construction                         0.07                      0.01          0.06         0.07          0.07           0.08          0.09        1,212
        For-profit Services                  0.36                      0.06          0.29         0.32          0.34           0.38          0.45        1,212
        Non-profit Services                  0.28                      0.03          0.24         0.25          0.28           0.30          0.31        1,212
             Table III: Real Estate Capital Gains before Creation and Entrepreneurial Outcomes
             The table reports the coefficient of regressions of several entrepreneurial outcomes— measured in 1999 (the first entire fiscal
             year after creation)— on the interaction of regional house price appreciation from 1992 to 1997 (∆p) and a dummy for
             individual home ownership (Owner). We control for characteristics of the business owner (occupation previous to becoming
             an entrepreneur, age, education, gender), legal form of the business (sole proprietorship or corporation), industry, whether
             the firm is located in the owner’s home or elsewhere, as well as all interactions of these controls with ∆p. The regressions
             also include region fixed effects. The outcomes we consider are logarithm of total assets (column (1)), logarithm of sales
             (column (2)), logarithm of total debt (column (3)), logarithm of 1 plus the number of employees (column (4)), logarithm
             of value added (column (5)), and logarithm of the total wage bill (column (6)). T-statistics are in parentheses. Standard
             errors are clustered at the regional level. *, **, and *** mean statistically different from zero at 10%, 5% and 1% levels of
             significance.


                        log(1+Assets)       log(1+Sales)      log(1+Debt)       log(1+#Employees)          log(Value Added)        log(Wage Bill)
                             (1)                 (2)               (3)                 (4)                        (5)                   (6)

     Owner × ∆p              1.7***              1***             1.3***                 .26***                   .74***                   1
                              (4.3)              (5.2)             (3.1)                  (3.1)                    (3.8)                 (1.6)
     Owner                   .17***            -.18***             .017                 -.11***                  -.17***               -.38***




33
                               (4)              (-4.8)             (.35)                  (-6.6)                   (-4.4)               (-5.1)


     Controls                  Yes                Yes               Yes                   Yes                      Yes                    Yes
     Controls × ∆p             Yes                Yes               Yes                   Yes                      Yes                    Yes
     Region FE                 Yes                Yes               Yes                   Yes                      Yes                    Yes

     Observations             9,173             9,173             9,173                  9,173                    9,173                  9,173
     Adj. R2                   0.17              0.10              0.20                  0.28                     0.10                   0.12
     Table IV: Real Estate Capital Gains before Creation and Subsequent Failure Hazard Rates
     This table reports the marginal effect from probit regressions of the failure hazard in year t, fh(t), defined as
     failure probability in year t conditional on survival until year t − 1, as a function of the interaction of regional
     house price appreciation from 1992 to 1997 (∆p) and a dummy for individual home ownership (Owner). The
     last column (7) uses the probability of failure before 2005 as a dependent variable. We control for characteristics
     of the business owner (occupation previous to becoming an entrepreneur, age, education, gender), legal form
     of the business (sole proprietorship or corporation), industry, whether the firm is located in the owner’s home
     or elsewhere, as well as all interactions of these controls with ∆p. The regressions also include région fixed
     effects. Standard errors are clustered at the regional level. Z-statistics are in parentheses. *, **, and *** mean
     statistically different from zero at 10%, 5%, and 1% levels of significance.


                         fh(2000) fh(2001)          fh(2002)     fh(2003)     fh(2004)     fh(2005)     fh(2000-2005)
                            (1)      (2)               (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)            (7)

     Owner × ∆p             -.085       -.025          .014        .0096        -.086*       -.045             -.15
                           (-1.3)       (-.47)        (.26)        (.18)        (-1.9)       (-.86)          (-1.1)
     Owner                 -.0093     -.061***      -.022***     -.024***     -.022***       -.017           -.1***




34
                           (-1.1)       (-7.2)        (-3.4)       (-3.2)       (-4.3)       (-1.6)          (-6.6)

     Controls               Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes             Yes
     Controls × ∆p          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes             Yes
     Region-FE              Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes             Yes

     Observations          9,164        8,297        7,073         6,629        6,123        5,725           9,169
     Pseudo-R2             0.04         0.04          0.04         0.03         0.03         0.02            0.04
Table V: Real Estate Capital Gains before Creation and Probability to Start a
Business
The table reports the estimates of regressions of the decision to start-up a company on the
interaction of local house price appreciation in the five years prior to the decision (∆p) and
a dummy for individual home ownership (Owner). Columns (1) and (2) present estimates
from probit regressions. Columns (3) and (4) are linear probability models. In column (1)
and (3), we control for region fixed effects and year fixed effects. In columns (2) and (4), we
add controls for individual characteristics (education, previous salary, age, sex, whether the
entrepreneur is a foreign national), as well as all interactions of these controls with ∆p. The
regressions also include region fixed effects. T-statistics are in parentheses. Standard errors
are clustered at the regional level. *, **, and *** mean statistically different from zero at
10%, 5%, and 1% levels of significance.


                                     Probability of Entrepreneurship
                                   (1)       (2)         (3)       (4)

           Owner × ∆p            .007***      .0019**     .0095*** .0065***
                                   (6.5)        (2.2)        (7.2)    (5.8)
           Owner (d)              .0013      .0022***        .0012  .0039***
                                   (1.6)        (4.1)        (1.4)    (6.1)
           ∆p                   -.007***      .0077**     -.0083*** .12***
                                  (-5.3)        (2.3)        (-5.2)   (3.5)

           Region FE              Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes
           Year FE                Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes
           Controls                No          Yes            No           Yes
           Controls × ∆p           No          Yes            No           Yes
           Observations          87,104       87,104        87,104        87,104




                                              35
Table VI: House Price Growth, Ownership Rate, and Local Entrepreneurial Activity
The table reports the estimates of linear regressions of entrepreneurial activity at the region level
on the interaction of local house price appreciation in the past five years (∆p) and the fraction of
homeowners in the region (% Owner). Columns (1) and (3) are unweighted. Columns (2) and (4)
are weighted by the number of active households. Columns (1) and (2) control for year and region
fixed effects. Columns (3) and (4) add controls for industry composition, size, and median wage
in the region, as well as interactions of these controls with ∆p. T-statistics are in parentheses.
Standard errors are clustered at the regional level. *, **, and *** mean statistically different from
zero at 10%, 5%, and 1% levels of significance.

                             Measure of Entrepreneurial Activity
                           (1)        (2)        (3)          (4)
           Panel A: # New Firms per “Active” Household

           % owners × ∆p          .005***      .0064*** .0047***            .0041***
                                    (4.6)         (13)     (4.2)               (8.4)
           ∆p                    -.0027***     -.0034*** .047***             .028***
                                   (-5.5)         (-17)     (3)                (3.3)

           Panel B: # Jobs in New Firms per “Active” Household

           % owners × ∆p         .0073***      .0083***       .011***       .0088***
                                   (2.9)          (5.7)          (4)          (6.2)
           ∆p                    -.003***      -.0036***        .075          .013
                                    (-3)          (-6.2)        (1.6)         (.46)

           Region FE                 Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
           Year FE                   Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
           Controls                  No            No            Yes            Yes
           Controls × ∆p             No            No            Yes            Yes
           Observations             1,212         1,212         1,212          1,212




                                                 36
A.                              Appendix Tables and Figures
                   .2
   5 Year Rolling Real Rent Growth
   0       .05        .1
                   -.05       .15




                                     -.4    -.2                0                .2                     .4
                                            5 Year Rolling Real House Price Growth

Figure A.I: Elasticity of Rents to House Prices - Evidence from the United States
The data on average house prices and rents come from Davis et al. (2008); it is available from
http://www.lincolninst.edu/resources/. CPI data are from the BLS. Every quarter between 1965:1 and
2013:1, we calculate the cumulative growth, over the past 20 quarters, of house prices and rents, net of CPI
growth (inflation). We then report these data on the above scatter plot, where each plot represents one
quarter between 1965:1 and 2013:1. The red line corresponds to the fitted linear regression of long-term rent
growth on house price growth. The estimated long-term elasticity of rents to prices is 0.15. The Newey-West
t-stat is 2.12 (p-value = 0.036).




                                                          37
Table A.I: Comparison between Homeowners and Renters in the Intensive-Margin Sample


                             Renters Owners                 T-Test
       Panel A: Firm characteristics (1999 book values, in thousand Euros)
       Log(Asset)              3.85       3.63               7***
       Log(Sales)              4.46       4.12             11.14***
       Log(Debt)               3.55       3.15             11.48***
       Log(1+# Employees)      0.69       0.42             15.13***
       Log(Value Added)        4.04       3.74             10.26***
       Log(Total Wage)         2.80       2.25             13.63***

       Panel B: Entrepreneur characteristics
       Sole Proprietor         0.38      0.59               19.36***
       Business at Home        0.26      0.77               50.87***
       Age                    36.82     39.17               11.02***
       Gender (Male==1)        0.76      0.81               5.35***
       Education
          No Diploma           0.17      0.21               3.93***
          Vocational Training  0.38      0.47                8.3***
          High School Diploma  0.20      0.15               5.83***
          College Diploma      0.25      0.18               7.93***
       Prior occupation
          Employed             0.53      0.54                 .25
          Unemployed           0.36      0.37                 .87
          Out-of-Workforce     0.11      0.09                 1.8*




                                        38
Table A.II: Comparison between Homeowners and Renters in the Extensive-Margin Sample


                                      Renters   Owners T-Test
                  Entrepreneurship     0.012      0.014   2.4**
                  log(wage)             8.496     8.966 40.23***
                  Unemployed            0.097     0.035 38.07***
                  Age                  40.386    45.329 85.22***
                  Gender                1.225    1.094  54.76***
                  Foreigner            0.104      0.034 42.42***
                     College Degree     0.088     0.114 12.17***

                  Education
                    Some College       0.084     0.093    4.4***
                    High School        0.097     0.109    5.6***
                    Technical          0.312     0.349   11.55***
                    No Diploma         0.418     0.335   25.15***




                                         39
        Table A.III: Effect of 1992-1997 House Price Growth on Several Outcome Variables of Homeowner En-
        trepreneurs: Robustness to Exclusion of Paris
        The table reports the coefficient of regressions of several outcome variables, measured in 1999 (first entire fiscal year after
        creation), on the interaction of regional home price appreciation from 1992 to 1997 (∆p) and a dummy for individual home
        ownership (Owner). We control for characteristics of the business owner (occupation previous to becoming an entrepreneur,
        age, education, gender), legal form of the business (sole proprietorship or corporation), industry, whether the firm is located
        in the owner’s home or elsewhere, départment fixed effects, as well as all interactions of the controls with ∆p. We exclude
        from the regression businesses located in the Paris area. Standard errors are clustered at the regional level. *, **, and ***
        mean statistically different from zero at 10%, 5%, and 1% levels of significance.


                         log(Assets) log(Sales)         log(Debt)     log(1+#Employees)          log(Value Added)        log(Wage Bill)
                             (1)         (2)               (3)               (4)                        (5)                   (6)

     Owner × ∆p             1.5***         1.1***         1.6***              .31***                      1***                    1
                             (3.5)           (3.7)          (3)                  (3)                      (2.9)                 (1.4)
     Owner                  .18***         -.18***        -.0066              -.11***                   -.19***               -.38***
                             (4.3)          (-4.4)        (-.12)               (-6.5)                    (-4.2)                (-4.9)




40
     Controls                 Yes            Yes            Yes                 Yes                       Yes                   Yes
     Controls × ∆p            Yes            Yes            Yes                 Yes                       Yes                   Yes
     Départment-FE            Yes            Yes            Yes                 Yes                       Yes                   Yes

     Observations            8,798          8,798         8,798                8,798                     8,798                 8,798
     Adj. R2                  0.17           0.11          0.20                0.29                       0.10                 0.12
Table A.IV: Real Estate Capital Gains before Creation and Probability of Start-
ing a Business
The table reports the estimates of linear probability model regressions of the decision to
start up a company on the interaction of local house price appreciation in the five years
prior to the decision (∆p) and a dummy for individual home ownership (Owner) as in Table
V, column 3. The columns introduce controls one after the other. All regressions include
region fixed effects and year fixed effects. T-statistics are in parentheses. Standard errors
are clustered at the regional level. *, **, and *** mean statistically different from zero at
10%, 5%, and 1% levels of significance.

                                                    Probability of Entrepreneurship
                                 (1)        (2)       (3)         (4)       (5)          (6)        (7)

 Owner × ∆p                   .0095***    .0096***   .01*** .0091***      .0068***      .007***  .0065***
                                 (7.2)        (6.8)    (7.5)    (7.2)        (5.7)        (6.1)     (5.8)
 Owner                           .0012        .0007 .0061*** .0055***     .0057***     .0037*** .0039***
                                 (1.4)        (.95)    (7.5)    (7.4)        (7.8)        (5.7)     (6.1)
 ∆p                           -.0083***   -.0062*** .09***     .14***       .12***       .12***    .12***
                                 (-5.2)      (-3.4)     (3)     (3.6)        (3.5)        (3.4)     (3.5)
 College                                  .0095*** .018*** .018***         .018***      .018***   .019***
                                                (7)    (14)      (15)         (14)         (14)      (14)
 College×∆p                                    .001   .0055     .0058       .0066*        .0061     .0055
                                               (.4)    (1.4)    (1.5)        (1.8)        (1.6)     (1.4)
 Some college                              .0045**   .01***    .01***       .01***      .011***   .012***
                                              (2.7)    (6.1)    (6.1)        (5.8)        (6.6)     (6.3)
 Some college×∆p                           -.0055**   -.0014   -.0012         .001        .0017    .00098
                                             (-2.3)   (-.57)    (-.52)       (.47)        (.81)     (.42)
 High school                              .0065*** .011*** .011***         .011***      .011***   .012***
                                              (5.2)    (9.2)    (9.2)        (9.1)        (9.3)     (9.1)
 High school ×∆p                           -.012***  -.0068*  -.0067*       -.0054       -.0055     -.006
                                             (-3.4)   (-1.8)    (-1.8)       (-1.4)       (-1.5)    (-1.6)
 Technical training                         .00099  .0039*** .0037***     .0035***     .0032*** .0035***
                                                (1)     (4)     (3.8)        (3.9)        (3.6)     (4.2)
 Technical training×∆p                       -.0016   -.0025 -.0035**       -.0018       -.0019    -.0026
                                             (-.91)   (-1.7)    (-2.2)       (-1.1)       (-1.2)    (-1.6)
 Log(wage) or Log(UI) (t-1)                         -.011*** -.013***     -.013***     -.013***  -.013***
                                                       (-18)    (-17)        (-17)        (-18)     (-18)
 Log(wage) × ∆p                                     -.011*** -.016***     -.016***     -.016***  -.016***
                                                        (-3)    (-3.5)       (-3.5)       (-3.5)    (-3.5)
 Unemployed (t-1)                                             -.02***      -.02***      -.02***   -.02***
                                                                (-4.6)       (-4.6)       (-4.6)    (-4.6)
 Unemployed (t-1) ×∆p                                        -.095***     -.095***     -.096***  -.095***
                                                                (-6.1)       (-6.1)        (-6)      (-6)
 Age                                                                      -.000037      .000021   .000016
                                                                             (-.52)        (.3)     (.24)
 Age × ∆p                                                                .00045***    .00044*** .00045***
                                                                             (3.6)        (3.6)     (3.7)
 Female                                                                                -.014***  -.014***
                                                                                          (-12)     (-12)
 Female ×∆p                                                                             -.0017*   -.002**
                                                                                           (-2)     (-2.3)
 Foreigner                                                                                          .0031
                                                                                                    (1.1)
 Foreigner ×∆p                                                                                   -.0052**
                                                                                                    (-2.5)
 Constant                     .019***     .017***    .11***    .12***     .13***         .13***    .13***
                                (9.6)       (8.9)     (20)      (20)       (19)            (19)      (18)

 Region FE                      Yes         Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes
 Year FE                        Yes         Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes




                                                    41
Table A.V: House Price Appreciation before Creation and Entry into En-
trepreneurship
The table reports the estimates of regressions of the decision to start up a company on
the local house price appreciation in the five years prior to the decision (∆p), without in-
teracting with the ownership dummy. Columns (1) and (2) present estimates from probit
regressions. Columns (3) and (4) are linear probability models. In columns (1) and (3), we
control for region fixed effects and year fixed effects. In columns (2) and (4), we add controls
for individual characteristics (education, previous salary, age, sex, whether the entrepreneur
is a foreign national). T-statistics are in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered at the
regional level. *, **, and *** mean statistically different from zero at 10%, 5%, and 1%
levels of significance.


                                     Probability of Entrepreneurship
                                     (1)      (2)       (3)      (4)

                ∆p                 -.11***     -.068*    -.004***     -.0027*
                                    (-3.1)     (-1.7)      (-2.9)      (-1.9)

                Region FE           Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes
                Year FE             Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes
                Controls             No        Yes          No          Yes
                Observations       87,104     87,104      87,104       87,104




                                              42
