NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

JOBLESS RECOVERIES DURING FINANCIAL CRISES:
IS INFLATION THE WAY OUT?
Guillermo Calvo
Fabrizio Coricelli
Pablo Ottonello
Working Paper 19683
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19683
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2013

We are grateful to Stijn Claessens, the participants of XVI Conference of the Central Bank of Chile,
LACEA-LAMES 2012 Annual Meetings, IMF Jobs and Growth Seminar, and 2013 CEPR European
Summer Symposium in International Macroeconomics (ESSIM), held in Izmir, Turkey. for valuable
comments. Forthcoming in Macroeconomic and Financial Stability: Challenges for Monetary Policy,
edited by Sofia Bauducco, Lawrence Christiano and Claudio Raddatz. Santiago, Chile. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19683.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 Central Bank of Chile, circulated with permission. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Jobless Recoveries During Financial Crises: Is Inflation the Way Out?
Guillermo Calvo, Fabrizio Coricelli, and Pablo Ottonello
NBER Working Paper No. 19683
November 2013
JEL No. E44,E52
ABSTRACT
This paper discusses three policy tools to mitigate jobless recoveries during financial crises: inflation,
real currency depreciation, and credit-recovery policies. Using a sample of financial crises in Emerging
Market economies, we document that large inflationary spikes appear to help unemployment to get
back to pre-crisis levels. However, the counterpart of inflation is sizably lower real wages. Hence,
inflation does not prevent wage earners as a whole from getting hit by financial crises. Interestingly,
neither the change in the real exchange rate nor the change in output composition (tradables/nontradables),
from output peak to recovery point, displays a statistically significant relationship with inflation or
jobless recovery. This suggests that currency depreciation can help reduce unemployment only insofar
as it is associated with inflation, and that jobless recovery is likely due to nominal wage rigidity. The
paper also shows that measures to reactivate credit flows could be beneficial to wage earners as a whole,
as measured by the real wage bill.
Guillermo Calvo
Columbia University
School of International and Public Affairs
420 West 118th St, Room 1303B
MC3332
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
gc2286@columbia.edu
Fabrizio Coricelli
Paris School of Economics
Universite' Paris 1
fabrizio.coricelli@univ-paris1.fr

Pablo Ottonello
Columbia University
Department of Economics
420 W 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
po2171@columbia.edu

I. INTRODUCTION
The slow rate of employment growth relative to that of output is a sticking point in the recovery from
the financial crisis episode that started in 2008 in the US and Europe (a phenomenon labeled “jobless
recovery”). The issue is a particularly burning one in Europe where some observers claim that
problem economies (like Greece, Italy, Ireland, Spain, and Portugal) would be better off abandoning
the euro and gaining competitiveness through steep devaluation. This would be a momentous
decision for Europe and the rest of the world because, among other things, it may set off an era of
competitive devaluation and tariff war. Thus, these topics require prompt attention.
In Calvo, Coricelli, and Ottonello (2012), we show that jobless recoveries have been a salient feature
of financial crises in advanced economies since World War II. Once output per capita recovers its
trend, the increase in unemployment from output peak to recovery tends to be higher during
financial crises than in other recession episodes. This is consistent with findings in previous
empirical literature that have documented the effect of financial crises on unemployment (see, for
example, Knotek and Terry, 2009; Reinhart and Reinhart, 2010; Bernal-Verdugo, Furceri, and
Guillaume, 2012; and Chodorow-Reich, 2013). However, jobless recoveries are not, in general,
observed in high-inflation episodes. In particular, in Calvo, Coricelli, and Ottonello (2012), we show
that in Emerging Market (EM) financial crisis episodes in which the annual rate of inflation exceeds
30 percent, when output recovers its trend level, the rate of unemployment returns to its pre-crisis
level, but real wages are 13 percent below their pre-crisis level –a phenomenon that we label
“wageless recovery.” Thus, inflation is no panacea for the labor market, and evidence supports the
view that the labor market is highly vulnerable to financial crisis through high unemployment and/or
low wages. Moreover, the fact that inflation helps to reduce the rate of unemployment suggests that
the two sets of cases identified in our previous study are partly a result of nominal wage rigidity (see
Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe, 2011; 2013b). If this is the case, currency devaluation, insofar as it
generates inflation, may help to speed up the return to full employment in Europe (as argued in
Friedman, 1953), but wage earners are likely to bear the brunt of the adjustment.
The objective of this paper is twofold: (1) to exhibit case studies for individual countries that
illustrate econometric results in Calvo, Coricelli, and Ottonello (2012), and (2) to discuss policies
related to jobless recovery in the current financial crisis in the US and Europe: inflation, real
currency depreciation, and credit-recovery policies.
First, case studies are developed for Sweden and Argentina. We look at two crisis episodes for each
country. In the case of Sweden, we examine the 1990-1993 and the 2008-2009 recessions. Identifying
the financial component of each crisis with a methodology similar to that developed in Calvo,

1

Izquierdo, and Mejia (2008), we show that only the crisis of 1990-1993 –one of the widely studied “Big
Five” banking crises– experienced a domestic credit sudden stop (i.e. a sudden and large contraction
in domestic bank credit flows). Although the 2008-2009 recession happened during a worldwide
financial crisis, evidence suggests that recession came through a contraction in exports due to a fall
in demand from the EU rather than a shock stemming from the financial market. Inflation was
relatively low in both episodes (below 10 percent annual rate) and, thus, putting them side-by-side
allows us to compare a financial with a non-financial crisis for the same economy under low inflation.
Results illustrate the econometric evidence in Calvo, Coricelli, and Ottonello (2012): joblessness is
substantially larger during the financial crisis (i.e., the 1990-93 episode).
For Argentina, we select the 1995 and the 1998-2002 crises. Both episodes can be classified as
financial crises. However, the 1998-2002 episode exhibits a much higher rate of inflation than the
threshold considered in our previous study (30 percent), while in the 1995 crisis, inflation remained
well below the threshold. In line with Calvo, Coricelli, and Ottonello (2012), the 1995 episode displays
a sharp and persistent increase in the rate of unemployment in contrast with the 1998-2002 episode
in which unemployment recovers pari passu with output (despite the record-setting output
contraction from peak to trough, comparable to that in the US Great Depression). However, when
output recovers its pre-crisis level, wages remain 16 percent below their pre-crisis level.
Second, we discuss three policy tools to speed up employment recovery during financial crises:
inflation, real currency depreciation, and credit-recovery policies. Being relatively rare phenomena in
advanced economies, the resulting dearth of data makes policies in financial crises difficult to
characterize. An option is to use the experience of (not so rare) EM financial crisis events as a
laboratory to discuss policy options. This is the methodology we follow in this paper. Thus, the
discussion of policies will be based on an empirical analysis that extends the one in Calvo, Coricelli,
and Ottonello (2012), focusing on 55 financial crisis episodes in EMs.
We begin by digging more deeply into the relationship between inflation and jobless recovery, also
considering the possible role of real currency depreciation and resource reallocation (between
tradables and non-tradables). This discussion is particularly relevant for countries that, being in the
Eurozone, cannot follow a nominal currency depreciation policy to mitigate high unemployment rates
(e.g. Greece, Italy, Ireland, Spain, and Portugal). We show some evidence suggesting that large
inflationary spikes (not a higher inflation plateau) help employment recovery. Even in high-inflation
episodes, inflation typically returns to its pre-crisis levels, which is consistent with a vertical Phillips
curve. Another finding is that (independent of inflation) financial crises are associated with real
currency depreciation (i.e., the rise in the real exchange rate) from output peak to recovery. This
shows that the relative price of non-tradables fails to recover along with output even if the real wage

2

does not fall, as is the case in low-inflation financial crisis episodes. This implies that, contrary to
widespread views, nominal currency depreciation may eliminate joblessness only if it generates
enough inflation to create a contraction in real wages; real currency depreciation or sector
reallocation might not be sufficient to avoid jobless recovery if all sectors are subject to binding credit
constraints that put labor at a disadvantage with respect to capital. Similarly, for countries with
fixed exchange rates, “internal” or fiscal devaluations during financial crises are likely to work more
through reductions in labor costs than changes in relative prices and sectoral reallocation obtained
through taxes and subsidies affecting differentially tradable and non-tradable sectors.1
However, neither nominal nor real wage flexibility can avoid the adverse effects of financial crises on
labor markets, as wage flexibility determines the distribution of the burden of the adjustment
between employment and real wages, but does not relieve the burden from wage earners. Our
findings highlight the difficulty in simultaneously preventing jobless and wageless recoveries, and
suggest that if the goal is to avoid jobless recovery, the first line of action should be an attempt to
relax credit constraints. We discuss both a theoretical framework and empirical evidence that help to
make this case.
Finally, we argue that an effective way to prevent jobless recoveries in EMs may be to accumulate
international reserves during booms, which can be used to provide credit to firms during financial
crises.

II. TWO CASE STUDIES: SWEDEN AND ARGENTINA
II.1

Sweden: Financial Crises and Jobless Recovery

In the early 1990s, Sweden experienced one of the largest “Big Five” banking crises in the post-war
history of developed economies. The Swedish banking crisis has been extensively studied (see, for
example, Englund, 1999; Reinhart and Rogoff, 2008). Moreover, this episode has been frequently
cited in literature to illustrate the effect of banking crises on unemployment (see, for example,
Knotek and Terry, 2009; Talvi, Munyo and Perez, 2012).
Our aim is to identify the effect of the financial component of the crisis on the labor market by
comparing the outcomes of the Swedish banking crisis of the early 1990s with those of another

1 Fahri, Gopinath and Itskhoki (2012) and Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2011) show that fiscal instruments can replicate the real
effects of nominal devaluations and discuss this route for European countries as a way to exit their recession ensuing from the
recent global financial crisis.

3

recession episode in Sweden, similarly deep, but whose nature has not been financial: the recession
that started in 2008 in the context of the European economic crisis.
Figure 1 (panel A) depicts the behavior of output per capita in the two recession episodes. Both
episodes displayed a large and similar contraction of economic activity: during the banking crisis of
the early 1990s, output per capita from peak to trough dropped by 7.7 percent, while in the crisis that
started in 2008, output per capita contracted from peak to trough by 8.6 percent. The duration of both
episodes is also comparable: 25 quarters from peak to output recovery point in the banking crisis of
the early 1990s, and 19 quarters in the 2008 recession. Measured by the year-on-year change in
producer price index, inflation in both episodes was relatively low: the maximum level of inflation
during the crisis of 1991-1993 and the crisis of 2008-2009 was 8.6 percent and 6.9 percent,
respectively.
While both crises are comparable in terms of economic activity and inflation, the financial aspect of
these recession episodes is remarkably different. In the early 1990s, Sweden went through a severe
real estate crisis. Real estate prices dropped by more than 50 percent in 1991-1992, affecting major
banks heavily exposed to the real estate market. A systemic banking crisis followed. During the
recession of 2008-2009, in turn, the picture looks significantly different. In spite of the sharp drop in
output, the financial sector was resilient, and credit conditions remained relatively favorable for
firms and households. Short-term interest rates were markedly reduced after 2008, and the spread
between Swedish and German long-term interest rates remained stable and close to zero throughout
the recession episode.
To more formally identify the financial nature of the two recession episodes, we determine whether,
in each episode, the economy experienced a sudden and large contraction in domestic bank credit
flows (i.e. a Domestic Credit Sudden Stop)2 using an empirical methodology similar to that developed
in Calvo, Izquierdo, and Mejia (2008), detailed in appendix 1. Results are portrayed in figure 2 (panel
A). We can see that, in the last 30 years, Sweden experienced two domestic sudden stops, both during
the banking crisis of the early 1990s. During the 2008 recession episode, Sweden experienced a
deceleration in bank credit growth but not a domestic sudden stop. This empirical evidence supports
the view that, of the two recession episodes we are studying for Sweden, only the banking crisis of the
early 1990s constitutes a financial crisis episode. Finally, figure 1 (panel B) displays the behavior of
real credit stock to the private sector during both episodes. We can see that, during the banking crisis
of the early 1990s, real bank credit stock contracted by 35 percent while it continued increasing
throughout the 2008 episode.

2 The concept of a (External) Sudden Stop was originally developed to describe a sudden and large contraction in external
credit flows (see Calvo, 1998).

4

The behavior of unemployment is depicted in figure 1 (panel C). It can be seen that the financial
crisis of the early 1990s was associated with a much larger jobless recovery than the 2008 recession.
In particular, during the financial crisis of the early 1990s, when output per capita recovers its precrisis level, unemployment is still 6 percentage points above its pre-crisis level, compared to only 1.9
percentage points during the 2008 recession. This illustrates the finding in Calvo, Coricelli, and
Ottonello (2012) that financial crisis episodes are associated with a larger jobless recovery than nonfinancial recession episodes.

Figure 1. Sweden: Financial Crisis and Jobless Recovery

Notes: data for GDP and unemployment rate was obtained from OECD; data for population was
obtained from WDI; data for bank credit to the private sector and the CPI was obtained from the
IMF. Real bank credit data was constructed using the CPI.

5

Figure 2. Domestic Sudden Stops in Sweden and Argentina
(Bank credit flows to the private sector, real year-on-year change)

Notes: real bank credit data was constructed using the CPI. Data for bank credit to the private sector
and the CPI was obtained from the IMF.

II.2

Argentina: High Inflation and Wageless Recovery

During the 1990s Argentina experienced two recession episodes. The first started in 1994 and was
triggered by the “Tequila crisis”; the second started in 1998 and was initially associated with the
East Asian and Russian crises. As shown in figure 2 (panel B), Argentina experienced a domestic
sudden stop during both episodes (see appendix 1 for details). Thus, using this methodology, both
recession episodes could be classified as financial crises. Other methodologies such as Calvo,
Izquierdo, and Talvi (2006) and Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) reach the same conclusion.

6

The crisis of 1998-2002 was the most severe in terms of both financial and real outcomes. Between
1998 and 2002, output per capita fell 23.7 percent from peak to trough, a much larger fall than the
6.5 percent peak-to-trough output per capita contraction between 1994 and 1995 (see figure 3, panel
A). However, analyzing the behavior of unemployment, a striking fact emerges: while the 1994-1995
crisis shows a significant jobless recovery (when output per capita recovers its pre-crisis level,
unemployment is still 4 percentage points above its pre-crisis level), the 1998-2002 crisis displays no
trace of jobless recovery at all (when output per capita recovers its pre-crisis level, unemployment
also recovers its pre-crisis level, as seen in figure 3, panel B).
A key difference between these episodes is inflation (see figure 3, panel C).3 During the crisis of 19941995 Argentina was in a currency peg, and the maximum level of inflation was 5.5 percent per
annum. During the 1998-2002 crisis, Argentina abandoned the currency peg, and inflation reached
123 percent per annum. 4
Inflation, however, cannot fully erase the trace of financial crises on the labor market. Figure 3
(panel D) shows the behavior of real wages. It can be seen that the crisis of 1998-2002 displays a
significant “wageless” recovery: when output per capita recovers its pre-crisis level, real wages are
still 16.4 percent below their pre-crisis level.
The case of Argentina illustrates the second lesson from our case studies: during financial crises,
inflation seems to be able to eliminate jobless recoveries but at the expense of a substantially lower
real wage, as shown in Calvo, Coricelli, and Ottonello (2012).

We measure inflation in each quarter with the year-on-year change of the producer price index.
Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2011) also provide evidence for the role of devaluation on unemployment and real wages in the
Argentinean 2001-2002 episode.
3
4

7

Figure 3. Argentina: Financial Crises, Inflation, Jobless and Wageless
Recovery

Notes: data for GDP, PPI, and unemployment rate was obtained from INDEC (Instituto Nacional de
Estadística y Censos, Argentina); data for nominal wages was obtained from ECLAC; data for
population was obtained from WDI. In periods in which data for unemployment, wages, and
population were not available at quarterly frequency, interpolation methods based on semi-annual or
annual data were used to illustrate the quarterly behavior of the series.

8

III. POLICY DISCUSSION

This section discusses policies to mitigate jobless recoveries during financial crises. We conduct an
empirical study to investigate the role of inflation, real currency depreciation, and credit policies on
jobless recoveries during financial crises. We begin this section by describing the data that we use in
the empirical analysis.

III.1 Data
III.1.1 Sample Construction
The main objective of the empirical analysis is to test how inflation, real exchange rate, sector
allocation, and credit are related to unemployment and wage recovery during financial crises. To this
end, we build a sample of financial crises in EMs and define an output peak and a recovery point for
each recession episode.
We use the sample of recession episodes since 1980 identified in Calvo, Izquierdo, and Talvi (2006)
using annual data for financially integrated EMs.5 In this sample, the occurrence of a recession
episode is identified as a period of negative change in GDP.
As in Calvo, Coricelli, and Ottonello (2012), we define the output peak and recovery point using the
cyclical component of output per capita for each recession episode.6 In particular, given a recession
episode, we define a pre-crisis peak as the period displaying the maximum cyclical component of
output per capita in the window with a positive cyclical component of output per capita preceding the
recession episode. The recovery point is defined as the period after the output trough in which output
per capita recovers its trend level. The output trough is defined as the period between output peak
and recovery point displaying the minimum level of cyclical component of output per capita. The
cyclical component of output was computed using the HP filter. Data on output and population are

Countries included in the sample are Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Chile, Colombia, Croatia, Czech Republic, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Hungary, Indonesia, Ivory Coast, Lebanon, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, Nigeria, Panama,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Russia, South Africa, South Korea, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, Uruguay, and Venezuela.
Since we are interested in analyzing unemployment recovery in market economies during the crisis, we excluded two types of
episodes from this sample. First, those associated with the collapse of the Soviet Union (in particular, the recession episodes
that started prior to 1991 in Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Croatia, Hungary, Poland, Russia and Ukraine). Second, episodes in
which output per capita did not fully recover its trend level before the occurrence of another recession episode.

5

6 As discussed in Calvo, Coricelli, and Ottonello (2012), defining the recovery point of output per capita in terms of its trend
level is relevant to ensure that differences among episodes are not driven by different recoveries to trend as argued in Ball,
Leigh and Loungani (2013). Dating recession episodes with the level of output per capita (i.e. defining the recovery point as the
point in which output recovers its pre-crisis level), similar results are obtained.

9

obtained from OECD, WEO, and WDI datasets. With this methodology, we identify 71 recession
episodes in EMs.
From this set of recession episodes, we focus on financial crises. As in Calvo, Coricelli, and Ottonello
(2012), we define a financial crisis as a recession episode in which a banking crisis event or a debt
default or rescheduling event occurs in a window of 1 year before the output per capita peak, and 1
year after the output per capita recovery point. Data on banking crises, debt default and rescheduling
events are obtained from Reinhart and Rogoff (2009). This methodology yields a sample of 55
episodes of financial crises in EMs, detailed in appendix 2 (table A.1).

III.1.2 Definition of Variables
All variables are defined using annual data. We measure jobless and wageless recovery as in Calvo,
Coricelli, and Ottonello (2012) and compute, for each episode, the change in the unemployment rate
and the log change in real wages between output peak and output recovery points (denoted ∆
∆

and

, respectively). The data on unemployment and wages are obtained from WEO, ILO, ECLA,

Trading Economics datasets, and national sources. Nominal wages are deflated by the producer price
index obtained from the IMF dataset and national sources.7
With these two variables we construct a proxy for the change of the real wage bill per capita, denoted
by ∆

. With ∆

denoting the log change of employment rate, the change of the wage bill per

capita is defined as ∆

∆

∆

.8

We follow a similar strategy to measure real exchange rate depreciation and resource reallocation.
For each episode, we compute the log change of the real exchange rate, the log change in the share of
tradables in production, and the log change in the share of exports in production between output
peak and output recovery point (denoted by ∆
rate (

,∆

and ∆

, respectively). The real exchange

) is defined as the ratio of US and domestic prices, both expressed in domestic currency (i.e.
∗

, where

denotes the nominal exchange rate,

∗

denotes US CPI, and

denotes domestic

CPI). We define the tradable output as the sum of value added in agriculture and manufacturing, as
is typically done in the literature. We compute the share of tradables in production as the ratio
between tradable output and GDP, and the share of exports in production as the ratio between
exports of goods and services and GDP, based on national account statistics. Both ratios are

For countries in which producer price index is not available we use the wholesale price index or the consumer price index.
Due to data availability, we proxy the log change of employment rate using unemployment data, i.e.
.
∆

7
8

10

computed with data at constant prices. Data for the real exchange rate and the share of tradables
and exports in production are obtained from WEO and WDI datasets.
For each episode, we compute the year-on-year inflation rate at the output peak (π ), at the output
trough (π ) and at the output recovery point (π ); and the maximum level of inflation for the entire
episode (π

). Following Calvo, Coricelli, and Ottonello (2012), we define a high (low) inflation

episode as one in which the maximum level of inflation is above (below) the 30 percent annual rate.
This threshold is the upper bound considered in Dornbusch and Fischer (1993) to define moderate
inflations, and the cutoff above which Calvo and Reinhart (2002) define high inflations. With this
classification, we construct a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 if the episode displays high
inflation and zero otherwise (denoted high_π

,

). It is also useful to distinguish episodes of

hyperinflation. We consider a hyperinflation episode as one in which the annual inflation rate is
above 200 percent. This classification leads us to identify eight hyperinflation episodes in line with
those studied in the literature (see for example, Hanke and Krus, 2013; Sargent, Williams, and Zha,
2009).9 We compute inflation using the producer price index (wholesale price index or the consumer
price index when not available) obtained from the IMF dataset and national sources.
We construct a variable to measure credit recovery during a recession episode (denoted by ∆

).

Based on the findings in Calvo, Izquierdo, and Talvi (2006), we use the change in the cyclical
component of real credit per capita from output peak to full recovery point (∆

_ ).10 The

cyclical component of credit was computed using the HP filter. Data on credit was obtained from IFS
dataset and from national sources.

Finally, the empirical analysis includes two sets of controls. The first are labor market controls
(denoted by

_

, computed at the output peak. As emphasized in the labor market literature,

labor market institutions are likely to affect the response of unemployment to shocks, including the
recovery of unemployment following recession episodes (see Blanchard, 2006; Bertola, Blau, and
Kahn, 2007; Furceri and Mourougane, 2009; Bernal-Verdugo, Furceri and Guillaume, 2012). In
particular, we use two variables: an indicator of labor market legislation (

) from the recent

dataset on labor market regulations constructed by Campos and Nugent (2012); and the natural rate
of unemployment (

_

), computed as the average rate of unemployment in the whole sample

9 In particular the hyperinflation episodes are Argentina 1980, 1984, and 1987; Bulgaria 1995; Brazil 1980, 1987 and 1991;
and Peru 1987 (dates refer to output peak of the episode).
10 In the recession episodes in which a financial crisis episode occurs prior to or at the output peak, we consider the maximum
level in the cyclical component of real credit per capita between the beginning of the financial crisis and the output peak
instead of the cyclical component of real credit per capita at the output peak. Otherwise, when a financial crisis starts before
the recession episode, considering the level of credit at the output peak is considering a level of credit already affected by the
financial crisis episode.

11

period. Second, we control for the secular growth experienced throughout the recession episode,
denoted by

. With

denoting the annual secular growth rate of a given country and

the duration

of a recession episode, the secular growth experienced throughout the recession episode is defined as
. The secular growth rate for a given country is computed as the average per capita growth
rate between 1980 and 2007. The duration of the recession episode is defined as the number of years
from output peak to recovery point. Controlling for this variable is relevant since countries can have
different long-run growth rates, and recession episodes might differ in their duration, which can
affect jobless and wageless recoveries. For instance, in a neoclassical growth model, higher
technological progress would lead to a higher growth of real wages.

III.2

Inflation and Labor Market Recovery from Financial Crises

Empirical evidence in Calvo, Coricelli, and Ottonello (2012) suggests that high inflation (defined as
annual inflation above 30 percent) may help to lower the rate of unemployment in the context of
financial crises. This is illustrated in our sample of EM financial crises in figure 4 (panels A and B):
low-inflation episodes display jobless recovery, with real wages similar to pre-crisis levels; highinflation episodes display no jobless recovery, but a significant wageless recovery.
To formally test this stylized fact, we estimate a model relating jobless and wageless recoveries to
high inflation, controlling for labor market characteristics and secular growth:
∆ z

α

β high_π

,

X′ γ

ϵ,

(1)

where ∆ z denotes the jobless recovery measure (∆ u )

or wageless recovery measure

(∆ w ) in financial crisis episode i, X is a vector of controls including labor market controls
(labor_mkt , ) and secular growth (gd ), and ϵ is a random error term (variables are defined in
section 2.1). The coefficient of interest is β, the difference in jobless recovery or wageless
recovery displayed by high-inflation episodes relative to low-inflation episodes.
Results from OLS estimates are presented in table 1 and confirm the findings in Calvo, Coricelli, and
Ottonello (2012): high-inflation episodes tend to display less unemployment and lower real wages at
output recovery point than low-inflation episodes. Estimated coefficients are statistically significant
at the five or ten percent level, and economically relevant: high-inflation episodes tend to display 2
percent less increase in the unemployment rate from output peak to recovery than low-inflation
episodes; and from output peak to recovery point real wages in high-inflation episodes tend to

12

decrease 15 percent more than low-inflation episodes. Appendix 3 (table A.2) shows that these results
are robust to the inclusion of additional recession and country controls.
The threshold we have considered so far to define a high-inflation episode (above 30 percent) is
similar to that used in previous literature (Dornbusch and Fischer, 1993; Calvo and Reinhart, 2002).
To study this threshold more formally, we conduct threshold estimation, following Hansen (2000), to
identify a level of inflation from which financial crisis episodes have a different degree of jobless
recovery. Results confirm the presence of a threshold around 30 percent (point estimate of 31.7
percent). The estimation procedure and results are detailed in appendix 4.
Having established a link between high inflation and unemployment recovery, we now use the
sample of EM financial crises to study the dynamic pattern displayed by inflation, which is especially
relevant from a policy perspective. As shown in figure 4 (panel C) in the typical financial crisis
episode, inflation spikes up between output peak and trough, and returns to its pre-crisis level once
output recovers its trend level, not resulting in permanently higher inflation. Since inflation returns
to its pre-crisis level even in high-inflation episodes (excluding hyperinflation episodes, section 2.1),
seems to suggest that a transitory hike in the rate of inflation can have an effect on unemployment
recovery.
To provide further evidence on this issue we estimate model (1) –relating high inflation to jobless and
wageless recovery– but instead of classifying high-inflation episodes based on the maximum level of
inflation experienced during the episode, we classify high-inflation episodes based on inflation
experienced at the output peak and at the output recovery point. In particular, we construct a
dummy variable that takes the value of 1 if the episode displays high inflation (above 30 percent) at
the output peak, and zero otherwise (denoted high_π , ); and a dummy variable that takes the value of
1 if the episode displays high inflation (above 30 percent) at the output trough, and zero otherwise
(denoted high_π , ).
Results from OLS estimates are presented in table 2. Neither high inflation at the output peak nor
high inflation at the recovery point displays a statistically significant relationship with jobless or
wageless recovery, suggesting that having high inflation when the financial crisis episode starts, or
maintaining high inflation levels once output has recovered its trend, might not be necessary to fight
jobless recovery. Thus, what seems to be needed to speed up employment during the recovery of
financial crises is more a relative price adjustment (a fall in the real wage) than a permanent
increase in the inflation rate.
To sum up, the good news for central banks is, first, that having inflation levels at the output peak or
recovery points does not seem to impinge on jobless recoveries; and, second, that in the typical high-

13

inflation episode, inflation does return to its pre-crisis low-inflation level (see figure 4, panel C). The
bad news is that the level of inflation that seems to be needed to mitigate a jobless recovery is not
trivial (above 30 percent), and is above what most central banks would be willing to accept.
Since the threshold identified (30 percent) is relatively high, a relevant question for policy design is
whether or not there is any linear type of relationship that can also be established empirically
between the inflation experienced in the episode (level or change) and unemployment recovery. If this
is the case, countries could choose only a moderate increase in inflation and still expect to have an
effect on jobless recovery. Appendix 5 shows that there does not seem to be strong evidence
supporting the statistical significance of a relationship of this type. Evidence suggests that, on the
one hand, a small increase in inflation might not be of any help to fight jobless recoveries. On the
other hand, a very large increase in inflation appears to be overkill, which is consistent with the
existence of a long-run vertical Phillips curve around the pre-crisis rate of unemployment. Thus, the
relationship between jobless recovery and inflation is far from simple. Part of this complexity is
probably associated with wage setting. We leave this issue for future research.

14

Figure 4. Inflation and Labor Market Recovery from Financial Crises in
EMs

Notes: dotted lines depict 95 percent confidence intervals for the change in unemployment and
inflation, and for the log change in real wages (sample and variables defined in section 2.1). Peak,
trough, and recovery point are defined using the cyclical component of output per capita, as defined
in section 2.1. Low-inflation (high-inflation) episodes are episodes in which the maximum level of
annual inflation rate is below (above) 30 percent. Hyperinflation episodes are eight episodes of the
sample that display a maximum level of annual inflation greater than 200 percent (Argentina, 1980,
1984, and 1987; Bulgaria, 1995; Brazil, 1980, 1987 and 1991; Peru, 1987 (see section 2.1)).

15

III.3 Real Exchange Rates, Inflation and Labor Market Recovery from Financial
Crises
During financial crises, it is common for EMs to achieve high levels of inflation by depreciating the
nominal currency, as illustrated by the case of Argentina in section 1. From a policy perspective, a
key issue to study is whether the relationship between high inflation and jobless recovery is driven
by currency depreciation. In other words, to what extent does the transmission mechanism from
inflation to higher employment rely on real currency depreciation and resource reallocation from nontradable to tradable sectors?
To shed light on this question, we begin by analyzing the behavior of the real exchange rate and
sector reallocation in our sample of EM financial crises, comparing low-inflation episodes and highinflation episodes (for definition of sample variables see section 2.1). Figure 5 (panel A) shows that
from output peak to trough, high-inflation episodes display larger real currency depreciation and
sector reallocation than low-inflation episodes. This is easy to understand given the fact that, during
an inflationary spike, the nominal exchange rate typically adjusts faster than goods prices due to
price stickiness.
However, if real depreciation were the main factor behind the negative relationship between inflation
and unemployment, one would expect that high-inflation episodes display higher real currency
depreciation and resource reallocation, from output peak to recovery, than low-inflation episodes. As
depicted in figure 5, this is shown not to be the case: both low-inflation episodes and high-inflation
episodes display similar levels of real currency depreciation from output peak to recovery point;
consistent with this, from output peak to recovery, both high-inflation episodes and low-inflation
episodes display a similar change in the share of exports in production and the share of tradables in
production.
To formally test these hypotheses, we estimate a model relating changes in the real exchange rate
and resource reallocation to high inflation, controlling for labor market characteristics and secular
growth:
∆ q

α

β high_π

,

X′ γ

ϵ,

(2)

where ∆ q denotes the log change in the real exchange rate (∆ rxr ) or the measures of
resource reallocation (∆ ty or ∆ xy ) in financial crisis episode i, τ denotes output trough
τ

T or output recovery point τ

R , X is a vector of controls including labor market

controls (labor_mkt , ) and secular growth (gd ), and ϵ is a random error term (variables are
defined in section 2.1). This model is similar to the one in equation (1) but uses real exchange

16

rate depreciation and resource reallocation instead of labor market outcomes as dependent
variables.
Results from OLS estimates are presented in tables 3A and 3B and confirm the above conclusions
from the graphical analysis. Columns 1-3 of table 3A show that from output peak to trough, the
increase in the real exchange rate is larger in high-inflation episodes than in low-inflation episodes.
However, if one considers the whole crisis interval, from output peak to recovery, there is no
statistically significant difference between the real exchange rate depreciation of high-inflation
episodes and low-inflation episodes, as shown in columns 4-6 of table 3A. As shown in table 3B,
similar conclusions are obtained for sector reallocation: sector reallocation is not larger in highinflation episodes than in low-inflation episodes. Appendix 3 (table A.3) shows that high inflation is
not related to changes in the real exchange rate, or sector allocation, from output peak to recovery
once additional recession and country controls are included.
Having established that from output peak to recovery point there is no significant relationship
between real exchange rate changes and inflation, we investigate whether, independent from
inflation, real currency depreciation and sector reallocation from output peak to recovery point might
have any relationship with jobless recovery. To study this question, we directly estimate the
relationship between jobless recovery, real exchange rate, and resource reallocation from output peak
to recovery point, controlling for labor market characteristics and secular growth:
∆ u

α

β∆ q

X′ γ

ϵ,

(3)

where the subscript i refers to each financial crisis episode, ∆ q denotes

∆ rxr ,

∆ ty or ∆ xy , and ϵ is a random error term (variables are defined in section 2.1).
Results are presented in tables 4A and 4B. OLS estimates indicate that there is no statistically
significant association between peak-to-recovery change in unemployment and real exchange rate
changes or sector allocation. Appendix 3 (table A.4) shows that these finding are robust to the
inclusion of additional recession and country controls.
We conclude that during financial crises, real currency depreciation and sector reallocation from
output peak to recovery seem to be independent of whether the recovery is jobless or wageless.
Accordingly, real exchange rate depreciation and sector reallocation might not be sufficient to
mitigate jobless recoveries if they take place without the adjustment in real wages. As we will discuss
in section 2.4, a key reason why financial crises impact the labor market may be the presence of
credit constraints that differentially affect employment from other factors of production, determining

17

a lower equilibrium real wage rate. If credit constraints were present in both tradable and nontradable sectors, a sector reallocation would not necessarily avoid a jobless recovery.11
Furthermore, evidence suggests that a full recovery of employment might be achieved without a
significant change in the real exchange rate and resource reallocation, given the economy manages to
achieve an adjustment in the real wage. In our sample, an extreme but illustrative example of this
situation can be found in some hyperinflation episodes.
These results suggest two policy implications for countries with fixed exchange rates, such as those in
the Eurozone. Firstly, fiscal devaluations, based on reduction of labor costs, might work better than
those based on changes in relative prices between tradable and non-tradable goods and sectoral
reallocation (provoked by, e.g., import tariff and export subsidy).
Secondly, if the Eurozone as a whole increases inflation and as a result, there is an adjustment in
real wages in peripheral economies (e.g. Greece, Ireland, Portugal and Spain), there could be positive
effects on unemployment even if this does not necessarily imply a real currency depreciation for the
peripheral economies relative to the core economies (Germany in particular).12

Tornell and Westermann (2003) argue that credit constraints are more stringent in the non-tradable sector, and this is one
reason for the dynamics of the real exchange rate and sectoral reallocation associated with twin crises (currency and banking
crises). They also find that real exchange rate changes and sectoral reallocation are independent of the exchange rate regime.
However, they do not discuss implications of credit constraints for the adjustment of labor markets.
12 For an analysis of adjustment in real wages as a result of inflation in the Eurozone, see Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2013a).
11

18

Figure 5. Inflation, Real Exchange Rates and Sector Allocation during
Financial Crises in EMs

Notes: dotted lines depict 95 percent confidence intervals for log changes in the real exchange rate,
tradable share (tradable-to-GDP ratio) and exports share (exports-to-GDP ratio), sample and
variables defined in section 2.1. Low-inflation (high-inflation) episodes are episodes in which the
maximum level of annual inflation rate is below (above) 30 percent. Peak, trough, and recovery point
are defined using the cyclical component of output per capita, as defined in section 2.1.

19

III.4

Beyond Inflation: Relaxing Credit Constraints

This section focuses on policies that go to the heart of the workings of financial crises and, if
adequately managed, could help the recovery of both employment and real wages, namely, relaxing
credit constraints. We begin by presenting a theoretical framework that explains the mechanism by
which financial crises can induce a jobless recovery.

III.4.1 A Simple Theoretical Framework
Financial crises typically impact collateral values (e.g. fall in housing prices), tightening the
availability of credit for firms. But not all firms’ projects require the same collateral per unit cost.
Collateral requirements are lower for projects and firms possessing easily recognizable collateral
(e.g., tangible assets) or “intrinsic collateral” (Calvo, 2011). As a large component of such intrinsic
collateral is given by physical capital, a relaxation of credit conditions might support more capitalintensive activities. This hypothesis is related to the literature on inalienability of human capital
(Hart and Moore, 1994) and to the literature on asset tangibility. Pledgeable assets support more
borrowing because such assets mitigate contractibility problems: tangibility increases the value that
can be captured by creditors in default states (see Almeida and Campello, 2007; Tirole, 2005).
In Calvo, Coricelli, and Ottonello (2012) we develop a simple theoretical framework to formalize this
hypothesis. In particular, the model considers the case of a firm that produces homogeneous output
by means of capital ( ) and labor ( ), using a production technology given by
stands for neutral technical progress, and function

,

, where A

is linear homogenous, and twice-continuously

differentiable. Factors of production have to be hired a period in advance, for which credit is required.
Therefore, assuming that capital is fully depreciated at the end of the period, and the relevant rate of
interest is zero (assumptions that can be relaxed without affecting the central results), profits are
given by the following expression,
,

(4)

,

where W stands for the wage rate plus search and other costs associated with labor hiring
(measured in terms of output).
The central element of the model is the assumption that credit is subject to a constraint that takes
the following form:
1

,

(5)

20

where

0 is a parameter measuring extrinsic collateral constraint (see below), and the

parameter

∈ 0,1 .

The left-hand side of expression (5) corresponds to credit needs which, for simplicity, are assumed
equal to factor cost. The right-hand side stands for total collateral, which equals the sum of the
“extrinsic collateral”, Z, (amount of collateral that the firm can post in addition to the factors of
production, an exogenous parameter), and the intrinsic collateral, 1
own collateral (i.e., θ

θ K. For instance, if K is its

0), then the credit constraint boils down to WL

Z and labor would be the

only input subject to a credit constraint. Moreover, the wage bill is proportional to the credit
constraint.
This constraint captures the asymmetry that might exist between capital and labor in providing
collateral. If loans are not repaid, for instance, the creditors can still recover some part of K. In
contrast, funds spent on hiring labor cannot be recovered from the workers. In Calvo, Coricelli, and
Ottonello (2012), we provide empirical evidence showing that, in advanced economies, the contraction
of collateral values (measured with stock market and housing prices) tends to be associated with
jobless recovery.
One can show that if firms are subject to a credit constraint of this form, then, after a contraction in
the binding extrinsic collateral ( ), profit-maximizing technology becomes more capital-intensive as
technology grows. This implies jobless recovery, if the real wage is constant; or a fall in the
equilibrium real wage at the point of output recovery, if wages are flexible (see Calvo, Coricelli, and
Ottonello, 2012).

III.4.2. Credit and Jobless Recovery during Financial Crises

From the theoretical framework discussed above, it follows that policies aimed to relax credit
constraints should help to mitigate the labor market consequences of financial crises (jobless or
wageless recovery).
We explore this hypothesis empirically for our sample of financial crises in EMs. In particular,
conditional on a financial crisis event, we analyze whether credit recovery is related to the recovery of
the wage bill, wl.13 Since, depending on the levels of inflation, financial crises can impact the labor

Calvo, Coricelli, and Ottonello (2012) analyze the relationship between credit recovery, and jobless and wageless recoveries
for all recession episodes to understand the difference between financial crises and other recession episodes. Here the objective
is the analysis of credit policies during financial crises, and for that reason we restrict the analysis only to these episodes.

13

21

market in the form of jobless or wageless recovery, the wage bill is a plausible summary measure of
conditions in the labor market. We estimate the following model:
∆ wl

α

β ∆ credit

β high_π

,

X′ γ

ϵ,

(6)

where, as before, X is a vector of controls including labor market controls (labor_mkt , ) and
secular growth (gd ), and ϵ is a random error term (variables are defined in section 2.1). In
this model, we also control for the presence of high inflation (which was identified in section
2.2 as having a negative relationship with jobless recovery). The coefficient of interest is β ,
interpreted as the effect of credit recovery on the recovery of the wage bill during financial
crisis episodes.
A major concern associated with the OLS estimates of model (6) is the possibility that the recovery of
bank credit is endogenous to labor market recovery, as, for example, unemployed workers might have
restricted access to the credit market. To address this issue, we use an instrumental variable (IV)
estimation strategy to identify the exogenous effect of credit recovery on the labor market recovery.
We use the instrument employed in Calvo, Coricelli, and Ottonello (2012), namely the cyclical
component of real per capita credit at the output peak (

). 14 This instrument is a variable that

captures credit market outcomes prior to the recession episode, as is typically done in the literature
to predict financial crises (see, for example, Gourinchas, Valdes, and Landerretche, 2001; Schularick
and Taylor, 2009; Mendoza and Terrones, 2012). Table 5A shows that the first stage coefficients are
negative and statistically significant at the one percent level, showing that credit booms prior to the
recession episodes are associated with a higher contraction of credit from output peak to recovery
point.
Results are presented in table 5B. The OLS estimates, reported in columns 1, 3, and 5, indicate that
there is a positive association between credit recovery and wage bill recovery, statistically significant
at the five percent level. Columns 2, 4, and 6 of table 5 show that the IV estimates are also positive
and significant at the five percent level, suggesting that the exogenous component of credit plays a
role in the labor market recovery. Appendix 3 (table A.5) shows that these findings are robust to the
inclusion of additional recession controls and country controls.
This empirical evidence is complementary to the view that credit policies can be an effective
instrument to mitigate the effect of financial crises on real economic activity (see, for example,

14

The cyclical component of credit is computed using the HP filter. Recall that the output peak occurs prior to the crisis.

22

Gertler and Kiyotaki, 2010).15 In particular, this evidence suggests that credit policies can improve
employment and wages simultaneously at the recovery of financial crises.

IV.

FINAL WORDS

In this paper we discuss the role of inflation, real currency depreciation, and credit-recovery policies
in helping unemployment recovery during financial crises, based on an empirical analysis of a sample
of EM financial crisis episodes.
Higher unemployment, once output has recovered its trend, seems to stem from the interaction
between credit constraints that differentially affect labor, and nominal wage rigidities. Our evidence
indicates that high inflation can help to overcome nominal wage rigidities –in high-inflation episodes,
unemployment recovers its pre-crisis level once output has recovered its trend– but not the labor
market consequences of credit constraints –in these episodes real wages are significantly below their
pre-crisis level once output recovers its trend. At the same time, real exchange rate depreciation
seems to be able to help unemployment only insofar as it generates inflation at levels far above
current convention.
Only direct credit policies that tackle the root of the problem seem to be able to help unemployment
and wages simultaneously. Even if our evidence points to the relevance of policies that relax credit
constraints, achieving this objective is an important open issue for future research. However,
common sense suggests the following conjectures.
In advanced economies, quantitative easing operations, especially if they involve the purchase of
“toxic” assets, can have an effect on increasing firms’ collateral and relaxing credit constraints that
affect employment recovery.
In EMs, credit policies can be harder to implement because the government tends to be part of the
problem. For this reason, a relevant instrument to mitigate jobless recovery might be the
accumulation of international reserves, prior to financial crises. International reserve accumulation
might not only reduce the probability of experiencing a credit event (see Calvo, Izquierdo and LooKung, 2012), but might also facilitate credit policies during financial crises. Brazil offers a good
example of this type of policy. It consists of using international reserves for extending credit lines to
the export sector.16

15 Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010) analyze credit policies employed by the Federal Reserve during the financial crisis that started
in 2008: i) expansion of discount window operations ii) lending directly in high grade credit markets.
16 See, for example, Martins and Salles (2010), Barbosa (2010), and Aisen and Franken (2010).

23

Finally this discussion stresses the potential role of multilaterals in providing liquidity during
financial crises in EMs. The new credit lines created by the IMF during the recent crisis (flexible
credit lines and the precautionary and liquid lines) go in that direction, although the overall
magnitude of the resources that can be quickly mobilized remains an issue. Partnership and
coordination between multilaterals and the private sector can also be effective. For some emerging
European countries, the so-called “Vienna initiative” –whereby the main foreign lenders committed
to maintain the pre-crisis stock of credit in those countries that agreed to subscribe an IMF/EU
program– helped to avoid a sudden withdrawal of foreign investors. However, in principle, the
“Vienna initiative” did not fully shelter receiving countries from a sudden stop in credit flows.

24

REFERENCES
Aisen, A. and M. Franken. 2010. “Bank Credit During the 2008 Financial Crisis: A Cross-Country
Comparison.” Working Paper 10/47, International Monetary Fund.
Almeida, H. and M. Campello. 2007. “Financial Constraints, Asset Tangibility, and Corporate
Investment.” Review of Financial Studies 20(5): 1429–60.
Ball, L.M., D. Leigh and P. Loungani. 2013. “Okun's Law: Fit at Fifty?” Working Paper 18668,
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Barbosa, N. 2010. “Latin America: Counter-Cyclical Policy in Brazil: 2008-2009.” Journal of
Globalization and Development 1(1): 1–14.
Blanchard, O. 2006. “European Unemployment: the Evolution of Facts and Ideas.” Economic Policy
21(45): 5–59.
Bernal-Verdugo, L., D. Furceri and D. Guillaume. 2012. “Crises, Labor Market Policy, and
Unemployment.” Working Paper 12/65, International Monetary Fund.
Bertola, G., F. Blau, and L. Kahn. 2007. “Labor Market Institutions and Demographic Employment
Patterns.” Journal of Population Economics 20(4): 833–67.
Calvo, G.A. 1998. “Capital Flows and Capital-Market Crises: The Simple Economics of Sudden
Stops," Journal of Applied Economics, 1(1): 35–54.
__________. 2011. “The Liquidity Approach to Bubbles, Crises, Jobless Recovery, and Involuntary
Unemployment.” Unpublished manuscript, Columbia University.
Calvo, G.A., F. Coricelli and P. Ottonello. 2012. “The Labor Market Consequences of Financial Crises
With or Without Inflation: Jobless and Wageless Recoveries.” Working Paper 18480, National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Calvo, G.A., A. Izquierdo and R. Loo-Kung. 2012. “Optimal Holdings of International Reserves: SelfInsurance Against Sudden Stop.” Working Paper 18219, National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Calvo, G., A. Izquierdo and L. Mejia. 2008. “Systemic Sudden Stop: The Relevance of Balance‐Sheet
Effects and Financial Integration.” Working Paper 14026, National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Calvo, G., A. Izquierdo and E. Talvi. 2006. “Phoenix Miracles in Emerging Markets: Recovering
without Credit from Systemic Financial Crises.” Working Paper 12101, National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Calvo, G. and C.M. Reinhart. 2002. “Fear of Floating.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117(2): 379–
408.
Campos, N. and J. Nugent. 2012. “The Dynamics of the Regulation of Labor in Developing and
Developed Countries since 1960.” Unpublished manuscript, University of Southern California.

25

Chodorow-Reich, G. 2013. “The Employment Effects of Credit Market Disruptions: Firm-level
Evidence from the 2008-09 Financial Crisis.” Unpublished manuscript, Harvard University.
Dornbusch, R. and S. Fischer. 1993. “Moderate Inflation.” The World Bank Economic Review 7(1): 1–
44.
Englund, P. 1999. “The Swedish Banking Crisis: Roots and Consequences.” Oxford Review of
Economic Policy 15(3): 80–97.
Fahri, E., G. Gopinath and O. Itskhoki. 2012. “Fiscal Devaluations.” Working Paper 17662, National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Friedman, M. 1953. “The Case For Flexible Exchange Rates.” In Essays in Positive Economics, edited
by M. Friedman. Chicago, Ill: The University of Chicago Press.
Furceri, D. and A. Mourougane. 2009. “The Effects of Financial Crises on Potential Output: New
Empirical Evidence from OECD Countries.” OECD Economic Department Working Paper 669.
Gertler, M. and N. Kiyotaki. 2010. “Financial Intermediation and Credit Policy in Business Cycle
Analysis.” In Handbook of Monetary Economics, edited by B. Friedman and M. Woodford.
Elsevier.
Gourinchas, P.O., R.O. Valdés and O. Landerretche. 2001. “Lending Booms: Latin America and the
World.” Working Paper 8249, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Hanke, S. and N. Krus. 2013. “World Hyperinflations.” Forthcoming in Parker, R. and R. Whaples,
The Handbook of Major Events in Economic History. London: Routledge Publishing.
Hansen, B.E. 2000. “Sample Splitting and Threshold Estimation.” Econometrica 68(3): 575–603.
Hart, O. and J. Moore. 1994. “A Theory of Debt Based on the Inalienability of Human Capital.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 109(4): 841–79.
Knotek, E.S. and S. Terry. 2009. “How Will Unemployment Fare Following the Recession?” Federal
Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Review.
Martins, G.B. and J.M. Salles. 2010.” The Credit Dimension of Monetary Policy: Lessons from
Developing Economies under Sudden Stops.” Unpublished manuscript, Columbia University.
Mendoza, E.G. and M.E. Terrones. 2012. “An Anatomy of Credit Booms and Their Demise.” Working
Paper 18379, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Reinhart, C. and V. Reinhart. 2010. “After the Fall.” Working Paper 16334, National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Reinhart, C.M. and K. Rogoff. 2008. “Is the 2007 U.S. Sub-Prime Financial Crisis So Different? An
International Historical Comparison.” Working Paper 13761, National Bureau of Economic
Research.
__________. 2009. “This Time is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly.” Princeton, N.J.:
Princeton University Press.

26

Sargent, T., N. Williams, and T. Zha. 2009. “The Conquest of South American Inflation.” Journal of
Political Economy 117(2): 211.
Schmitt-Grohé, S. and M. Uribe. 2011. “Pegs and Pain.” Working Paper 16847, National Bureau of
Economic Research.
__________. 2013a. “Downward Nominal Wage Rigidity and the Case for Temporary Inflation in the
Eurozone.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 27(Summer): 193–212.
__________. 2013b. “Downward Nominal Wage Rigidity, Currency Pegs, and Involuntary
Unemployment.” Unpublished manuscript, Columbia University.
Schularick M. and A. Taylor. 2009. “Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary Policy, Leverage Cycles and
Financial Crises, 1870-2008.” Working Paper 15512, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Talvi, E., I. Munyo, and D. Perez. 2012, “Latin America Macroeconomic Outlook: A Global
Perspective.” Brookings Institution.
Tirole, J., 2005. The Theory of Corporate Finance, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Tornell, A. and F. Westermann. 2003. “Credit Market Imperfections in Middle Income Countries."
Working Paper 9737, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Uribe,
M.
2012.
Open
Economy
Macroeconomics,
www.columbia.edu/~mu2166/GIM/lecture_notes.pdf.

Columbia

University.

27

Table 1: Inflation and Labor Market Recovery from Financial Crises in EMs

ΔPRu

Dependent variable:
(1)

(2)

ΔPRw
(3)

‐0.021** ‐0.024*** ‐0.023**
(0.008) (0.009) (0.009)

high_πmax
natural_uP

0.088
(0.086)

lamrigP

gd

0.121
(0.095)
0.002
(0.008)

0.007
(0.009)

‐0.037
(0.042)

‐0.052
(0.040)

‐0.026
(0.044)

45

45

45

Number of Observations

(4)

(5)

(6)

‐0.165*
(0.084)

‐0.157*
(0.078)

‐0.165*
(0.087)

0.752
(0.963)

0.758
(1.017)
‐0.005
(0.079)

0.002
(0.087)

0.873**
(0.402)

0.768**
(0.367)

0.876**
(0.429)

41

45

41

Notes : s tanda rd errors i n pa renthes es .
* i ndi ca tes s i gni fi ca nce a t 10 percent l evel ; ** at 5 percent l evel ; *** a t 1 percent l evel .
Sa mpl e a nd vari a bl es defi ni ti on a re deta i l ed i n Secti on III.1.

Table 2: Inflation and Labor Market Recovery from Financial Crises in EMs

ΔPRu

Dependent variable:

high_πP

(1)

(2)

(3)

‐0.010
(0.009)

‐0.012
(0.009)

‐0.010
(0.009)
‐0.009
(0.010)

high_πR

natural_uP

0.128
(0.089)

Number of Observations

0.139
(0.101)
‐0.004
(0.008)

0.002
(0.009)

‐0.022
(0.043)

‐0.047
(0.042)

‐0.018
(0.047)

45

45

45

lamrigP

gd

ΔPRw
(4)

(5)

‐0.012
(0.010)

0.121
(0.091)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

0.036
(0.090)

0.020
(0.085)

0.038
(0.091)

‐0.010
(0.010)
0.135
(0.103)

‐0.003
(0.008)

0.003
(0.009)

‐0.033
(0.047)

‐0.060
(0.044)

‐0.028
(0.050)

45

45

45

1.161
(1.012)

1.056
(1.071)
‐0.058
(0.080)

‐0.030
(0.090)

1.038**
(0.418)

0.754*
(0.384)

0.987**
(0.449)

41

45

41

(10)

(11)

(12)

‐0.063
(0.104)

‐0.085
(0.096)

‐0.061
(0.105)

0.894
(1.039)

0.811
(1.095)
‐0.040
(0.080)

‐0.024
(0.090)

0.917**
(0.444)

0.683*
(0.389)

0.878*
(0.472)

41

45

41

Notes : s ta nda rd errors i n pa renthes es .
* i ndica tes s ignifi ca nce a t 10 percent l evel ; ** a t 5 percent level; *** a t 1 percent l evel.
Sa mpl e a nd va ri a bl es defini tion a re deta i led in Secti on III.1.

28

Table 3a: Inflation and Real Exchange Rate during Financial Crises in EMs

ΔPTrxr

Dependent variable:

ΔPRrxr

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

high_πmax

0.111
(0.093)

0.143*
(0.084)

0.135
(0.095)

‐0.058
(0.114)

0.052
(0.107)

‐0.020
(0.114)

natural_uP

‐0.476
(0.945)

‐1.044
(1.038)

‐0.005
(1.155)

‐0.050
(0.082)

‐0.121
(0.095)

0.216
(0.460)

0.357
(0.381)

0.014
(0.483)

45

55

45

lamrig P

gd

Number of Observations

‐0.873
(1.254)
‐0.154
(0.105)

‐0.185
(0.114)

0.088
(0.562)

0.315
(0.487)

‐0.221
(0.583)

45

55

45

Notes : s tanda rd errors i n pa renthes es .
* i ndi ca tes s i gni fi cance at 10 percent l evel ; ** a t 5 percent l evel ; *** a t 1 percent l evel.
Sa mpl e a nd vari a bl es defi ni tion a re deta i l ed i n Secti on III.1.

Table 3b: Inflation and Sector Allocation during Financial Crises in EMs

ΔPTty

Dependent variable:

ΔPRty

ΔPTxy

ΔPRxy

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

high_πmax

0.003
(0.016)

‐0.006
(0.017)

0.000
(0.016)

‐0.019
(0.022)

‐0.029
(0.021)

‐0.019
(0.023)

‐0.008
(0.050)

0.019
(0.045)

‐0.004
(0.052)

‐0.048
(0.050)

‐0.007
(0.050)

‐0.038
(0.051)

natural_uP

‐0.002
(0.159)

0.117
(0.178)

‐0.355
(0.225)

‐0.338
(0.259)

‐0.989*
(0.508)

‐1.083*
(0.568)

‐1.537***
(0.507)

0.022
(0.017)

0.023
(0.016)

0.126
(0.090)

0.072
(0.081)

0.185*
(0.098)

40

48

40

lamrigP

gd

Number of Observations

0.015
(0.021)

0.003
(0.024)

0.112
(0.127)

0.136
(0.101)

0.120
(0.142)

40

48

40

0.023
(0.045)

‐0.020
(0.052)

‐0.044
(0.247)

0.224
(0.200)

‐0.077
(0.264)

45

53

45

‐1.766***
(0.562)
0.023
(0.049)

‐0.049
(0.051)

0.327
(0.247)

0.660***
(0.219)

0.246
(0.262)

45

53

45

Notes : s tanda rd errors in parenthes es .
* i ndicates s i gni fica nce a t 10 percent l evel ; ** at 5 percent l evel ; *** at 1 percent l evel .
Sa mple and vari ables definiti on are deta il ed i n Section III.1.

29

Table 4a: Real Exchange Rate and Jobless Recovery During Financial Crises in EMs

ΔPRu

Dependent variable:

ΔPTrxr

(1)

(2)

(3)

‐0.003
(0.015)

‐0.006
(0.015)

‐0.002
(0.015)

ΔPRrxr

natural_uP

0.140
(0.090)

lamrig P

gd

0.151
(0.104)

‐0.005
(0.008)

0.002
(0.009)

‐0.017
(0.044)

‐0.044
(0.043)

‐0.013
(0.048)

45

45

45

Number of Observations

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.005
(0.012)

0.004
(0.013)

0.006
(0.013)

0.142
(0.089)

0.159
(0.102)

‐0.004
(0.008)

0.003
(0.009)

‐0.018
(0.044)

‐0.045
(0.043)

‐0.011
(0.048)

45

45

45

Notes : s ta ndard errors i n pa renthes es .
* i ndi ca tes s igni fi ca nce a t 10 percent l evel ; ** a t 5 percent l evel ; *** a t 1 percent l evel .
Sa mpl e and va ri abl es defini ti on a re deta i l ed i n Section III.1.

Table 4b: Sector Allocation and Jobless Recovery During Financial Crises in EMs

ΔPRu

Dependent variable:

ΔPTty

(1)

(2)

(3)

0.019
(0.103)

0.013
(0.108)

‐0.009
(0.106)

ΔPRty

(4)

(5)

(6)

‐0.027
(0.072)

‐0.050
(0.072)

‐0.027
(0.072)

ΔPTxy

(7)

(8)

(9)

‐0.009
(0.028)

‐0.019
(0.028)

‐0.008
(0.029)

ΔPRxy

natural_uP

0.132
(0.094)
0.002
(0.009)

0.011
(0.010)

0.003
(0.054)

‐0.024
(0.053)

0.037
(0.062)

40

40

40

lamrig P

gd

Number of Observations

0.194*
(0.109)

0.123
(0.096)

0.185
(0.111)
0.003
(0.009)

0.011
(0.010)

0.009
(0.053)

‐0.011
(0.053)

0.040
(0.060)

40

40

40

0.134
(0.093)

0.145
(0.106)
‐0.004
(0.008)

0.002
(0.009)

‐0.017
(0.044)

‐0.042
(0.043)

‐0.013
(0.048)

45

45

45

(10)

(11)

(12)

0.017
(0.028)

‐0.001
(0.026)

0.019
(0.029)

0.167*
(0.097)

0.187
(0.113)
‐0.004
(0.008)

0.003
(0.009)

‐0.023
(0.045)

‐0.045
(0.046)

‐0.018
(0.048)

45

45

45

Notes : s ta nda rd errors i n pa renthes es .
* i ndi ca tes s i gni fi ca nce a t 10 percent l evel ; ** a t 5 percent l evel ; *** a t 1 percent l evel .
Sa mpl e a nd va ri a bl es defi ni ti on a re deta i l ed i n Secti on III.1.

30

Table 5a: Credit Cycle at the Peak and Credit Recovery
(First Stage)

ΔPRcredit

Dependent variable:
(1)

creditP

(2)

(3)

‐1.285*** ‐1.105*** ‐1.256***
(0.143) (0.124) (0.150)

high_πmax

‐0.086
(0.063)

natural_uP

‐0.900
(0.636)

‐0.107*
(0.055)

‐0.706
(0.707)

lamrigP

gd

‐0.096
(0.066)

0.122**
(0.053)

0.044
(0.067)

‐0.134
(0.310)

0.180
(0.247)

‐0.066
(0.329)

45

55

45

Number of Observations

Notes : s tanda rd errors i n parenthes es .
* i ndi ca tes s i gni fi ca nce a t 10 percent l evel ;
** a t 5 percent l evel ; *** at 1 percent l evel .
Sampl e a nd vari abl es defi ni ti on a re detai l ed i n Secti on III.1.

Table 5b: Credit Recovery and Labor Market Recovery during Financial Crises in EMs

ΔPRwl

Dependent variable:
Estimation Method

OLS
(1)

IV
(2)

OLS
(3)

IV
(4)

OLS
(5)

IV
(6)

ΔPRcredit

0.403**
(0.159)

0.456**
(0.197)

0.428**
(0.162)

0.507**
(0.205)

0.421**
(0.165)

0.483**
(0.206)

high_πmax

‐0.096
(0.084)

‐0.089
(0.085)

‐0.087
(0.086)

‐0.075
(0.089)

‐0.084
(0.087)

‐0.075
(0.090)

natural_uP

0.668
(0.920)

0.662
(0.921)

0.509
(0.975)

0.479
(0.979)

lamrigP

gd

Number of Observations

‐0.060
(0.081)

‐0.068
(0.082)

‐0.046
(0.086)

‐0.053
(0.087)

1.042**
(0.386)

1.057**
(0.389)

0.891**
(0.376)

0.906**
(0.378)

0.973**
(0.411)

0.979**
(0.412)

39

39

39

39

39

39

Notes : s ta nda rd errors i n pa renthes es .
* i ndi ca tes s i gni fi ca nce a t 10 percent l evel ; ** a t 5 percent l evel ; *** a t 1 percent l evel .
Sa mpl e a nd va ri a bl es defi ni ti on a re deta i l ed i n Secti on III.1.

31

Appendices
Appendix 1: Methodology for Domestic Sudden Stops
Following Calvo, Izquierdo, and Mejia (2008) a Domestic Sudden Stop is defined as a phase that
meets the following conditions:
• It contains at least one observation where the year-on-year fall in real bank credit flows lie at least
two standard deviations below its sample mean (this addresses the “unexpected” requirement of a
sudden stop).
• The sudden stop phase starts the first time the annual change in real bank credit flows fall one
standard deviation below the mean and ends once the annual change in capital flows exceed one
standard deviation below its sample mean (this captures the persistence of the Sudden Stop).
Calvo, Izquierdo, and Mejia (2008) use this methodology to define External Sudden Stops, using
(external) capital flows instead of bank credit flows. Data on bank credit flows includes claims on the
private sector by depositary institutions. CPI deflates credit data. Data source: IFS.

Appendix 2: List of Financial Crisis Episodes
Table A.1 lists the 55 financial crisis episodes included in the empirical analysis. As detailed in
section 2.1, low-inflation (high-inflation) episodes are episodes in which the maximum level of annual
inflation rate is below (above) 30 percent.

32

Table A1: Sample of Financial Crisis Episodes
Low Inflation
Country
Peak
Algeria
Algeria
Argentina
Brazil
Colombia
Côte d'Ivoire
Côte d'Ivoire
Côte d'Ivoire
Côte d'Ivoire
Côte d'Ivoire
Korea
Malaysia
Malaysia
Morocco
Morocco
Morocco
Panama
Panama
Peru
Phillipines
South Africa
South Africa
South Africa
Thailand

1985
1992
1994
1997
1995
1982
1986
1991
1998
2001
1996
1984
1997
1980
1982
1986
1982
1986
1997
1997
1981
1984
1989
1996

High Inflation
Country

Peak

Algeria
Argentina
Argentina
Argentina
Brazil
Brazil
Brazil
Bulgaria
Chile
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Ecuador
El Salvador
Indonesia
Lebanon
Mexico
Mexico
Nigeria
Peru
Phillipines
Russia
Turkey
Turkey
Turkey
Uruguay
Uruguay
Venezuela
Venezuela
Venezuela
Venezuela
Venezuela

1989
1980
1987
1998
1980
1987
1991
1995
1981
2000
1981
1998
1980
1997
1988
1981
1994
1980
1981
1983
1997
1993
1997
2000
1981
1998
1980
1988
1992
1995
2001

Appendix 3: Robustness
In this section, we explore how robust our results are to the inclusion of additional controls that could
be associated with the dependent variables in the above estimated equations. We explore controls
related to the characteristics of the recession episode, and linked to country-specific characteristics.
The following list describes each of these controls:

33



Depth of the recession episode (∆

). Defined as the log change in GDP per capita from

output peak to trough. Jobless recoveries could result from deeper recession episodes if, for
example, larger output contractions lead to higher increases in unemployment and there is
hysteresis in unemployment. Data source: WEO and WDI.


Country’s historical inflation (

_ ): Defined as the country’s historical median (1980-

2007) rate of inflation. We compute inflation using the producer price index (wholesale price
index or the consumer price index when not available). Data source: IMF and national
sources.


Country’s

, defined as the country’s historical average (1980-2007) of the share of

tradables in GDP. The tradables sector includes agriculture and manufacturing. An
economy that is more open could, for instance, require smaller real currency depreciation
for a given shock (see Calvo, Izquierdo, and Mejia, 2008). Data source: WDI.


Country’s financial development (

). Defined as the country’s historical

_

median (1980-2007) of domestic credit provided by the banking sector in terms of GDP.
Data source: WDI.


Country size (

_

,

_

, and

_

). Defined as three dummy

variables measuring the size of the population of a given country:

_

takes the

value of one when the country’s population is below 20 million and zero otherwise;
_

takes the value of one when the country’s population is between 20 and 80

million and zero otherwise;

_

takes the value of one when the country’s

population is above 80 million and zero otherwise. Definition of thresholds and data source,
Uribe (2012).

Results are presented in tables A.2-A.5. Table A.2 shows that the result –high-inflation episodes tend
to display less unemployment and lower real wages at the output recovery point than low-inflation
episodes (table 1, section 2.2)– is robust to the inclusion of the additional recession and country
controls. Only when we control for financial development or country size does the relationship
between real wages and high inflation lose its statistical significance, although the estimated
coefficient remains negative and has a similar size to that of the other regressions.
Table A.3 shows that, in line with section 2.3, high inflation is not related to changes in the real
exchange rate or sector allocation from output peak to recovery once additional recession controls and
country controls are included.

34

Table A.4 shows that the finding of no statistically significant association between jobless recovery
and peak-to-recovery change in real exchange rate/sector allocation (section 2.3) is robust to the
inclusion of the additional controls of this section.
Finally, table A.5 shows that the finding of a positive and statistically significant relationship
between credit recovery and wage bill recovery (section 2.4) is robust to the inclusion of the additional
controls of this section. In particular, both OLS and IV estimates are positive and statistically
significant for all specifications.
Table A.2: Inflation and Labor Market Recovery from Financial Crises in EMs

ΔPRu

Dependent variable:
(1)

high_πmax

ΔPTy

(2)

(3)

ΔPRw
(4)

(5)

‐0.020** ‐0.022** ‐0.023** ‐0.031*** ‐0.022**
(0.009) (0.009) (0.008) (0.010) (0.009)
0.061
(0.059)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

‐0.160*
(0.094)

‐0.158*
(0.089)

‐0.167*
(0.087)

‐0.134
(0.105)

‐0.133
(0.092)

0.083
(0.603)
‐0.010
(0.017)

hist_π

openness

‐0.078
(0.167)
0.121
(0.072)

fin_development

‐0.779
(0.730)
‐0.000
(0.000)

0.001
(0.002)

small_country

‐0.016
(0.013)

‐0.149
(0.131)

medium_country

‐0.012
(0.011)

‐0.012
(0.110)

natural_uP

0.118
(0.095)

0.109
(0.098)

0.251**
(0.121)

0.120
(0.093)

0.164
(0.103)

0.760
(1.031)

0.661
(1.049)

0.021
(1.228)

0.670
(1.041)

1.371
(1.138)

lamrig P

0.005
(0.009)

0.008
(0.009)

0.015
(0.010)

0.003
(0.009)

0.005
(0.009)

‐0.001
(0.091)

0.014
(0.092)

‐0.056
(0.103)

0.018
(0.094)

0.004
(0.091)

gd

‐0.025
(0.044)

‐0.031
(0.046)

‐0.023
(0.043)

‐0.018
(0.044)

‐0.019
(0.048)

0.878*
(0.436)

0.834*
(0.443)

0.846*
(0.429)

0.857*
(0.435)

1.083**
(0.462)

45

45

45

45

45

41

41

41

41

41

Number of Observations

Notes : s ta nda rd errors i n pa renthes es .
* indi ca tes s i gnifica nce a t 10 percent level ; ** a t 5 percent l evel ; *** a t 1 percent l evel.
Sa mple a nd va ri a bl es defi ni ti on a re deta il ed i n Secti on III.1.

35

Table A.3: Inflation, Real Exchange Rate and Sector Allocation during Financial Crises in EMs

ΔPRrxr

Dependent variable:

ΔPRty

ΔPRxy

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

high_πmax

‐0.087
(0.119)

‐0.004
(0.116)

‐0.022
(0.114)

‐0.081
(0.132)

‐0.022
(0.122)

‐0.028
(0.024)

‐0.018
(0.023)

‐0.015
(0.023)

‐0.008
(0.027)

‐0.012
(0.024)

‐0.030
(0.055)

‐0.050
(0.051)

‐0.040
(0.049)

‐0.009
(0.059)

‐0.020
(0.053)

ΔPTy

‐1.269
(0.766)

‐0.175
(0.159)
‐0.213
(0.223)

hist_π

openness

0.163
(0.354)
‐0.030
(0.053)

‐1.093
(0.973)

fin_development

0.150
(0.098)
‐0.310
(0.194)

‐0.002
(0.002)

‐0.874**
(0.421)
0.000
(0.000)

0.001
(0.001)

small_country

0.042
(0.176)

‐0.030
(0.038)

‐0.121
(0.076)

medium_country

0.029
(0.151)

0.003
(0.031)

‐0.035
(0.065)

natural_uP

‐0.819
(1.228)

‐1.119
(1.281)

‐2.050
(1.631)

‐0.876
(1.256)

‐0.990
(1.379)

‐0.348
(0.258)

‐0.361
(0.264)

‐0.618*
(0.308)

‐0.348
(0.261)

‐0.234
(0.290)

lamrigP

‐0.154
(0.113)

‐0.156
(0.118)

‐0.260*
(0.132)

‐0.212*
(0.118)

‐0.181
(0.121)

0.004
(0.024)

0.007
(0.025)

‐0.014
(0.026)

0.009
(0.025)

0.010
(0.025)

‐0.053
(0.053)

‐0.069
(0.052)

‐0.109*
(0.057)

‐0.036
(0.053)

‐0.048
(0.052)

gd

‐0.235
(0.571)

‐0.334
(0.596)

‐0.249
(0.582)

‐0.161
(0.588)

‐0.244
(0.644)

0.104
(0.142)

0.110
(0.145)

0.163
(0.142)

0.103
(0.145)

0.190
(0.157)

0.247
(0.264)

0.325
(0.263)

0.224
(0.252)

0.216
(0.263)

0.388
(0.279)

45

45

45

45

45

40

40

40

40

40

45

45

45

45

45

Number of Observations

‐1.773*** ‐1.593*** ‐2.707*** ‐1.764*** ‐1.414**
(0.568) (0.565)
(0.705) (0.562)
(0.597)

Notes : s ta nda rd errors i n pa renthes es .
* i ndi ca tes s i gni fi ca nce a t 10 percent l evel ; ** a t 5 percent l evel ; *** a t 1 percent l evel .
Sa mple a nd va ri a bl es defi ni ti on a re deta i l ed i n Secti on III.1.

36

Table A.4: Jobless Recovery, Real Exchange Rate and Sector Allocation during Financial Crises in EMs

ΔPRu

Dependent variable:

ΔPRrxr

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.012
(0.013)

0.004
(0.013)

0.010
(0.013)

0.006
(0.013)

0.007
(0.013)

ΔPRty

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

‐0.008
(0.069)

‐0.029
(0.073)

‐0.006
(0.074)

‐0.028
(0.074)

‐0.061
(0.065)

ΔPRxy

ΔPTy

0.116*
(0.060)

0.135**
(0.061)
‐0.015
(0.018)

hist_π

openness

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

0.014
(0.028)

0.026
(0.029)

0.037
(0.029)

0.021
(0.030)

0.009
(0.030)

0.100*
(0.059)
‐0.004
(0.023)

0.134
(0.079)

fin_development

‐0.020
(0.018)
0.092
(0.088)

‐0.000
(0.000)

0.155*
(0.081)
0.000
(0.000)

‐0.000
(0.000)

small_country

‐0.020
(0.014)

‐0.049***
(0.014)

‐0.019
(0.014)

medium_country

‐0.008
(0.012)

‐0.025**
(0.012)

‐0.008
(0.012)

natural_uP

0.150
(0.099)

0.138
(0.106)

0.306**
(0.133)

0.159
(0.104)

0.214*
(0.109)

0.182*
(0.105)

0.181
(0.114)

0.277*
(0.141)

0.184
(0.114)

0.321***
(0.106)

0.166
(0.111)

0.173
(0.113)

0.383**
(0.150)

0.191
(0.115)

0.219*
(0.116)

lamrigP

0.003
(0.009)

0.005
(0.010)

0.013
(0.011)

0.003
(0.010)

0.003
(0.010)

0.012
(0.010)

0.012
(0.011)

0.016
(0.011)

0.012
(0.011)

0.016
(0.009)

0.002
(0.009)

0.007
(0.010)

0.015
(0.011)

0.003
(0.010)

0.003
(0.010)

gd

‐0.013
(0.046)

‐0.021
(0.049)

‐0.007
(0.047)

‐0.011
(0.049)

0.007
(0.050)

0.039
(0.057)

0.038
(0.061)

0.025
(0.062)

0.039
(0.063)

0.102*
(0.058)

‐0.018
(0.047)

‐0.031
(0.049)

‐0.019
(0.046)

‐0.016
(0.049)

0.002
(0.052)

45

45

45

45

45

40

40

40

40

40

45

45

45

45

45

Number of Observations

Notes : s ta nda rd errors in pa renthes es .
* i ndi ca tes s i gni fi ca nce a t 10 percent l evel ; ** a t 5 percent l evel ; *** a t 1 percent l evel .
Sa mpl e a nd va ri a bl es defi ni ti on a re deta i l ed i n Secti on III.1.

37

Table A.5: Credit Recovery and Labor Market Recovery during Financial Crises in EMs

ΔPRwl

Dependent variable:
Estimation Method

OLS
(1)

IV
(2)

OLS
(3)

IV
(4)

OLS
(5)

IV
(6)

OLS
(7)

IV
(8)

OLS
(9)

IV
(10)

ΔPRcredit

0.427**
(0.169)

0.485** 0.516*** 0.624**
(0.210) (0.175) (0.229)

0.423**
(0.158)

0.535**
(0.197)

0.416**
(0.170)

0.475**
(0.214)

0.401**
(0.181)

0.470*
(0.233)

high_πmax

‐0.090
(0.092)

‐0.083
(0.094)

‐0.099
(0.084)

‐0.082
(0.087)

‐0.075
(0.102)

‐0.070
(0.103)

‐0.079
(0.092)

‐0.072
(0.093)

ΔPTy

‐0.139
(0.607)

‐0.170
(0.612)

‐1.420*
(0.735)

‐1.423*
(0.741)
0.000
(0.002)

0.000
(0.002)

small_country

‐0.027
(0.141)

‐0.016
(0.143)

medium_country

0.011
(0.114)

0.007
(0.114)

hist_π

‐0.043
(0.091)

‐0.022
(0.095)

‐0.245
(0.170)

‐0.285
(0.180)

openness

fin_development

natural_uP

0.495
(0.991)

0.465
(0.995)

0.122
(0.997)

0.014
(1.013)

‐0.745
(1.139)

‐0.801
(1.150)

0.484
(1.001)

0.467
(1.003)

0.650
(1.157)

0.562
(1.175)

lamrigP

‐0.043
(0.088)

‐0.049
(0.089)

‐0.023
(0.086)

‐0.030
(0.087)

‐0.141
(0.096)

‐0.153
(0.098)

‐0.041
(0.094)

‐0.049
(0.096)

‐0.039
(0.095)

‐0.049
(0.097)

gd

0.967**
(0.418)

0.972**
(0.419)

0.835*
(0.416)

0.822*
(0.419)

0.962**
(0.395)

0.974**
(0.398)

0.966**
(0.419)

0.975**
(0.420)

1.033**
(0.463)

1.014**
(0.465)

39

39

39

39

39

39

39

39

39

39

Number of Observations

Notes : s ta nda rd errors i n pa renthes es .
* i ndi ca tes s i gni fi ca nce a t 10 percent l evel ; ** a t 5 percent l evel ; *** a t 1 percent l evel .
Sa mpl e a nd va ri a bl es defi ni ti on a re deta i l ed i n Secti on III.1.

38

Appendix

4:

Threshold

Effects

in

the

Inflation-Unemployment

Relationship17
We follow Hansen (2000) in order to assess whether there is indeed robust evidence of a non-linear
relationship between inflation and unemployment during financial crises in EMs. In particular, we
wish to verify the presence of two different regimes for unemployment behavior distinguished by
their level of inflation during the crisis episodes, as assumed in model (1) in the main text of the
paper. Our conjecture is that low-inflation episodes are associated with more jobless recovery than
high-inflation episodes.
The general form for the estimated model for a single threshold is as follows18:
∆ u

α

X γ

ϵ

π

,

,

∆ u

α

X′ γ

ϵ

π

,

,

(A.1)

where q is the threshold, ∆ u denotes the jobless recovery measure in financial crisis episode
i, X is a vector of controls including labor market controls (labor_mkt , ) and secular growth
(gd ), ϵ is a random error term (variables are defined in section 2.1). The threshold variable is
defined with respect to the maximum rate of inflation experienced during the episode (π

,

).

The equation estimated in model (1) of the main text is a single equation version of the above model,
in which the threshold q is used to create a dummy, with value 1 for the high-inflation regime and 0
for the low-inflation regime.
Hansen’s approach allows us to consider either all parameters as regime-dependent or just a subset
of them. In the model estimated in the main text, we consider as regime-dependent only the
intercept, which is the variable subject to the shift caused by the threshold-related dummy. This
amounts to assuming that γ

γ

.

The least squares point estimate for the threshold is derived from

the minimum of the graph of the normalized likelihood ratio sequence as a function of the threshold
in inflation depicted in figure A.1 (see Hansen, 2000). Said estimated value is 0.317. There are 17
17

We thank Zorobabel Bicaba and Farshad Ravasan for excellent research assistance.
The specification in (A.1) is consistent with the one in model (1), studied in section 3.1, in which the level of inflation does not enter as a
regressor. An alternative specification of the model for a single threshold would be to include the inflation variable that defines the threshold as
a regressor:

18

∆ u

α

π

,

X γ

ϵ

π

,

,

∆ u

α

π

,

X′ γ

ϵ

π

,

.

(A.2)

A relationship of this type is studied in appendix 5, where we relate continuous measures of inflation to unemployment recovery. The estimated
threshold under this alternative specification is similar to that estimated under (A.1).

39

episodes with π

,

0.317 and 26 episodes with π

,

0.317. The confidence interval around said

point estimate is rather large, at 90 percent the interval is from 0.19 to 1.74 (see table A.6). Roughly
speaking, this interval can be seen in the graph from the intersections of the LR with the lowest
critical line (associate to 90 percent confidence). The wide confidence interval indicates a difficulty in
pinning down the exact location of the relevant threshold and, possibly, suggests the presence of
additional thresholds. Due to the small size of our sample, we cannot perform robust tests for the
presence of an additional threshold. The estimated threshold is robust to different sets of controls,
including the case in which π

,

enters the set of regressors. Table A.6 reports the results of the

OLS regression for the split sample for model (1). The intercept switches in sign in the two regimes,
and the difference between high and low inflation implies a decline in the rate of unemployment of
about 2 percent when we move from low to high inflation.
In summary, Hansen’s approach indicates that there is evidence of a threshold on inflation, dividing
the sample in two different regimes. As documented in the OLS regression that uses the estimated
threshold to identify a switch in regime, evidence suggests that moving from below to above a
threshold around 30 percent for inflation helps explain a switch from jobless to job-intensive
recovery.

Table A.6: Regression on split sample

ΔPRu (π≤0.317)

ΔPRu (π>0.317)

1

2

natural_uP

0.105
(0.099)

0.105
(0.099)

lamrigP

0.005
(0.009)

0.005
(0.009)

gd

‐0.019
(0.04)

‐0.019
(0.04)

0.012
(0.025)

‐0.011
(0.025)

17

26

Dependent variable:
Regime independent variables

Regime dependent variable
Intercept

Number of Observations

Notes :
Sa mpl e and vari a bl es definition a re deta i l ed in s ecti on III.1
Sta nda rd errors s hown bel ow the coeffi ci ent

40

Figure A.1. Likelihood Ratio and Threshold Variable (Inflation)

Note: the three dotted lines starting from below indicate the confidence interval at 90 percent, 95
percent, and 99 percent.

Appendix 5: A Linear Relationship between Inflation and Unemployment
The threshold identified in this paper, in terms of a level of inflation up to which financial crisis
episodes do not display a jobless recovery, is relatively high (30 percent). A relevant question for
policy design is whether there is any linear type of relationship that can also be established
empirically between the inflation experienced in the episode (the level of inflation or the change in
inflation) and unemployment recovery. If this is the case, countries could choose only a moderate
increase in inflation and still expect to have an effect on jobless recoveries.
The pattern we identify in the data is illustrated in figure A.2, displaying our measure of jobless
recovery for different ranges of inflation rate achieved during the episode and suggesting the nonlinear type of relationship between inflation and unemployment recovery we have discussed in
section 2.2. However, aside from this pattern, data does not suggest a (strictly) decreasing
relationship between the level of inflation and jobless recovery.

41

To further explore this pattern, we estimate a linear model relating jobless recovery to different
continuous measures of inflation experienced during the episode. In particular, we estimate the
model
∆ u

α

βπ

X′ γ

ϵ,

(A.1)

where π denotes a measure of the inflation experienced during the financial crisis episode i.
The four measures of inflation experienced during the episode considered are the maximum
level of inflation (π

), the level of inflation at the output trough (π ), the difference between

the maximum level of inflation and inflation at the output peak (∆

π), and the change in

inflation from peak to trough (∆ π) (variables are defined in section 2.1).
This model is similar to model (1), but the regressor –instead of being a dummy variable– is a
continuous measure of the inflation experienced during the episode. Results are presented in table
A.7. Columns 1-4 show that, for the whole sample, there is no statistically significant relationship
between any of the continuous measures of inflation and unemployment. A possible explanation of
this result could be that, as explained in section 2.1, eight episodes in our sample could be considered
hyperinflations. However, columns 5 - 8 show that, if we include a dummy for hyperinflation
episodes, the relationship between jobless recovery and inflation is still not statistically significant.
Moreover, the negative estimated relationship is mostly driven by the difference between lowinflation episodes and high-inflation episodes: if we include a dummy variable for low-inflation
episodes, it is not even clear that there is a negative relationship between inflation and
unemployment recovery for low-inflation episodes (see columns 9-12).19
The estimated results from this section show that there does not seem to be strong evidence
supporting the statistical significance of a linear relationship between a continuous measure of
inflation and unemployment recovery. Although the sample size is small, this suggests that, on the
one hand, a small increase in inflation might not be of any help to fight jobless recoveries; and on the
other hand, a very large increase in inflation, beyond the identified threshold, might be an overkill to
avoid jobless recovery.

19 The results shown in table A.7 (columns 9-12) include a dummy variable for low-inflation episodes that experience a
maximum annual rate of inflation below 30 percent, as in section 3.2. If we estimate this threshold using the method in
Hansen (2000), as in appendix 4, model (A.2), we obtain similar results: there does not seem to be evidence of a negative and
significant relationship between inflation and unemployment recovery for low-inflation episodes.

42

Figure A.2. Inflation and Jobless Recovery

Note: Sample and variables definition are detailed in section 2.1.

43

Table A.7: Inflation and Labor Market Recovery from Financial Crises in EMs

ΔPRu

Dependent variable:
(1)

πmax

(2)

(3)

(4)

‐0.000
(0.001)

πT

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.000
(0.001)
‐0.001
(0.001)

ΔPmaxπ

(9)

‐0.000
(0.001)
‐0.001
(0.002)

0.000
(0.001)
0.002
(0.002)

‐0.014
(0.011)

πT x (1‐hyper)

(12)

0.001
(0.002)
0.000
(0.001)

πmax x (1‐hyper)

(11)

0.000
(0.001)
0.001
(0.002)

ΔPTπ

(10)

0.002
(0.002)
‐0.001
(0.014)

‐0.015
(0.011)

ΔPmaxπ x (1‐hyper)

‐0.002
(0.015)
‐0.010
(0.013)

ΔPTπ x (1‐hyper)

0.013
(0.015)
‐0.014
(0.014)

πmax x (1‐high_πmax)

0.000
(0.015)
0.192**
(0.090)

πT x (1‐high_πmax)

0.193**
(0.090)

ΔPmaxπ x (1‐high_πmax)

‐0.006
(0.100)

ΔPTπ x (1‐high_πmax)

‐0.023
(0.085)

(1‐hyper)

0.027
(0.020)

0.030
(0.023)

0.023
(0.020)

0.027
(0.021)

(1‐high_πmax)

0.013
(0.021)

0.017
(0.024)

0.003
(0.020)

0.016
(0.021)

‐0.003
(0.018)

‐0.003
(0.018)

0.028**
(0.013)

0.024**
(0.011)

0.091
(0.095)

0.093
(0.107)

natural_uP

0.151
(0.102)

0.154
(0.101)

0.144
(0.105)

0.147
(0.105)

0.129
(0.103)

0.125
(0.103)

0.126
(0.109)

0.113
(0.109)

0.097
(0.096)

0.093
(0.096)

lamrigP

0.003
(0.009)

0.003
(0.009)

0.002
(0.010)

0.002
(0.010)

0.006
(0.009)

0.006
(0.009)

0.004
(0.010)

0.004
(0.010)

0.010
(0.009)

0.010
(0.009)

gd

‐0.015
(0.047)

‐0.013
(0.047)

‐0.012
(0.049)

‐0.009
(0.049)

‐0.022
(0.048)

‐0.024
(0.048)

‐0.013
(0.049)

‐0.026
(0.051)

‐0.021
(0.044)

‐0.023
(0.044)

‐0.024
(0.045)

‐0.020
(0.050)

45

45

44

44

45

45

44

44

45

45

44

44

Number of Observations

0.006
(0.010)

Notes : s ta nda rd errors i n pa renthes es .
* indi ca tes s i gnifica nce a t 10 percent l evel; ** a t 5 percent l evel; *** a t 1 percent l evel.
Sa mple a nd va ri a bles defi nition a re deta i led in Section III.1.

44

