                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      HEALTH AND THE ECONOMY IN THE UNITED STATES, FROM 1750 TO THE
                               PRESENT

                                               Dora Costa

                                         Working Paper 19685
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19685


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2013




I thank Hoyt Bleakley, John Brown, Matthew Kahn, the participants at a joint CCPR and von Gremp
miniconference and five anonymous referees for comments. I gratefully acknowledge the support of
NIH grants R01 AG19637 and P01 AG10120 and the use of facilities and resources at the California
Center for Population Research, UCLA, which is supported in part by NICDH grant R24HD041022.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Dora Costa. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Health and the Economy in the United States, from 1750 to the Present
Dora Costa
NBER Working Paper No. 19685
November 2013, Revised June 2014
JEL No. I1,N30

                                             ABSTRACT

I discuss the health transition in the United States, bringing new data to bear on health indicators, and
investigating the changing relationship between health, income, and the environment. I argue that
scientific advances played an outsize role and that health improvements were largest among the poor.
Health improvements were not a precondition for modern economic growth. The gains to health are
largest when the economy has moved from “brawn” to “brains” because this is when the wage returns
to education are high, leading the healthy to obtain more education. More education may improve
use of health knowledge, producing a virtuous cycle.


Dora Costa
Bunche Hall 9272
Department of Economics
UCLA
Box 951477
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
costa@econ.ucla.edu




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w19685
Between the end of the nineteenth and the beginning of the twentieth century today’s developed
countries began the transition from a world in which childhood deaths and infectious disease
were common to one in which childhood deaths are rare and chronic diseases are prevalent. A
white American ten-year old boy born in the early 1880s could expect to live to age 48 and to
grow to 169cm, a short, stunted life compared to that of his counterparts born at the time of the
American Revolution or after the 1920s (see Panel A of Figure 1). He began life in a country
which had witnessed three major cholera epidemics, widespread malaria in the midwest, the
rise of typhoid fever as newly constructed sewers poured their contents into the rivers and lakes
from which towns drew their drinking water, and regulations mandating a privy for every 20
people and banning adulterated milk from cows fed on distillery wastes. He witnessed the
chlorination of the water supply, the pasteurization of milk, the quarantining of all measles
cases, vaccination campaigns, and the discovery of the first antibiotics. His children and
grandchildren saw the elimination of smallpox and polio, the rise of smoking and its decline in
response to the Surgeon General’s Report, pacemakers, open heart surgery, angioplasties, and
clot-busting and recombinant DNA drugs. Not all of the world has been as lucky. The Middle
East and Africa still suffer from polio outbreaks. In India, where over half of the population
defecates in the open, typhoid is endemic, 43% of children below age 5 are stunted and 56 out
1000 children die before age 5. 1

What are the lessons, if any, from the past about the health transition? This review will discuss
theories of the health transition and examine how the health transition occurred in the United
States and how different indicators of health, not just mortality and height, changed. It will
examine changes in the distribution of health by socioeconomic status and the roles in the
health transition played by rising incomes and by scientific advances and their application. In
addition to reviewing the existing literature, I will bring new data to bear for some of the health
indicators. The review will investigate how scientific advances were implemented. The review
also will examine the implications of improvements in health improvements for economic
growth. Concurrent with the increase in life expectancy and height since the 1880s, years of
education almost doubled and real GDP per capita rose more than six-fold over one hundred
years (see Panel B of Figure 1). I will focus on the United States both because of the
availability of extensive microdata and because variation in health across both space and time –
population health declined prior to the modern health improvement, helps identify the causes of
the health transition.

Sanitation, medicine, nutrition, income, and fertility all affect health (see the schematic in Panel
B of Figure 1). The relative roles of these factors, particularly the first four, in the health
transition have been debated widely (e.g. Preston 1975; McKeown 1976; Easterlin 1996; Floud
et al. 2011; Deaton 2013). This review will argue that scientific advances and their practical
application, both in the past and more recently, played an outsized role. Of course scientific
advances could not have been possible without rising incomes because investment in science
requires a certain level of income. A certain level of income is also necessary to buy sufficient
food and shelter. A review of evidence from microdata will highlight the importance of both the
disease environment and of income early in the twentieth century. In contrast, the impact of
exogenous changes in income on health is limited in recent times. Together, the trend and
micro data imply that unhealthy conditions can outweigh the positive effects of income (as seen
in Figure 1 for the 1830s to the 1880s), healthy conditions can outweigh the negative effects of




1See http://www.unicef.org/india/wes.html and the country profiles at
http://www.who.int/gho/countries/en/index.html#N , updated May 2013.

                                                   2
income declines (e.g. during the Great Depression), and rising incomes may have little effect on
health (e.g. the recent slow down in the heights at a time of rising incomes).

Both researchers and policy makers have pointed to health as spurring economic growth both in
the past and today (e.g., Fogel 1994; Gallup and Sachs 2001; WHO 2001; Bloom and Canning
2005). Health affects GDP directly through productivity gains and indirectly through
educational gains. Unless fertility increases outweigh these productivity and educational gains,
per capita GDP will grow (see the schematic in Panel B of Figure 1). This review will argue that
while improvements in health have undoubtedly raised productivity, these improvements are not
a precondition for modern economic growth. The wage returns to health in the US past were
low, suggesting that the nature of the economy in which health improvements occur matters.
Healthier workers are both stronger and better educated workers. In the non-mechanized, low
education economies of the past where physical strength was of value, the healthiest children
may have sorted into unskilled occupations because the opportunity cost of education was high.
The economic gains from health thus come from better ditch-digging but not necessarily from
changes that push forward the technological frontier. If in today’s human capital economies the
healthiest children now have an advantage in learning the advanced concepts taught at higher
educational levels, the marginal benefit of schooling will be rising at higher educational levels
and the healthiest children will sort into high human capital occupations. Marginal
improvements in childhood health thus can have big effects on educational attainment in a brain
based economy.

Health may have a limited impact on economic growth if health improvements are costly. The
early applications of scientific advances took the form of large and expensive public health
works projects, such as investments in clean water. Fear of infection from the immigrant and
migrant hordes crowding into cities provided the political support for financing these projects
(Troesken 2004: 135). More recent applications of scientific advances have taken the form of
health recommendations and therapies targeted to chronic disease. Because there are no
longer any spillover effects to treating the poor, political support for programs benefitting the
poor is now likely to be lower. The educated, whether because of education per se or because
of characteristics such as self-discipline and patience associated with education, can better
utilize the new health knowledge and maintain medical regimes, thus reinforcing at adult ages
the effects of early life health on educational attainment.

This review will begin with a discussion of theories of the health transition, the relationship
between health and economic growth, and economic models of health. I will then present
evidence on long-run health trends, including trends in health by socioeconomic status. A
review of the micro evidence will examine the changing relationship between health, the
environment and income and between health and productivity. I also will review our limited
knowledge of the impact of health on fertility, stressing that the effect depends on education. I
will then examine how expenditures on health and political support for these expenditures has
changed and how health should be valued. I will conclude with some thoughts for future
research.

Theories of the Health Transition

Theories of the health transition, i.e. the increase in life span accompanied by a decline
infectious disease mortality, are macro theories which emphasize aggregate changes. This
section will review these theories and their implications for economic growth. It will also review
the growing body of biomedical research which emphasizes the longitudinal and
intergenerational effects of health and micro theories of health based on individual behavior.

                                                3
Although these theories are not explicitly about the health transition, they have implications for
the health transition.

Macro Theories

Theories of the health transition variously have emphasized the roles of science and technology
and of rising incomes and improved nutritional intake. McKeown (1976;1981) pointed out that
the decline in tuberculosis mortality occurred before the availability of effective drug therapies,
thus suggesting that improved nutrition was a key factor. In contrast, Preston (1975)
emphasized the role of public health initiatives, showing that the curve relating life expectancy to
income has been shifting upward over time. He interpreted movements along the curve, which
is steep at low income levels and flatter at high income levels, as indicative of the contribution of
rising living standards to life expectancy, thus giving the curve a causal interpretation. He
interpreted the upward shift of the curve and changes in its slope as indicative of the
contribution of scientific and medical knowledge and their practical implementation. He argued
that over three-quarters of the increase in life expectancy between the 1930s and the 1960s
came from scientific advances and their application. A large body of literature provides
evidence on the historical importance of such public health initiatives as cleaning up the water
supply (Cutler and Miller 2005; Troesken 2004) or eradicating hookworm and malaria (Bleakley
2007; 2010b). But there is also evidence for the role of income. In a cross-section of poor,
high mortality countries disease and food availability, as proxied by income, both matter for
adult health (Bozzoli, Deaton, and Quintana-Dominique 2009), suggesting that prior to the
1880s income may have played an important role.

Cutler, Deaton, and Lleras-Muney (2006) argue that the history of mortality reduction from the
mid-18th century to the present encompasses three phases. They acknowledge that during the
first phase , from the middle of the 18th century to the middle of the 19th century, improved
nutrition and economic growth may have played a large role in health. They argue that in the
second phase in the closing decades of the 19th century and into the early years of the 20th
century public health mattered more – first negatively, because of high mortality in cities, then
positively in the delivery of clean water and the removal of wastes. They label the third phase,
dating from the 1930s on, as the era of big medicine, starting with vaccinations and antibiotics,
and moving to the expensive and intensive personal surgical and pharmaceutical targeted at
chronic disease.

Preston’s emphasis on the role of scientific advances has been echoed in work by Easterlin
(1996) and Deaton (2013). Deaton (2013) points out that investing in and applying new
scientific knowledge requires both income and state capacity. Public health expenditures
require both large financial outlays and local government employees to inspect, enforce, and
teach how to avoid germs and how to care properly for babies. Following Szreter (1988),
Deaton (2013) argues that broad political support, which is more likely if the poor have a political
voice, is needed to implement scientific advances in the form of public health investments.

Easterlin (1996), examining the links between the mortality transition and economic growth,
concluded that while modern economic growth and the rapid decline in mortality stem from the
same root causes, that is, the explosion of science and technology in the last three centuries,
the mortality revolution was not due to economic growth. It was instead due to public health
interventions that were dependent on scientific knowledge and techniques and on government
action to overcome information failures, externalities, and principal-agent and free rider
problems. He discounted the role of free market institutions (Easterlin 1999) even though
privately owned water companies were more likely to invest in filtration than publicly owned


                                                 4
companies (Troesken 1999). 2 Easterlin (1996) added that it is easier to achieve a mortality
revolution than it is to achieve modern economic growth because controlling infectious disease
demands fewer institutional, physical capital, and educational requirements. Controlling one
infectious disease even can lead to declines in other diseases because complementarities
increase health investments (Dow, Philipson, and Sala-i-Martin 1999).

Fogel’s theory of technophysio evolution emphasizes the relationship between improvements in
health and economic growth (Costa and Fogel 1997; Floud et al. 2011). Adjustments to
adverse conditions including a limited food supply, do not occur through crisis mortality but,
rather, through chronic starvation producing a thin, stunted population. The Bastille, according
to Fogel’s memorable image, was stormed by underweight Lilliputians. The relationship
between health and economic growth is an intergenerational one. One cannot give a grown
man food and expect him to be as healthy as someone who had been well-fed his entire life.
Nutritional status (a function of both nutritional intake and the demands made on that intake by
disease, work, climate, and other factors) determines longevity and current work levels. 3 Work
levels and intensity plus technology determine output. Output in turn determines living
standards and technological investments. The standard of living in turn determines the
nutritional status of the next generation. As a resident of London’s East End at the turn of the
20th century put it, “Look at my scrawny arm, will you … Not enough to eat, that’s what’s the
matter with it. Oh, not now. I have what I want to eat these days. But it’s too late. It can’t
make up for what I didn’t have to eat when I was a kiddy” (London 1903).

Health and Economic Growth

Fogel estimates that improvements in nutritional status account for at least 20% and up to 30%
of British economic growth between 1800 and 2000 (Fogel 1994; Floud et al. 2011: 125-133).
These increases came both from bringing the stunted and wasted beggars and paupers into the
labor force and from improving the health of those already in the labor force. 4 Of course,
improvements in nutritional status may not translate into the technological innovations that lead
to economic growth. England at the time of the Industial Revolution had many other
advantages as well and there are many examples of poor but healthy populations, including the
Plains Indians (Steckel and Prince 2001), the Irish in prefamine times (Nicholas and Steckel
1997), and the Scots relative to the English in the second half of the 1700s and the first half of
the 1800s (Floud et al.1990: 202-204).

2 The fraction of US water companies with filters n 1899 was an unimpressive 19% for private companies
and 6% for public companies (Troesken 1999).
3 The distinction between nutritional status and nutritional intake is often lost in critiques of Fogel’s view

(e.g. Deaton 2006; Cutler, Deaton, and Lleras-Muney 2006) which associate Fogel’s view with nutritional
intake.
4 This back-of-the-envelope calculation is often cited and often disputed. Various scholars have

questioned the estimates of caloric availability in Britain circa 1800. Harris, Floud, and Song (2014)
summarize this lively debate and conclude that the optimistic estimates of British caloric availability are
based on rosy assumptions about the amount of land in cultivation, the number of animals produced for
food, and the amount of food lost in production processes. However, other factors are likely to bias the
calculation upward. As acknowledged in Floud et al. (2011: 217), assuming that everyone above the
caloric threshold is in the labor force will bias upward the actual labor force participation rate. The
estimated gains of improving the health of those already in the labor force is also likely to be upward
biased. This estimate is based on a present discounted value of earnings calculation which estimates
the increase in earnings from increases in height and weight from a regression relating the value of
slaves to height and weight. Because slaves had no work choices, the value of height and weight is likely
to be overestimated. Because the need to maintain control over slaves skewed their skill accumulation,
the increase in the peak of the age-earnings profile may also be over-estimated.

                                                      5
Improvements in nutritional status or health may not even lead to increases in education, which
is widely viewed as a key determinant of economic growth in general and of twentieth century
US economic growth in particular (Goldin and Katz 2008; Acemoglu and Autor 2012). In the
19th century economy where, prior to widespread mechanization, brawn relative to brain must
have been of greater relative value, improvements in child health could even have raised the
opportunity cost of schooling, particularly for adolescents, thus reducing the optimal time spent
in school. Bleakley et al. (forthcoming) point out that health could affect income through three
distinct channels: 1) unskilled workers are more productive if they are healthier because they
are stronger and better able to do physically demanding jobs; 2) healthier students learn more
from the time they spend in school; and 3) better health may motivate a student to spend more
time in school. Because a healthier child is more productive either because he is stronger or
because he learns more during time spent in school, his opportunity cost of schooling is high.
In the 19th century, when formal education was often not a job requirement, improvements in
health may have increased the marginal cost of schooling. In contrast, in the 20th century,
when wage returns to education are high, if healthier students have a large advantage in
learning the advanced concepts taught at higher educational levels, the marginal benefit of
schooling is rising at higher educational levels. Yamauchi (2008), Bleakley (2010), and Pitt,
Rosenzweig, and Hassan (2012) present empirical examples of the ambiguity in the effect of
childhood health on schooling.

The Malthusian world view has been revived in several macroeconomic studies which
emphasize that mortality reductions, by increasing fertility, lead to modest or even negative
output effects. For example, Acemoglu and Johnson (2007), using cross-country data, examine
the effects of the sharp reduction in mortality in developing countries in the 1950s caused by the
diffusion of medical technologies. They conclude that increases in life expectancy led to
population increases and to smaller and statistically insignificant increases in GDP, producing a
negative effect on output per capita. This is worse than the worse case produced by Ashraf,
Lester, and Weil’s (2009) simulation model but even their model yields relatively modest
estimates. They conclude that an increase in life expectancy at birth from age 40 to 60 would
raise GDP per capita by only 15 percent in the long run. Eliminating either malaria or
tuberculosis in sub-Saharan Africa would raise GDP per capita by only 2 percent in the long run.
These Malthusian macroeconomic studies have been criticized on several grounds. These
include differences in the initial conditions faced by treatment and control group and the validity
of the instrumental variables strategy, issues of how health should be measured (e.g. mortality
versus morbidity) and of whether, in today’s urbanized and globalized world, excess populations
have the same impact as in the past (e.g. Bloom et al. 2009; Bleakley 2010a).

The modest, at best, estimates of health on GDP from macroeconomic studies stand in sharp
contrast to some of the large effects of health on wages found in microeconomic studies, such
as Bleakley (2010b, 2007). The macro and micro literature are not necessarily inconsistent.
Even though the cohort experiencing a health improvement may benefit from higher wages,
GDP per capita may not rise because of fertility effects, spillover effects leading to lower wages
for other cohorts or high costs of improving health. To understand the macroeconomic effects
of improvements in health we would need to know how health improvements interact with other
aspects of the economy.

Micro Theories of Health

The classic Grossman (1972) model of health treats health as both a consumption good (the
healthy feel better) and as an investment good (better health leads to greater income and more

                                                 6
time for work). The health endowment of adults deteriorates with age, with the rate of
deterioration depending on health investments produced from a combination of time and
purchased medical care. Individuals then solve an optimal resource allocation problem with the
price of health care, their wages and their productivity in the production of health determining
how resources are allocated between health capital and other goods and services.

The Grossman model implicitly underpins Mokyr and Stein’s (1996) reworking of Ewbank and
Preston’s (1990) emphasis on the role of changing household behavior in the health transition.
In this view, the germ theory of disease offered households new health production technologies;
this knowledge was transmitted to households through the popular press, schools, churches,
women’s associations, and others impressed into the sanitary movement’s cause; using this
knowledge, households then made decisions given relative prices, limited resources, and
environmental risk. Socioeconomic differences in health develop either because the new
knowledge first diffuses to the well-to-do or because the well-to-do are more productive in
applying the new technologies. However, whether changes in household behavior contributed
to the health transition remains unclear, as does the extent to which household behavior
changed. Mokyr and Stein’s (1996) argument was theoretical, not data driven. Brown (2000),
looking at correlations in a panel data set of German towns from 1889-1912, identifies higher
incomes, sanitary infrastructure improvements, and lower fertility as the biggest factors behind
the decline in infant mortality rates. Declining fertility and sanitary infrastructure improvements
accounted for up to one-fifth and one-third of the fall in infant mortality rates, respectively.
Another frequently cited behavioral factor and the target of German health campaigns, breast-
feeding and other approaches to infant care, was important in explaining differences across
cities and important in explaining declines in diarrheal diseases.

A drawback to the Grossman model is that it is a static model. The production function for
health is fixed and known and health deteriorates much like a machine. A growing body of
research which emphasizes the longitudinal and intergenerational origins of health status poses
challenges to the Grossman model.

The Barker hypothesis (e.g., 1992, 1994) argues that the chronic diseases we associate with
old age originate in utero or in the first year of life, either because of insults occuring during
these critical periods or because of intergenerational effects that operate through the mother.
Although much of Barker’s evidence (e.g.,1992,1994) is correlational, evidence on arguably
exogeneous insults comes from animal studies finding intergenerational effects of maternal
malnutrition during gestation through at least the second generation (Resnick and Morgane
1984; Brelser, Ellison, and Zamenhof 1975; McLeod, Goldrick, and Whyte 1972) and from
cases such as the Influenza Pandemic (Almond and Mazumder 2005) and the Dutch Hunger
winter (e.g., Stein et al. 2006; Painter, Roseboom, and Bleker 2005). The Dutch Hunger Winter
shows that nutrition of the mother during pregnancy not only influences her daughter’s nutrition
during her fetal life but also her grandchild’s birth weight (Lumey and Stein 1997).

The Barker hypothesis allows for interactions between early life insults and later life conditions.
For example, in the case of non-insulin-dependent diabetes, the interaction between a poor
prenatal “diet” and a rich adult diet may be important. Changes in the disease, work, and food
environment (such as the move from manual to mechanized and then to sedentary labor and
the increased availability of cheap food high in caloric density) occurred within a generation,
potentially leading to maladaptation. Alternatively, it may be through the accumulation of
insults throughout the life cycle that infectious disease leads to inflammation (e.g. Finch and
Crimmins 2004).


                                                 7
Both the Barker hypothesis and theories of inflammation emphasize the scarring effects of
insults, while other research argues that poor environmental conditions could leave very resilient
survivors through positive selection effects. Models of selection posit that when mortality at
younger ages is high, frailer individuals die, leaving a more robust population that survives
longer. Empirical analyses, however, predominately show positive associations between
debilitating events and the morbidity and mortality of adults more than 20 years after the event
(e.g. Horiuchi 1983; Elo and Preston 1992; Finch and Crimmins 2004; Barker 1992, 1994;
Almond and Mazumder 2005; cf. Casselli and Capocaccia 1989; Kannisto et al. 1997).
Evidence of selection leaving a more robust population comes from extreme cases such as Civil
War POW camps where mortality among soldiers over age 30 was greater than 50% (Costa
2012). Evidence of an exact offset between selection and scarring comes from the Chinese
famine (Gørgens, Meng, and Vaithianathan 2012). In the US, scarring was probably typical.
Civil War soldiers who enlisted in large cities where life expectancy at birth was roughly age 24
or 26 were shorter and faced higher old age mortality rates (Costa and Lahey 2005a).

Epigenetics, a heritable change in gene function without a change in the structure of DNA,
provides a mechanism for the early life origins of disease and for transmission through both the
mother and father (Pembrey 2010). Waterland and Jirtle (2003) showed that supplementing the
diets of Agouti mice dams with folic acid, vitamin B12, betaine, and choline permanently
affected the offspring’s DNA methylation at epigenetically susceptible loci. In rats, germline
epigenetic marks imposed by exposure to nicotine during pregnancy can become permanently
programmed and transferred through the germline to subsequent generations, manifesting itself
in asthmatic lungs (Rehan et al. 2012). Experimentally controlled dominance rank in rhesus
monkeys leaves an imprint on gene regulation, probably by affecting DNA methylation levels
(Tung et al. 2012). A comparison of maternal and non-maternal (including inanimate surrogate)
reared monkeys shows that adverse social conditions can become embedded within the basal
transcription of primate immune cells within the first four months of life (Cole et al. 2012). The
Dutch Hunger Winter provides evidence for humans: those exposed to famine prenatally had
less DNA methylation of the imprinted insulin like growth factor II (IGF2) gene compared with
their unexposed, same-sex siblings (Heijmans et al. 2008). Suggestive evidence from a remote
Swedish area associates a surfeit of food in the environment when the paternal grandfather was
a 9 to 12 year-old boy (during his slow growth period) with a shortening of grandchild survival
(Bygren et al. 2001).

Epigenetics also provides a mechanism for the mitigation of adverse effects. Mice with the
Agouti gene are yellow and obese and face an increased susceptibility to tumors and to
premature infertility. Supplementing maternal diets produced normal, brown mice (Warterland
and Jirtle 2003). Maternal exposure to bisphenol A (BPA), a chemical used in the manufacture
of polycarbonate plastic, alters the epigenome of offspring but the effect can be counteracted by
maternal dietary supplements either of methyl donors such as folic acid or of the phytoestrogen
genistein (Dolinoy, Huang, and Jirtle 2007). Future generations are not the only beneficiaries
of mitigation. Regular exercise changes the genome-wide DNA methylation pattern in human
skeletal muscle and adipose tissue. These epigenetic changes could contribute to altered gene
expression and improved metabolism and may explain how exercise improves health (Ling and
Rӧnn 2014).

In practice, mitigation will depend not only on self-discipline and the knowledge of how to
mitigate, both areas where the well-educated may have a comparative advantage, but also on
whether parents mitigate or reinforce health shocks between siblings. Equity concerns will drive
parents to mitigate but the high marginal returns to investing in the healthy child will push to
reinforcement. Empirical evidence is limited. There is evidence that parental early childhood

                                                8
inputs reinforce health outcomes at birth between siblings in the US (Datar, Kilburn, and
Loughran 2010). Chinese evidence suggests that parental educational inputs reinforce the
health outcomes of twins (Heckman et al. 2013; Rosenzweig and Zhang 2009), but that parental
health inputs compensate for health outcomes (Heckman et al. 2013). Comparisons across
socioeconomic groups using British data are also suggestive of both reinforcement and
compensation: low birth weight high socioeconomic status boys are more likely to suffer
adverse educational outcomes than their low socioeconomic status counterparts but high
socioeconomic status mitigates the later life health effects of low birth weight among women
(Currie and Hyson 1999). Empirically, in reduced form specifications, reinforcement will
produce overestimates of the biological effect of health whereas mitigation will produce
underestimates.

Longitudinal studies of the Dutch Hunger Winter show that either there is a long latency period
for health conditions or small initial differences in health, not easily measured at young ages,
become more important at older ages. Even though exposure to the famine led to low birth
weights among children in utero during the third and second trimester (Stein et al. 2004), there
was no effect of the famine on 18 year olds, as seen in a variety of health measures when men
were examined for military service (Stein et al. 1975: 197-228). By age 59, however, any
gestational famine exposure of at least 10 weeks duration was associated with hypertension
(Stein et al. 2006) and exposure to famine in early gestation was associated with more coronary
heart disease, even though birth weights had been normal (Painter, Roseboom, and Bleker
2005). Parental reinforcement of initial health differences may produce large health differences
at older ages and the interactions of initial health with subsequent educational and health
investments may be complex.

Heckman (2007) and Conti and Heckman (2010) provide such a framework for examining
health and educational investments over the life cycle, thus reconciling the Grossman model
with the intergenerational aspects of the Barker hypothesis by making self-control and
conscientiousness, which determine how productive an individual is in producing health in the
Grossman model, the outputs of a developmental model in which “skill begets skill.” In this
developmental model people possess a vector of capabilities at each age, including pure
cognitive abilities such as IQ, noncognitive abilities such as patience, self-control, temperament,
risk aversion, a rate of time perference and health stocks, including mortality and morbidity
propensities. All capabilities are produced by investments, the environment, and genes. The
capability formation process is governed by a multistage technology where each stage
corresponds to a different period in the life cycle. The model allows for different inputs and
technologies at different stages and for different sensitive and critical periods, that is periods
where one stage is more effective and where only that stage can produce, respectively. The
capabilities produced at one stage augment the capabilities attained at later stages, leading to
”self-productivity.” Thus higher levels of self-regulation and conscientiousness reduce health
risks and avoid accidents and higher levels of health promote learning. Education in turn can
have a causal effect on health. Through dynamic complementarity capabilities produced at one
stage of the life cycle raise the productivity of subsequent investments. Early investment
therefore needs to be followed up by later investment for the early investment to be productive.
It is this dynamic process that accounts for socioeconomic differentials in health. Together,
dynamic complementarity and self-productivity imply an equity-efficiency trade-off for late child
investments but not for early investments. The returns to early investments are therefore very
high.

The Heckman (2007) and Conti and Heckman (2010) model has implications for the mortality
transition. The cohorts that experienced the health transition, roughly those born in the first half

                                                 9
of the twentieth century, benefited not only from public health interventions when they were
young but also from investments in public education such as the” kindergarten movement” and
the “high school movement” and beyond (Goldin and Katz 2008). In their old age their better
cognitive and non-cognitive skills enabled them to take advantage of new medical knowledge
and therapies targeted toward older adults. These cohorts began to experience a virtuous
“self-productivity” cycle which should have led to improving health, but widening socioeconomic
differentials, at older ages. Previous cohorts, such as those born in the nineteenth century,
would have experienced less “self-productivity” because of limited medical knowledge and
therapies and because of the limited availability of schooling.

Long-Run Health Trends in the US

This section examines long-run trends in several health proxies – mortality, height, body mass
index (BMI), birth weight, and chronic conditions and discusses potential explanations for the
trends. The trends reveal that the US can be divided into four periods. The first period, in the
1700s and early 1800s, was one of a relatively good disease environment and high nutritional
availability. More and better food, better shelter (particularly less crowding), and better
geographic locations, where disease was not endemic, led to better health. The second period,
from the 1830s to the 1880s, was one of a worsening of the disease environment and of
nutritional availability with no new technologies to improve health. The worsening of the
disease environment was starkest in urban areas. On the eve of the Civil War, New York City
was “natural home of every variety of contagious disease, and the favorite resort of foreign
pestilences” (Smith 1911: 19). The third period, from the 1880s to the early 1900s, saw the
widespread introduction of new technologies to combat disease. The most effective
technology, the provision of clean water, was a public good. Everyone was treated. In contrast,
during the fourth period, from the 1930s or 1950s to the present, the new health technologies
were private goods. First they were drugs to combat infectious disease and then they were
therapies and health recommendations targeted at chronic conditions. The health
recommendations and the new therapies, requiring both individual purchases and skills to use
effectively, were complementary with income and education or correlates of education such as
patience and self-discipline.

Changes in the disease environment or in relative food prices can outweigh the positive effects
of income on health. During the US health declines of the 1830s to 1880s, real GDP per capita
was rising (see Panel B of Figure 1). In Europe, the largest increases in heights and the sharpest
decreases in infant mortality in the post-1850 periods occurred between 1913 and 1951, a period
encompassing two World Wars and the Great Depression and the period of lowest growth in per
capita GDP (Hatton and Bray 2010). The US time series evidence does not reveal effects of the
Great Depression on health, though its effects may have been mitigated by relief programs
(Fishback, Haines, and Kantor 2007) and by Old Age Assistance (Balan-Cohen 2008). One
potential explanation for the absence of a Great Depression effect is that the public health
investments that had already been made in the years preceeding the Great Depression such as
the provision of clean water, milk, and improvements in housing protected against disease while
incomes were adequate enough to secure sufficient nutritional intake and shelter. Recession
effects may have been different prior to the sanitary revolution. In nineteenth century Holland,
recessions increased the mortality rate later in life for most of the population, with lower social
classes suffering disproportionally (van den Berg et al. 2009). Because of limited birth and death
registration data, little is known about the effects of nineteenth century US recessions.
Microeconomic evidence on the twentieth century finds either no effects, e.g., experiencing the
Dust Bowl in utero did not affect older age disability and chronic disease rates (Cutler, Miller, and
Norton 2007), or an inverse correlation between recessions and health both in recent data and

                                                 10
data from the 1920s and 1930s (Ruhm 2000; Fishback, Haines, and Kantor 2007; Dehejia and
Lleras-Muney 2004). 5

Rising incomes may have played a larger role in health improvements in Europe than in the US
both before and after the health transition. The US in its early history, however, was one of
those fortunate places of which Malthus (1872: 252) noted, “[i]t has been universally remarked
that all new colonies settled in healthy countries, where there was plenty of room and food, have
constantly increased with astonishing rapidity in their population.” Writing of London’s East End
in 1903, Jack London declared, “As a vagrant in the “Hobo” of a California jail, I have been
served better food and drink than the London workman receives in his coffee-houses; while as
an American labourer I have eaten a breakfast for twelvepence such as the British labourer
would not dream of eating.” During the 1930s there was concern that 18-50% of surveyed
British manual and even artisanal worker families did not have the resources to maintain a
healthy diet (Rowntree and Lavers 1951;Crawford and Broadley 1938; Orr 1937) and an
experiment with the diets of school children in Scotland in the 1920s led to those receiving a
milk supplement to grow 20% more than either the control group or those receiving a biscuit
supplement (Orr 1928; Leighton and Clark 1929).

Life Expectancy and Mortality

Figure 2 shows long-run trends in men’s life-expectancy in the United States, patched together
from different sources. The longest time series, originally put together by Fogel (1986) and
continued to the present-day from Vital Statistics sources, is for life expectancy at age 10. Life
expectancy at age 10 in the 1790s was high by the standards of the day, reaching almost 57
years in the early 1790s. In contrast, life expectancy at age 10 in Sweden was 46. Hacker’s
(2010) series (life expectancy at birth is shown in Figure 1) puts the low point during the 1860s,
a period of wartime hardship. Mortality data from genealogies shows that life expectancy at
age 20 declined from approximately 47 years at the beginning of the century to slightly less than
41 years in the 1850s and recovery to levels of the early 1800s was not attained until the end of
the nineteenth century (Pope 1992). Both a worsening of the disease environment, with
diseases spread by increased immigration and internal migration, and rising food prices and
lower food consumption resulting from a population that was growing faster than the food
supply explain the decline. However, the American cohorts born in 1880-1900 were well fed,
suggesting that disease and unhealthy conditions were very important just prior to the health
transition (Floud et al. 2011: 331-335).

We observe the sustained twentieth century increase in life expectancy among both whites and
blacks and among both men and women. Trends in women’s life expectancy at birth since
1850 were similar to those of men until about 1930 when women’s life expectancies began to
increase more sharply (figure not shown). Since the 1970s, increases in women’s life
expectancies have lagged those of men. Smoking rates explain much of the deviation in life
expectancy levels and trends by sex. The fraction of deaths at age 50 and older attributable to
smoking was neglible for women in 1955, reached men’s 1955 level in 1980 but was still
relatively small at 8% and grew to 20% in 2003, the highest fraction in all OECD countries. For
men the fraction of deaths attributable to smoking was 23 and 22%, respectively, in 1980 and
2003 (Preston, Glei, and Wilmoth 2011).


5 Explanations for the inverse correlation have included improvements in health behavior during a
recession, selection in who gives birth during a recession, and counter-cyclical fluctuations in the quality
of care, particularly in nursing homes (e.g. Stevens et al. 2011).

                                                     11
Height

The use of stature as a proxy for health in the economics literature was pioneered by economic
historians in the early 1980s (e.g. Engerman, Fogel, and Trussell 1982) and is now a commonly
used proxy for health, particularly in development economics. Height is a measure of net
nutritional status during the growing years, including the fetal period. It depends both on
nutritional intake and on nutritional demands, including those from disease, climate, and work.

Stunting starts in utero or in early childhood (before age 3) and usually persists to give rise to a
small adult. What is still unclear is whether the persistence of stunting is inevitable and
permanent or whether complete catch-up can occur if conditions are conducive to it. Rat pups
and piglets that were malnourished for a period shortly after birth never caught up, suggesting
that stunting in humans may be permanent (Widdowson and McCance 1960). Based on
extensive studies in Guatemala, Martorell, Rivera and Kaplowitz (1990) concluded that stunting
is "a condition resulting from events in early childhood and which, once present, remains for
life.” Although there is usually catch-up growth among adoptees, emigrants, or children treated
for diseases, it often is not to the NCHS standards. Epigenetic imprinting in very early
development may limit an individual's maximum height. Full catch-up appears to take place at
young ages but is followed by an advanced puberty and early cessation of growth (Proos,
Hofvander and Tuvemo 1991).

Fogel (1986) using the abundance of military records, which recorded height as an identifier,
was the first to note that the long-term trend in US white, native-born heights mirrored mortality
trends. Figure 3 reproduces his data using the heights of native-born soldiers from the
eighteenth through the twentieth centuries and extends the time series with the heights of white,
native-born men in the last decades of this century. 6 The data, which are arranged by birth
cohort, show that troops who fought in the French and Indian War of the 1750s and the 1760s
or who fought in the American Revolution of the 1770s nearly attained 1930s heights of 175cm.
Cohorts born from the early 1700s to those born in 1830 achieved a gradual increase in
average stature of approximately one centimeter. Average heights fell by approximately 4cm in
the ensuing half century, reaching a trough among births in the 1880s. 7 After the 1880s,
American men experienced the familiar secular increase in stature of recent times, gaining
approximately six centimeters by the mid-twentieth century. The secular increase in heights has
been small in recent decades, rising by only half a centimeter since 1960.

Figure 3 shows that trends in black stature, obtained from a recently collected sample of black
Civil War soldiers and from recent health surveys, were similar to those of whites. The decline
in black stature is consistent with Steckel’s (1979) finding of a decline of two and a half to seven
and half centimeters in the heights of slave children born in the two decades after 1830.

What are health implications of height? Waaler (1984), using a sample of Norwegian males age
40-49 in 1963-79, was the first to show that mortality first declines with height to reach a
minimum height close to 187cm and then starts to rise. Costa (1993) found a similar functional
relation between height and subsequent mortality among a sample of 322 Union Army recruits
measured at ages 23-49 who lived to age 55 and were followed for 20 years. Floud et al. (2011,

6 Since the sample sizes are substantial, particularly for those periods before the large wars, the major

movements in the series are unlikely to represent sampling variation. In fact, the difference in average
height between rejectees and those who served in the Union Army was 0.25 inches. The averages have
been corrected for minimum height standards.
7 No national height series is available for the end of the nineteenth century. Interpolation was based

upon the assumption that the time pattern for the country followed that for Ohio.

                                                   12
Figure 6.8, p. 341) found this same functional relationship among white American males age 40-
59 in the 1986-1992 and among Union Army veterans measured at ages 40-59, both followed
for 10 years. Height appears to be inversely related to heart and respiratory diseases and
positively related to the hormonal cancers (Barker 1992). A caveat is that the relationship
between height and subsequent mortality only shows up in large samples and is sensitive to the
choice of follow-up period. Using a larger sample of Union Army recruits, I obtained suggestive
evidence of a J-shaped relationship between height and mortality but the height that minimized
mortality was about 10cm shorter than in Waaler’s Norwegian sample and the odds of death
was greater at taller than at shorter heights.

BMI

Americans have grown fatter since the 1950s, but not necessarily less healthy. While obesity is
associated with cardiovascular disease and type II diabetes, underweight is associated with
wasting illnesses and in the past underweight was a problem. Obesity at older ages no longer
kills though it still disables.

Overweight and underweight are measured by the body mass index (BMI), defined as weight in
kilograms divided by the square of height in meters, which is an indicator of current nutritional
status. Figure 4 shows that in the US mean BMI for white men at ages 18-19, 20-24, 25-29,
30-34, 35-39, 40-49, and 50-64 began to increase after the 1950s, with sharper increases at
older ages. A similar pattern is observed among US blacks (not shown).

The US data show that in the past, a large fraction of men were underweight (a BMI of less than
18.5%). Among men 50-64, 6% of Union Army veterans were underweight in 1900 compared to
less than 1% of men in 1988-94 (see Table 1). Even younger men were underweight: among
Union Army soldiers age 25-49, 6.9% were underweight.

Table 1 also illustrates the rising proportion of obesity from 3 percent among Union Army
veterans to 13% in the 1970s, 27% in the late 1980s, and 38% in 2005-2010. Recent research
has suggested that rising obesity levels may threaten future gains in life expectancy (Olshansky
et al. 2005; Stewart, Cutler, and Rosen 2009), but these projections do not account for a
changing relationship between obesity and mortality.

The relationship between weight and mortality has been changing since 1960. Mehta and
Chang (2011), comparing earlier and later cohorts at ages 50-74 in three data sets, find that
over time class I obese individuals (those with a BMI between 30.0 and 34.9) no longer face an
elevated mortality risk relative to normal weight individuals (those with a BMI between 18.5 and
24.9) but BMI levels of 35 and over remain dangerous. The obese have experienced
improvements in hypertension and cholesterol levels over the last few decades and a declining
risk of dying from cardiovascular disease. However, declining relative mortality risks for the
obese have not led to declining relative disability risks, as measured by functional limitations
and activities of daily living, between 1988-94 and 1999-2004 (Alley and Chang 2007).

Table 2 shows that the relationship between weight and mortality has been changing at least
since 1900. The table gives hazard rates from a Cox proportional hazard model of 12 year all-
cause mortality for 50-64 year-old white men. Men in 1900 faced an elevated mortality risk from
being overweight (a BMI between 25.0 and 29.9) as well as from being obese compared to men
of normal weight. There was no relative mortality risk of being overweight in either 1971-1976
or 1988-1994. Mehta and Chang (2011) show that overweight individuals in the original
Framingham cohort in 1948-1970 did not face an elevated mortality risk relative to individuals of

                                               13
normal weight, suggesting that the relationship between overweight and mortality changed
between 1900 and 1960. The changing relationship between weight and mortality is greater
than that documented by Floud et al. (2011: 341, Figure 6.8) for white men age 40-59, perhaps
because I control for smoking. However, it is consistent with the changing relationship between
weight and labor force participation rates at older ages in the United States documented by
Costa (1996).

Although obesity levels in the population have risen, Tables 1 and 2, together show that the
proportion of men facing an elevated mortality risk because of their weight has fallen from 25%
in 1900 (those who were underweight, overweight, and obese I and II) to 13% in 1971-1976
(those who were underweight and obese I and II) and to 6% in 1988-1994 (those who were
underweight and obese II). We have become better at controlling the risk factors for heart
disease such as cholesterol levels and high blood pressure (Gregg et al. 2005).

Birth Weight

Low birth weight is associated with significantly increased relative risk of death in the first days
of life. This risk springs in part from the prematurity of many low-birth-weight infants and in part
from intrauterine growth retardation. Infants that are small for gestational age because of
nutritional or other deficiencies do not catch up in growth with normal infants and tend to be at
greater risk of health problems throughout their lives. Barker’s (1992, 1994) “fetal origins
hypothesis” proposes that cardiovascular disease and non-insulin-dependent diabetes originate
through adaptations made by the fetus when it is undernourished. Some, but not all, of these
adaptations are reflected in lower birth weight. In the Dutch Hunger Winter even a normal birth
weight was not a sufficient marker for good health at older ages.

The series on US birth weight trends in Figure 5 is inconsistent with the secular height and life
expectancy trends, leading Floud et al. (2011, p. 340) to speculate that “the association
between infant mortality and adult height was primarily related to the association between post-
perinatal mortality and adult height.” In developing countries adult height is positively
associated with birth weight (e.g. Adair 2006; Victora et al. 2008) and the contributions of the
prenatal and post-natal environment to adult height are roughly equal (Li et al. 2003; Victora et
al. 2008). US white birth weights in the past were high by today’s standards. Birth weights at
the Philadelphia Almshouse circa 1850 were above 3500 grams and those at Boston, New York
Lying-In, and Johns Hopkins were between 3400 and 3500 from the 1890s to the 1930s. Birth
weights were not high because low birth weight babies were not born alive. Including still births,
mean birth weights at Johns Hopkins fell to only to 3387 from 3421 gm. Birth weights after 1950
never reached such high levels. 8 In contrast, black birth weights in the US were above 3200
grams only in 1950 and then fell.

High birth weights in the past are observed only at higher parities. In recent vital statistics data,
mean birth weights increase by less than 100 grams for 0 parity to parities of 1-2. In contrast,
among whites at New York Lying-In and Johns Hopkins, birth weights increased by up 400

8
  High birth weights were also observed in Montreal in the 1850s-1870s where birth weights fluctuated
above 3500 gm before falling to 3100 gm by 1900 (Ward 1993: 149-150) and in three Norwegian cities
where, for married women, they were above 3400 in 1860-1920 (and for unmarried women up to 200 gm
lower between 1860 and 1900) and increased thereafter, reaching 3600 gm around 1980 (Rosenberg
1988). Among survivors to 1951, babies born in Hertfordshire, England between 1911 and 1939
weighed 3500 gm if they were boys and 3400 gm if they were girls (Syddall et al. 2005). In contrast, in
Vienna between 1870 and 1914 birth weights fluctuated between 3100 and 3200 grams (Ward 1993:
147), rising above 3200 grams only after 1923.

                                                  14
grams between 0 parity and parities of 1-2 and by even more for higher order parities (see
Figure 6). Why birth weight rose so rapidly with parity in the past is unclear. The health or
socioeconomic status of mothers is an unlikely explanation. Fathers of higher parity children
were more likely to be laborers. Maternal mortality at JHU was only 0.5 percent, suggesting that
any mortality selection effects would be small. Mothers of higher parity children were shorter
(less than 152cm tall) and as likely to have rickets. Although, controlling for age, they were less
likely to have hypertension or preeclampsia, controlling for hypertension or preeclampsia does
not change the coefficients on dummies for parity in a regression of birth weight on maternal
characteristics. High parity children were more likely to be born alive. Stillbirths represented
12% of first births but only 7% of later births and including them in total births reduces first births
by 64 gm and later births by less. One hypothesis I cannot discount for large birth weights at
higher parities is gestational diabetes which, controlling for maternal age, increases with parity.
Although glucose tests were not commonly administered, a study at Boston City Hospital in
1921-24 found that 13.6% of 500 patients had glucose in their urine (Williams 1925). Variation
in other contemporary studies ranged from 5 to 35% (Eastman 1946). Glycosuria is most
commonly due to diabetes. In contrast to the prevalence rates at Boston City Hospital,
gestational diabetes among Kaiser Permanente patients in California in 2005 was 5.3% among
non-Hispanic whites and 5.0% among blacks, with rates increasing with the mother’s age
(Lawrence et al. 2008).

The birth weights of first-born white children rose between 1915 and 1968, continued to rise
until 2000 and then fell (see Figure 7). The high birth weights at the Philadelphia Almshouse
circa 1850 remain a puzzle. They could be due to a deliberate misreporting of parity by the
mother aided by the charitable foundation (a first birth to an unwed mother may be viewed as an
error but later births as a bad habit), an increase in food intake among malnourished women
during the last trimester of pregnancy, or a diabetogenic effect. Explanations for
improvements in birth weights from the 1910s to the late 1960s include improved nutrition (both
calories and vitamin levels) and maternal health, and reduced exposures to infectious disease
and environmental toxins (e.g. low-grade lead exposure is associated with preeclampsia and
thus smaller babies). Some of the improvements in the prenatal environment may be a result
of reductions in fertility and the concomitant move from child quantity to quality.

The pattern for African-Americans from 1968 to the present observed in Figure 7 resembles that
for whites, though birth weights were lower. Causes of the recent decline in mean birth weights
among both blacks and whites are still unknown but cannot be attributed to trends in maternal
and neonatal characteristics, changes in obstetric practices, or concurrent decreases in
gestational length (Donahue et al. 2010).

Sickness and Chronic Conditions

Research emphasizing the longitudinal and intergenerational origins of chronic conditions
predicts that infectious disease and poor diets in the past will lead to sickness and older age
chronic disease. Inflammation caused by infectious disease has been implicated in
arteriosclerosis (Finch and Crimmins 2004). Both low birth weight and maternal gestational
diabetes is associated with hypertension in the adult children (Barker 2008; Simeoni and Barker
2009). Some scholars, however, have argued that even controlling for age average health has
worsened over time because we now keep the sick alive. 9 By examining military sickness trends


9Using friendly society sickness reports, Riley (1990) argued that health has worsened over time.
However, as pointed out by Harris (1999), his number of reported sick days is biased because it depends
on the number of sick days paid for by friendly societies (Harris 1999). These paid sick days were limited

                                                    15
and chronic conditions among the mothers of children born in the 1910s and 1930s, young men
examined for WWII service, and older Union Army veterans, I will show that over the 20th
century as a whole, health improved and that the patterns hint at longitudinal and
intergenerational effects.

The longest-running sickness series shows that the rate of admission to Army sick reports, fell
from 1867 to 1970, with temporary increases during periods such as the building of the Panama
Cana (see Figure 8, reproduced from Cautero 1998). Although changes in both Army
standards and self-selection into the Army may have produced healthier inductees, Army
mortality closely matched civilian mortality (Cautero 1998).

Evidence on chronic conditions provides snapshots in time. The mothers of children born in the
1910s and 1930s were shorter, showed signs of malnutrition, had high blood pressure during
pregnancy, and were more likely to be syphilitic (see Table 3) than mothers who gave birth in
the 1960s and in 1988. Five to six percent of white mothers and 14% of black mothers in the
1910s and 1920s bore the scars of early life malnutrition. Malnutrition is measured by a flat
pelvis, that is, by an external conjugate diameter of less than 18 cm or a conjugate diagonal less
than 11 cm. Under-nutrition during infancy, particularly lack of vitamin D, softens the bones
and reduces all pelvic dimensions. When an undernourished infant begins to stand, the pelvis
becomes flattened from the pressure. The rates seen at NY Lying-In and JHU in the 1910s to
1930s are similar to rates of 4.6% for whites and 11.6% for blacks seen in 1905 at JHU (Riggs
1904). By the early 1960s (at the time of the Collaborative Perinatal Project), the incidence of
flat pelvis was negligible. In Sheffield, England, the prevalence of flat pelvis fell from 10% in
1907-16 to 3% in 1927-30 (Martyn, Barker, and Osmond 1996) found that the prevalence of flat
pelvis fell from 10% in 1907-16 to 3% in 1927-30. Because flat pelvis was associated with
increased risk of stroke in children at older ages, nutritional improvements are implicated in
stroke declines.

Roughly 30% of both white and black mothers at JHU developed hypertension, as measured by
at least one systolic reading of more than 140 or one diastolic reading of more 90, during their
pregnancies (see Table 3). The rate is similar to that of 37% found by Barker et al. (2007) in
Finland in the 1920s and 1930s. In contrast, only 12-16% of mothers were hypertensive in the
1960s and in 1988. Because blood pressure readings were taken more frequently in the recent
data, the decline in hypertension may be understated. Higher rates of hypertension in the past
were due both to higher rates of preeclampsia and to higher rates of hypertension without
preeclampsia. Declining blood pressure during pregnancy implies decreasing risk of stroke,
heart, and kidney disease later in life (Garovic et al. 2010).

The high rates of hypertension and malnutrition observed in mothers in the 1920s, the low birth
weights of their first-born children and their suspected gestational diabetes are consistent with
the high rates of hypertension among young men (predominately born in the 1920s) observed in
WWII induction records (see Table 4). Among whites the prevalence of hypertension rose from
17% among men ages 18-19 to 33% among men ages 35-37. Prevalence rates were similar
for blacks. In contrast, among whites, prevalence rates for hypertension in 1988-91 were zero
at ages 18-19 and 11% at ages 35-37. Rates were higher for blacks but were less than half of
the WWII rate at ages 35-37.

Information on chronic disease rates at older ages comes from comparisons of the Civil War
cohort with national cohorts age 50-74 in the 1970s and onward. Tables 5 and 6, reproduced

to workers who had passed a physical exam (even though Riley compared with the recent non-
institutionalized population) and generally excluded short-term illnesses.

                                                16
from Costa, Helmchen, and Wilson (2007) and Costa (2000), show that prevalence rates for the
average combined category of decreased breath and adventitious sounds fell by 0.2% points
per year for both whites and blacks between 1900 and 1910 and 1988 –1994. For men ages 50
– 64 prevalence rates for musculoskeletal conditions fell by 0.5% points per year from 1910 to
1988 –1994 for black men and by 0.4% points per year for white men. Within the same age
group prevalence rates for the combined category of arteriosclerosis, valvular heart disease,
and congestive heart failure fell by 0.4% points from 1910 to 1976 –1980 for black men and by
0.2% points per year for white men. 10 Prevalence rates for blacks were higher for almost all
conditions, symptoms, and signs between 1971 and 2004. They speculate that manual labor
accounted for higher rates of musculoskeletal conditions for blacks than whites whereas
infectious disease explained higher rates of arteriosclerosis and heart ailments.

A drawback to the Union Army data is that ischemic heart disease was not recognized. There
was no diagnostic equipment for hypertension. What is therefore unknown is whether ischemic
heart disease was common, but undiagnosed, or whether ischemic heart disease replaced
valvular heart disease as the most common form of heart disease and became an epidemic. By
1950 age-adjusted death rates from cardiovascular disease in the US were already close to 600
per 100,000, peaked in the late 1960s at roughly 650 per 100,000 and then fell sharply to reach
200 per 100,000 in the late 1990s (Mirzaei 2009).

Costa (2002), using the same Union Army data, finds that functional limitations (walking,
bending, paralysis, blindness, and deafness) among the elderly declined by 0.6% per year
between 1910 and the 1990s. She finds that 24% of the decline in functional limitations was
due to decreases in the debilitating effects of chronic disease, 37% was due to reduced chronic
disease, and the remainder was unknown.

Have disability declines accelerated in recent years? Standardizing for age, Manton, Gu, and
Lamb (2006) report disability declines of 0.6% per year between 1982-84, 1.1% per year
between 1984-89, 1.3% per year between 1989-94, 1.8% per year between 1994-99, and 2.2%
per year between 1999-2004/2005 among those age 65 and over. Other work finds mixed
evidence for the 1980s but consistent declines from the mid and late 1990s onward on the order
of 1 to 2.5% per year for difficulty with daily activities and help with daily activities (see the
review by Freedman et al. 2004). Martin, Schoeni, and Andreski (2010) find differences
between those age 65+ and those age 40-64. Among those age 65+ the proportion with high
risk biomarkers (C-reactive protein, total cholesterol, and blood pressure) declined as did the
proportion needing help with activities of daily living. The fraction reporting difficulty with at least
one of nine physical functions remained unchanged. In contrast, among younger cohorts there
was little change in high-risk biomarkers, no change in reporting difficulty with at least one of
nine physical functions and an upward trend in the proportion reporting difficulty with activities of
daily living, though this was a small number. The data raise the concern that future cohorts of
elderly may not be as healthy as recent cohorts, perhaps because of rising obesity.

Some International Comparisons

Data from the European countries with long time series on life expectancy and heights
illustrates that in its early history the US was an unusually healthy place to live but converged to

10 Floud et al. (2011: 345), reproduce the prevalence rates in Fogel (1994), which give a prevalence rate

of 76% for heart disease. This high prevalence rate was derived before the detailed medical information
was available and simply indicates that the heart was mentioned but does necessarily have diagnostic
implications.

                                                   17
the European pattern between the 1850s and 1880s. However, even when US heights were at
their nadir circa the 1883 birth cohort, Americans were taller than the French, the British, and a
full 5.2 cm taller than the Italians but were shorter than the Dutch, the Norwegians, and the
Swedes even though those populations only achieved the height of the US cohort of 1780 after
1911 (see the times series in Hatton and Bray 2010). 11 Jack London could write of London’s
East End, “One thing particularly conspicuous in this crowd was the shortness of stature. I, who
am but of medium height, looked over the heads of nine out of ten. The natives were all short,
as were the foreign sailors. There were only five or six in the crowd who could be called fairly
tall, and they were Scandinavians and Americans.”

In all countries consistent improvement in life expectancy and adult heights comes only after
1850, sometimes later. Prior to 1850 there were fluctuations or even reversals in life
expectancy and heights. See Figures 9 and 10, which, respectively, compare male life
expectancy at age 10 in the United States, Sweden, and France and men’s heights in the
United States, Sweden, France, Great Britain, and the Netherlands.

For Sweden, the period between 1720 and 1850, was characterized by fluctuations in life
expectancy and heights brought on by wars, epidemics, and crop failures; but, the overall trend
in heights and life expectancy was one of improvement. Although incomes remained low, there
were periods of peace. The spread of the potato as a field crop provided a cheap source of
nutrition. Public health measures included small pox vaccination campaigns and improvements
in sanitation, hygiene, and child care spurred by government propaganda spread through
churches and compulsory schools. Initial investments were made in water and sewage. After
the last disastrous crop failure of 1868-69, heights and life expectancy increased almost
steadily, with heights rising by almost 10cm and with life expectancy at age 10 increasing by
almost 10 years. Since the 1960s, the rate of growth in heights has slowed. These steady
improvements in heights and life expectancy coincide with rising incomes, declining food prices
between 1870 and 1914, investments in public sanitation infrastructure, and, particularly in the
1915-50 period, the expansion and improvement of publicly provided medical facilities and
personnel (Sandberg and Steckel 1997).

In France, heights rose by about 2.5cm for the 1800 to 1893 birth cohorts, with slightly faster
growth at the beginning and end of the period and none between 1880 and 1900. Cohorts born
in the twentieth century experienced more rapid increases – heights rose by about 7.5cm
between the 1900 and 1978 birth cohorts. Life expectancy at age 10 declined sharply with the
Franco-Prussian War and the two World Wars but the overall trend increased life expectancy at
age 10 by 24 years. For nineteenth century cohorts, the relationship between per capita
income and height was a linear one (Weir 1997). Weir’s (1997) analysis of height differentials
across French departments between 1840 and 1911 implies that rising wages explain between
44 and 63% of the height increase between those years. 12 The effects of declines in crude
death rates on height increases cannot be inferred because the effects of crude death rates are
not robust across his specifications. Although public health investments played a large role in



11 One difficulty in comparing trends in heights in the US and UK with those in continental Europe is that
continental European heights are consistently conscript heights whereas those in the US and the UK are
not. There is a height decline in the US and the UK that coincides with industrialization but there is no
such decline on the continent.
12 Height in mm rose from 1643.4 to 1661.1. A real wage index rose from roughly 380 to 700. The

coefficients on the logarithm of real wages ranged from 12.84 to 18.21 in a regression of height in mm on
wages, crude death rates, and other factors (see Weir 1997).

                                                    18
mortality declines within cities between 1820 and 1880, most of France was relatively rural
(Weir 1997).

Floud et al. (1990: 134-163) discovered that in Great Britain the heights of 20 year-olds declined
beginning with the cohort born in the 1840s and reaching a nadir roughly with the cohorts born
in the 1860s, with the exact timing depending on the age that was examined. Floud et al.
(2011: 134-139) discuss the challenges to these estimates raised by other scholars on statistical
grounds and on the basis of other samples such as those of convicts. On the whole there is
agreement that there was a decline in the heights of British cohorts somewhere between 1820
and 1850, thought the exact timing is unclear. Although heights increased by more than 2cm
from 1870 to the end of the nineteenth century, there were fluctuations and the sustained
increase does not come until the twentieth century when heights increased by another 7cm.
The decline in British heights coincides with rising urbanization and all of the attendant ills of
unsanitary cities and, although diets improved in second half of the nineteenth century, the
sustained increase in heights came after the substantial investments in sewage and water
treatment in the 1890s and early 1900s (Floud et al. 2011: 173).

The Netherlands also experienced a reversal in heights in the early 1800s. After an increase in
heights for those born between 1798 and 1810, the cohorts born between 1810 and 1837
experienced a decline. The upward climb begins only after 1850. Early cohorts faced
fluctuations in food prices and economic stagnation (Drukker and Tassenaar 1997). Between
1870 and 1978 heights increased by almost 16cm, with the most rapid increases in the
twentieth century, and unlike the United States, Sweden, France, or Great Britain, there is no
evidence of a slow-down in height increases. For the Dutch, the timing of growth spurts in the
second half of the nineteenth century coincides with changes in real wages (Jacobs and
Tassenaar 2004). Starting with the cohorts born in the late 1950s, the Dutch became the tallest
population. Explanations are purely speculative and include the Dutch medical system and
universal health insurance, the low labor force participation rates of mothers, and a public health
monitoring system in which mothers from all social classes participated (de Beer 2004).

Past European populations also were underweight, even more so than Americans. Floud et al.
(2011) estimate that mean BMI for males age 20-30 was about 21 circa 1800 and was only 19
for French males circa 1785. Mean BMI among younger British men was less than 22 in the
1850s and 1860s and it was between 23 and 24 among older men. Mean BMI for older men
began to increase after 1950 and for younger men to increase after 1960 (Floud 1998).
Europeans remain thinner than Americans.

Overall the time series data on individual European countries suggests that increases and
improvements in nutritional intake played a role in nineteenth century height increases, but the
experiences of different countries varied. The twentieth century evidence points more toward
public health reforms. The importance of public health reforms is emphasized by Hatton (2013)
who finds that in a panel of 15 European countries from 1871 to 1980 declines in infant mortality
account for 4 to 5cm of the increase in height, with most of the increase coming between 1911
1955, whereas increases in income account for 1 to 2cm of the height increase.

Trends in Health by Socioeconomic Status

US trends in health differentials by socioeconomic status for infant and child mortality, birth
weight, height, and BMI are consistent with changes in the disease environment and with the
spread of public health followed by the diffusion of personal health therapies and regimes. The
low inequality in health by socioeconomic status of period one was replaced by high inequality

                                                19
as the disease environment worsened. The third period saw reductions in health inequality
which continued until the 1950s because public health investments differentially benefited lower
income individuals who could not afford to pay for clean water. In the fourth period health
inequality by socioeconomic status began to rise because the new health producing
technologies were private goods requiring income to purchase and education (or its correlates)
to use effectively. Although socioeconomic differentials contract as a new medical innovation
becomes more widespread (Goldman and Lakdawalla 2005; Chang and Lauderdale 2009), as
long as new innovations become available then on average there may be no contractions.

Changes in socioeconomic health differentials coincide with changes in income inequality. The
wage returns to clerks relative both to common laborers and to artisans were increasing in the
19th century (Katz and Margo forthcoming). Income inequality was high but falling at the
beginning of the twentieth century, compressed sharply during the 1940s, was relatively stable
in the 1950s and 1960s, and then rose sharply in the late 1950s reaching levels higher than
those in 1939 (Goldin and Katz 2008). However, changes in income inequality are not
necessarily the drivers of changes in health inequality. There are many potential pathways
relating income inequality to health. One of these includes nonlinear income effects, whereby if
the health of the rich is not much affected by their income but that of the poor is then transfers to
the poor will improve their health (Preston 1975). Another is relative deprivation in which rank
determines not just in how healthy of a location people live but also how much control they have
over their lives and in their jobs, thus affecting their health through stress levels (Marmot and
Wilkinson 1999). Additional arguments include credit restrictions which prevent the poor from
making investments in their children’s health and human capital, nutritional traps such that poor
workers cannot buy the food needed to sustain their work (Ray 1998), and public goods
provision, under the reasoning that more equal societies provide more public goods. Surveying
the evidence, largely from developing countries but also for the US and the UK, Deaton (2003)
concludes that there is little evidence that income inequality per se leads to poor population
health (though it may increase homicide levels) and that research should focus on the role of
low income in poor health. Thus if rising inequality coincides with income declines for the
poorest, average health may worsen during periods of inequality if income effects are large only
at low income levels.

Those at the bottom of the income distribution are likely to be in poor health if the causality goes
from health to income and much of the evidence for adults in today’s developed countries points
to this. For example, using data on London civil servants, Case and Paxson (2011) find that
health in adulthood is associated with future promotions but that current civil service rank is not
associated with future health. Smith (1999; 2004) finds that health shocks among the middle-
aged have a relatively large negative impact on family income and wealth. However, for
children in the US today, a powerful determinant of their health is their family’s long-run average
income, which protects child health upon the arrival of chronic conditions. The health of children
from families with lower incomes erodes faster with age, and these children enter adulthood with
both lower socioeconomic status and poorer health (Case, Lubotsky, and Paxson 2002).

Infant and Child Mortality

Figure 11 summarizes the twentieth century US evidence on child and infant mortality, drawn
from Haines (2010). The ratio of infant mortality among the lowest relative to the highest
socioeconomic status classes was very high circa 1912, became roughly equal by 1950 and
then rose again, though it never reached 1912 levels. Inequality decreased between 1990 and
2000. Trends in child mortality by socioeconomic class suggest increases in inequality between
1900 and 1920. The increase in inequality between 1910 and 1920 is not necessarily

                                                 20
inconsistent with the trend in inequality in infant mortality – no data are available on inequality in
infant mortality for that period. One of the drawbacks in examining trends in infant mortality by
socioeconomic status is that they magnify socioeconomic differences at low infant mortality
levels. For example, if infant mortality falls from 40 to 5 per thousand among low status
households and from 30 to 2 per thousand among high status households, the infant mortality
ratio increases from 130 to 250 whereas the infant survivorship ratio increases from 99 to 100.
Similar to the trend in inequality in infant mortality, infant survivorship between 1912 and 1950
became more equal, but unlike the trend in infant mortality the trend in infant survivorship since
the 1960s has been almost as equal as in 1950 (see Figure 11).

Detailed data from England and Wales reveal that from 1895 to 1921 infant mortality rates fell
more sharply among the upper and middle classes than among unskilled workmen, leading to
rising inequality in infant survivorship (see Figure 12). 13 Unusually bad years, such as 1911,
produced greater reversals among lower class families (Woods 2000: 265). After 1921,
inequality declined as infant mortality rates fell more among the unskilled than among the
skilled. 14 Because of differences in how social class is defined, infant survivorship ratios
between the top and bottom social ranks in the United States and England and Wales in Figures
11 and 12 cannot be compared. Preston and Haines (1991: 185) reclassified US occupations
into British occupational codes to conclude that inequality in child mortality in the US circa 1895
was less than in England and Wales in 1911. Although 1911 was an unusually bad year for the
UK, it was no worse than 1895. The US social gradient in infant mortality is now higher than in
Europe because of worse outcomes among less educated mothers after the first month of life
(Chen et al. 2013).

In both the United States and England and Wales, geographical differences in mortality
swamped socioeconomic differences (Preston and Haines 1991; Woods 2000). However,
within cities place of residence was a good indicator of socioeconomic differences. Figure 13,
reproduced from Floud et al. (2011: 328, Figure 6.3), plots the maximum, mean, and minimum
infant mortality rate by ward in 6 major cities in the US. Because the poor lived in the areas with
the highest infant mortality rates and the rich lived in the areas with the lowest infant mortality,
the figure implies that between 1900 and 1950 more than 80 percent of the difference in the
infant mortality rate between the poorest and richest wards had disappeared. 15

Birth Weight and Weight in Infancy

Consistent with trends in infant mortality by socioeconomic class, socioeconomic differentials in
birth weight were larger in the US of the 1910s-1930s than in more recent data. Costa (1998)

13 The study of socioeconomic differentials in mortality can be carried back even further in time in England
and Wales. Examining ducal and commoner life expectancy at birth (and thus including the high child
mortality rates of the era) from 1541/46 to 1866/71, Harris (2004) finds that life expectancy at birth began
to diverge after 1750 and by 1866/71 the difference was roughly 20 years.
14 Comparisons of the top and bottom social ranks have been criticized as ignoring the middle ranks,

whose numbers have been rising as fewer men are in the bottom social rank. Using a summary indicator
for all social classes, Pamuk (1988) argued that for legitimate births inequality rose between 1921 and
1972 and then fell from 1972 to 1980. Pamuk’s summary indicator was a "slope index of inequality,” i.e.
the slope of the linear regression of mortality across all classes weighted for the proportion of the
population in each class. This procedure effectively magnifies the effect of socioeconomic differentials at
low levels of infant mortality.

15High within city differentials were also found in Paris where life expectancy at age 5 between the worst
and the best neighborhoods was over 10 years in the 1890s (Rosenthal and Kesztenbaum 2012).

                                                    21
found that differences in birth weight between the 10th and 90th wage percentile at New York
Lying-In in the 1910s to 1930s compared to the 1988 National Maternal and Infant Health
Survey were twice at large at NY Lying-In, probably an understatement because NY-Lying In
was primarily an upper working class sample and did not cover the full wage distribution. A
comparison of full-term, “normal” white births at 5th Avenue (a hospital serving the well-to-do) in
the early 1930s with charity cases at Bellevue found birth weight differences of 100 gm among
first births, but little difference in higher order births (Stewart 1943). Absolute differences
between private and welfare patients in the Collaborative Perinatal Project of the 1960s were
only 30 gm (see Table 7).

Inequality in birth weights by education has increased since the late 1960s. Controlling for
gestational age, mother’s age, sex of the child, parity, and hispanic origin, the difference in white
birth weights between those with less than a high school education and those with more was
less than 100 gm in 1960, rose to a peak of 127 to 195 gm in 1988 and then fell to a difference
of 50 to 100 gm in 2011(see Figure 14). The gradient was particularly large for college
education. The educational gradient in birth weight differentials coincides with the educational
gradient in maternal cigarette smoking, which peaked between 1980 and 1990 (Aizer and
Stroud 2010).

Weight differentials by socioeconomic status diverged in the first year of life (see Figure 15),
though the early samples were too small to determine if this was true controlling for first birth.
Babies born at Bellevue in the late 1920s were well below the modern WHO 50th weight
percentile whereas those born at 5th Avenue Hospital reached the 50th percentile by the 25th
week. In contrast, there was little difference in the weights of babies of private and welfare
patients in the 1960s. At one year of age the babies of white and black patients at Johns
Hopkins University in the first third of the century had similar weights, but there may be bias in
who was followed in the samples.

Height and BMI

For the cohorts born circa 1750 there were no differences in adult height by broad occupational
group. Among the cohorts born in the 1820s to 1840s, farmers were relatively taller but there
were no differences between laborers and professionals and proprietors. 16 In contrast, the
difference between laborers and professionals and proprietors was an inch (2.54cm) for the
cohorts born in the 1920s and then declined for cohorts born in the 1940s and later (Costa and
Steckel 1998).

Educational differentials by height are consistent with occupational differentials by height (and
also with infant mortality differentials) and suggest that inequality was low in the first half of the
nineteenth century. The top panel of Figure 16 graphs the height coefficients from regressions
of height on years of education in Bleakley et al. (forthcoming). There was little relation
between height and education among the Civil War cohort (born in the 1820s to mid 1840s), a
very strong relation between height and education among the cohort serving in World War II
(born in the 1900s to mid-1920s), and then a declining relation thereafter. Because height is
largely determined by age 3, Bleakley et al. (forthcoming), treat the causality as going from
height to education, while acknowledging the correlational nature of the evidence. They
attribute the lack of a strong relation between height and education in the 19th century to a more
brawn-based economy which led healthier children either to select into manual occupations or

16 Differences by occupational class in Britain and Ireland were larger. Among men born circa 1815, the
difference between the tallest occupational group (those in commerce) and the shortest (domestics) was
about half of an inch (1.3m) (see Figure 5.3 in Floud, Wachter, and Gregory 1990: 203).

                                                   22
not to stay in school longer because their time spent in school was more productive and the
opportunity cost of additional schooling was high.

The bottom panel of Figure 16 shows that only among cohorts age 20-45 after the 1950s has
the relationship between education and BMI become stronger. The figure graphs the
coefficients from a regression of education on BMI from the Civil War cohort to present cohorts.
For more recent cohorts, I also control for smoking status which magnifies the relationship
between education and BMI. These data are consistent with models in which education plays
an important role in determining current health.

The relationship between education and mortality at older ages has become stronger since
1900, in part because of the educational gradient in smoking. Table 8 presents hazard ratios
from Gompertz models examining 12-year mortality rates among Union Army veterans age 55-
74 in 1900 and men of the same age first observed in the 1970s and the late 1980s and early
1990s. Education was not a statistically significant predictor of 12-year middle and older age
mortality rates among native-born Union Army veterans. However, without controls for smoking,
education was a statistically significant predictor of mortality rates in all three late 20th century
samples, and its effect may be increasing. The hazard ratios suggest that the relative risk of
death for a year of education fell from 0.989 in the Union Army to 0.969 in NHANES I to 0.956 in
NHANES II and then to 0.948 in NHANES III and the differences between the Union Army
sample and NHANES II and III were statistically significant in a pooled sample. However,
controlling for smoking reduces the impact of education on mortality to 0.977 in NHANES 1 and
to 0.965 and 0.964 in NHANES II and III. With further smoking controls the impact of education
falls to 0.979 in NHANES III. The increase in mortality differentials by education for men dates
to at least 1960, whereas educational differentials among women remained relatively constant
(see the review by Dow and Rehkopf 2010), consistent with women’s later take-up of smoking. 17

The growing importance of education in maintaining medical regimes also may explain the rising
education gradient in older age mortality. Glied and Lleras-Muney (2008) report steepening
education gradients in mortality among causes of death for which there was greater
technological progress. Smith (2007) finds that the education gradient in diabetes prevalence
has increased since the 1970s, perhaps because of better self-management at higher
educational levels (Goldman and Smith 2002). 18 Technological change also will
disproportionately benefit the advantaged because they are the heaviest health care users and
new medical technologies raise the productivity of health care (Goldman and Lakdawalla 2005).

Evidence from experimental animal studies has led to the recognition of the role of stress in
health and mortality, particularly for hypertension and atherosclerosis (e.g. Henry and Stevens
1977), and to its effects on the next generation, through gene imprinting (Tung et al. 2012). The
effects of stress may be mediated by social networks. Perceptions of social support are
associated with better adjustment to stressful events (e.g., House et al. 1988; Lett et al. 2007)
even though actual social support often is not correlated with better adjustment (e.g., Bolger and
Amarel 2007). Social networks may positively affect cellular immune response (Cohen et al.
1992; Thomas, Goodwin, and Goodwin 1985) and neuroendocrine functioning (Seeman et al.
1994); feelings of social isolation may even be linked to alterations in the activity of genes that

17
   The results in Table 8 differ from those of Cutler et al. (2011) who find that smoking trends explain little
if any of the increase in relative mortality risk for the less educated over the last three decades. A
potential explanation for the differences is that in the broad 25 to 74 year old age group examined by
Cutler et al. (2011) the number of years spent smoking within educational groups may vary widely.
18 In contrast, Goldman and Smith (2005) find no educational gradient in hypertension.


                                                      23
drive inflammation, the first response of the immune system (Cole et al. 2007). One of the
difficulties of studying people is that those who are in poor health may be socially isolated,
making it hard to establish causality. Among Union Army veterans, for whom both wartime
stress and the cohesion of the wartime company were arguably exogenous, wartime stress
increased older age mortality rates but men from more cohesive companies were statistically
significantly less likely to be affected by wartime stress (Costa and Kahn 2010).

While stress and social support may explain some health inequalities, it is hard to implicate
stress and social support in the increase in health inequalities. Putnam (2000) emphasized the
decline of social capital, but evidence on trends is mixed (Costa and Kahn 2003). Even less is
known about changes in stress levels. Stevenson and Wolfers (2008) find that self-reported
happiness by educational level has widened since the 1970s but that the differences by race
and by sex have narrowed, the latter because women no longer report higher happiness rates
than men and now report lower rates.

Health Inequality within Families

Families are now more likely to transmit good health to all of their children. Among whites,
sibling correlation in birth weights, birth length, and gestational weeks has since the 1920s (see
Table 9). 19 These correlations, which control for birth order, show that among children born
under the auspices of Johns Hopkins University Hospital, sibling correlations in birth weight and
gestational weeks were lower than among children born in 1955-66 and surveyed in the
Collaborative Perinatal Project and those in turn were lower than those observed in the data
from Norway from 1967-2004 and in the PSID from 1985-1997. Sibling correlations in birth
length were greater in 1967-2004 than in the Johns Hopkins University sample in the first third
of the 19th century.

The narrowing of brother correlations in adult height shows that inequality within families has
decreased since the Civil War cohort (see Table 10). 20 The most likely cause for the low
correlation in the past is families’ inability to protect themselves against disease and nutritional
shocks. Among brothers in the Union Army heights were lower in more populous counties and
the variability in height was greater, suggesting that the environmental contribution to variability
in height is of greater relative importance in populations reared in worse environments
(Lauderdale and Rathouz 1999). Not only has the disease environment improved but families
may now also be better able to protect themselves against shocks that do occur because of
improvements in knowledge.

Causes of the Mortality Transition: Micro-Evidence

Trends in health and in health inequality suggested that technological innovations, first in the
form of public health interventions and then in the form of medical treatments and personal
health regimes, were the primary drivers of changes in health and in health inequality,
swamping any effects of income trends. This section reviews some of the micro-evidence.
The micro-evidence consists of correlational evidence, particularly for some of the historical
studies, studies of specific public health interventions, studies of exogenous income transfers,
and studies of exogenous schooling increases. On the whole, this evidence shows that both

19
  Sample sizes for blacks are too small to determine the trend.
20
  The US decline in brother-brother correlations is consistent with the increase in height heritability
observed among Finnish twins born in the first half of the 20th century and those born later (Silventoinen
et al. 2000).

                                                    24
the disease environment and arguably exogenous increases in income were important
determinants of health and mortality in the nineteenth century and the early twentieth century
but that the importance of both these factors fell over the course of the 20th century. The
evidence on education is less clear.

The decline in health that began in the 1830s has been analyzed using cross-sectional data by
various scholars. Haines et al. (2000)’s analysis of 1850 county-level death rates finds no
statistically significant effect of various measures of nutritional availability but does find
statistically significant effects of transport access and urbanization. In contrast, their analysis of
the heights of Union Army soldiers finds a positive and statistically significant effect of nutritional
availability, some evidence that growing food specialization had a negative effect, evidence of
the negative effects of transport access and urbanization, and a sizable negative effect of crude
deaths rates, an indicator of the infectious disease environment. They cannot determine why
crude death rates rose, but the increase in both immigration and in internal migration is a likely
explanation. Union Army recruits who spent their early years in counties where malaria was
endemic were 1.1 inches shorter at enlistment and 13% more susceptible to infection (Hong
2007). Westward expansion before the drainage of the wet lands brought the population into
the malarial Midwest.

The importance of infectious disease to mortality, particularly infant mortality, is illustrated by
cities’ adoption of clean water technologies. City life in the 19th and early 20th century was dirty
and dangerous (Melosi 2000). The water and milk supply of cities was contaminated with
bacteria causing typhoid fever, dysentery, and diarrhea. Cities did not remove sewage and their
streets were filled with garbage and carrion. The influx of migrants from abroad and from rural
areas crowding into dank and dark urban tenements provided new foci of infection and new
victims, and the rapid transmission of disease from host to host increased its virulence. Among
infants the excess urban mortality was 88 percent in 1890 and 48 percent in 1900 (Haines
2001) and nowhere was the urban mortality penalty as large as in the poor areas of town where
crowding was greater and where parents could not afford to buy clean water and milk
(Rochester 1923). City life left those who survived to age 60 permanently scarred, shortening
their lives at older ages even controlling for later residential moves (Costa 2003; Costa and
Lahey 2005a). The adoption of clean water technologies sharply lowered mortality rates. In
Chicago 30-50% of the 60% decline in crude death rates between 1850 and 1925 is accounted
for by water purification and the eradication of diarrheal diseases and typhoid fever and its
sequelae (Ferrie and Troesken 2008). In major cities between 1900 and 1936 overall mortality
rates fell by 30% and infant mortality rates by 62%. Clean water (both filtration and
chlorination) accounted for 43 and 74% of the reductions, respectively (Cutler and Miller 2005).

Many other interventions, such as cleaning the milk supply and city vaccination campaigns,
remain understudied. We do not know the effects of slum clearing, though we do know that
shared toilet facilities were correlated with high infant mortality both in the United States and in
Germany (Brown 2000a). We cannot assess the impact of cleaner air. Although early air
monitoring data do not exist, problems were severe enough that monitoring was moot.
Pittsburgh streetlights burned all day because the skies were darkened by pollution and white
shirt collars would turn gray by mid-day. The city replaced coal with natural gas as its major fuel
between 1884-1892, but then it depleted its gas supplies and its skies were darkened once
more. Only in 1941 did the city reduce its use of bituminous coal and it continued to reduce its
reliance on coal after WWII (Tarr 2002; Tarr and Lamperes 1981). Jack London (1903) cited
scientific studies that “no less than six tons of solid matter, consisting of soot and tarry
hydrocarbons, are deposited every week on every quarter of a square mile in and about
London.” He added that “sulphuric acid in the atmosphere is constantly being breathed by the

                                                  25
London workmen through all the days and nights of their lives.” Clay and Troesken (2011)
found that “foggy” days in London correlated with excess mortality and that the number of these
days rose from 1870 to 1891 and then fell until their series ended in 1905. They attributed the
decline to population shifts from the center city, fines for excess smoke emissions instituted in
1891 which led to switches from bituminous coal and to more efficient stoking and firing
procedures, and the spread of gas cookers and heating, particularly among the poor.

Conditions in cities have led historians, particularly those of British economic history, to wonder
why migrants moved from the country-side to the dark satanic mills of the cities. Williamson
(1981), looking at average death rates and wage rates across cities from the 1800s to the
1860s, argued that there was a 10-24% wage premium for city life in England as whole but that
even this mortality premium was not enough to erase the wage gain of moving from the village
to the city. Given the variance in mortality rates within cities, the wage premium may be
underestimated. However, the wage gain to moving to the city may have been particularly high
for those born in the country. Jack London described those born in the East End as, “a weak-
kneed, narrow-chested, listless breed, that crumples up and goes down in the brute struggle for
life with the invading hordes from the country.” He added that, “The railway men, carriers,
omnibus drivers, corn and timber porters, and all those who require physical stamina, are
largely drawn from the country; while in the Metropolitan Police there are, roughly, 12,000
country-born as against 3000 London-born.” In addition, cities provided upward job mobility,
leading to the migration of the more able (Long 2005). While we know that the infants of city-
dwellers suffered, we do not know how the health of the “invading hordes from the country”
declined. As city conditions worsened, an adolescence and an adulthood spent in large cities
was at least as dangerous as being born in a large city under somewhat better conditions (Cain
and Hong 2009).

Evidence on the declining importance of early life environmental conditions comes from studies
of the impact of season of birth. Doblhammer and Vaupel (2001) discovered that in recent
populations those 50 years old and over born in the northern hemisphere live longer if they were
born in the fourth quarter instead of the second quarter whereas in the southern hemisphere the
pattern is exactly reversed. They argue that those born in the second quarter, after the long
winter months, experienced reduced intrauterine growth. The populations they examined were
for the most part born in the twentieth century when the mortality transition was already well
under way.

Costa and Lahey (2005a,b), comparing the Union Army cohort with US cohorts born 1881-1920,
learned that the effect of being born in the second quarter of birth relative to the fourth on older
age mortality has lessened and that whereas there was a pronounced negative effect of being
born in the summer among the Union Army cohort, this effect disappeared almost entirely for
the 1881-1920 cohort. Spring and summer were bad seasons to be born in both because of
the inadequacy of maternal diets and high infectious disease incidence in early infancy and
early pregnancy. At Johns Hopkins in the first third of the twentieth century babies born during
the second quarter (April-June) were more likely to be premature and babies born during the
spring (March-May) had lower birth weights, even if they were full-term (Costa 2004b). The
mortality of infants and of children below age two peaked in the summer because of diarrhea
and its sequelae throughout the nineteenth century, starting to dampen in the late nineteenth
and early twentieth century but persisting until 1920 (Condran and Lentzner 2003). A study of a
rural North Carolina mill town begun in 1939 found that in the spring vitamin levels were at their
lowest point (Beardsley 1989: 204). Poor nutritional intake and maternal infection from
respiratory disease during the winter months may have led to low birth weights and high
prematurity rates among babies born in the spring. The impact of season of birth effects fell

                                                26
between 1900 and 1960-80, coincident with declining infectious diseases rates, particularly from
summer water-borne diseases, and a more varied diet. The declining impact of season of birth
accounts for roughly 16 to 17 percent of the 0.087 difference in the 10 year mortality rates of
Union Army veterans and of Americans in 1960-1980.

Analyses of the mortality impact of temperatures provide additional evidence on the declining
importance of environmental conditions. Using state-level mortality data, Barreca et al. (2013)
find that the mortality effect of an extremely hot day declined by about 80% between 1900-1959
and 1960-2004. The effect of cold days on mortality decreased as well but the effects were
more modest than for hot temperatures, probably because of the importance of waterborne
diseases such as typhoid and diarrhea circa 1900. Deschênes and Moretti (2009), using
individual-level data, find that cold temperature days have a significant and long-lasting impact
on mortality rates (much more than hot days) in 1972-1988 and attribute 3% to 7% of the gains
in longevity experienced by the U.S. population over the past three decades to migration from
cold, northeastern states to warm, western states.

The shift from manual to white collar work accounts for a large fraction of the improvement in
health at older ages but not of mortality. Among Union Army veterans, occupational shifts
were relatively unimportant predictors of older age mortality (Costa 2013) but explain 29% of the
66% decline in the combined category of chronic respiratory conditions, valvular heart disease,
arteriosclerosis, and joint and back problems from the 1900s to the 1970s and 1980s. The
fraction of the decline explained by occupational shifts was larger than the 18% explained by the
disease environment as proxied by early life urban residence and infectious illnesses in the
army (Costa 2000). Occupational hazards within manual and factory occupations have fallen.
In addition to injuries and physical demands, lung diseases and respiratory symptoms result
from occupational exposure to dust, fumes, or gases in manufacturing, mining, and farming. In
the United States men’s risk of death on wage-paying jobs fell from roughly 0.17 per million
hours worked circa 1940 to less than 0.07 by 1970, with most of the decline due to decreased
risk of death within jobs (Costa and Kahn 2004). Nonetheless, even controlling for education
and income, those in manual occupations today have worse self-reported health and more
rapidly declining health with age (Case and Deaton 2003).

Income in the 19th century enabled individuals to buy lower room congestion, housing in an area
of a city with better sanitation, private toilet facilities, soap, better food, an icebox to preserve
food, and less work away from home for the pregnant mother. Thus Preston and Haines
(1991), using the questions on the number of children ever born and the number of children
living in the 1900 census, report that place of residence, together with race, was the important
correlate of child survival in the late 19th century, much more important than father’s occupation.
However, within locations, income mattered. Within U.S. cities there was a steep gradient
between infant mortality and income. In Providence, Rhode Island, in 1865 the annual crude
death rate for taxpayers was 11 per thousand, while the corresponding rate for non-taxpayers
was 25 per thousand (Chapin 1924). Reduced occupational stress includes both the shift from
manual to white collar work and the reduction in occupational hazards within manual and factory
work. . Ferrie (2003) linked households in 1850 and 1860 to one year mortality rates as
reported in the 1850 and 1860 censuses of mortality and found a wealth gradient in rural areas
of the United States. Those with greater personal wealth were less likely to die from any cause
and from pulmonary tuberculosis, a disease associated with crowding and poor housing. They
were no less likely to die of cholera, a disease they did not know was spread through
contaminated water supplies. Among Union Army veterans, an extra $1 in exogenous income
lowered mortality hazards by 21% (Eli 2012). Effects were large for respiratory, digestive, and
cardiovascular illnesses, all conditions predicted by previous bouts of infectious disease (Costa

                                                 27
2000). Pensions decreased veterans’ exposure to infectious disease and to occupational
hazards by allowing them to retire, to live independently of their children, and to live in better
areas.

Income transfers in the 1930s and at mid-century also had substantial effects on mortality.
Relief spending during the Great Depression reduced infant mortality and deaths from diarrhea
and infectious disease, with a dollar increase in relief spending reducing overall infant mortality
by more than 30% (Fishback, Haines, and Kantor 2007). Old Age Assistance decreased elderly
mortality by 22% between 1930 and 1950, but only among men. Their infectious disease
mortality fell with the shift away from the crowded housing of the poorhouse and access to
antibiotics, particularly penicillin, and sulfa drugs (Balan-Cohen 2008). The (male) children of
poor mothers who received pensions because of husband’s death, disability, or absence
between 1900 and 1930 lived ten years longer than the children whose mothers’ applications
were rejected (Aizer et al. 2013).

Income transfers in more recent times may have a negative impact on older age mortality in
developed countries. Using exogenous decreases in income arising from adjustments to
erroneous overpayments of Social Security benefits, Snyder and Evans (2004) uncovered a
small but statistically significant positive impact of income on male mortality, with a 4% decline
in Social Security payments lowering male mortality by 2% (there was no effect on women’s
mortality). They argue that the decline in mortality can be explained by the increase in part-time
employment among men older than 67, perhaps because of the beneficial effects of increased
social interactions. In contrast, in South Africa, the extension of generous pensions to elderly
blacks led to improved self-reported health status and decreased depression for all household
members because richer households were able to obtain on-site water and flush toilets and
were less likely to skip meals (Case 2001).

The impact of income on birth outcomes in more recent times is smaller than in the 1930s, as
might be expected given higher income levels and better health. The income maintenance
experiments of the 1970s in Gary, Indiana, which guaranteed families a certain income level
had positive effects on the birth weights of children of mothers who were smokers and who had
short intervals between births but negative effects on the children of mothers who were non-
smokers and who had long intervals between births compared to controls who did not (Kehrer
and Wolin 1979). The differential county roll-out of the Food Stamp Program, which is
equivalent to a cash transfer (Hoynes, Schatzenbach, and Whitmore 2009), also provides
evidence on exogenous income effects. Exposure to the program in the last trimester had
small and statistically insignificant effects on neo-natal mortality and a less than half a percent
increase for blacks and whites in mean birth weight . However, it had a 7% reduction in the
incidence of low birth weight for whites and 5 to 11% reduction for blacks (Almond, Hoynes, and
Schanzenbach 2011). Using the differential county roll-out of the Supplemental Program for
Women Infants and Children, which provides food packages to low-income pregnant and post-
partum women, Hoynes, Page, and Stevens (2011) find that the program increased birth
weights by only 19 to 28g among participating women, a less than 1% increase (cf. Bitler and
Currie 2005). Declines in the welfare case load because of the Personal Responsibility and
Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act (PRWORA) which eliminated entitlement to cash
assistance had either no or small effects on birth weight (Currie and Grogger 2002; Kaestner
and Lee 2005).

The large effect of income on health in the past is not inconsistent with the deviation of health
trends from income. Income was important but disease was even more so. The rather modest
effects of exogenous income changes on health in the US today compared to strong

                                                 28
correlations between income and health suggest either that the causality is reversed or that
income is picking up other factors. One likely other factor is education, which is strongly
positively associated with health, but identifying causal effects of education has been a
challenge.

Lleras-Muney (2005) pioneered the use of compulsory schooling and child labor laws as
instruments to estimate the causal impact of education on health. Her revised estimates
(Lleras-Muney 2006) imply that an extra year of schooling lowers mortality risk at older ages by
nearly 70 percent, but the results are not robust to using different codings of the laws, to the
expansion of the sample, and to the use of state-specific cohort effects (Mazumder 2008).
Mazumder (2008), using compulsory schooling and child labor laws as an IV, finds robust
effects of education on older age chronic conditions such as diabetes, vision, hearing, speaking
ability, back problems, deformities, and senility. With the exception of diabetes, none of these
conditions are related to the ability of the better educated to make better use of new information
or medical technologies, leading Mazumder (2008) to conclude that compulsory schooling and
child labor laws are suspect instruments and are probably picking up the many public health
initiatives occurring in schools during the time period, such as smallpox vaccinations.

Other research using compulsory education as instruments finds small effects at best. Changes
in British compulsory schooling laws that increased the minimum school leaving age from 14 to
15 in 1947 and from 15 to 16 in 1972 (both years unlikely to be affected by public health
initiatives) had no health effects and did not affect smoking habits (Clark and Royer 2013).
Using differences in school entry policies between California and Texas, McCrary and Royer
(2011) find that an extra year of maternal education has little effect on either the birth weights or
prematurity effects of infants born in the 1990s and no effects on fertility. However, they find
some suggestive evidence that an extra year of education lowers the incidence of low birth
weight among blacks. A compulsory education reform in Sweden which affected the 1946-57
birth cohorts had negligible effects on long-term health (Meghir et al. 2013). Why are these
estimates so small? Perhaps an extra year of education has an impact only at very low
education levels or only the difference between college and less than college matters. If the
health effects of education largely operate through smoking, it may be hard to identify an impact
of education if the educational gradient in smoking between those with compulsory schooling
and those with less is small.

The causality may also run from health to education (Currie 2009) or both education and health
may be determined by a third factor such as time or risk preferences (Fuchs 1982). Using data
on British cohorts born in 1970, Conti, Heckman, and Urzua (2011) explicitly model selection
into education by those with high cognitive and non-cognitive skills and health status at age 10.
Examining health differences at age 30 between those with more than compulsory schooling
levels and those with compulsory schooling levels, they estimate that the causal effect of
education explains most differences in smoking behavior but that education leads to risky
behaviors such as cannabis use (or willingness to report usage). Overall, education explains
less than half of self-reported health differences among men but more than half among women.

Health and Productivity

Jack London claimed that he, “would turn out an amount of work in the course of the day that
would put to shame the amount he [the British laborer] turned out. So there are two sides to
it. The man with the high standard of living will always do more work and better than the man
with the low standard of living.” Height has been shown to be strongly associated with wages
and productivity in a variety of settings. Surveying the evidence from developing countries,

                                                 29
Schultz (2002) concludes that an additional centimeter of adult male height is significantly
associated with a higher wage of 1.5% in Ghana and 1.4% in Brazil. Historical data also shows
that height was associated with lower productivity in now-developed countries. Data from the
antebellum American South shows that height and weight were positively associated with slave
value, suggesting that better fed, healthier slaves were more productive (Margo and Steckel
1982). In the contemporary US, taller individuals also earn higher wages (Case and Paxson
2008), although the “height premium” is higher in developing countries than in the US (where
one more centimeter raises wages by 0.45%). However, this evidence does not purely reflect
the better physical health of taller individuals—improved conditions in childhood will often result
both in better health and cognitive abilities, even in developed countries (Case and Paxson
2008, Schick and Steckel 2012, Barham et al 2013). 21 For example, early life health
interventions providing extra medical care in both Chile and Norway, two countries at very
different stages of development, led to higher academic achievement in school (Bharadwaj,
Løken, and Neilson 2013).

One of the implicit assumptions in the literature has been that in the US past, returns to height
were as high as they are in developing countries today, thus suggesting that improvements in
health account for a large fraction of productivity gains (e.g. Floud et al. 2011: 20-24; Costa and
Steckel 1998). Controlling for education, estimates from developing countries report a
coefficient of height in centimeters on log wages of 0.008 in Columbia (Ribero and Nuñez 2000,
Table 5, Column 6), of 0.023 in Mexico (Vogl 2014, Table 2, Column 4, and Table 4, Column 1),
0.015 for Ghana and of 0.014 for Brazil (Schultz 2002). In contrast, similar specifications for
the US yield an estimate of 0.005 (Schultz 2002).

The historical evidence suggests that returns to height in the United States circa the mid-
nineteenth century were very low and that they have risen over time. Bleakley et al.
(forthcoming) estimate that, for climbing the occupational ladder, the returns to height controlling
for education were at most 0.002 in the mid-nineteenth century, 0.001 circa WWII, and 0.004 by
the 1970s and 1980s. Even if the wage returns to height were twice the occupational ranking
returns (as was true circa 1980), the returns to height would be smaller than in most developing
countries. A similar temporal increase is observed in the wealth returns to height (see the top
panel of Figure 17), though the wealth returns to height were mainly for farmers. At the same
time the returns to education to climbing the occupational ladder and to wealth have risen (see
the bottom panel of Figure 17). Bleakley et al. (forthcoming) estimated specifications for wealth
and for occupational ranking both with and without a control for education. Although in the
nineteenth century controlling for education did not affect the returns to height of climbing the
occupational ladder, controll3ing for education decreased the returns to height in the twentieth
century, suggesting that height effects are now operating more through educational effects.
The growing returns to height are consistent with Bleakley et al.’s (forthcoming) hypothesis of a
movement from a brawn to a brain based economy. In the nineteenth century, height may have
brought returns in the jobs requiring physical stamina such as coal, corn, or timber carrying, but
it was not sufficient for climbing the occupational ladder.

The returns to BMI are also different between developing countries and the US in the past. In
developing countries BMI is positively related to wages, arguably because in these countries a
higher BMI is associated with physical strength which is valued in manual labor (Strauss and

21 An alternative explanation for the returns to height is that height is correlated with personal traits

conducive to worker productivity, such as emotional skills and extraversion. For example, if the tall
receive more investments and praise they become more optimistic and also have better communication
skills (e.g. Persico et al. 2004; Mobius and Rosenblatt 2006). In addition, the tall may be placed in
leadership roles because they are tall.

                                                    30
Thomas 1998). However, for the US Civil War non-farm cohort, unlike developing countries
today, BMI and occupational ranking were unrelated (see Table 11). 22 BMI and occupational
ranking were positively related for the World War II non-farm cohort, but each unit increase in
BMI only increased occupational ranking by 0.2%. Among more recent cohorts, once I
controlled for education, there was no relation between BMI and occupational ranking and it was
negative without controls for education. In contrast in the Côte d’Ivoire the OLS coefficient on
BMI in a log wage regression is 0.045 and in Ghana it is 0.053 (Schultz 2003).

In the evidence presented thus far on US returns to height and BMI the health measures
depend not just on malleable environmental factors but also on genetics and measurement
error. One strand of the literature (see the survey in Shultz 2001) has therefore focused on
using instrumental variables for health such as the local price of health inputs and access to
health care or community level investments in disease prevention and treatment to identify the
effects of the component of health due to environmental factors. Schultz (2002) finds that
relative to the OLS estimates the IV estimates of male wage returns to height in Ghana were 5
times greater and in Brazil were 3 times greater. Schultz (2003) was also able to estimate male
wage returns to BMI for Ghana and Côte d’Ivoire and found that the IV estimates were greater
than the OLS estimates. However, when the primary interest is in determining how the
relationship between height and productivity has changed and when no instruments are
available for US heights over a century and half, reduced form estimates, estimated using
similar specifications and sample restrictions, can establish long-run trends.

An alternative strategy for estimating the returns to health, but limited to a single point in time,
has been to examine either early life exogenous shocks or the impact of exogenous health
interventions. By comparing the lighter and heavier twin, Black, Devereux and Salvanes (2007)
show that low birth weight has a causal effect on adult height, earnings, and education. The
sons of mothers infected during the influenza pandemic of 1918 suffered an annual wage
income loss of about 5-9% and up to to half of the total wage effect might be due to decreased
educational attainment (Almond 2006). 23 Bleakley’s (2007) study of the hookworm eradication
program in the U.S. South concluded that hookworm infections through childhood reduced adult
wages by about 40%. Controlling directly for education did not significantly change the
estimated effect of hookworm treatment, but changes in literacy suggested that effective
deworming increased the productivity of time spent in school. His analysis of malaria
eradication in the US South, Mexico, Columbia, and Brazil implies that persistent childhood
malaria infection reduces adult income by around 50% with similar estimates for all four
countries studied even though income levels and institutions were very different. Results for
education were mixed. We do not know whether evidence from disease shocks would reveal
different or similar magnitudes in the nineteenth century before formal education became more
important as a channel of upward mobility.

Health and Fertility

In the short run, declines in child mortality will mechanically increase fertility. In the longer-run,
theoretical predictions of the relationship between health and fertility largely hinge on the child

22 Returns to BMI were negative among all men because farmers were the heaviest and also had a low
occupational ranking.
23 Brown and Thomas’ (2013) re-examination of the influenza pandemic suggests that Almond’s strategy

of using adjacent cohorts as control groups in invalid because the children born during the WWI draft
were born to lower income fathers of large families. Controlling for parental characteristics Almond could
not observe in his data, they find no effect of the influenza pandemic. They speculate that parents
mitigate the adverse effects of early life insults.

                                                   31
quantity-quality tradeoff and thus on the effects of health changes on the prices of child quantity
and quality. Whether the price of child quantity or quality declines depends in turn on when in
the life cycle individuals are affected by health changes. Declines in infant mortality lower the
quantity price of children, though declines in scarring effects, by improving child cognition, also
lower the quality price of children. Improvements in child health and mortality could lower the
price of child quality by relaxing constraints on human capital investments. Increases in fertility
could result either from declines in infant mortality or from declines in maternal mortality among
women whose educational investments are already completed. Declines in fertility could result
either from improvements in child health or from declines in maternal mortality for women whose
education is not yet completed. In both cases the channel is education. As life expectancy
increases the returns to education rise. Even with no changes in life expectancy,
improvements in health will lower the cost of child quality if health is complementary with
education.

Empirical evidence on the relationship between health and fertility is limited but consistent with
theoretical predictions. Hookworm eradication in the US South circa 1910 led to marked
decreases in fertility in treatment relative to control areas because this eradication relaxed the
constraint of investing in human capital (Bleakley and Lange 2009) . When the risk of dying in
childbirth in Sri Lanka fell sharply between 1946 and 1953, the propensity to have children
during this time period increased (Lleras-Muney and Jayachandra 2009) . Albanesi and Olivetti
(2010) attribute the baby boom of the 1950s and the subsequent baby bust as in part a
response to decreasing maternal mortality which led to an increase in fertility for the cohorts
whose education was complete and then a decline for cohorts whose education was not yet
complete.

Exogenous declines in fertility could lead to improvements in child health, again through a child
quantity-quality trade-off. In twin data from China, an extra child, net of the lower birth weights
stemming from twinning, decreases the parent-assessed health of all children (and also their
educational outcomes) but the effects are relatively modest (Rosenzweig and Zhang 2009).

Spending on Health

Clean water technologies and other public health expenditures that made the dramatic mortality
declines in cities possible were expensive. The value of the mean big city water system in 1915
was close to $300 million in 2003 US dollars (Cutler and Miller 2005). Chicago’s water system
was valued at $1027 million in 2003 US dollars (Ferrie and Troesken 2008). These
investments in public health infrastructure were a success that disproportionately benefited the
poor, including blacks and immigrants. While water filtration benefited both blacks and whites,
blacks benefited more than whites in terms of disease reduction (Troesken 2004: 135). Within
cities the decline in mortality rates in the worse areas, where the poor lived, to the level of the
best areas (see Figure 13) also provides suggestive evidence. Cities with more illiterate
residents experienced larger mortality reductions from the provision of clean water (Cutler and
Miller 2005). City public health expenditures were positively correlated with the fractions of the
immigrant and black populations (Costa and Kahn 2006). Public health programs targeted to
rural areas, such as the Rockefeller’s foundation’s anti-hookworm campaign, also
disproportionately benefited the poor (Bleakley 2007).

The primary explanation for why US cities spent so much on mortality reductions that
disproportionately benefited the poor is that middle class and rich taxpayers viewed public
health investments as a type of insurance policy. When the vast majority of a city’s
employment was located in its downtown and the suburbs were not developed, the rich and

                                                32
poor lived in closer physical proximity, allowing a public health shock in poor neighborhoods to
have a contagion effect on rich neighborhoods. When whites and blacks lived in close
proximity, failing to install water and sewer mains in black neighborhoods increased the risk of
diseases spreading from black neighborhoods to white ones, Blacks gained less from filtration
in segregated cities, suggesting that denial of service was more likely when disease spillovers
were lower (Troesken 2004: 10, 135). In San Francisco, where typhoid rates were the highest
in Chinatown, “[t]he Chinese were in the very center of the city, strategically located to infect the
rest of San Francisco with their diseases” (Craddock 2000: 135). Recognizing that this
community interacted with the native community through work in laundries or as cooks and
domestics outside of Chinatown, civic leaders took pro-active steps to invest in public health.

In contrast to the literature on clean water reforms in the United States, the public health
literature on these reforms in Europe has emphasized the political impediments to reform.
Szreter (1988) argued that in English cities, the new entrepreneurial class saw no reason to
spend on public health (specifically, on clean water) and that political reform, particularly the
limited political emancipation of working men, was necessary for sanitation and public health to
become a priority. Evans’ (1987) case study of the 1892 Hamburg cholera epidemic held the
mercantile classes responsible for delays in installing a sand-filtration system, an expenditure in
which they could see no benefit to themselves. He argued that they sanctioned their stinginess
with laissez-faire ideology and theories of the “miasmatic” origins of disease (which
hypothesized that epidemic disease was related to local soil and climatic conditions) and that
their desire to avoid trade disruptions led them to conceal the initial outbreak.

The economic history literature presents a more nuanced view on sanitary reforms and implies
that a universal franchise was not necessary for implementing these reforms. By the turn of the
twentieth century, German cities had become leaders in sanitary reforms. Typhoid mortality
rates in Germany were 1.2 times higher than in England and Wales in 1877 but by 1893 were
equal and were lower until rates in England and Wales converged to those in Germany. In
1912, 90% of German households in cities of 50,000 or more were connected to a sewer
compared to 75% of US households in comparably sized cities. But in most German cities only
the small minority of adult males who paid enough taxes and had legal residence were eligible
to vote (Brown 1989, 2000). Noting that in Germany, the United States, and in England, the
elite pushed for sanitary reforms, Brown (1989) argued that they were driven in part by self-
interest. Healthier workers were better workers; compensating wage differentials were lower in
a healthier work environment; and, faced with a slow-down in rural to urban migration and a
decline in urban fertility rates, employers feared a labor shortage. Opposition came from small
businesses and owners of rental properties because of the funding model. In the US and
Germany funding came from a one-time assessment of properties fronting sewers and from
annual charges on owners of buildings as well as general tax revenue. In the UK funding in the
first half of the nineteenth century came from assessments on home values with the poorest
properties exempt. Health expenditures were widely seen as benefiting both the poor and
factory owners (see also Brown 2000b; Smith 1979: 216-17; Wohl 1983, Ch. 4 and 7; and
Hassan 1985).

Access to capital markets can explain why government, through municipal waterworks, played a
large role in the health transition and why large investments in waterworks did not happen
earlier. Demand for water was growing. The costs of building sufficiently large water systems
were too large for private firms and only the largest cities or cities with access to sophisticated
municipal finance techniques could afford them. State constitutions limited borrowing for capital
improvements. By facilitating debt finance, the development of a municipal bond market


                                                 33
enabled both American and British cities to make the necessary sanitary investments (Brown
1989; Cutler and Miller 2006).

The ability to fund public health investments is not necessarily the only explanation for the
timing of the health transition. Cleaning water (sewage largely remained untreated), purifying
the milk supply, establishing disease reporting and quarantining systems, disseminating health
information to citizens, and ensuring that all babies and children have medical exams and
vaccinations required setting up new organizations and co-operation between citizens, doctors,
private philanthropists, and city public health departments. Improvements in air quality in
Pittsburgh were dependent on knowledge of smoke reduction, on the availability of alternate fuel
sources and on infrastructure spending, such as natural gas pipes to homes (Tarr 2002; Tarr
and Lamperes 1981). Time to build (including time to finance) meant that the public health
expenditures undertaken by US cities at the beginning of the twentieth century were low relative
to the value of lives saved under a range of estimates of the value of a life (Costa and Kahn
2006; Cutler and Miller 2005).

By 1940 US cities had solved their sanitation problems and, beginning in the 1970s, the biggest
increases in life expectancy began to come at older ages, with technological advances playing a
more important role. Seventy percent of the improvement in heart attack survival rates
between 1984 and 1998 came from technological improvements in care (Cutler and McClellan
2001). Technological change also played large roles in the survival and quality of life of low
birth weight babies, treatments for depression, cataracts, and cancer (Cutler and McClellan
2001). The benefits of medical technology are nicely illustrated by the collapse of Eastern
Germany into the arms of Western Germany. Eastern Germany experienced rapid
improvements in older age survival rates as technology that was trailing Western standards by
15-20 years was quickly updated (Gjonça, Brockmann, and Maier 2000). Another illustration
comes from the collapse of segregation in the US South. Once blacks in the rural south
obtained legal access to the only nearby hospitals, previously restricted to whites, infant
mortality rates fell sharply between 1966 and 1975 because of hospital treatments for
pneumonia and gastroenteritis (Almond, Chay, and Greenstone 2006).

In 1913, the United States was spending twice as much on hospitals and health as it was on
public poor relief and welfare (Lindert 2004). In contrast, in 1980 the United States was
spending three times as much on public poor relief and welfare as hospitals and health for the
poor. The well-to-do were not more generous about health spending in the past, they were
more self-interested because of fear of infectious disease. As chronic disease replaced
infectious disease, health care has become more of a private good and is not necessarily
viewed any differently from other types of welfare spending. The issues raised in the social
capital literature come to the fore: support for redistribution will be low when the group receiving
the transfers differs in race or ethnicity from the group paying for the transfers (e.g. Luttmer
2001;Alesina and Glaeser 2004; Poterba 1997). The public health literature has recognized
some of the political economy implications of health care becoming a private good, lamenting
that their own profession’s emphasis on the importance of individuals' responsibility for their
lifestyles and behavior was co-opted by the New Right’s agenda to reduce public services
(Szreter 2002).

Although the efficacy of medical care is not in doubt, evidence on the efficacy of programs
providing free or low cost medical care is mixed. Using age variation in Medicare coverage to
identify its effect, several researchers find, at best, very modest health benefits from Medicare,
both at the time of its introduction (Finkelstein and McKnight 2008) and in more recent times
(Card, Dobkin, and Maestas 2009). Using both geographic variation and variation in the

                                                34
timing of Medicare implementation in Southern counties, Finkelstein and McKnight (2008) find
modest effects of Medicare on elderly mortality, with a statistically significant, but still
substantively small, decline in nonwhite elderly pneumonia mortality rates. The caveat is that
at the time of Medicare's introduction, hospitals were primarily effective at treating short term
acute illness, rather than chronic disease.

The expansion of public health insurance to a random group of low-income, uninsured adults in
Oregon provides additional evidence. The Oregon health expansion led to a 25% increase in
the probability that people report themselves in good to excellent health and reduced
depression rates by 30% (perhaps because of positive effects, discussed below, on household
finances) but had no statistically significant effects on measured blood pressure, cholesterol or
glycated hemoglobin (a measure of diabetic blood sugar control) two years after the
implementation of the program. The program increased the use of preventive care and thus
may have longer term effects (Baiker et al. 2013). However, long-run effects may be limited
without adherence to medical therapies and such adherence is absent even with equal access
to care within the Veterans Health Administration (Simeonova 2013).

The one exception to this literature finding modest effects of coverage increases is Sommers et
al.’s (2014) study of mortality after the Massachusetts Health Care Reform. Annual all-cause
mortality rates in Massachusetts’ 14 counties, stratified by age, sex, and race, fell by almost 3%
and mortality rates from amenable causes by almost 5% relative to control countries in other
New England states. The difficulty with the empirical design is uncertainty whether the control
counties are a good match and whether there were no other interventions, such as those
leading to greater adherence, at the same time.

Evidence both from Medicare and from the Oregon health insurance experiment implies that
there is a causal effect of poor health on income. The largest impact of the Medicare program
was to reduce elderly out of pocket expenditures. The largest effect of the Oregon health
insurance program was to eliminate out-of-pocket catastrophic medical expenditures and
reduce by more than 50% the probability of having to borrow money or skip paying other bills
because of medical expenses (Finkelstein et al. 2012).

Valuing Health

Health expenditures show up in national accounts as a cost but the benefits of health are not
counted. The discipline of economics “has fallen seriously behind the economy” (Fogel 1998).
To catch up to the economy, researchers have sought both to construct better output measures
and better prices for health goods and to quantify the value of improvements in health. Better
output measures and prices have been constructed for heart attack treatments (Cutler et al.
1998), glaucoma treatments (Shapiro and Wilcox 1997), and cataracts surgery (Shapiro,
Shapiro, and Wilcox 2001) and these reveal that, after accounting for quality, the price of
treatments has remained constant or fallen. Measurements of the value of improvements in
health are based on value of life calculations (e.g. Nordhaus 2003; Murphy and Topel 2006,
2003). Using a constant value of life, these estimates show that while increases in longevity
have been valuable throughout the twentieth century, the early increases in longevity, when the
decline in infant mortality led to dramatic increases in life expectancy, are more valuable.
Becker, Philipson and Soares (2005) argue that because of declines in infant mortality in
developing countries there has been more convergence across nations than the income
numbers would suggest.



                                                35
How soon will we reach diminishing returns to increases in longevity? After 1960, mortality
declines have been concentrated at older ages. However, the economic value of these recent
mortality declines is arguably larger than the value of the dramatic pre-1960 mortality gains from
reductions in infant mortality. Because the value of life rises with increases in wealth and in
wages and because we have become wealthier, the smaller, post-1960 increases in life
expectancy are more valuable (Costa and Kahn 2004). Will mortality rates at older ages
continue to fall? The cohort which will reach age 65 in 2020 was born in 1955 after the steep
plunge in infant and child mortality and the literature on scarring and early life factors suggests
that this cohort may be particularly long-lived compared to past cohorts. Mortality rates may
not fall as steeply for the cohorts born after 1955 as for earlier cohorts. The difference in early
life conditions for cohorts born in 1955 instead of 1995 was not as stark as that for cohorts born
in 1915 instead of 1955. For cohorts born after 1955 improvements in older age mortality rates
will need to come from medical care or better health habits that reduce premature mortality or
innovations that decrease the rate of senescence. Without innovation the rate of reduction in
future mortality improvements cannot be as sharp as it has been in the recent past. If mortality
rates in OECD nations reach a plateau at older ages, as the literature indicates is possible (e.g.
Vaupel et al. 1998; Carey et al. 1992), then as long as we can change the level of the plateau,
investments in health at very old ages will not hit diminishing returns.

Hall and Jones (2007) conclude from their model that health care will consume 30% of GDP by
the middle of the twentieth century and argue that this is a good thing because it reflects
consumer preferences for better health over additional consumer goods such as cars. The big
issue is how to pay for health care and for medical innovation. Paying for innovation frequently
conflicts with a desire for wider health care coverage. Innovation is a public good which benefits
both rich and poor, even though the benefits accrue first to the rich, but incentives for innovation
depend on the structure of health care. Generous health insurance encourages the diffusion of
innovations once they are available, and in turn the development of new innovations (see the
review by Cutler 2002). But this innovation is expensive, leading to efforts to reduce health
insurance generosity by encouraging managed care or by reducing the tax benefits for
generous health insurance policies or to low pharmaceutical prices negotiated by national health
care systems. Creating the institutions necessary to maintaining increases in longevity may
thus be a challenge.

The Unfinished Agenda

This review has documented trends in various measures of health, including by socioeconomic
status, and findings from micro data on the changing health effects of the environment and of
income. The large health effects of exogenous changes in disease and income in the past
imply that in the time series income effects have been swamped by disease trends. Modest
income effects in recent data suggest that the strong relationship between health and income is
now largely driven by reverse causality. The time trends hinted at both longitudinal and
intergenerational effects, but we need new data to fill in many missing data points in our
historical series on health trends, particularly for women, for chronic conditions, and for birth
weights. We need a better understanding of why birth weights were so low for first births but so
high for later births. Is birth weight a poor measure of health at birth? If so, what other
measures could be used instead? Another empirical challenge will be understanding cognition
and mental health in the past. A voluminous literature has established that past populations
were underweight and stunted. Recent work on numeracy, grain prices, and poor relief in
England before 1850 (Baten et al., forthcoming) suggests they also were cognitively impaired.
Elevated schizophrenia levels among those in utero during in famines (Lumey and van Pappel
2013) hints that they were mentally unstable as well.

                                                36
The literature has established the importance of water filtration and chlorination as perhaps the
biggest contributor to the decline in infant mortality during the health transition, but we still have
a poor understanding of the efficacy of many of the other public health interventions occurring at
the same time such as the establishment of local boards of health, the elimination of malaria
through wetland drainage, the cleaning of the milk supply, vaccination and well-baby
campaigns, and slum clearing. Our knowledge of recent interventions, including the limitations
on their implementation imposed by political economy considerations, is limited as well. If
expansions of health insurance are ineffective, is it because we need programs to increase
adherence to medical regimes? Alternatively, are programs aimed at younger children more
cost effective? The Carolina Abcedarian program, which targeted disadvantaged children
before age 5, led to decreases in risk factors for cardiovascular and metabolic diseases among
children in their thirties who had been randomized into the program (Campbell et al. 2013).
However, it is unclear which aspects of the program – the cognitive and social stimulation, the
pediatric care, or the free meals, led to the outcomes. Nor is it clear how parents reinforced the
program’s inputs.

More work is needed to understand health in the context of family choices, not just fertility, but
also when and how families mitigate or reinforce health shocks and thus how health is
transmitted across generations. Epigenetics is elucidating the biology of this transmission,
showing how fathers’ and mothers’ misfortunes such as famines and sins such as smoking can
be transmitted to future generations. The early life experiences and health habits of families
thus are dynastically linked through the epigenome, affecting not just the health but also the
brain development of future generations and thus potentially influencing behavior, cognition, and
personality (Badcock and Crespi 2008). Inheritance is not destiny though: epigenetics shows
how the effects of negative shocks can be reversed, and can thus inform choices. However,
parents must know how to use this knowledge and must decide how to allocate scarce inputs
given the returns to those choices. Health, cognition, and personality all will affect education
which in turn may affect choices over own and children’s health outcomes. Small initial health
differences at birth are magnified into large differences later in life. Models of health therefore
need to account for intergenerational links, critical periods of development, and the dynamic
interplay between health, personality, cognition, and education. The data requirements for
estimating such models are considerable, and new datasets will need to be developed that
follow individuals from the womb, or even better their parents’ wombs, to the grave. By
constructing such datasets for different cohorts we can investigate changes in the transmission
of health across generations as economies move from brains to brawn.

This review has noted the importance of understanding how health interacts with other aspects
of the economy, particularly with education. The productivity returns to health are now bigger
than they were in the US past, suggesting that the importance of health in the economy has
grown and that health increases are most effective in increasing economic growth in a brain
based economy with the institutions that enable individuals use their health capital to increase
their human capital. These institutions are lacking in many developing countries and were
adopted at different times in today’s developed countries. Historical European micro-data
would elucidate the relationship between health and education, health and fertility, and
productivity and health. Did good health push early Europeans out of school? In what time
periods and under what institutions did improvements in health induce investments in child
quality rather than quantity and thus reductions in fertility? Were the occupational returns to
health in the past as low in Europe as they were in the US? Does the European experience
shed any light on why occupational returns to health were low in the US? Answering these
questions will require a big data push. Large-scale micro historical data collections in the US

                                                 37
began prior to 1982 (Fogel et al. 1982) and have produced large, longitudinal databases by
linking individuals across census records, or even more ambitiously, by also linking across
military and pension records. 24 European historical data collections, while extremely valuable
in establishing patterns of the demographic transition, have either focused more narrowly on
demography or have been smaller-scale.

An underlying theme of this review has been that the US economy would have grown even
without improvements in health. However, because the economy is increasingly brain based
and health and cognition are linked, even marginal improvements in health now may have large
effects on future economic growth.

References

Acemoglu, Daron and David Autor. 2012. What Does Human Capital Do? A Review of Goldin
and Katz’s The Race between Education and Technology. Journal of Economic Literature.
50(2): 426-63.

Acemoglu, Daron and Simon Johnson. 2007. Disease and Development: The Effect of Life
Expectancy on Economic Growth. Journal of Political Economy. 115(6): 925-85.

Adair, Linda S. 2006. Size at birth and growth trajectories to young adulthood. American
Journal of Human Biology. 19: 327–37.

Aizer, Anna, Shari Eli, Joseph Ferrie, and Adriana Lleras-Muney. 2013. The Effects of Means
Tested Cash Transfers on Mortality. Unpublished MS. University of California, Los Angeles.

Aizer, Anna and Laura Stroud. 2010. Education, Knowledge and the Evolution of Disparities in
Health. NBER Working Paper Series No. 15840.

Albanesi, Stefania and Claudia Olivetti. 2010. Maternal Health and the Baby Boom. NBER
Working Paper No. 16146.

Alesina, Alberto and Edward L. Glaeser. 2004. Why the U.S Doesn’t Have a European-Style
Welfare State? Oxford University Press.
Alley, Dawn E. and Virginia W. Chang. 2007. The Changing Relationship of Obesity and
Disability, 1988-2004. Journal of the American Medical Association. 298(17)

Almond, Douglas. 2006. Is the 1918 influenza pandemic over? Long-term effects of in utero
influenza exposure in the post-1940 US population. Journal of Political Economy 114(4): 672-
712.

Almond, Douglas, Kenneth Y. Chay, Michael Greenstone. 2006. Civil Rights, the War on
Poverty, and Black-White Convergence in Infant Mortality in the Rural South and Mississippi.
MIT Department of Economics Working Paper No. 07-04.

Almond, Douglas, Hilary W. Hoynes, and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach. 2011. Inside the
War on Poverty: The Impact of Food Stamps on Birth Outcomes. The Review of Economics
and Statistics. 93(2): 387-403.


24   See the data available at www.uadata.org.

                                                 38
Almond D, B Mazumder. 2005. The 1918 influenza pandemic and subsequent health outcomes:
An analysis of SIPP data. American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings. 95: 258-262.

Ashraf, Quamrul, Ashley Lester, and David N. Weil. 2009. When Does Improving Health Raise
GDP? In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2008, Volume 23. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.

Katherine Baicker, Sarah Taubman, Heidi Allen, Mira Bernstein, Jonathan Gruber, Joseph P.
Newhouse, Eric Schneider, Bill Wright, Alan Zaslavsky, Amy Finkelstein, and the Oregon Health
Study Group. 2013. The Oregon Experiment – Medicaid's Effects on Clinical Outcomes. New
England Journal of Medicine. 368.

Badcock, Christopher and Bernard Crespi. 2008. Battle of the sexes may set the brain.
Nature. 454 (August 28): 1054-55.

Bakwin, Harry and Ruth Morris Bakwin. 1931. Body Build in Infants. II. The Proportions of the
External Dimensions of the Healthy Infant During the First Year of Life. Journal of Clinical
Investigation. 377-394.

Balan-Cohen, Andreea. 2008. The Effect of Income on Elderly Mortality: Evidence from the Old
Age Assistance Program in the United States. Unpublished MS. Tufts University Department of
Economics.

Barham, Tania, Karen Macours, and John A. Maluccio. 2013. Boys' Cognitive Skill Formation
and Physical Growth: Long-Term Experimental Evidence on Critical Ages for Early Childhood
Interventions. American Economic Review, 103(3): 467-71.

Barker D.J.P. 1992. Fetal and Infant Origins of Adult Disease. London: British Medical
Publishing Group.

Barker D.J.P. 1994. Mothers, Babies, and Disease in Later Life. London: British Medical
Publishing Group.

Barker DJP. 2006. Adult consequences of fetal growth restriction. Clinical Obstetrics and
Gynecology. 49(2): 270-83.

Barker, David JP. 2008. Human Growth and Cardiovascular Disease. In The Window of
Opportunity: Pre-Pregnancy to 24 Months of Age, DJP Barker, RL Bergman, and PL Ogra
(Eds.), 61st Nestlé Nutrition Workshop, Pediatric Program, Bali, April 2007.

Barker, David J.P., Clive Osmond, Tom J. Forsen, Eero Kajantie and Johan G. Eriksson.
2007. Maternal and Social Origins of Hypertension. Hypertension. 50: 565-71.

Barreca, Alan, Karen Clay, Olivier Deschênes, Michael Greenstone, and Joseph S. Shapiro.
2013. Adapting to Climate Change: The Remarkable Decline in the U.S. Temperature-Mortality
Relationship over the 20th Century. NBER Working paper No. 18692.

Baten, Jӧrg, Dorothee Crayen, and Joachim Voth. Forthcoming. Numeracy and the Impact of
High Food Prices in Industrializing Britain, 1780-1850. Review of Economics and Statistics.



                                               39
Beardsley E.H. (1987), A History of Neglect: Health Care for Blacks and Mill Workers in the
Twentieth Century South, Knoxville, TN, University of Tennessee Press.

Becker, Gary S., Tomas J. Philipson, and Rodrigo R. Soares. 2005. The Quantity and Quality
of Life and the Evolution of World Inequality. American Economic Review. 95(1): 277-91.

Bharadwaj, Prashant, Katrine Velleson Løken, and Christopher Neilson. 2013. Early Life Health
Interventions and Academic Achievement. American Economic Review. 103(5): 1862-91.

Bitler, Marianne P. and Janet Currie. 2005. Does WIC Work? The Effects of WIC on
Pregnancy and Birth Outcomes. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management. 24(1): 73-91.

Black, Sandra E., Paul J. Devereux, KG Salvanes. 2007. From the cradle to the labor market?
The effect of birth weight on adult outcomes. Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(1): 409-439.
Bleakley, C. Hoyt. 2007. Disease and development: Evidence from hookworm eradication in the
American South. Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(1): 73-117.
Bleakley, C. Hoyt. 2010a. Health, Human Capital, and Development. Annual Review of
Economics, 2:283–310.

Bleakley, C. Hoyt. 2010b. Malaria in the Americas: A Retrospective Analysis of Childhood
Exposure. American Economic Journal: Applied, 2(2):1-45, April.

Bleakley, C. Hoyt, Dora L. Costa, and Adriana Lleras-Muney. Forthcoming. Health, Education,
and Income in the United States, 1820-2000. In L. Boustan, C. Frydman, and R.A. Margo, Eds.,
Human Capital and History: The American Record. University of Chicago Press.

Bleakley, C. Hoyt and Fabian Lange. 2009. Chronic Disease Burden and the Interaction of
Education, Fertility, and Growth. Review of Economics and Statistics. 91(1): 52-65.

Bloom, David E., David Canning, and Günther Fink. 2009. Disease and Development
Revisited. NBER Working Paper No. 15137.

Bloom, David E., David Canning, and Jaypee Sevilla. 2004. The Effect of Health on Economic
Growth: A Production Function Approach. World Development. 32(1): 1-13.

Bozzoli, Carlos; Deaton, Angus; Quintana-Domeque, Climent. 2009. Adult Height and
Childhood Disease. Demography. 46(4 ): 647-669.

Bresler, DE, G Ellison, and S. Zamenhof. 1975. Learning Deficits in Rats with Malnourished
Grandmothers. Developmental Psychobiology. 8(4): 315-23.

Brown, John C. 1989. Public Reform for Private Gain? The Case of Investments in Sanitary
Infrastructure: Germany, 1880-1887. Urban Studies. 26: 2-12.

Brown, John C. 2000a. Economics and infant mortality decline in German towns, 1889-1912:
household behavior and public intervention. In Sally Sheard and Helen Powell, eds., The Body
and the City, University of Liverpool Press, 2000: 166-193.

Brown, John C. 2000b. Wer bezahlte die hygienische Stadt? Finanzielle Aspekte der sanitären
Reformen in England, USA, und Deutschland um 1910 [Who Paid for the Sanitary City? Issues



                                              40
and Evidence Ca. 1910]. In Jörg Vögele and Wolfgang Woelk, eds. Stadt, Krankheit, und Tod.
Berlin: Duncker and Humblot: 237-257.

Brown, Ryan and Duncan Thomas. 2013. On the Long Term Effects of the 1918 U.S. Influenza
Pandemic. Unpublished MS. Duke University.

Bygren LO, G Kaati, S Edvinsson. 2001. Longevity determined by paternal ancestors’ nutrition
during their slow growth period. Acta Biotheoretica. 49: 53-9.

Cain, Louis and Sok Chul Hong. 2009. Survival in 19th Century Cities: The Larger the City, the
Smaller Your Chances. Explorations in Economic History. 46(4): 450-63.

Campbell, Frances, Gabriella Conti, James J. Heckman, Seong Hyeok Moon, Rodrigo Pinto,
Elizabeth Pungello, and Yi Pan. 2014. Early Childhood Investments Substantially Boost Adult
Health. Science. 343(6178): 1478-1485.

Card, David, Carlos Dobkin, and Nicole Maestas. 2009. Quarterly Journal of Economics.
124(2): 597-636.

Carey, JR, P Liedo, D. Orozco, and JW Vaupel. 1992. Slowing of mortality rates at older ages
in large medfly cohorts. Science. 258(5081): 457-61.

Case, Anne. 2001. Does Money Protect Health Status? Evidence from South African
Pensions. NBER Working Paper No. 8495.

Case, Anne and Angus Deaton. 2003. Broken Down by Work and Sex: How Our Health
Declines. NBER Working Paper No. 9821.

Case, Anne, Darren Lubotsky, and Christina Paxson. 2002. Economic Status and Health in
Childhood: The Origins of the Gradient. American Economic Review. 92(5): 1308-34.

Case, Anne and Christina Paxson. 2008. Stature and status: Height, ability, and labor market
outcomes. Journal of Political Economy. 116: 491-532.

Case, Anne and Christina Paxson. 2011. The Long Reach of Childhood Health and
Circumstance: Evidence from the Whitehall II Study. The Economic Journal. 121: F183-F204.

Caselli, G., and Capocaccia, R. 1989. Age, period, cohort and early mortality: An analysis of
adult mortality in Italy. Population Studies. 43:133–153.

Cautero, Kimiko S. 1998. Working Time Reconsidered: Evidence on Workers’ Health Across
the Past Century. Unpublished MS. Harvard University. Copy available at
http://www.econ.ucla.edu/costa/papers.html .

Chang, Virginia W. and Diane S. Lauderdale. 2009. Fundamental Cause Theory,
Technological Innovation, and Health Disparities: The Case of Cholesterol in the Era of Statins.
Journal of Health and Social Behavior. 50: 245-60.

Chapin, Charles V. 1924. Deaths among taxpayers and non-taxpayers, income tax,
Providence, 1865. American Journal of Public Health. 14: 647-51.

Chen, Alice, Emily Oster, and Heidi Williams. 2013. Why is Infant Mortality Higher in the US
than in Europe? Unpublished MS. University of Chicago and MIT.


                                               41
Clark, Damon and Heather Royer. 2013. The Effect of Education on Adult Mortality and Health:
Evidence from Britain. American Economic Review. 103(6): 2087-2120.

Clay, Karen and Werner Troesken. 2011. Did Frederick Brodie Discover the World’s First
Environmental Kuznets Curve? Coal Smoke and the Rise and Fall of the London Fog. In G.
Libecap and R.H. Steckel (Eds.), The Economics of Climate Change: Adaptations Past and
Present. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Cole, Steven W. Gabriella Conti, Jesusa M.G. Arevalo, Angela M. Ruggiero, James J.
Heckman, and Stephen J. Suomi. 2012. Transcriptional modulation of the developing immune
system by early life social adversity. 109(50): 20578-83.

Condran, Gretchen A. and Harold R. Lentzner. 2004. Early Death: Mortality among Young
Children in New York, Chicago, and New Orleans. Journal of Interdisciplinary History. 34(3):
315-354.

Conti, Gabriela and James J. Heckman. 2010. Understanding the Early Origins of the
Education-Health Gradient: A Framework That Can Also Be Applied to Analyze Gene-
Environment Interactions. Perspectives on Psychological Science. 5(5):585-605

Conti, Gabriela, James J. Heckman, and Sergio Urzua. 2011. Early Endowments, Education,
and Health. Human Capital and Economic Opportunity Working Group, University of Chicago,
Working Paper No. 20111-001.

Costa, Dora L. 1993. Height, weight, wartime stress, and older age mortality: Evidence from
Union Army records. Explorations in Economic History. 30: 424-449.

Costa, Dora L. 1996. Health and Labor Force Participation of Older Men, 1900-1991. Journal of
Economic History. 56(1): 62-89.

Costa, Dora L. 1998. Unequal at Birth: A Long-term Comparison of Income and Birth Weight.
Journal of Economic History. 58(4): 987-1009.

Costa, Dora L. 2000. Understanding the Twentieth Century Decline in Chronic Conditions
Among Older Men. Demography. 37(1): 53-72.

Costa, Dora L. 2002. Changing Chronic Disease Rates and Long-term Declines in Functional
Limitation among Older Men. Demography. 39(1): 119-138.

Costa, Dora L. 2003. Understanding Mid-Life and Older Age Mortality Declines: Evidence from
Union Army Veterans. Journal of Econometrics. January 2003. 112(1): 175-92.

Costa, Dora L. 2004a. The Measure of Man and Older Age Mortality: Evidence from the Gould
Sample." Journal of Economic History. 64(1): 1-23.

Costa, Dora L. 2004b. Race and Pregnancy Outcomes in the Twentieth Century: A Long-Term
Comparison. Journal of Economic History. 64(4): 1056-1086.

Costa, Dora L. 2012. Scarring and Mortality Selection among Civil War POWs: A Long-Term
Mortality, Morbidity, and Socioeconomic Follow-Up. Demography. 49(4):1185-206.



                                              42
Costa, Dora L. and Matthew E. Kahn. 2010. Health, Wartime Stress, and Unit Cohesion:
Evidence from Union Army Veterans. Demography. 47(1): 45-66.

Costa, Dora L. and Matthew E. Kahn. 2003. Understanding the American Decline in Social
Capital, 1952-1998. Kyklos. Fasc. 1. 56(1): 17-46.

Costa, Dora L. and Matthew E. Kahn. 2004. Changes in the Value of Life, 1940-1980. Journal
of Risk and Uncertainty. 29(2): 159-80.

Costa, Dora L. and Matthew E. Kahn. 2006. Public Health and Mortality: What Can We Learn
from the Past? In Alan J. Auerbach, David Card, and John M. Quigley (Eds), Poverty, the
Distribution of Income, and Public Policy. Russell Sage Foundation.

Costa, Dora L. and Joanna N. Lahey 2005a. Becoming Oldest-Old: Evidence from Historical
US Data. Genus. 2005. 61(1): 125-6.

Costa, Dora L. and Joanna N. Lahey 2005b. Predicting Older Age Mortality Trends. Journal of
the European Economic Association. April-May 2005, 3(2-3).

Costa, Dora L., Lorens Helmchen, and Sven Wilson. 2007. Race, Infectious Disease, and
Arteriosclerosis. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 104: 13219-13224.

Costa, Dora L. and Richard H. Steckel. 1997. Long-Term Trends in Health, Education, and
Economic Growth in the United States. In R.H. Steckel and R. Floud, Eds., Health and Welfare
during Industrialization. Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER: 47-89.

Craddock, Susan. 2000. City of Plagues, Disease, Poverty and Deviance in San Francisco.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Crawford, William and Herbert Broadley. 1938. The People’s Food. W. Heineman Ltd.

Currie, Janet. 2009. Healthy, wealthy, and wise: Socioeconomic status, poor health in
childhood, and human capital development. Journal of Economic Literature. 47 (1): 87-122.

Currie, Janet and Jeffrey Grogger. 2002. Medicaid Expansions and Welfare Contractions:
Offsetting Effects on Prenatal Care and Infant Health? Journal of Health Economics. 21(2):
313-35.

Currie, Janet and Rosemary Hyson. 1999. Is the Impact of Health Shocks Cushioned by
Socioeconomic Status? The Case of Low Birthweight. American Economic Review. Papers
and Proceedings. 89(2): 245-250.

Cutler, David M. 2002. Health Care and the Public Sector. Handbook of Public Economics.
Vol. 4, Alan J. Auerbach and Martin Feldstein (Eds.). Amsterdam: Elselvier Science, North-
Holland: 2143-2243.

Cutler, David M, Angus Deaton, and Adriana Lleras-Muney. 2006. The Determinants of
Mortality. Journal of Economic Perspectives. 20(3): 97-120.

Cutler, David M., Fabian Lange, Ellen Meara, Seth Richards-Shubik, Christopher J. Ruhm.
2011. Rising Educational Gradients in Mortality: The Role of Behavioral Risk Factors. Journal
of Health Economics. 30(6): 1174-1187



                                              43
Cutler, David M. and Mark McClellan. 2001. Is Technological Change in Medicine Worth It?
Health Affairs.

Cutler, David M., and Mark McClellan. 2001. Productivity Change in Health
Care. American Economic Review, 91(2): 281-286.

Cutler, David M, Mark McClellan, Joseph P. Newhouse, and Dahlia Remler. 1998. Are Medical
Prices Declining? Evidence for Heart Attack Treatments. Quarterly Journal of Economics.
113(4): 991-1024.

Cutler, David M. and Grant Miller. 2005. The Role of Public Health Improvements in Health
Advances: The Twentieth-Century United States. Demography. 42(1): 1-22.

Cutler, David M. and Grant Miller. 2006. Water, Water Everywhere. Municipal Finance and
Water Supply in American Cities. In Corruption and Reform: Lessons from America’s
Economic History. University of Chicago Press.

Cutler, David M., Grant Miller, and Douglas M. Norton. 2007. Evidence on Early-Life Income
and Late-Life Health from America’s Dust Bowl Era. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences. 104(33): 13244-9.

Datar, Ashlesha, M. Rebecca Kilburn, and David S. Loughran. 2010. Endowments and
Parental Investments in Infancy and Early Childhood. Demography. 47(1): 145-162.

Deaton, Angus. 2003. Health, Inequality, and Economic Development. Journal of Economic
Literature. 41(1): 113-158.

Deaton, Angus. 2006. The Great Escape: A Review of Robert Fogel’s The Escape from
Hunger and Premature Death, 1700-2100. Journal of Economic Literature. 44(1): 106-114.

Deaton, Angus. 2013. The Great Escape: Health, Wealth, and the Origins of Inequality.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.

De Beer, H. 2004. Observations on the History of Dutch Physical Stature from the Late-Middle
Ages to the Present. Economics and Human Biology. 2: 45-55.

Dehejia, Rajeev and Adriana Lleras-Muney. 2004. Booms, Busts and Babies’ Health.
Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 119, No. 3: 1091-1130, August 2004.

Deschênes, Olivier and Enrico Moretti. 2009. Extreme weather events, mortality, and
migration. Review of Economics and Statistics. 91(4): 659-81.

Doblhammer, Gabriele and James W. Vaupel. 2001. Lifespan depends on month of birth.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA. 98(5): 2934-9.

Dolinoy, Dana C., Dale Huang, and Randy L. Jirtle. 2007. Maternal nutrient supplementation
counteracts bisphenol A-induced DNA hypomethylation in early development. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences. 104(32): 13056-61.

Donahue, Sara M.A., Ken P. Kleinman, Matthew W. Gillman, and Emily Oken. 2010. Trends in
birth weight and gestational length among singleton term births in the United States: 1990-2005.
Obstetrics and Gynecology. 115(2, Pt. 1): 357-64.


                                              44
Dow, William H., Tomas J. Philipson, and Xavier Sala-i-Martin. 1999. Longevity
Complementarities under Competing Risks. American Economic Review, 89(5): 1358-1371.

Dow, William H. and David H. Rehkopf. 2010. Socioeconomic gradients in health in
international and historical context. ANNALS of the New York Academy of Sciences. 1186: 24-
36.

Drukker, J.W. and Vincent Tassenaar. 1997. Paradoxes of Modernization and Material Well-
Being in the Netherlands during the Nineteenth Century. In R.H. Steckel and R. Floud, Eds.,
Health and Welfare during Industrialization. Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER:
331-377.

Easterlin, Richard A. 1996. Growth Triumphant: The Twenty-First Century in Historical
Perspective. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

Easterlin, Richard A. 1999. How Beneficient is the Market? A Look at the Modern History of
Mortality. European Review of Economic History. 3(3): 257-94

Eastman, Nicholas J. 1946. Diabetes Mellitus and Pregnancy: A Review. Obstetrical and
Gynecological Survey. 1(1): 3-31.

Eli, Shari. 2012. Income Effects on Health: Evidence from Union Army Pensions. Unpublished
MS. University of Toronto, Department of Economics.

Elo IT, Preston SH. 1992. Effects of early-life conditions on adult mortality: A review. Population
Index 58: 186–212.

Evans, Richard J. 1987. Death in Hamburg. Society and politics in the cholera years 1830-1910.
Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Ewbank, Douglas C., and Samuel H. Preston. 1990. Personal health behavior and the decline of
infant and child mortality: The United States, 1900-1930. In What we know about health
transition, ed. John Caldwell, Sally Findley, Patt Caldwell, Gigi Santow, Wendy Cosford,
Jennifer Braid, and Daphne Broers-Freeman, 116-48. Health Transition Series. Canberra:
Australian National University.

Ferrie, Joseph P. 2003. The Rich and the Dead: Socioeconomic Status and Mortality in the
United States, 1850-1860. In Health and Labor Force Participation over the Life Cycle:
Evidence from the Past, Dora Costa (ed.), Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Ferrie, Joseph P. and Werner Troesken. 2008. Water and Chicago’s Mortality Transition,
1850-1925. Explorations in Economic History. 45: 1-16.

Finch CE, EM Crimmins. 2004. Inflammatory exposure and historical changes in human life-
spans. Science 305: 1736-9.

Finkelstein, Amy and Robin McKnight. 2008. What Did Medicare Do? The Initial Impact of
Medicare on Mortality and Out of Pocket Medical Spending. Journal of Public Economics.
92(7): 1644-1668.

Finkelstein, Amy, Sarah Taubman, Bill Wright, Mira Bernstein, Jonathan Gruber, Joseph P.
Newhouse, Heidi Allen, Katherine Baicker, and the Oregon Health Study Group. 2012. The

                                                45
Oregon Health Insurance Experiment: Evidence from the First Year. Quarterly Journal of
Economics. 127(3): 1057-1106.

Fishback, Price V., Michael R. Haines, and Shawn Kantor. 2007. Births, Deaths, and New Deal
Relief during the Great Depression. Review of Economics and Statistics. 89(1): 1-14.

Floud, Roderick. 1998. Height, Weight, and Body Mass of the British Population Since 1820.
NBER Historical Working Paper No. 108.

Floud, Roderick, Robert W. Fogel, Bernhard Harris, and Sok Chul Hong. 2011. The Changing
Body: Health, Nutrition, and Human Development in the Western World since 1700. Cambridge
University Press: Cambridge.

Floud, Roderick, Kenneth Wachter, Annabel Gregory. 1990. Height, Health, and History:
Nutritional Status in the United Kingdom, 1750-1980. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Fogel, Robert W. 1986. Nutrition and the decline in mortality since 1700: Some preliminary
findings. In Long-Term Factors in American Economic Growth, ed. Engerman SL, Gallman RE,
439-556. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Fogel, Robert W. 1994. Economic growth, population theory, and physiology: The bearing of long-
term processes on the making of economic policy. American Economic Review 84(3): 369-395.
Fogel, Robert W. 1999. Catching Up with the Economy. American Economic Review. 89(1): 1-
21.
Fogel, Robert A. and Dora L. Costa. 1997. A Theory of Technophysio Evolution, With Some
Implications for Forecasting Population, Health Care Costs, and Pension Costs. Demography.
34(1): 49-66.

Fogel, Robert A., Stanley L. Engerman, and James Trussell. 1982. Exploring the uses of data
on height: The analysis of long-term trends in nutrition, labor welfare, and labor productivity.
Social Science History. 6: 401-21.

Fredericks, A., S Van Buren, R Burgmeijer, J. Meulmeester, R. Beuker, E. Brugman, M.J.
Roede, S.P. Verloove-Vanhorick, J.M. Wilt. 2000. Continuing positive secular growth change in
the Netherlands, 1955-97. Pediatric Research. 47: 316-23.

Freedman, V.A., E.M. Crimmins, R.F. Schoeni, B. Spillman, H. Aykan, E. Kramarow, K. Land, J.
Lubitz, K. Manton, L.G. Martin, D. Shinberg, and T. Waidmann. 2004. Resolving
Inconsistencies in Old-Age Disability Trends: Report From a Technical Working Group.
Demography 41:417-41.

Fuchs, Victor R. 1982. Time preference and health: An exploratory study. In V. R. Fuchs (Ed.),
Economic Aspects of Health, pp. 93-120. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Gallup, John Luke, and Jeffrey D. Sachs. 2001. The Economic Burden of Malaria. American
Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 64, suppl. 1 (January): 85–96.

Garovic, Vesna. D.,Kent R. Bailey, Eric Boerwinkle, Steven C. Hunt, Alan B. Weder, David
Curb, Thomas H. Mosley, Jr., Heather J. Wiste, and Stephen T. Turner. 2010. Hypertension in
pregnancy as a risk factor for cardiovascular disease later in life. 284(4): 826-833.

                                               46
Gjonça, Arjan, Brockmann, Hilke and Maier, Heiner. 2000. Old-age mortality in Germany prior to
and after reunification. Demographic research. 3 (1).
http://www.demographic-research.org/volumes/vol3/1/3-1.pdf

Glied, Sherry and Adriana Lleras-Muney. 2008. Health Inequality, Education and Medical
Innovation. Demography. 45(3): 741-61.
Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence F. Katz. 2008. The Race between Education and Technology.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Goldin, Claudia and Robert Margo. 1989. The Poor at Birth: Birth Weights and Infant Mortality
at Philadelphia’s Almshouse Hospital, 1848-1873. Explorations in Economic History. 26(3):
360-79.

Goldman, Dana P. and Darius N. Lakdawalla. 2005. A Theory of Health Disparities and
Medical Technology. B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy: Contributions to Economic
Analysis and Policy. 4(1): 1-30.

Goldman, Dana P. and James P. Smith. 2002. Can Patient Self-Management Help Explain the
SES Health Gradient? Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 96(16): 10929-34.

Goldman, Dana, and James P. Smith. 2005. Socioeconomic Differences in the Adoption
of New Medical Technologies. American Economic Review, 95(2): 234-237.

Gørgens, Tue, Xin Meng and Rhema Vaithianathan. 2012. Stunting and selection effects of
famine: A case study of the Great Chinese Famine. Journal of Development Economics. 97(1):
99-111.

Gregg EW, Cheng YJ, Cadwell BL, et al. 2005. Secular trends in cardiovascular disease risk
factors according to body mass index in US adults. JAMA. 293(15):1868-1874.

Grossman, Michael. 1972. On the Concept of Health Capital and the Demand for Health.
Journal of Political Economy 80 (2): 223–255.

Hacker, J. David. 2010. Decennial Life Tables for the White Population of the United States,
1790-1900. Historical Methods. 43(2): 45-79.

Haines, Michael. R. 2001. The Urban Mortality Transition in the United States, 1800 to 1940.
Annales De Démographie Historique. 1: 33-64.

Haines, Michael R. 2010. Inequality and Infant and Child Mortality in the United States in the
Twentieth Century. NBER Working Paper No. 16133.

Haines, Michael R., Lee A. Craig, Thomas Weiss. 2000. Development, Health, Nutrition, and
Mortality: The Case of the Antebellum Puzzle in the United States. NBER Historical Working
Paper No. 130.

Hall, Robert E. and Charles I. Jones. 2007. The Value of Life and the Rise in Health Spending.
Quarterly Journal of Economics. 122(1): 39-72.




                                               47
Harris, Bernard. 1999. Morbidity and mortality during the health transition: a comment on James
C Riley 'Why sickness and death rates do not move parallel to one another over time”. Social
History of Medicine, 12(1): 125-31.

Harris, Bernard. 2004. Public health, nutrition, and the decline of mortality: The McKeown
thesis revisited. Social History of Medicine. 17(3): 379–407.

Harris, Bernard, Roderick Floud, and Sok Chul Hong. 2014. Food for Thought: Comparing
Estimates of Food Availability in England Wales, 1700-1914. Unpublished MS. University of
Strathclyde.

Hassan, J.A. 1985. The Growth and Impact of the British Water Industry in the Nineteenth
Century. The Economic History Review. 38(4): 531-547.

Hatton, Timothy J. 2013. How have Europeans grown so tall? Oxford Economic Papers.
Advance Access published September 1, 2013.

Hatton, Timothy J. and Bernice E. Bray. 2010. Long Run Trends in the Heights of European
Men, 19th-20th Centuries. Economics and Human Biology. 8(3): 405-13.

Heckman, James J. 2007. The economics, technology, and neuroscience of human capability
formation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA. 104(33):13250-5. Epub
2007 Aug 8.

Heckman, James J., Junjian Yi, and Junsen Zhang. 2013. Early Health Shocks,
Intrahousehold Resource Allocation, and Child Human Capital. Unpublished MS. University of
Chicago, Department of Economics.

Heijmans BT, EW Tobi, AD Stein, H Putter, GJ Blauw, ES Susser, PE Slagboom, LH Lumey.
2008. Persistent epigenetic differences associated with prenatal exposure to famine in humans.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA. 104(44): 17046-9.

Hong, Sok Chul. 2007. The burden of early exposure to malaria in the United States, 1850-60:
Malnutrition and immune disorders. Journal of Economic History. 67(4): 1001-1035.

Horiuchi, S. 1983. The long-term impact of war on mortality: Old-age mortality of First World
War survivors in the Federal Republic of Germany. Population Bulletin of the United Nations
15: 80-92.

Hoynes, Hilary, Marianne Page, and Ann Huff Stevens. 2011. Can Targeted Transfers Improve
Birth Outcomes? Evidence from the Introduction of the WIC Program. Journal of Public
Economics. 95: 813-827.

Hoynes, Hilary, Diane Schatzenbach, and Diane Whitmore. 2009. Consumption Responses to
In-Kind Transfers: Evidence from the Introduction of the Food Stamp Program. American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics. 1(4): 109-139.

Jacobs, J and Vincent Tassenaar. 2004. Height, income and nutrition in the Netherlands in the
second half of the nineteenth century. Economics and Human Biology. 2: 181-95.



                                               48
Jayachandran, Seema and Adriana Lleras-Muney. 2009. Life expectancy and human capital
investments: Evidence from declines in maternal mortality. Quarterly Journal of Economics.
124(1): 349–397.

Kaestner, Robert and Won Chan Lee. 2005. The Effect of Welfare Reform on Prenatal Care
and Birth Weight. Health Economics. 14: 497-511.

Kannisto,V, K Christensen, and JW Vaupel. 1997. No increased mortality in later life for cohorts
born during famine. American Journal of Epidemiology 145: 987-994.

Karpinos, Bernard D. 1958. Blood Pressure and its Relation to Height, Weight, Race, and Age
– World War II. American Journal of Epidemiology. 68(3): 288-311.

Katz, Lawrence F. and Robert A. Margo. Forthcoming. Technical Change and the Relative
Demand for Skilled Labor: The United States in Historical Perspective. In L. Boustan, C.
Frydman, and R.A. Margo, Eds., Human Capital and History: The American Record. University
of Chicago Press.

Kehrer, Barbara H. and Charles M. Wolin. The Impact of Income Maintenance on Low Birth
Weight: Evidence from the Gary Experiment. The Journal of Human Resources. 14(4): 434-
462.

Komlos, John. 1987. The Height and Weight of West Point Cadets: Dietary Change in
Antebellum America. Journal of Economic History. 47(4): 897-927.

Komlos, John. 1996. Anomalies in Economic History: Toward a Resolution of the “Antebellum
Puzzle.” Journal of Economic History. 56(1): 202-14.

Lauderdale, D.S. and P.J. Rathouz. 1999. Evidence of environmental suppression of familial
resemblance: height among US Civil War brothers. Annals of Human Biology. 26(5):413-26.

Lawrence, Jean M., Richard Contreras, Wansu Chen, and David A. Sacks. 2008. Trends in the
prevalence of preexisting diabetes and gestational diabetes mellitus among a racially/ethnically
diverse population of pregnant women, 1999-2005. Diabetes Care. 31(5): 899-904.

Leighton, G. and M.L. Clark. 1929. Milk consumption and the growth of schoolchildren.
Lancet. 1:40-3.

Li Haojie, Aryeh D. Stein, Huiman X Barnhart, Usha Ramakrishnan, and Reynaldo Martorell.
2003. Associations between prenatal and postnatal growth and adult body size and
composition. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 77: 1498–505.

Lindert, Peter H. 2004. Growing Public: Social Spending and Economic Growth Since the
Eighteenth Century. Cambridge University Press.

Ling, Charlotte and Tina Rӧnn. 2014. Epigenetic adaptation to regular exercise in humans.
Drug Discovery Today. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.drudis.2014.03.006 .

Lleras-Muney, Adriana. 2005. The Relationship between Education and Adult Mortality in the
United States,” Review of Economic Studies, 72(1): 189-221.


                                               49
Lleras-Muney, Adriana. 2006. The Relationship between Education and Adult Mortality in the
United States: Erratum. Review of Economic Studies. 73(3): 847.

London, Jack. 1903. The People of the Abyss. New York: The MacMillan Company.
https://openlibrary.org/books/OL24186399M/The_people_of_the_abyss

Lumey LH, AD Stein. 1997. Offspring birth weights after maternal intrauterine undernutrition: a
comparison within sibships. American Journal of Epidemiology. 146(10): 810-819.

Lumey, L.H. and F.W.A. van Poppel. 2013. The Dutch Famine of 1944-45 as a Human
Laboratory: Changes in the Early Life Environment and Adult Health. In, Early Life Nutrition and
Adult Health and Development, L.H. Lumey and Alexander Vaiserman (Eds.). Nova Science
Publishers: 59-76. Available on-line at
https://www.novapublishers.com/catalog/product_info.php?products_id=37892

Lunde, Astrid, Kari Klungsøyr Melve, Håkon K. Gjessing, Rolv Skjærven, and Lorentz M. Irgen.
2007. Genetic and Environmental Influences on Birth Weight, Birth Length, Head
Circumference, and Gestational Age by Use of Population-based Parent-Offspring Data.
American Journal of Epidemiology. 165(7): 734-741.

Luttmer, Erzo F.P. 2001. Group Loyalty and the Taste for Redistribution. Journal of Political
Economy. 109: 500-28.

Malthus, T.R. 1872. An Essay on the Principle of Population. 7th Edition. London: Reeves
and Turner.
https://archive.org/stream/anessayonprinci13maltgoog#page/n6/mode/2up

Manton, Kenneth, XiLiang Gu, and Vicki L. Lamb. 2006. Change in chronic disability from 1982
to 2004_2005 as measured by long-term changes in function and health in the U.S. elderly
population. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 103(48).

Margo, Robert A. and Steckel, Richard. 1982. The heights of American slaves: New evidence
on slave nutrition and health. Social Science History. 6, (4), 516-538.

Marmot, Michael and Richard G. Wilkinson (Eds). 1999. Social Determinants of Health.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Martin, Linda G., Robert F. Schoeni, and Patricia M. Andreski. 2010. Trends in Health of Older
Adults in the United States: Past, Present, Future. Demography. 47: S17-S40.

Martorell R, Rivera J & Kaplowitz H. 1990. Consequences of stunting in early childhood for adult
body size in rural Guatemala. Ann. Nestlé 48, 85-92.

Martyn, CN, DJ Barker, and C. Osmond. 1996. Mothers’ pelvic size, fetal growth, and death
from stroke and coronary heart disease in men in the UK. Lancet. 348(9037): 1264-8.

Mazumder, Bhaskar. 2004. Sibling Similarities, Differences and Economic Inequality. Federal
Reserve Bank of Chicago WP 2004-13.




                                               50
Mazumder, Bhashkar. 2008. Does Education Improve Health? A Reexamination of the
Evidence from Compulsory Schooling Laws. Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Economic
Perspectives. 32(2): 2-16.

McCrary, Justin and Heather Royer. 2011. The Effect of Female Education on Fertility and
Infant Health: Evidence from School Entry Policies Using Exact Date of Birth. American
Economic Review. 101(1): 158-95.

McKeown. Thomas. 1976. The Modern Rise of Population. London: Arnold.

McKeown, Thomas. 1981. The Origins of Human Disease. Wiley-Blackwell.

McLeod, JI, RB Goldrick, and HM Whyte. 1972. The Effect of Maternal Malnutrition on the
Progeny in the Rat. Studies on Growth, Body Composition and Organ Cellularity in First and
Second Generation Progeny. The Australian Journal of Experimental Biology and Medical
Science. 50(4):435-46.

Melosi, Martin, V. 2000. The Sanitary City: Urban Infrastructure in America from Colonial Times
to the Present. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.

Mehta, Neil K. and Virginia W. Chang. 2011. Secular Declines in the Association Between
Obesity and Mortality in the United States. Population Development Review. 37(3): 435-51.

Meghir, Costas, Marten Pålme, and Emilia Simeonova. 2013. Education, Cognition, and
Health: Evidence from a Social Experiment. NBER Working Paper No. 19002.

Mirzaei, M., A.S. Truswell, R. Taylor, et al. 2009. Coronary heart disease epidemics: not all the
same. Heart. 95: 740-746.

Mobius, Markus M., and Tanya S. Rosenblatt. 2006. Why Beauty Matters. The American
Economic Review 96 (1):222-235.

Mokyr, Joel and Rebecca Stein. 1996. Science, Health, and Household Technology: The Effect
of the Pasteur Revolution on Consumer Demand. In The Economics of New Goods, Timothy
F. Bresnahan and Robert J. Gordon, eds., Chicago: University of Chicago Press: 143-206.

Murphy, Kevin M. and Robert H. Topel. 2003. The Economic Value of Medical Research. In
Measuring the Gains from Economic Research: An Economic Approach, Kevin Murphy and
Robert Topel (Eds.). Chicago: University of Chicago Press: 41-73.

Murphy, Kevin M. and Robert H. Topel. 2006. The Value of Health and Longevity. Journal of
Political Economy. 114(5): 871-904.

Nicholas, Stephen and Richard H. Steckel. 1997. Tall but Poor: Living Standards of Men and
Women in Pre-Famine Ireland. Journal of European Economic History. 26(1): 105-134.

Nordhaus, William D. 2003. The Health of Nations: The Contribution of Improved Health to
Living Standards. In Measuring the Gains from Economic Research: An Economic Approach,
Kevin Murphy and Robert Topel (Eds.). Chicago: University of Chicago Press: 9-40.



                                               51
Olshansky, Jay, 2005. A potential decline in life expectancy in the United States in the 21st
century. New England Journal of Medicine. 352(11): 1138-45.

Orr, John Boyd. 1928. Milk Consumption and the Growth of Schoolchildren. Lancet. 1: 202-3.

Orr, John Boyd. 1937. Food, Health and Income: Report on a Survey of Adequacy of Diet in
Relation to Income. MacMillan.

Painter, Rebecca C., Tessa J. Roseboom, and Otto P. Bleker. 2005. Prenatal exposure to the
Dutch famine and disease in later life: An overview. Reproductive Toxicology. 20: 345-352.

Pembrey M. 2010. Male-line transgenerational responses in humans. Human Fertility 13(4):
268-271.

Persico, Nicola, Andrew Postlewaite, and Dan Silverman. 2004. The Effect of Adolescent
Experience on Labor Market Outcomes: The Case of Height. Journal of Political Economy.
112:1019-1053.

Pitt, Mark M., Mark R. Rosenzweig, Nazmul Hassan. 2012. “Human Capital Investment and the
Gender Division of Labor in a Brawn-Based Economy,” American Economic Review.
102(7):3531-60.

Pope, Clayne L. 1992. Adult mortality in America before 1900: A view from family histories. In
Strategic Factors in Nineteenth-Century American Economic History, ed. Goldin C, Rockoff H,
267-296. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Poterba, James. 1997. Demographic Structure and the Political Economy of Public Education.
Journal of Policy Analysis and Management. 16: 48-66.

Preston, Samuel. 1975. The changing relation between mortality and level of economic
development. Population Studies 29(2): 231–48.

Preston, Samuel H., Dana A. Glei, and John R. Wilmoth. 2011. Contribution of Smoking to
International Differences in Life Expectancy. International Differences in Mortality at Older
Ages: Dimensions and Sources. The National Academies Press.

Preston, Samuel H. and Michael R. Haines. 1991. Fatal Years: Child Mortality in Late
Nineteenth Century America.

Proos LA, Hofvander Y & Tuvemo T. 1991. Menarcheal age and growth pattern of Indian girls
adopted in Sweden. Catch-up growth and final height. Indian Journal of Pediatrics. (58): 105-
114.

Putnam, Robert D. 2000. Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American Community.
New York: Simon & Schuster.

Ray, Debraj. 1998. Development Economics. Princeton: Princeton University Press

Rehan VK, J Liu, E Naeem, J Tian, R Sakurai, K Kwong, O Akbari, JS Torday. 2012. Perinatal
nicotine exposure induces asthma in second generation offspring. BMC Medicine. 10:129.



                                                52
Resnick, O. and PJ Morgane. 1984. Generational Effects of Protein Malnutrition in the Rat.
Brain Research. 317(2): 219-27.

Ribero, Rocío and Jairo Nuñez. 2000. Adult Morbidity, Height, and Earnings in Colombia. in W.
D. Savedoff and T. P. Schultz, eds., Wealth from Health: Linking Social Investments to Earnings
in Latin America. Washington, D.C.: Inter-American Development Bank.

Riggs, Theodore F. 1904. A Comparative Study of White and Negro Pelves, with a
Consideration of the Size of the Child and Its Relation to Presentation and Character of Labor in
the Two Races. Johns Hopkins Hospital Reports. 12: 421-454.

Riley, James C. 1990. The Risk of Being Sick: Morbidity Trends in Four Countries.
Population and Development Review, 16: 403-32.

Rochester, Anna. 1923. Infant Mortality: Results of a Field Study in Baltimore, Maryland, Based
on Births in One Year. U.S Department of Labor, Children’s Bureau. Bureau Publication 119.
Government Printing Office, Washington D.C.

Rosenberg, M. 1988. Birth Weights in Three Norwegian Cities, 1860-1984: Secular Trends and
Influencing Factors. Annals of Human Biology. 15(4): 275-88.

Rosenthal, Jean-Laurent and Lionel Kesztenbaum. 2012. The democratization of longevity:
How the poor became old in Paris, 1870-1940. Unpublished MS. Caltech Division of the
Humanities and Social Sciences.

Rosenzweig, Mark R. and Junsen Zhang. 2009. Do Population Control Policies Induce More
Human Capital Investments and China’s “One-Child” Policy. The Review of Economic Studies.
76(3): 1149-74.

Rowntree, B.S. and G.R. Lavers. 1951. Poverty and the Welfare State. London: Longmans
Green.

Ruhm, Christopher J. 2000. Are Recessions Good for Your Health? Quarterly Journal of
Economics. 115(2): 617-50.

Sandberg, Lars G. and Richard H. Steckel. 1987. Heights and economic history: the Swedish
case. Annals of Human Biology. 14(2): 101-10.

Sandberg, Lars G. and Richard H. Steckel. 1997. Was Industrialization Hazardous to Your
Health? Not in Sweden! In R.H. Steckel and R. Floud, Eds., Health and Welfare during
Industrialization. Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER: 127-158.

Schick, Andreas and Richard H. Steckel. 2010. Height as a Proxy for Cognitive and Non-
Cognitive Ability. NBER Working Paper Series. w16570.

Schultz, T. Paul. 2002. Wage gains associated with height a form of health human capital.
American Economic Review. 92(2): 349-353.

Schultz, T. Paul. 2003. Wage rentals for reproducible capital: Evidence from Ghana and the
Ivory Coast. Economics and Human Biology. 1(2): 207-221.


                                               53
Shapiro, Matthew and David Wilcox. 1997. Mismeasurement in Consumer Price Index: An
Evaluation. Macroeconomics Annual. 11: 93-142.

Shapiro, Irving, Matthew D. Shapiro, and David W. Wilcox. 2001. Measuring the Value of
Cataract Surgery. NBER Studies in Income and Wealth. 62. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.

Silventoinen K, Kaprio J, Lahelma E, Koskenvuo M. 2000. Relative effect of genetic and
environmental factors on body height: differences across birth cohorts among Finnish men and
women. American Journal of Public Health. 90(4):627-30.

Simeoni, Umberto and David J. Barker. 2009. Offspring of diabetic pregnancy: Long-term
outcomes. Seminars in Fetal and Neonatal Medicine. Diabetes and Pregnancy. 14(2): 119-
124.

Simeonova, Emilia. 2013. Doctors, Patients and the Racial Mortality Gap. Journal of Health
Economics. 32(5): 895-908.

Smith, Francis Barrymore. 1979. The People’s Health, 1830-1910. New York: Holmes and
Meier.

Smith, James P. 1999. Healthy Bodies and Thick Wallets: The Dual Relation Between Health
and Economic Status. Journal of Economic Perspectives. 13(2):145-167.

Smith, James P. 2007. The Impact of Socioeconomic Status on Health over the Life-Course.
Journal of Human Resources. 42(4): 739-764.

Smith, Stephen. 1911. The City That Was. New York: Frank Allaben,

Snyder, Stephen E. and William N. Evans. 2006. The Effect of Income on Mortality: Evidence
from the Social Security Notch. The Review of Economics and Statistics. 88(3): 482-95.

Sommers, Benjamin D., Sharon K. Long, and Katherine Baiker. 2014. Changes in Mortality
After Massachusetts Health Care Reform: A Quasi-Experimental Study. Annals of Internal
Medicine. 160(9): 586-94.

Steckel, Richard H. 1979. Slave Height Profiles from Coastwise Manifests. Explorations in
Economic History. 16: 363-380.

Steckel, Richard H. and Joseph M. Prince. 2001. Tallest in the World: Native Americans of the
Great Plains in the Nineteenth Century. American Economic Review. 91(1): 287-94.

Stein, Zena A., Susser, Mervyn, Gerhart Saenger, and Francis Moraolla. 1975. Famine and
Human Development: The Dutch Hunger Winter of 1944–1945. Oxford University Press.

Stein, Aryeh D., Patricia A. Zybert, Margot van de Bor, and L.H. Lumey. 2004. Intrauterine
famine exposure and body proportions at birth: the Dutch Hunger Winter. International Journal
of Epidemiology 33:831–836.

Stein, Aryeh D., Patricia A. Zybert, Karin van der Pal-de Bruin, and L.H. Lumey. 2006.
Exposure to famine during gestation, size at birth, and blood pressure

                                              54
at age 59 y: evidence from the dutch famine. European Journal of Epidemiology. 21:759–765.

Stevens, Ann Huff, Douglas L. Miller, Marianne E. Page, and Mateusz Filipski. 2011. The Best
of Times, the Worst of Times: Understanding Pro-cyclical Mortality. NBER Working Paper
Series No. 17657.

Stewart, T.D. 1943. Food and Physique. The ANNALS of the American Academy of Political
and Social Science 1943 225: 22-28.

Stewart, Susan T, David M. Cutler, Allison B. Rosen. 2009. Forecasting the effects of obesity
and smoking on U.S. life expectancy. New England Journal of Medicine. 361(23): 2252-60.

Stevenson, Betsey and Justin Wolfers. 2008. Happiness Inequality in the United States.
Journal of Legal Studies. 37(S2): S33-S79, 06.

Strauss, John and Duncan Thomas. 1998. Health, Nutrition, and Economic Development.
Journal of Economic Literature. 36(2): 766-817.

Syddall, HE, AA Sayer, SJ Simmond, C Osmond, V Cox, EM Dennison, DJ Barker, and C
Cooper. 2005. Birth weight, infant weight gain, and cause-specific mortality: the Hertfordshire
Cohort Study. American Journal of Epidemiology. 161(11): 1074-80.

Szreter, Simon. 1988. The importance of social intervention in Britain’s mortality decline c.
1850–1914: A reinterpretation of the role of public health,” Social History of Medicine 1(1): 1–36.

Szreter, Simon. 2002. Rethinking McKeown: the relationship between public health and social
change. American Journal of Public Health, 92(5): 722-725.

Tarr, J.A. 2002. The metabolism of the industrial city—the case of Pittsburgh. Journal of Urban
History. 28(5):511-545.

Tarr, J.A. and B.C. Lamperes. 1981. Changing fuel use behavior and energy transitions—the
Pittsburgh Smoke Control Movement, 1940-1950—a case-study in historical analogy. Journal of
Social History. 14(4):561-588.

Troesken, Werner. 1999. Typhoid Rates and the Public Acquisition of Private Waterworks,
1880-1920. Journal of Economic History. 59(4): 927-948.

Troesken, Werner. 2004. Water, Race and Disease. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Tung, J, LB Barreiro, ZP Johnson, KD Hansen, V Michopoulos, D Toufexis, K Michelini, ME
Wilson, Y Gilead. 2012. Social environment is associated with gene regulatory variation in the
rhesus macaque immune system. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 109(17):
6490-6495.

Vaupel JW, Carey JR, Christensen K, Johnson TE, Yashin AI, Holm NV, Iachine IA, Kannisto V,
Khazaeli AA, Liedo P, Longo VD, Zeng Y, Manton KG, Curtsinger JW. 1998. Biodemographic
trajectories of longevity. Science. 280(5365): 855-60.




                                                55
Victora, Cesar G., Linda Adair, Caroline Fall, Pedro C. Hallal, Reynaldo Martorell, Linda Richter,
and Harshpal Singh Sachdev. 2008. Maternal and child undernutrition: consequences for
adult health and human capital. Lancet. 371: 340-57.

Vogl, Tom. 2014. Height, Skills, and Labor Market Outcomes in Mexico. Journal of
Development Economics. 107: 84-96.

Waaler, Hans T. 1984. Height, weight, and mortality: The Norwegian experience. Acta Medica
Scandinavia Supplement. 679: 1-51.

Ward, W. Peter. 1993. Birth Weight and Economic Growth: Women’s Living Standards in the
Industrializing West. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Waterland, Robert A. and Randy L. Jirtle. 2003. Transposable Elements: Targets for Early
Nutritional Effects on Epigenetic Gene Regulation. Molecular and Cellular Biology. 23(15):
5293-5300.

Weir, David R. 1997. Economic Welfare and Physical Well-Being in France, 1750-1990. In
R.H. Steckel and R. Floud, Eds., Health and Welfare during Industrialization. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press for NBER: 161-200.

WHO (World Health Organization). 2001. Macroeconomics and Health: Investing in Health for
Economic Development. Report of the Commission on Macroeconomics and Health. WHO
Press.

Widdowson EM and McCance RA. 1960. Some effects of accelerating growth. I. General
somatic development. Proceedings of the Royal Society, Ser. B 152, 188-206.

Williams, John T. 1925. Some Observations Upon the Glycosuria of Pregnancy. The Boston
Medical and Surgical Journal. 192(4): 163-165.

Williamson, Jeffrey G. 1981. Urban Disamenities, Dark Satanic Mills, and the British Standard of
Living Debate. Journal of Economic History, March 1981 41(1) 75-83.

Williamson, Samuel H. 2014. What Was the U.S. GDP Then? Measuring Worth.
http://www.measuringworth.org/usgdp/ .

Wohl, Anthony S. 1983. Endangered Lives: Public Health in Victorian Britain. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.

Woods, Robert. 2000. The Demography of Victorian England and Wales. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

Yamauchi, F. 2008. “Early Childhood Nutrition, Schooling and Sibling Inequality in a Dynamic
Context: Evidence from South Africa.” Economic Development and Cultural Change 56:657–8.




                                               56
Table 1 BMI Distribution for White Men, Age 50-64

                               Union    NHANES I,     NHANES      NHANES        NHANES
                               Army     II            III         1999-2004     2005-2010
                               1900     (1970-80)     (1988-94)
 Underweight, BMI < 18.5        6.1%    1.2%          0.7%        0.5           1.2
 Normal weight (omitted),      75.0     43.4          27.2        21.4          17.8
 18.5 <= BMI < 25.0
 Overweight, 25.0 <= BMI <     15.8      43.4         45.1        42.6          42.8
 30.0
 Obese Class I, 30.0 <= BMI     2.6      10.0         21.6        23.0          24.4
 < 35.0
 Obese Class II, BMI >= 35.0    0.5      2.6          5.5         12.5          13.8

 Observations                   8,315 2,263            1,155       737           894
Source: Author’s calculations. The first 3 columns are for men observed over 12 years.
NHANES weighted using sample weights.




Table 2 BMI and Mortality: Changing Relationship

White Men, Age 50-64, Observed for 12 Year Period

                                                       Union        NHANES I,     NHANES
                                                       Army         II            III
                                                       1900         (1970-80)     (1988-94)
                                                       Hazard       Hazard        Hazard
                                                       Ratio        Ratio         Ratio
 Underweight, BMI < 18.5                               1.364***     1.287         2.208
                                                       (0.086)      (0.357)       (2.696)
 Normal weight (omitted), 18.5 <= BMI < 25.0
 Overweight, 25.0 <= BMI < 30.0                        1.233***     0.961         0.907
                                                       (0.053)      (0.093)       (0.213)
 Obese Class I, 30.0 <= BMI < 35.0                     1.280***     1.738**       1.047
                                                       (0.123)      (0.226)       (0.300)
 Obese Class II, BMI >= 35.0                           2.449***     1.648         1.863***
                                                       (0.457)      (0.493)       (0.024)

 Observations                                          8,315        2,263         1,155
Source: Author’s calculations from a Cox proportional model. Standard errors in parentheses.
NHANES regressions control for present and past smoking status. All regressions control for
age.




                                                57
Table 3 Mothers’ Health Conditions at Time of Birth, 1922-1988

                        1910-35     1910-35   1910-35   1959-74   1959-74   NMIHS      NMIHS
                        NY Lying-   JHU       JHU       CPP       CPP       1988       1988
                        In, White   White     Black     White     black     White      Black
 Height (cm)            157.0       159.4     160.8     161.9     161.4     164.1      164.2
 Signs of               5.1         5.6       13.5      0.0       0.0
 Malnutrition/Rickets
 At least one BLP
 reading of
 High Blood Pressure                31.8      29.8      14.4      12.2      15.5       12.2
  Systolic > 140 or
 Diastolic > 90
 Severely High Blood                10.0      6.4       2.2       2.7       3.2        2.6
 Pressure
  Systolic > 160 or
 Diastolic > 105
 Hypertension but no                24.4      23.2      12.1      9.1       10.1       6.6
 proteinuria
 Preeclampsia                       9.0       8.9       2.4       3.0       4.7        4.8
 Syphilis                           2.0       13.4      0.5       5.5       0.1        1.5
Source: Author’s calculations from the records of New York Lying-In, 1910-1935; Johns
Hopkins University (JHU), 1910-1935; the Collaborative Perinatal Project (CPP), 1959-1974,
and the National Maternal and Infant Health Survey (NMIHS), 1988. The height measurements
are given only for those age 18-45. Hypertension w/no proteinuria and preeclampsia do not
necessarily add up to hypertension because of missing information. Signs of
Rickets/Malnutrition: External conjugate diameter < 18 cm (NY Lying-In) or Conjugate diagonal
< 11 cm. Blood pressure readings are more frequent in the CPP and the NMIHS, thus
potentially biasing the earlier estimates downward.




Table 4 Men’s Hypertension Prevalence Rates

                                  Whites                                 Blacks
 Age               WWII               1988-91             WWII               1988-91
 18-19             16.9%              0.0%                18.2%              0.9%
 20-24             20.7               3.0                 22.6               5.5
 25-29             26.0               4.2                 28.6               10.0
 30-34             29.8               11.2                31.9               12.5
 35-37             32.6               11.1                33.9               15.6
Source: Compiled from the tables in Karpinos (1958).




                                               58
Table 5 Chronic Conditions, Symptoms, and Signs Prevalence Rates for White Men

                         1900/10 1971-        1976-80    1988-      1999-2004
                                 75                      94
 Age 50-64
  Irregular Pulse     32.4      3.5       3.4            1.9        4.0
  Murmur              27.9      2.6       3.7            1.9        1.5
  Valvular HD         19.2      2.5       3.4                       0.2
  CHF                 2.7                 4.2            3.7        3.4
  Arteriosclerosis    1.7       1.6       0.4                       0.6
  Adventitious Sounds 20.1      5.1       6.0            3.5
  Decreased Breath    11.9      4.2       7.4            5.0
  Joint problems      43.2      8.5       8.8
  Back problems       39.2      22.0      24.9           34.3
 Age 60-74
  Irregular Pulse     43.7      7.1       8.4            7.8        9.7
  Murmur              38.7      6.6       7.6            3.5        2.3
  Valvular HD         26.9      2.6       5.5                       1.2
  CHF                 8.9                 9.5            5.6        7.0
  Arteriosclerosis    9.2       1.6       1.6                       2.7
  Adventitious Sounds 29.1      7.9       10.5           4.0
  Decreased Breath    15.4      12.9      11.6           7.3
  Joint problems      55.0      9.1       12.3           13.1
  Back problems       47.5      29.5      39.8           31.2
Source: Costa, Helmchen, and Wilson (2007).

Sample weights are used for the 1971-2004 samples, all of which are from NHANES. All
prevalence rates are physician reported with the exception of congestive heart failure (CHF) in
1988-94, which is self-reported, and of murmur, valvular heart disease (HD), and CHF in 1999-
2004, which are self-reported. Unlike earlier surveys, arteriosclerosis in 1999-2004 is not based
upon physician impressions but upon an ankle brachial pressure index in either the right or left
leg that was less than 0.7.




                                               59
Table 6 Chronic Conditions, Symptoms, and Signs Prevalence Rates for Black Men

                         1900/10 1971-          1976-80   1988-    1999-2004
                                 75                       94
 Age 50-64
  Irregular Pulse     47.3      5.0       5.9             7.7      6.1
  Murmur              36.9      5.6       6.4             3.6      3.0
  Valvular HD         22.0      2.8       6.4                      2.1
  CHF                 1.1                 7.0             6.3      5.3
  Arteriosclerosis    2.4       2.8       0.5                      2.8
  Adventitious Sounds 16.5      5.1       9.0             4.2
  Decreased Breath    15.3      4.2       3.5             5.4
  Joint problems      51.4      8.5       15.4
  Back problems       47.5      22.0      20.7            27.2
 Age 60-74
  Irregular Pulse     60.4      7.7       4.3             10.1     15.5
  Murmur              39.7      9.8       9.9             3.6      3.6
  Valvular HD         26.0      3.4       9.3                      1.5
  CHF                 47.4                9.7             7.8      4.5
  Arteriosclerosis    16.0      4.2       2.8                      7.0
  Adventitious Sounds 20.3      11.6      10.4            3.9
  Decreased Breath    22.6      3.3       10.1            8.8
  Joint problems      60.7      2.5       10.6            14.0
  Back problems       55.0      32.2      24.0            26.9
Source: Costa, Helmchen, and Wilson (2007).

Prevalence rates in 1900 are weighted by the geographic representation of the black population
in the four census regions in 1900. See the notes to Table 6 for additional details.




Table 7 Birth Weights by Socioeconomic Status

                         First Birth   Higher
                                       Order
 1931         5th Ave,      3432       3588
              full-term
              Bellevue      3331          3536
 1959-74      CPP,          3307          3354
              private
              CPP,          3336          3350
              welfare
Source: Stewart (1943) and author’s calculations from the Collaborative Perinatal Project.
Restricted to full-term, “normal” births.




                                                60
Table 8 Effect of Education on 12 Year Mortality Rates

                                              Union        NHANES     NHANES          NHANES
                                              Army         I (1971-   II              III
                                                           1975)      (1976-80)       (1988-94)
                                              Hazard       Hazard     Hazard          Hazard
                                              Ratio        Ratio      Ratio           Ratio
 Without controls for smoking
  Years Education                             0.989        0.969***   0.956***        0.948***
                                              (0.025)      (0.007)    (0.010)         (0.008)

 With controls for ever and current smoker
   Years Education                                         0.977*     0.965***        0.964***
                                                           (0.013)    (0.010)         (0.009)

 With controls for ever and current smoker
 And years smoked                                                                     0.979**
  Years Education                                                                     (0.010)

Source: Bleakley et al. (forthcoming). Hazard ratios are from Gompertz models examining 12-
year mortality rates among Union Army veterans age 55-74 in 1900 and men of the same age
first observed in the NHANES surveys. Additional controls for the Union Army sample are age
in 1900, log of population in the city of enlistment, an 1860 census dummy, and state of
enlistment fixed effects. Additional controls for NHANES are age at the time of the survey, a
metro dummy, region of residence fixed effects in NHANES I and II, and state of residence fixed
effects in NHANES III. Sample weights were used for NHANES III.



Table 9 Sibling Correlations at Birth

                              Birth weight            Birth length          Gestational weeks
 JHU, whites                  0.466                   0.213                 0.124
 1895-1935 cohort             (0.061)                 (0.075)               (0.068)
 CPP, whites                  0.482                                         0.225
 1955-66 cohort               (0.005)                                       (0.006)
 Norway                       0.506                   0.408                 0.316
 1967-2004 cohort             (0.003)                 (0.004)               (0.004)
 PSID                         0.500                                         0.377
 1985-97 cohort               (0.019)                                       (0.019)

 JHU, blacks                 0.447                  0.242                    0.115
 1895-1935 cohort            (0.052)                (0.055)                  (0.045)
 CPP, blacks                 0.424                                           0.155
 1955-66 cohort              (0.005)                                         (0.006)
Source: JHU and CPP indicate author’s calculations from the records of Johns Hopkins
University Hospital (see Costa 2004) and the Collaborative Perinatal Project using Restricted
Maximum Likelihood (REML). Estimates from the PSID are from Mazumder (2004) and for
Norway from Lunde et al. (2007). All estimates are for full-term, singleton births.


                                               61
Table 10 Brother-Brother Adult Height Correlations Among Whites

       Union Army, 1861-65             World War II, 1939-45                      PSID

       (1812-1844 Cohort)                (1909-1924 Cohort)                 (1959-1968 Cohort)

             0.394                               0.462                            0.492

             (0.024)                             (0.024)                         (0.017)

All correlations are estimated using Restricted Maximum Likelihood (REML). Standard errors
are in parentheses. I thank John Parman for estimating the WWII correlation. The PSID
estimates are from Mazumder (2004).




Table 11 BMI and Log Occupational Score

                       Gould Sample of Union       World War II, Non-Farm      NHANES 1 and 2
                       Army Soldiers, Non-Farm                                 (1971-80)

 BMI                   -0.003      -0.002          0.002***    0.002***        -0.004*     -0.001
                       (0.003)     (0.003)         (0.000)     (0.000)         (0.002)     (0.002)
 Grade completed                   0.013***                    0.018***                    0.047***
                                   (0.002)                     (0.000)                     (0.002)


  Adjusted R-       0.011        0.027         0.044        0.132         0.006       0.193
  squared
  Observations      1,717        1,717         1,663,344    1,663,344     1,867       1,867
Source: Author’s calculations from the Gould sample (Costa 2004a), WWII enlistment records,
and NHANES 1 and 2. Additional controls are age (age dummies for the WWII data) and
dummy for city of enlistment of 50,000 or more (for the Gould sample), past and current smoker
(for NHANES), and state/country of birth dummies (for the WWII sample).




                                                   62
Figure 1: The Health Transition

Panel A: Life Expectancy at Age 10, Adult Height and Public Health and Medical Milestones




                                                                                                                                                                    180
 45 50 55 60 65 70
 Life Expectancy at Age 10




                                                                                                                                                        Height (cm)
                                                                                                                                                            175
                                    Height
                                                                                                                          First
                                                                                                                        pacemaker and
                                                                                                                        coronary bypass




                                                                                                                                                     170
                                                                                                                              Surgeon General's
                                                 Life Expectancy                                                Discovery       report
                                                                                                            double helix        Efficacy aspirin
                                                                                                 First polio vaccinations        for heart attacks
                                                                                                                                    established




                                                                                                                                                     165
                                                                                    First continuous US                            Streptokinase
                                                                                       water chlorination Milk pasteurization        approved
                                                                                                           prevalent in               First
                                                                                                           largest cities             recombinant
                                                                                                                                        DNA drug
                                                                             NY state NY                     Diphtheria                 approved
                                                                            abolishes Tenement                vaccine                   (insulin)
                                                                             swill milk House Act              Discovery penicillin
                                                                                                                 First sulfonamide



                                                                                                   Industrial production penicillin
                                                           Jenner                          Mosquito transmission
                                                                     Snowden turns off      of yellow fever proved
                                                         innoculates Broad St. pump                                             Stroke clot
                                                                                       Koch isolates                              buster
                                                           Phipps   Chicago constructs tb and cholera
                                                                                                                                  approved
                                                                      sewer system      bacilli


                             1700         1750              1800             1850               1900                1950               2000
                                                                              Year


Panel B: Education and Real Per Capita GDP
              15




                                                                                                                                                           50
                                                     public health/
                                                     medical care
              14




                                                                                                                                                           10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45


                                    nutrition
                                                                                                                                                           Per Capita GDP (in 1000s of 2009$)


                                                        health             education
              13




                                     fertility
        9 10 11 12




                                                       income
     Years of Education




                                                                                                                 Education



                                                                                                                                    GDP
    8         7
              6




                                                                                  Education
                                                                                                                                                           5
              5




                                                                                                                                                           1




                             1700            1750            1800              1850               1900                1950                2000
                                                                                Year



                                                                                                   63
Sources: For Panel A see figures 2 and 3. Per Capita GDP in Panel B is from Williamson
(2014). Years of education from 1876 onwards is by year of birth for the native-born and
reproduces and extends Figure 1.4 from Goldin and Katz (2008: 20). I thank Goldin for
providing the data. Earlier years of education are for white males who served in the Union
Army and are from Bleakley et al. (forthcoming).

Figure 2: Male Life Expectancy in the US, 1722 -2010
        80




                                                              Life Expectancy at Birth, White
        70
  Life Expectancy
             60




                      Life Expectancy, Age 10, White
    50  40




                                                                     Life Expectancy at Birth, Black

                     Life Expectancy at Birth, Hacker's Series, White
        30




                    1700                   1800                      1900                       2000
                                                            Year


Source: Fogel (1986), Hacker (2010), and Vital Statistics data.




                                                       64
Figure 3: Heights for US Men Born 1710-1989

       178
       176  174
   Height (cm)




                               Whites
  172




                                         Blacks
       170
       168




                  1700 1720 1740 1760 1780 1800 1820 1840 1860 1880 1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000
                                                    Birth Year




Source: Bleakley et al. (forthcoming). This figure updates the white height series in Figure 2.1
in Costa and Steckel (1997), which in turn updated Fogel (1986), using the 1963-2010 NHIS
and adds a height series for blacks using the Union Army records at www.uadata.org, published
WWII heights, and the NHIS. Year of birth is centered at the marks. Estimates using the NHIS
were adjusted to account for biases resulting from self-reporting in the NHIS.




                                                     65
Figure 4: Men’s BMI by Age Group in the US, 1864-2009

     30




                                                                                  Age 57
     28




                                                                                      Age 37


                                                                Age 45
  BMI
   26




                                                                         Age 32


                                                                   Age 27
     24




                                                                Age 22
                                                                         Age 19
     22




          1850                  1900                    1950                        2000
                                            Year


Source: Author’s calculations from the Gould sample (Costa 2004a), the Union Army sample,
WWII enlistment records, and NHANES.




                                            66
Figure 5: US Birth Weight Trends, 1850s-2008

           3500

                                                                         NY
                                                                         Lying-In
                                                                                           US, white
                                                                         white
                                                      Boston   JHU
                   3400




                                                                white
                                 Philadelphia         white
  Birth Weight (gm)




                                 Almshouse
                                  white
        3300




                                                                                            US, black
           3200




                                                                        JHU
                                             Boston                     black
                                             black
           3100




                          1850                          1900                        1950                2000
                                                                        Year

Source: Author’s calculations from Goldin and Margo’s (1989) Philadelphia Almshouse data,
Ward (1993: 148-149), the records of JHU (Costa 2004b), the records of NY Lying-In (Costa
1998), published National Vital Statistics Records (for 1950), and the NCHS’s 1968, 1978, 1998,
and 2008 Vital Statistics Natality Data.




                                                                  67
Figure 6: Birth Weights by Parity
       3700


                                                                                     NY


                                                                                   JHU
       3600




                                          JHU
          3500




                                             NY                                   1988
  Birth Weight




                                          1988
                                                                                     1978
                                          1998                                    1998
                                             1978
  3400




                 1988                                                             1968
                                          2008                                    2008
                 1998                     1968
                    1978
                 2008
       3300




                 1968
       3200




                 JHU
                   NY


                  0                       1-2                                      3+
                                                 parity


Source: Author’s calculations from the records of New York Lying-In (Costa 1998), Johns
Hopkins (Costa 2004), and NCHS’s 1968, 1978, 1998, and 2008 Vital Statistics Natality Data.




                                             68
Figure 7: US Birth Weight Trends for First Births, 1850s-2008

          3500



                                                                         US, White
          3400




                              Philadelphia Almshouse
  Birth Weight (gms)




                              White
     3200    3300




                                                                           US, Black
                                        JHU
                                                       NY Lying-In
                                        White          White
          3100




                                          JHU
                                          Black
          3000




                       1850          1900                       1950             2000
                                                       Year


Source: Author’s calculations from the records of the Philadelphia Almshouse (Goldin and
Margo 1989), of New York Lying-In (Costa 1998), Johns Hopkins (Costa 2004), and NCHS’s
1968, 1978, 1998, and 2008 Vital Statistics Natality Data.




                                                  69
Figure 8: Sickness Rates in the US Army, 1867-1970


                                                3000
  Rate of Admission to Sick Report Times 1000




                                                2500



                                                2000



                                                1500



                                                1000



                                                500


                                                       1870 1880 1890 1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970
                                                                                Year


Source: Reproduced from Cautero (1998) using Get Data Graph Digitizer. Cautero compiled
the rate of admission from the Annual Reports of the Surgeon General for the Army. The rate
of admission to sick report is the total number admitted divided by the total number of
personnel.




                                                                            70
Figure 9: Male Life Expectancy at Age 10, United States, Sweden, and France

              70           60
   Life Expectancy at Age 10




                                       US, White
                                                                                FR
               50




                                            SW
  40          30




                                1700       1750    1800    1850        1900   1950   2000
                                                          Birth Year


Source: For the US, see the notes to Figure 1. Data for Sweden and France are from the
Human Mortality Database, http://www.mortality.org/ and are for period life expectancy.




                                                          71
Figure 10: Men’s Heights, US, Sweden, Great Britain, the Netherlands, and France

       185


                                                                     NL, Age 20
                                                                                    SW
       180  175
   Height (cm)




                          US, Age 25-49


                                                                           FR, Age 20
  170




                    SW, Age 25-49
       165




                         GB, Age 20
       160




                  1700          1750      1800      1850      1900       1950           2000
                                                 Birth Year


Source: For the US, see the notes to Figure 2. The data for Sweden, age 25-49 are from
Sandberg and Steckel (1987) and begin with the 1720-29 birth decade and end with the 1850-
59 birth decade. The second Swedish series (SW) is from two sources. The longest running
series, covering the 1820-1965 birth cohorts, is from Sandberg and Steckel (1997) and
measures men at age 21 (born 1820-97), age 20 (born 1898-1929), age 19 (born 1930-35), and
age 18 (born 1936-present). These age reductions coincide with declines in the age of
maturation. This series was augmented with Hatton and Bray’s (2010) series for 1968-1978.
The series for France is based on Weir (1997) for the cohorts born 1784-1902, on Drukker and
Tassenaar (1997) for the cohorts born 1902-1920, and on Hatton and Bray (2010) for the
cohorts born 1923-1978. The series for Great Britain was based on Floud et al. (1990: 142-
144) for the cohorts born 1743-1888 and Hatton and Bray (2010) for cohorts born 1893-1978.
The series for the Netherlands was based on Drukker and Tassenaar (1997) for cohorts born
1798-1920 and on Hatton and Bray (2010) for the cohorts born 1918-1978.




                                                 72
Figure 11: Infant and Child Mortality Trends by Socioeconomic Status

                  350
  Ratio for Lowest to Highest SES Group




                                                             Infant Mortality
                         250     300




                                           Child Mortality
       150      200




                                                                                                   Infant Survivorship
                                           Child Survivorship
                  100




                                          1900          1920             1940               1960        1980             2000
                                                                                     Year


Source: Haines (2010). Socioeconomic status is not consistently defined.




                                                                                73
Figure 12: Infant Mortality by Social Class, England and Wales, 1895-2001

                         150
   Infant Mortality Rate
               100




                                                                 Class V
       50




                                                     Class I
                   0




                                           1900   1920         1940               1960   1980   2000
                                                                       Year
   Ratio for Lowest to Highest SES Group
        92     94     96    98    100




                                           1900   1920         1940        Year   1960   1980   2000




The top panel shows infant mortality rates by father’s occupation for Class I (upper and middle
class) and Class V (unskilled workmen). Class V in 1921 includes unskileld textile workers,
miners, and agricultural laborers. These were separate classes prior to 1921. The bottom
panel shows the ratio of infant survivorship for Class V to Class I. Sources: 1895-1911 from
Table 7.3 in Woods (2000: 264). 1921 from the Registrar General’s Decennial Supplement,
1938. 1931-2001 from Table 4.3 in Floud et al. (2011: 150).




                                                                      74
Figure 13: Trends in Disparities by Ward in the 6 Largest US Cities, 1900-1950




Source: Floud et al. (2011: 328, Figure 6.3). The circles, triangles, and squares denote,
respectively, the maximum, mean, and minimum value of infant mortality rates among wards in
each city in a given year. The dashed and solid curves are lowess fit curves. This diagram
shows that between 1900 and 1950 more than 80 percent of the difference in the infant mortality
rate between the worst and best wards of the six large cities had disappeared.




                                              75
Figure 14: The Educational Gradient in Birth Weight, Whites, 1969-2011.
                                                        200
  Birth Weight Difference Relative to Less than High School




                                                                                     College
                        100              150




                                                                                    High School
        50




                                                              1970   1980    1990                 2000   2010
                                                                             Year


Source: Author’s calculations from the 1969-2011 NCHS Vital Statistics Natality Data. The
figure plots the coefficients on education levels (relative to less than high school) and the
confidence intervals (the dashed lines) from a regression of birth weight on educational levels
controlling for age, parity, sex of the child, and gestational weeks.




                                                                            76
Figure 15: Weight in the First Weeks of Life

  3300 4600 5900 7200 8500 9800
            Weight (gms)




                                  0   10          20            30          40            50
                                                       Age in Weeks

                                      5th Ave                         Bellevue
                                      JHU, white                      JHU, black
                                      CPP, private patient            CPP, welfare recipient
                                      WHO, 50th Percentile




Source: Bakwin and Bakwin (1931) and author’s calculations from the records of Johns
Hopkins University (JHU), 1910-19935 and the Collaborative Perinatal Project, CPP (1959-
1974).




                                                         77
Figure 16: The Relationship between Education, Height and BMI, White Native-Born Males

           .08
   Height Coefficients
    .02   .04
           0      .06




                         1850    1900                      1950                      2000
                                               Year
           0
   BMI Coefficient
             -.1




                                                          Controls for Smoking
    -.2    -.3




                         1850    1900                      1950                      2000
                                               Year



Source: Tables 2 and 3 from Bleakley et al. (forthcoming) for height coefficients and author’s
calculations for BMI coefficients using the Gould sample (Costa 2004a) , WWII enlistment
records, and NHANES. The coefficients are from regressions of years of education on height or
BMI, controlling for age or cohort, region of residence, metro area, and state or place of
residence.




                                              78
Figure 17: The Relationship Between Height, Wealth and Occupational Ranking and BMI,
Wealth and Occupational Ranking, White Men
                          .08
   Coefficients on Height
             .04    .06




                                                          Wealth Regression
     .02




                                                    Occupational Score Regression
              0




                                1850   1900                          1950                2000
                                                      Year
                          .5
   Education Coefficients
                    .4




                                              Wealth Regression
    .1   .2   .3




                                                 Occupational Score Regression
              0




                                1850   1900                          1950                2000
                                                      Year




Source: Tables 4, 5, and 6 in Bleakley et al. (forthcoming). The coefficients are from a
regression of wealth or occupational ranking on height and education controlling for age and/or
cohort, year of survey (when applicable), foreign birth, and region of residence.




                                                    79
