NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ADVANCING THE EMPIRICAL RESEARCH ON LOBBYING
John M. de Figueiredo
Brian Kelleher Richter
Working Paper 19698
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19698
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2013

We thank David Austen-Smith, Jordi Blanes i Vidal, Charles Cameron, David Primo, David Lewis,
Brian Roberts, Tim Werner, and an anonymous referee for helpful comments on earlier drafts of this
paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by John M. de Figueiredo and Brian Kelleher Richter. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Advancing the Empirical Research on Lobbying
John M. de Figueiredo and Brian Kelleher Richter
NBER Working Paper No. 19698
December 2013
JEL No. H11,K0,P16
ABSTRACT
This essay identifies the empirical facts about lobbying which are generally agreed upon in the literature.
It then discusses challenges to empirical research in lobbying and provides examples of empirical
methods that can be employed to overcome these challenges—with an emphasis on statistical measurement,
identification, and casual inference. The essay then discusses the advantages, disadvantages, and effective
use of the main types of data available for research in lobbying. It closes by discussing a number of
open questions for researchers in the field and avenues for future work to advance the empirical research
in lobbying.
John M. de Figueiredo
The Law School and Fuqua School
Duke University
210 Science Drive, Box 90360
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
jdefig@duke.edu
Brian Kelleher Richter
University of Texas at Austin
McCombs School of Business
2110 Speedway, B6500, CBA 5.250
Austin, TX 78712-0177
brian.richter@mccombs.utexas.edu

I.

INTRODUCTION
One of the central tenets of representative democracy is the right of individuals, by

themselves or in groups, to petition elected officials and the government. These petitions are
designed to influence the opinions, policies, and votes of legislators and other government
officials. One outgrowth of this right to petition the government has been the creation and
evolution of organized interest groups comprised of individuals, companies and other
organizations. These organized interests employ a variety of methods to influence government
policies including campaign contributions, endorsements, grassroots campaigns, media
campaigns, and lobbying. A robust literature has spawned hundreds of papers on each of these
topics in political science.
While empirical papers written on the subject of campaign contributions and money have
dominated the statistical work on the influence of interest groups in politics (Ansolabehere et al.
2003), there has emerged over the past decade a growing literature in political science and
related disciplines that empirically examines lobbying. This renewed interest seems to find its
roots in three areas. First, newly created disclosure rules on lobbying and lobbyists’ effort
coupled with more innovative data collection methods have led to the creation of a number of
new datasets on lobbying that are now available to researchers, mostly, but not exclusively,
focused on activity in the United States. Second, the rise of these datasets has created a keen
public interest in the process and statistical regularities in lobbying efforts. Third, political
scientists have very recently joined forces with economists to create a more seamless research
boundary on the topic between the disciplines, jointly developing more advanced and better
identified statistical models of lobbying.

2

In this paper, lobbying is defined as the transfer of information in private meetings and
venues between interest groups and politicians, their staffs, and agents. Information takes the
theoretical representation of a message, and in practice, may have many forms: statistics, facts,
arguments, messages, forecasts, threats, commitments, signals or some combination of the
aforementioned. Interest groups have budgets for and spend money on these activities, but that
money is not transferred explicitly to politicians (as it is with campaign contributions) (de
Figueiredo 2002). If we assume, following most of political economy literature, that a
politician’s objective function is comprised of re-election to the current office, promotion to
higher office, and ideological pursuits, then the politician seeks information on how her position
on a given issue or issue set will affect these outcome variables (Milyo 2001). There may be
intermediate forms of information—such as how many jobs a policy position will create, how
will my constituents be affected by a particular yea or nay vote, whether business leaders will
support me in the next election, etc. —but ultimately, the key piece of information the politician
cares about is understanding how position-taking on various issues will affect her re-election,
promotion, and ideological policy outcomes.1
This essay synthesizes four main aspects of the empirical lobbying literature. First, we
summarize the generally accepted findings in recent empirical and statistical advances in the
informational lobbying literature. Second, we discuss statistical methods that we believe are

1

This essay does not discuss a number of areas. The essay does not cover the campaign finance literature or illegal
lobbying expenditures—such as situations where lobbying becomes money transfers. In those situations, lobbying
expenditures are bribes and most appropriately discussed with respect to the literature on corruption. This paper
does not examine how interest groups employ direct-to-voter media campaigns and other forms of public pressure
campaigns (e.g. Hall & Reynolds 2012). The paper does not cover the literature on the structure and value of
political connections (e.g. Faccio 2006; Goldman et al. 2009) outside of the purely lobbying context. Within the
lobbying literature, the essay does investigate legislative lobbying but does not explicitly pursue the large literature
on lobbying of bureaucratic agencies that deserves its own analysis. Papers in this latter area include Naoi &
Krauss (2009); de Figueiredo & Tiller (2001); Holburn & Vanden Bergh (2004); McKay (2011); de Figueiredo &
Kim (2004); Yackee & Yackee (2006), McKay & Yackee (2007), and McKay (2011) to name only a few.

3

particularly fruitful in obtaining statistical identification and making causal inference in the
lobbying literature. Third, we discuss the new datasets that have recently become available in
the field and what particular advantages and disadvantages each type of dataset engenders in a
research program. Finally, we provide what we believe are some possible avenues for future
research. Ultimately, this essay examines what we know about lobbying, what we’d like to
know about lobbying, and how we might make headway in finding the answers.
II.

EMPIRICAL REGULARITIES IN LOBBYING
This section takes the large number of empirical studies on lobbying and attempts to distill

a few central facts where there seems to be consensus in the literature. We attempt to stay away
from equivocal findings and focus, instead, on findings where there is broad agreement.
A. WHO LOBBIES, HOW MUCH THEY LOBBY, AND HOW LOBBYING IS
ORGANIZED
The first regularity in the data is that lobbying is pervasive in the American political
system and seems to be quite important in the political systems of many other developed
countries. Milyo et al (2000) shows that lobbying expenditures at the U.S. federal level are five
times that of political action committee (PAC) campaign contributions. Moreover, the relative
magnitude of lobbying expenditures to interest groups’ campaign contributions continues to
persist at similar levels. In 2012, the amount spent by organized interests on lobbying the federal
government amounted to $3.5 billion annually—while the estimated amount spent on campaign
contributions by interest groups’ political action committees, super-PACs, and 527 organizations
was approximately $1.55 billion over the two-year 2011-to-2012 election cycle, or
approximately $750 million annually (Federal Election Commission 2013; Center for

4

Responsive Politics 2013). Thus, even in the past few years, lobbying expenditures remained
approximately five times interest group campaign finance contributions.
There is now overwhelming evidence to support a second general regularity in the data:
corporations and trade associations comprise the vast majority of the lobbying expenditures by
interest groups. Lobbying expenditures by corporations and trade associations represent over
84% of total interest group lobbying expenditures at the U.S. federal and 86% of total lobbying
expenditures at the state level (de Figueiredo 2004). In contrast, this same paper finds issueideology membership groups represent 2% of lobbying expenditures at the federal level and 7%
of lobbying expenditures at the state level. In addition, large organized interest groups and
groups that are supported by large corporations are more likely to lobby than smaller groups and
groups that are supported by smaller corporate interests. This is true for a wide of variety of
firms across a number of industries and a number of years in the United States (Ansolabehere et
al. 2002; Hansen et al. 2004; Hochberg 2009; Richter et al. 2009; Guo 2009; Hill et al. 2011).
Moreover, in particular industries and issue areas, such as tariffs and trade disputes, this same
regularity holds (Bombardini & Trebbi 2006; Schuler 1996; Lee & Baik 2010). Non-profits, such
as universities, also exhibit this same pattern—larger universities are more likely to lobby that
smaller ones (de Figueiredo & Silverman 2006). Finally, these patterns are not confined to
North America, but have been shown to be true in other developed and transition economies
(Naoi & Krauss 2009; Sukiassyan & Nugent 2011).
While businesses represent a substantially large proportion of total lobbying
expenditures, they represent a smaller proportion (but a still a majority) of the number of interest
groups lobbying. In a survey of ninety-eight randomly selected issues before the Congress in
1999-2001, Baumgartner et al (2009) found that trade and business associations, business

5

corporations, professional associations, and coalitions specific to the issue represented 54% of all
lobbying groups. Citizen groups, unions, foundations, think tanks, governments, institutions, and
other groups represented the remainder. At the state level, Lowery and Gray (1996) found that
approximately 30% of lobbying groups registered in the American states were governments or
social groups. This data combined with the expenditure data above suggests that business
groups’ lobbying expenditures are, on average, higher than non-business interests.
A third regularity in the data is that large corporations and well-funded groups are more
likely to lobby independently than smaller groups. Most small interest groups are more likely to
lobby using only trade associations. Richter et al. (2009) and Kerr et al. (2013) found that only
10% of publicly-traded firms actually lobbied on their own behalf. Moreover, these authors
show that groups that lobby tend to show substantial persistence and serial correlation in their
lobbying efforts—with Kerr et al. (2013) reporting that the probability that a firm lobbies in a
given year conditional on lobbying in the prior year is 92%. Various authors have suggested the
reason for this is that smaller interests lack the resources to front the fixed costs for a lobbying
organization, they lack the necessary access to politicians to influence public policy, they do not
individually carry the political power to influence outcomes, or they have issues that arise only
intermittently (Bertrand et al. 2012). Companies, however, may also avoid using external
lobbyists when corporate secrets and innovations are at risk (de Figueiredo & Tiller 2001), when
political systems differ (Mahoney 2007), and when free-riding or issue characteristics lend
themselves to collective as opposed to individual efforts (Bombardini & Trebbi 2012). The use
of trade associations by smaller organizations and companies may mask these smaller
organizations’ participation in lobbying, as trade associations in the U.S. must report lobbying
efforts, but trade association members do not generally have to report the fees they pay to

6

become members of those organizations, and thus these fees are not tabulated as lobbying
expenditures by smaller firms. Harstard & Svensson (2012) have gone further to show that small
companies may actually be more likely to engage in bribes as a substitute to lobbying. Together,
this implies that in a snapshot of lobbying in an industry or issue area, it should be common to
see both individual interest groups and trade associations lobbying at the same time and larger
lobbying groups having offices present near the center of political decision-making (Hansen &
Mitchell 2000; Campos & Giovannoni 2007; Schuler et al. 2002).
A fourth regularity in the data is that lobbying increases when the issues are more
relevant or salient, or there are big stakes for the organized interest (Leech et al. 2005; Bonardi
2005; Baumgartner et al. 2011, Baumgartner & Leech 2002; Calderia et al. 2000). A related
finding is that budgeting drives increases in lobbying efforts. Leech et al. (2005) show at the
federal level that issues and agencies with larger budgets draw more lobbying effort by interest
groups. de Figueiredo (2014) and de Figueiredo & Cameron (2012) exploit the cross-sectional
and time-series variation in budgeting rules and budget size in 38 U.S. states over many years
and political regimes to show that budgeting time periods result in a 19% increase in lobbying
expenditures by interest groups. Just as issue salience draws interest group attention, so do
budget issues, government monies, and tax issues (La Pira et al. 2012).
B. THE NUMBER OF INTEREST GROUPS REGISTERED
In 1996, Gray & Lowery authored The Population Ecology of Interest Representation on
the organizational ecology of interest groups in American states. Since that time there has been
an explosion in the number of papers that examine the ecology of interest groups at the state
level, focusing on both their density and diversity based primarily on counts of groups rather
than dollars spent. The argument put forward in the book was first articulated in biology and

7

then extended into the social science literature by the sociologists Hannan & Freeman (1978,
1984) and with advancements by Carroll & Hannan (1992). The core argument put forward in
the Hannan-Freeman-Carroll theory is that organizations in a population are buffeted by two
forces: legitimation and competition. Gray & Lowery (1996) brought this framework to interest
groups and collected data on the names and counts of all the registered lobbying groups in each
state in certain specified years (1975, 1980, 1990, and subsequently 1997). Putting the
legitimation and competitive effects together results in an inverted U-shaped curve of the number
of organizations over time. Initially, the legitimation effect causes a rise in the number of
organizations in a field. Then the competitive effect takes over, causing a shakeout of the
number of organizations. The number of organizations finally stabilizes around a steady-state
number. More recent advances in this area consistently show a second regularity, that the
number of interest groups is correlated with the size of economy and number of issues the
legislature faces (Baumgartner et al. 2009; Gray & Lowery 1998) and positively correlated with
number of constituents and constituent interests (Berkman 2001; Lowery & Gray 1998). Some of
the most recent findings in the field are particularly focused on health care lobbying (Benz et al.
2011; Lowery et al. 2005).
C. EXPERTISE, CONNECTIONS, TARGETING, AND COUNTERACTNG
One of the key questions researchers have attempted to tackle, with limited success, is
whether lobbyists derive value from what they know (expertise) or who they know
(connections). Empirically we know that at least some lobbyists tend to specialize in issues.
Lobbying groups like Cassidy Associates or Sidley Austin specialize in lobbying on behalf of
academic institutions and telecommunications issues, respectively, suggesting issue expertise is
valuable. Measuring the value of expertise is difficult. Cameron & de Figueiredo (2013)

8

develop a model based on expertise and test its implications using state level panel lobbying
data. They find substantial empirical support in the intensity and targeting of lobbying for a
model based on expertise, but do not explicitly measure expertise nor estimate its value.
Bertrand et al. (2012) also find indirect support for the expertise explanation, demonstrating that
lobbyists who specialize in particular issues are more likely to access politicians of an opposite
party, assumedly because the politicians value the issue expertise of the lobbyist.
However, a recent paper by Blanes i Vidal et al. (2012), discussed in-depth later in this
essay, examines the lobbying revenue of former Senatorial staffers who have become lobbyists.
The paper investigates what happens to the revenues when there is a change in focal Senator’s
status. They find a 23% decline in a lobbyist’s revenue after the Senator on whose staff the
lobbyist formerly served is defeated in an election or retires from Congress. Likewise, Bertrand
et al. (2012) also find that lobbyists tend to follow the politician to whom they are connected,
even when that politician switches committees and handles substantially different issue areas.
This would suggest a “who you know” story drives at least a good proportion of lobbying
revenues. As we discuss at the end of this essay, the “who you know” versus “what you know”
debate is an attractive area for empirical research in lobbying.
Despite this ongoing debate, there is consensus on a number of aspects of targeting in the
lobbying literature. First, powerful legislators are most likely to be targeted for lobbying. These
legislators usually have agenda setting power as sponsors or co-sponsors of bills (Hojnacki &
Kimball 1999), are on issue-relevant or generally powerful and influential committees, like
Appropriations, Budget, or Finance Committees (Drope & Hansen 1998; Honjacki & Kimball
2004; Duso 2005), or in the congressional leadership, such as committee chairs and ranking
members or majority or minorities leaders (Evans 1996).

9

The second set of regularities in the studies on targeting focus on where targets sit on the
ideological or position continuum. There seems to be a growing consensus in the literature that
both allied (Heberling 2005; Honjacki & Kimball 1999; Kollman 1997; Calderia & Wright 1998;
Hall & Deardoff 2006, Hall & Miler 2008) and marginal legislators on both sides of the issue
(Bertrand et al. 2012; Gawande et al. 2012; Keheller & Yackee 2009; Holyoke 2003; Tung 2011)
are targeted for lobbying efforts, but staunch enemies are not targeted by interest groups.
Because the current U.S. lobbying disclosure regulations do not require lobbyists to identify
which legislators they are targeting, the papers on the subject usually rely on survey data or
inference from lobbying expenditure data. A clear linking of theory to the empirical regularities
on targeting is found in the counteractive lobbying literature by Austen-Smith & Wright (1994,
1996). In empirical work done on Supreme Court nominations, Austen-Smith & Wright find
empirical support for the theory that lobbyists target marginal legislators to “swing” them to the
lobbyist’s position, and they target friends to “counteract” the lobbying from opposition groups.
Hall & Miler (2008) and Hojnacki & Kimball (1998) have critiqued the counteractive lobbying
approach, instead arguing that the interest groups’ legislative allies are the primary targets,
followed by marginal legislators. They show empirically in accordance with the theoretical
predictions of Rotemberg (2003) and Hall & Deardoff (2006), that lobbyists will target mainly
allies (as a legislative subsidy) and agenda-setters to influence the shape of legislation, or to
encourage these allies to in turn lobby marginal and influential policymakers. These two
approaches to targeting paint a picture of lobbying where a variety of different legislators are
targeted, even by one group, based on their position in Congress and their position on the issue.

10

D. THE EFFECTIVENESS OF LOBBYING
A final area of interest to scholars is understanding and quantifying how effective interest
group lobbying is in obtaining policy or other outcomes. This is an extraordinarily challenging
question to tackle because econometric identification is problematic and causal mechanisms are
extremely difficult to isolate. Because of this, the significant number of papers measuring the
effectiveness of lobbying must overcome a number of challenges that make statistical inference,
estimation, and interpretation difficult. Literature in this area should be viewed with a critical
eye toward these drawbacks by the reader. (This point is discussed further in the next two
sections of this essay.)
The most common area for researchers to examine is international trade. A variety of
papers have attempted to show that lobbying affects tariffs, customs classifications, and dumping
determinations across a wide variety of countries (Grasse & Heidbreder 2011; Gawande et al.
2006, 2012; Stoyanov 2009; Ehrlich 2008; Drope & Hansen 2004; Baylis & Furtan 2003; Tung
2011; Tavares 2006; Lee & Baik 2010). A second area that has received substantial attention
over the past five years is the effect of lobbying on a variety of financial and regulatory
accounting issues. These papers purport to demonstrate that lobbying affects the ability of firms
to influence financial regulation and legislation, to engage in revenue hiding and avoid fraud
detection, and to garner excess returns in the marketplace through a variety of mechanisms
(Mian & Trebbi 2011; Blau et al. 2013; Hochberg et al. 2009; Igan et al. 2012; Yu & Yu 2011;
Gelbach 2006; Richter 2011; Hill et al. 2011; Adelino and Dinc 2013). A third area that has
received attention substantial attention is the effect of lobbying on appropriations and budgeting.
A set of papers in this vein argue that lobbying is effective in allowing interest groups and their
allies to obtain a larger slice of government budget and contracts in a number of different

11

countries (Evans 1996; Helland 2008; Kelleher & Yackee 2009; Alt et al. 1999; de Figueiredo &
Silverman 2006, 2007, details discussed in further depth in the next section). A fourth area that
has received increasing attention is the effect on lobbying on taxation. Richter et al. (2009) has
found that firms that lobby are more likely to pay lower income taxes to the U.S. federal
government. (This paper is also discussed in further depth in this essay.) Schone et al. (2013)
finds that tax development credits are more likely to be granted in the presence of lobbying in
France. Finally, there have been papers measuring the effect of lobbying on a variety of different
outcomes. These papers attempt to show that lobbying affects judicial confirmations (Caldeira &
Wright 1998; Austen-Smith & Wright 1996), immigration policy (Facchini et al. 2011), trade
association entry barriers (Morris & Neeley 2001), regulated prices in telecommunications (Duso
2005), technology diffusion (Comin & Hobijn 2009), the general passage of bills (Grasse &
Heidbreder 2011), and overall economic performance (Horgos & Zimmerman 2009), to mention
just a few areas.
Perhaps the most comprehensive academic study on the effects of lobbying was carried
out by Baumgartner et al (2009). In an eight-year study covering ninety-eight policy issues
before Congress, the authors track in detail lobbying efforts by nearly 2,200 advocates; they also
follow the results of lobbying efforts and policy outcomes up to four years after the policies were
proposed. They find that both sides of an issue are usually able to mobilize relatively equal
amounts of resources. One reason for this is any side of an issue is usually comprised of a
heterogeneous mix of corporate, citizen, and government advocacy groups that bring to bear
resources comparable to the opposition. Baumgartner et al (2009) find that policies are usually
very stable and resilient to change, but when changes do occur, the policy changes tend to be
substantial.

12

Overall, there have been numerous studies attempting to estimate the effects of lobbying
on policy outcomes. However, the validity of their results depends crucially on the dataset and
econometric methods employed to cleanly identify and isolate the causal effect of lobbying. In
the following sections we discuss the data and these methods for the empirical analysis of
lobbying.
E. SUMMARY
The burgeoning empirical literature on lobbying has created many new findings. There is
now an emerging consensus around a set of facts. Lobbying is a pervasive institution in the
American political landscape with lobbying expenditures representing five times the dollar
volume of interest group campaign contributions. This activity is most likely to be pursued by
large firms and interest groups. Large firms will have a higher probability of lobbying
independently than small firms, while small firms will tend to agglomerate their lobbying in
trade associations. Budgeting, highly salient issues, and issues which impact groups more will
attract more lobbying effort. In addition, the number of interest groups is positively correlated
with macroeconomic activity, constituent interest, and legislative workflow. These facts are well
established and there are few returns to future researchers demonstrating these facts are true, yet
again.
There is also a set of facts that has been shown to be true, but the underlying reasons for
the regularities in the data are a bit more opaque. The politicians targeted by interest groups tend
to be powerful allied agenda setters and marginal legislators on the issue, but tend not to be
staunch opponents. While this has been demonstrated, there are a number of different theories as
to why this might occur. Recent literature has found strong evidence that “who you know”
matters and there is some evidence that issue expertise may also matter to targeting. However,

13

the precise magnitude and mechanism underlying this fact is not well understood. Finally, there
are a large number of papers that show lobbying has returns. However, these papers employ a
variety of different empirical methods, methods that each have drawbacks to isolating and
identifying the causal effects of lobbying. In the next section, we discuss these methodologies in
further detail.
III. EMPIRICAL APPROACHES TO STUDYING LOBBYING
Advances in social science research methods since the 1990s have allowed researchers who
studying lobbying to move away from correlational studies by applying quasi-experimental
research designs that allow stronger causal inferences to be made. These advances now permit
scholars to avoid, as Baumgartner & Leech (1996) note, the “pitfalls of one-shot cross-sectional
designs,” but do not obviate the need for understanding the underlying narratives and
institutional details of lobbying. In fact, understanding how lobbying works in practice is
arguably even more important than before in implementing the design of empirical research.
In this section, we outline how advances in research design and statistical methods can
enable scholars to provide more reliable answers to otherwise difficult questions. We outline the
challenges inherent in empirical research on lobbying, outline research designs and statistical
approaches to overcome these challenges, and provide examples of recent research that has
employed these approaches. While each of the articles we will highlight has slightly different
attributes and research designs, they all adhere to a common set of practices that we believe are
necessary to advance the next generation of empirical research in lobbying.

14

A. CHALLENGES TO CONDUCTING EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS IN LOBBYING
In order to advance our understanding of these and other areas, however, researchers are
encountering a number of statistical challenges that are making causal inference difficult. The
first challenge that has arisen is the time series persistence and stickiness of lobbying effort and
lobbying registrations within interest groups. With little within-interest-group variation in
lobbying over time, it can be difficult to draw inferences from a panel dataset without external
shocks that affect different groups at different times (as opposed to all groups at once). For
example, imagine a certain interest group allocates $100,000 to lobbying per year and is awarded
a government contract of $1M every year. While this relationship may be suggestive, we cannot
describe the causal relationship between lobbying and contracts without a shock to the group’s
budget or to the contract’s size as, holding everything else constant, the variation necessary for
techniques like fixed effects is not present.
The second challenge of empirical studies in lobbying is a rather significant omitted
variable problem. For instance, consider that multiple instruments for exercising political
influence may be used in tandem but only some of them may be observed. If this is the case, we
may falsely attribute an outcome to an interest’s lobbying efforts when the effect is really due to
the interest’s location in a key district. Given the nature of lobbying and some actors’ desire to
operate under the radar, researchers are faced with omitted variables even when using the best
available data. Data sets may not contain data on observable factors we would like to include as
controls in the analysis—or there may be factors that are simply unobservable such as interests’
or lobbyists’ innate ability at lobbying. The omitted variable problem can be extremely
problematic if these omitted variables are correlated with the error term in a regression, as this
will result in biased parameter estimates and incorrect causal inference. We believe this is a

15

pervasive problem in the lobbying literature. As quantification of outcomes, rather than
descriptions of phenomena, becomes an increasingly important goal, avoiding omitted variable
bias will become a primary concern.
A third challenge for the literature is endogenous selection into the lobbying process.
The decision to lobby by an interest group is not a random event—and hence does not meet the
idealized world of an experimental trial, in which some interest groups would be assigned to
lobby and others not. Not permitting random selection could lead to biased results because the
group assignment process could be correlated with outcomes. An interest group’s decision to
lobby is likely driven by the group’s expected reactions of other groups who may also lobby and
by the focal group’s anticipated outcomes. That is, groups are more likely to lobby when they
believe they are more likely to succeed. Endogenous selection will result in incorrect statistical
inference and biased parameter estimates in a standard regression model. Moreover, endogenous
selection can make the direction of causality difficult to assess, since interests may only lobby
the way they do because they expect a benefit from doing so. We note this problem could be
pervasive given that far fewer interests choose to lobby in practice than could (about 10%). If
the majority of interests that do not lobby choose not to because they expect no return, then
without properly accounting for selection, estimates of returns will be biased upwards.
Moreover, the exact level of lobbying activity, the venues targeted, etc. may be chosen in such a
way as to optimize on the outcome of the interest, further complicating causal stories about
lobbying linked to outcomes. This is related to the omitted variable problem, and like it, makes
newer questions that require causal inference difficult.
Finally, recent empirical work has attempted to make the links between theory and data
more tightly coupled. As the empirical lobbying literature began to emerge, it was largely

16

independent of theory. However, with tighter linking of theory and empirical work expected
going forward, researchers face the challenge that though theories about lobbying are often about
information, the information (or message) is, in most datasets, generally not directly observable.
Hence, empirical work must develop mechanisms that were not required in the past to test
theories of informational lobbying when the information cannot be observed or might be
incomplete.
B. EMPIRICAL METHODS FOR ADVANCING EMPIRICAL LOBBYING
RESEARCH
In this section, we highlight some of the research designs and empirical methods that help
to overcome the challenges identified, providing an example of each approach. The approaches
covered here are difference-in-differences, event studies, instrumental variables, selection
models, and structural modeling.
1.

Difference-in-Differences Approach with Exogenous Shock

The first research design that allows researchers to identify causal effects of lobbying
activities is the difference-in-differences approach. Differences-in-differences is a technique
whereby one measures the change in the treatment and control groups across pre- and posttreatment periods. The main advantage of the differences-in-differences approach vis-à-vis the
challenges presented above is that it exploits an exogenous source of variation to deal with the
stickiness or persistence issue in lobbying data. A secondary advantage of the approach is that,
through the use of fixed effects in panel data, it eliminates concerns about all time-invariant
observation-unit specific omitted variables.

17

Blanes i Vidal et al. (2012) employ this difference-in-difference with exogenous shocks
approach in an examination of revolving door lobbyists. Blanes i Vidal et al. (2012) quantify
how valuable ‘who you know’ is to the lobbyist. Focusing on former congressional staffers who
are contract lobbyists for interest groups, they examine how the revenues of lobbyists change
when politicians to whom the lobbyists are connected via prior employment retire or are defeated
in an election. Because many politicians exit over time, the authors have a key source of
exogenous shock or variation that allows the authors use to identify how valuable “who you
know” is.
Empirically, they estimate the equation:

where

represents the revenue the lobbyist earns in a specific period,

whether or not the lobbyist’s former employer is an active politician or not,
varying observable lobbyist attributes,
factors that remain time-invariant, and

is an indicator of
represents time-

controls for unobservable individual lobbyists specific
controls for unobservable time-specific factors

depending upon the party and chamber to which a lobbyist is connected.
Because a key source of variation that the research design exploits for identification is
prior employment with a particular politician, the authors can rely on politician exits to generate
their statistical results. By having a relatively long time-dimension panel (22 periods) and
including in their specifications time-varying lobbyist attributes, lobbyist fixed effects, and
party-chamber specific time fixed-effects, Blanes i Vidal et al. are able to attribute drops in
lobbyist revenue vis-à-vis the within-lobbyist counterfactual trend to lobbyists losing someone
who they know. Hence, with the differences-in-differences approach, the authors can identify

18

that who lobbyists know matters, accounting for approximately 23% of the value of a given
lobbyist’s services.
2.

Event Study Approach

The second method that can be utilized to overcome some of the challenges identified is
the event study approach. This quasi-experimental approach relies on an exogenous shock to
one group to allow comparison between a control and experimental groups in the pre- and postshock conditions. The exogenous events that shock the lobbying systems help avoid concerns
about endogenous selection into a particular behavior. Like the differences-in-difference
approach, event studies also are well suited to handling the stickiness or persistence issue in
lobbying since they focus on how actors’ behavior changes (or does not change) in response to a
major shock to the system.
We highlight Jayachandran (2006) who uses a financial market event study to examine
how firms that align themselves with politicians from the majority party may benefit from that
position.2 Although this paper is not directly about lobbying, it nicely executes and illustrates an
approach that can be usefully employed in lobbying studies. In May 2001, Senator James
Jeffords announced he was leaving the Republican Party to become an Independent, making the
Democrats the majority party in the U.S. Senate, in turn, altering the political landscape as
Democrats took over key leadership roles and now had more power over the legislative agenda.
Jayachandran (2006) employs a financial market event study around Jeffords’ switch to
construct a counterfactual of how the stock prices of certain firms fared versus how they would
have fared had Jeffords not left the majority Republican Party. She then examines whether
2

Other papers that profitably use event study analysis to analyze political outcomes include Roberts (1990), Werner
(2011), and Hillman et al. (1999).

19

aberrations between the actual and counterfactual performance could be predicted by firms’
relative relationships with both parties. To construct the abnormal returns—or the difference
between actual and counterfactual market performance of firms—around Jeffords’
announcement, Jayachandran employs two steps. First, she calculates expected returns for firms
by estimating the following equation using data from before the event-period:

Then, she assumes that the estimates of

and

will persist around the event, allowing

her to calculate abnormal returns (as the difference between actual and expected returns) during
the event window (i.e. the days around Jefford’s announcement) as:

Jayachandran then investigates whether deviations in firms’ actual performance and
counterfactual performance can be explained by firms’ alignment with the majority party who
unexpectedly loses power. To do so, she regresses estimates of firms’ political party alignment
prior to Jefford’s announcement (as proxied by soft money contributions) on her estimated
abnormal returns. More formally, she estimates:

After controlling for other observable firm-specific factors that might explain why the
market performance of some firms deviated from their long-run trend, Jayacahndran finds
stronger alignment with the former majority party, i.e. the Republicans, hurt the firm’s market
performance. Hence, the paper implements an event-study based research design that allows the
author to uncover the importance of structuring political relationships in a way that aligns

20

interest groups with politicians who have agenda setting abilities and other forms of legislative
power, while remaining flexible to adapt should the political environment change. While
Jayachandran focuses directly on campaign contributions rather than informational lobbying, the
approach in her work illustrates how event-studies are potentially fruitful quasi-experimental
approaches for lobbying.
3.

Instrumental Variables Approach

A third method for identifying the substantive impact of lobbying is the implementation
of an instrumental variables approach. This approach relies on identifying a variable that is
correlated with the endogenous explanatory variables, conditional on other covariates, but is
uncorrelated with the error term in the regression equation. The instrumental variables approach
is primarily focused on solving the challenge of omitted variable bias and endogeneity of right
hand side variables.
de Figueiredo & Silverman (2006) employ this method in their study of the effects of
lobbying on earmarks granted to academic institutions by Congress from 1997 to 1999. The goal
in the paper is estimate the returns to university lobbying by measuring the size of the earmarks
Congress appropriates to an institution as a function of that institution’s lobbying expenditures.
One reason this setting is chosen for empirical analysis is that other common forms of political
action that might also contribute to political outcomes, such as grassroots organization of
employees for political purposes and political action committees, is not permitted by non-profit
charitable organizations such as universities, allowing the authors to isolate the effect of
lobbying. Empiricists might be tempted to estimate the following equation:

21

Unfortunately, this approach would be invalid if the level of lobbying that an institution
chooses is a function of its expected return on lobbying efforts in the form of earmarks. The
authors overcome this very common challenge in estimating the effects or outcome of lobbying
effort by finding an instrumental variable to use in a two-stage least squares research design
(Angrist et al. 1996).
de Figueiredo & Silverman argue that overhead rates charged to universities as part of
grant funding are a valid instrument because overhead rates (i) are a meaningful cost shifter for
universities in using grant monies, (ii) are the result of negotiations between each university and
the bureaucratic government agencies that disperse funds, and (iii) are not under the purview of
elected politicians who are lobbied to insert earmarks into legislation. Hence, higher overhead
rates should cause universities to invest more in lobbying, but should not directly result in
earmarks. Rather, the earmarks appear through the higher lobbying investments that universities
make because of higher overhead rates.
In the first stage, they estimate the determinants of lobbying as a function of overhead
rates among other factors. Specifically they estimate:

where

is their key instrumental variable that affects the level of lobbying a

university chooses, but does not affect the size of earmarks it receives, and where

represents

other observable factors which could affect how much a university spends on lobbying.
In the second stage, they estimate the causal effect of lobbying on obtaining earmarks by
using the instrumented value of lobbying estimated in the first stage regression,
their key independent variable. Hence, they estimate a version of:
22

, as

where

represents other observable factors which could affect the earmarks a university

receives.
Because the authors have an instrument in their empirical setting that determines
lobbying levels, but is likely not correlated with the error term in the regression, they are able to
estimate the direct effect of lobbying on that outcome free of simultaneity bias—overcoming one
of the key challenges to estimates of the efficacy of lobbying on outcomes. de Figueiredo &
Silverman find that lobbying has a significant effect on the size of earmarks received when the
legislator representing the district of the university is on an appropriations committee in
Congress, but that lobbying has no statistically significant independent effect on earmarks when
the legislator representing the university is not on an appropriations committee. Thus, the paper
also enhances our understanding of when lobbying has a payoff.
4.

Selection Model Approach

A fourth method of addressing the challenges of estimating the effects of lobbying is to
utilize selection models. In this approach, the non-random assignment of subjects to two groups
(e.g. control and experimental) is explicitly modeled. This method is geared toward resolving
challenges related to groups choosing to lobby on a non-random basis. When coupled with panel
data methods, they can also be used to reduce concerns about time-invariant, unit-specific
omitted variables bias.
Richter et al. (2009) employ a selection model in their study of the relationship between
lobbying efforts and the effective tax rates companies pay as a check on whether or not there is

23

an endogenous process of selection into lobbying on taxes. Nevertheless, the authors argue that
because all firms prefer lower effective tax rates to higher effective tax rates, endogenous
selection into lobbying should not be a problem for that outcome, noting that only 10% of firms
actually lobby.
Simple panel methods, without accounting for the selection effect, would estimate the
following equation:

where

is firm’s i effective tax rate at time t,

expenditure in the previous time period,
and

is the firm’s lobbying

are lagged time-varying observable factors,

are firm and time fixed effects. In the presence of sample selection bias, this equation

would suffer from omitted variable bias and the coefficient on lobbying expenditures,

would

result in incorrect inference about the effects of lobbying on tax rates.
To check for this problem, Richter et al. implement a two-step Heckman (1979) selection
model that accounts for any selection effect. In the first step, a binary selection equation is
estimated—and the coefficients from it are used to calculate an estimate of the inverse Mills ratio
( ). This represents an estimated selection hazard for the probability that a given firm selected
into lobbying.
In Richter et al.’s (2009) case, they estimate the decision to lobby or selection equation
as:

where

is a binary variable representing the decision to lobby or not, F( . ) represents

the cumulative density function of a standard normal distribution since they are estimating a
24

probit model and

represents factors that influence a firms decision to lobby including both

factors included in

in the baseline estimation equation of interest and factors not included.

Given functional form assumptions, the inclusion of additional factors is not strictly necessary
for estimation; however, the inclusion of additional factors that affect selection but not outcomes
greatly increase the robustness of the estimates (Sartori 2003). In the case of Richter et al., they
use as additional factor liquid assets, such as cash, which when plentiful may make it easier for
firms to lobby, but are unlikely to directly affect the effective tax rate.
Richter et al. then use the estimates

to construct the estimate of the inverse Mills ratio

as:

where

represents the standard normal probability density function and

, its cumulative

density function. This is then inserted into the outcome equation to control for endogenous
selection into lobbying to overcome selection bias issues and make causal inference.

Using the sample selection method outlined here, Richter et al. (2009) find not only that
increasing lobbying efforts by 1% over a firm’s baseline level in a given year predicts lower
effective tax rates by 1.07 percentage points on the margin in the next period, but also that these
results are not driven by firms’ decisions to select into lobbying because they covet lower tax
rates. This paper and the use of selection models, however, cannot resolve fully whether or not
firms, that are already lobbying, opportunistically increase their efforts at opportune moments—
making it difficult to say whether or not money is left on the table by firms that do not lobby.

25

5.

Structural Modeling Approach

A final approach that can be used to overcome the inherent challenges in empirical
research in lobbying is to employ a structural modeling approach. Although not a quasiexperimental approach like the four presented above, a structural model does build out the
econometric equations directly from a theoretical model so that each parameter in the statistical
model has theoretical underpinnings. Moreover, the structural estimation approach allows the
researcher to calibrate the theoretical model to policy experiments (doing “what-if” analysis)
which cannot be done as rigorously with a reduced form approach. The simultaneity and causal
direction of effects are derived in the formal model, and the empirical tests match the theoretical
model. This minimizes endogenous selection concerns if the theoretical model is believed to
reflect the true institutional details of the situation. In doing this, structural models overcome
some, but not all of the traditional issues that arise with statistical inference. Underlying these
models, though, are often a number of strong assumptions that are required to generate the result,
assumptions which may be so strong as to render these models suspect.
Kang (2012) provides a current example of a structural econometrics approach to lobbying.
She builds a formal all-pay contest model of a lobbying process in which groups choose to select
into a counteractive lobbying environment. Applying this model to energy issues, she estimates
the model’s parameter values in examining energy interest groups’ support and opposition for
policies embedded within various bills during the 110th Congress. To obtain results, Kang
assumes that it is difficult for interest groups to change their lobbying strategies within a single
two-year session of Congress.

26

Kang finds that the effect of energy interest groups lobbying expenditures on a policy’s
equilibrium enactment outcome to be very small, but that these small shifts in policy are actually
quite profitable relative to the small investments in lobbying firms make. She finds that lobbying
in this setting has a marginal return in policy of 140% return. The value of structural
econometric approaches comes from their ability to marry theory with data in such a way that
predictions from theoretical models can be estimated broadly.
C. SUMMARY OF EMPIRICAL METHODS AND RESEARCH DESIGN
The five examples above demonstrate that recent research in lobbying has been able to
overcome a number of empirical challenges inherent in assessing various aspects of lobbying
activity by using more advanced empirical methods. While each paper approaches its respective
question with a different methodological approach, they almost all share a quasi-experimental
design structure that has advantages over more common empirical designs used in lobbying
research.3
Each of the articles we have reviewed provides an application of a research design to a
different question of lobbying. They each demonstrate that lobbying can be valuable in some
contexts, but also show that the value of lobbying depends on timing, the interest groups’ targets,
and other factors that appear to play a role in determining the outcomes of lobbying efforts.

3

Despite the attractiveness of these new statistical approaches, these methods are not fool-proof. Differences in
differences can suffer from inconsistent standard errors (Bertrand et al. 2004). Event study analysis may have
inappropriate windows or confounding factors in the window that are correlated with the outcomes, yielding
incorrect causal inference. Weak instruments may eliminate the benefits of an instrumental variables regression
(Stock & Staiger 1997). Lack of a convincing selection mechanisms or small samples may doom selection models
(Sartori 2003). Unrealistic assumptions might make structural models unbelievable (Angrist & Pischke 2010).
Nevertheless, when correctly employed and carefully used, these methods can make substantial strides in addressing
the challenges that empirical lobbying research faces.

27

Beyond the methods used in the examples above, there are also a number of quasiexperimental approaches in other literatures that might become useful in advancing the empirical
analysis of lobbying. A commonly used method in other social science fields to help deal with
sample selection and omitted variables bias issues is to compare treated units with untreated units
who are otherwise similar using advanced matching methods (Rosenbaum & Rubin 1983).
Regression discontinuity designs exploiting knife-edge assignments to treatment and control
groups help overcome questions about sample selection and omitted variable bias as well
(Imbens & Lemieux 2008; Angrist & Lavy 1999). Synthetic controls have been constructed to
empirically identify treatment effects in single case studies (Abadie & Grazebal 2003; Abadie et
al. 2010). These approaches have yet to be employed in the empirical analysis of lobbying, but
will likely yield fruit if used in the appropriate settings in future research.
Despite the importance of methodological approaches to advance the empirical analysis
of lobbying, researchers should continue to adhere to the basic tenets of any good research
design. These include: 1) clearly defining the research question, 2) understanding the
institutional details, 3) understanding the source of variation and the counterfactual, 4)
identifying and explaining the mechanisms that explain the results, and 5) eliminating alternative
explanations. These factors coupled with the more advanced methodological techniques should
allow researchers to push the envelope on empirical research in lobbying by allowing
quantifiable causal inference.
IV. DATA
While it is important to understand what types of empirical approaches are effective and
likely to yield strong causal inferences about lobbying, implementing such research designs

28

cannot be conducted without appropriate and sufficiently high quality data. The amount of data
available on lobbying is increasing rapidly as interest in the topic grows both within and outside
of academia, as disclosure laws proliferate in new jurisdictions, and as time passes allowing
existing datasets stemming from older disclosure laws to grow with time. In addition,
researchers are becoming more creative in their own data collection efforts. In this section, we
review the basic types of data available and the advantages and disadvantages associated with
each. We also consider what future sources of data will advance empirical research in lobbying.
We stress, though, that advances in measuring lobbying will be most useful in answering the
returns to lobbying only to the extent that outcome variables can be well-measured too and
clearly linked to lobbying efforts. Too often, the link between lobbying activity and the outcome
in questions can be incomplete or tenuous, particularly when authors fail to provide institutional
details about the linkages.
A. TYPES OF DATA
Broadly speaking there are three general classes of data typically collected on lobbying
activity: surveys, registries, and transaction records. Disclosure rules and survey questions
typically dictate what information is available in a particular dataset. The questions asked of
survey participants vary from study to study and disclosure laws vary from jurisdiction to
jurisdiction. This leads to datasets of varying quality and degrees of usefulness for researchers
who want to empirically identify causal outcomes related to lobbying activity rather than simply
produce summary statistics or generate partial/conditional correlations. Each class of data has its
own strengths and weaknesses as does each distinct dataset.

29

1.

Surveys

Some of the first modern empirical academic research on lobbying dates back to
Milbrath’s (1963) survey work4 and this tradition has continued with surveys and interviews of
lobbyists (Heinz et al. 1993; Baumgartner et al. 2009), interest groups (Schlozman & Tierney
1986; Wright 1990; Kollman 1998; Yadav 2008), and bureaucrats (Furlong 1998; Waterman et
al. 1998).
One key advantage of survey data is that the survey questions are flexible and allow
researchers to investigate topics that lobbying disclosure laws would not permit. For example,
Nelson & Yackee (2012) use survey data to study when organizations choose to lobby as a
coalition instead of by themselves. This is particularly useful because disclosure laws typically
do not require organizations to declare whether or not their lobbying activity is coordinated with
other groups as part of a coalition nor do they typically require associations to disclose their
members. Survey data can also be particularly useful when conducting cross- or multijurisdictional studies, since the disclosure requirements and institutional rules may vary (subtly
or dramatically) from location to location—making transactional data from different locations
difficult to compare without understanding how the institutional rules shape lobbying behavior.
Campos & Giovannoni (2007) use World Bank Survey data to show that lobbying and corruption
are substitutes and that lobbying is more likely to occur than bribery in locations with stronger
institutions. Yadav (2008) collects her own comparative survey data in India and China to
analyze when interest groups get involved in the lobbying process. Hence, survey data is most

4

While governments collected some data on lobbying at that time, the information content was limited and it was
difficult to access.

30

likely to be fruitfully collected when observational data on lobbying is limited due to the nature
of disclosure laws or when the questions of interest are cross-jurisdictional in nature.
Despite these advantages, survey data has a number of disadvantages. Survey data in
lobbying frequently suffers from significant non-random non-response rates, lack of random
samples, ex-post recollection, small numbers of observation units, cross-sectional dimensionality
only, and limited ability to verify the validity of answers (Groves et al. 2009). All of these issues
combined make it impossible for empiricists to fully control for unobservable individual
observation-unit fixed characteristics, one of the important characteristics of good statistical
work highlighted earlier. Moreover, the problems with surveys will likely generate multiple
sources of statistical bias making causal inference difficult if not impossible.
2.

Lobbying Registrations

Disclosure laws have also generated public sources of data that are widely available
today. Among this data, registries of lobbyists are by far the most common. Nearly every
jurisdiction that attempts to regulate lobbying activity has a registry requirement, although the
requirements of who must register and what information registrants must provide vary greatly
across jurisdiction. Researchers have heavily relied on this registry information to make broad
inferences about interest group participation in lobbying activity (e. g. Gray & Lowery 1996;
Wolak et al. 2005; Gray et al. 2004).
Registry data offer a number of advantages when studying lobbying. Because the
registry data is available for a full population of interest groups over a long period of time, it can
help to answer questions about who is registered to lobby. A second advantage of many lobbying
registries is that they also contain information on the not just the groups, but the individual

31

lobbyists who are registered to lobby. This allows researchers not only to track lobbyists over
time, but also to link lobbyists to various interest groups. This may be particularly useful to
researchers attempting to identify the use of in-house versus contract lobbyists by groups, and
could also lead to creation of lobbying network maps that include the connectedness, proximity,
and centrality of lobbyists and interest groups (e.g. La Pira et al. 2012).
Registry data, however, suffers from a number of practical drawbacks. Given the
differences in registration rules across jurisdictions, it is difficult to make direct comparisons
across them. In some geographies registration is voluntary; in others, registration rules differ;
and in yet others, there is substantial gray area as to who must register (e.g. La Pira & Thomas
2013). A second problem is that registration by an interest group or lobbyist provides a right to
lobby, but does not necessarily mean that the group has lobbied in the jurisdiction. In fact, it is
not uncommon to find many registered interest groups with zero lobbying expenditures. Even
when this issue does not occur, the groups that register to lobby are not a random sample of
groups, as there is likely to be endogenous selection into registration, accompanied with all the
aforementioned issues that arise with that. Finally, registries are composed of counts of interest
groups, but do not provide information on lobbying effort by groups. This drawback will be
particularly problematic if the goal of research is to identify how “active” or “effective” interest
groups are in lobbying.
3.

Transaction Reports

A few national governments and a significant number of state governments in the U.S.
have moved beyond simply requiring lobbyists to register—and now collect transaction related
data on lobbying. This data includes how much each interest group spends on lobbying in each

32

time period, how much (and from whom) each lobbyist earns in revenue in each time period,
and, in some cases, in which general issue areas the interest group is lobbying. Advancements in
the statistical analysis of lobbying have been driven, in part, by the availability of these new
databases. One database, in particular, has been used extensively. The Lobbying Disclosure Act
of 1995 (and its Amendments) requires lobbyists to report lobbying expenditures and other data
to the U.S. Congress; this data has proven to be popular source for papers on the subject. Papers
using this federal data (Baumgartner et al. 2009; Bertrand et al. 2012; Blanes i Vidal et al. 2012;
Richter et al. 2009) and similar state-level transactional data (Grasse & Heidbreder 2011; Lewis
2013; de Figueiredo & Cameron 2012; Cameron & de Figueiredo 2013; de Figueiredo 2014)
now abound.
One advantage of this transactional data is its scope: researchers can now identify the
timing, intensity, and focus on an interest groups’ lobbying effort. This should, in turn, allow
researchers to link lobbying intensity to lobbying outcomes. Second, this data can be integrated
into the registry data to develop better network maps of the lobbying process and help identify
endogenous selection and timing issues in registries. Third, because of the quantity of the data in
both time and transactions, this data supports “big data” studies with large numbers of
observation units over long periods of time that will permit more advanced statistical methods to
be employed.
Despite the attractiveness of transactional data, it is not without disadvantages. Like
registry data, there is some gray area as to what is to be included in lobbying expenditures.
Moreover, these rules and regulations differ across jurisdictions, making cross-jurisdiction
comparisons difficult without cross-jurisdiction fixed-effects. Second, the transactional data
show lobbying intensity, but does include the content of the message that is being transmitted.

33

Third, the US federal transaction data does not inform the researcher who in the legislature, for
example, is the specific target of the lobbying effort. Thus, unlike campaign contributions,
researchers cannot map interest groups’ lobbying efforts to individual legislators.
B. FUTURE PATHS FOR DATA COLLECTION ON LOBBYING
The current data now available for researchers in lobbying should help to advance the
empirical research agenda in lobbying. In particular, the use of transactional data, which is now
available over longer time periods, will likely be one of the more attractive archival data roads
for researchers to travel in order to employ the more advanced statistical methods to obtain better
statistical identification and isolate the causal effects of lobbying on policy.
However, the transactional data alone will likely not be enough. In order to make
headway, researchers will have to integrate archival datasets (transactional data and registry
data) with external datasets to obtain natural experiments and better statistical identification for
isolating causal mechanisms. Blanes i Vidal et al. (2012) integrated a database on lobbyists’
career histories with transactional lobbying data; Kang (2013) integrated a database on bill
proposals with transactional lobbying data; de Figueiredo & Silverman (2006) integrated a
database on university overhead rates and academic earmarks with transactional lobbying data;
Richter et al. (2009) integrated a database on corporate tax payments with transactional lobbying
data. Integrating external archival datasets with the current lobbying datasets will likely yield
substantial payoffs for research.
In addition, researchers will likely profit from expanding statistical research on interest
group lobbying outside of the U.S. and its states. Papers have been written using datasets for a
number of countries, including China (Yadav 2008), India (Yadav 2008), Japan (Naoi & Krauss

34

2009), Mexico (Siegel 2005), and Norway (Alt et al. 1999). Although lobbying data in
developing countries is scant, data collected in these countries will also allow researchers to
make substantial contributions to understanding the breadth of applicability of theories of
lobbying. Studies that employ this international data could contribute substantially to defining
the generalizability of the U.S.-based empirical work. Even simple bivariate correlations in these
less studied international contexts could be quite useful until higher quality data is available and
more well-defined causal inference studies can be designed.
Finally, archival data will benefit from being combined with survey data, despite their
many disadvantages, to uncover new ground and institutional details in the mechanisms that
cause lobbying outcomes (e.g. Baumgartner et al. 2009).
V.

FUTURE RESEARCH
In thinking about the future of empirical research in lobbying, there are a number of areas

where crisp, clean, and well-identified statistical work could contribute substantially to our
understanding of lobbying and help the field to make substantial headway in answering the
questions posed below. In addition to simply applying quasi-experimental approaches,
understanding and incorporating the institutional details of lobbying remains very important in
the research design stage and will likely lead to the highest value results. Good empirical studies
in the areas suggested below could substantially move the literature on lobbying.
The first area that deserves attention is, “Why is there so little money is lobbying?” In
the United States, federal budgets represent in excess of two trillion dollars, yet lobbying
represents only three to four billion dollars. Relatedly, “Why do so few interest groups lobby?”
If lobbying is presumed to be so influential in appropriations and most policy domains, then

35

empirical researchers must convincingly guide scholars to an answer of why approximately only
10% of firms lobby in practice and why they spend so little given the magnitude of potential
benefits politicians could redirect towards interest that do lobby.
Second, a related area that deserves substantially more attention is the quantification of
the returns to lobbying. While lobbying is pervasive in the American and many other political
systems, the returns to lobbying cannot be infinitely large. Moreover, the billions of dollars
being spent annually on the activity are likely not all wasted. Presumably, the interest groups
that choose to lobby have some expectation of a return; however, understanding more about the
distribution of the payoffs among interest groups would seem to be an important question to
answer. A more nuanced question might be, “When, and under what conditions, does lobbying
produce a payoff?” If there are substantial marginal returns to lobbying, as most papers suggest,
why is there not much more investment? Put another way, when do the marginal benefits of
spending an extra dollar on lobbying begin to be outweighed by the marginal costs?
de Figueiredo & Silverman (2006) suggest that there are returns to lobbying only when
the supply and demand conditions are in equilibrium. Moreover, the author’s argue because a
legislator’s time is extremely limited and because the legislator is seeking a particular piece of
information that will be persuasive, once the legislator has been persuaded, the marginal returns
to additional lobbying is likely zero. An alternative view is that lobbying that the returns to
lobbying is extremely difficult to measure because most lobbying is defensive, preserving the
status quo. Measuring the impact of lobbying to get no measurable policy change makes it
difficult for researchers to measure the returns to lobbying. In addition, if interest groups lobby
friendly legislators who subsequently and privately lobby marginal legislators for votes (Hall &
Deardoff 2006), quantifying the precise returns to lobbying is difficult. Employing better

36

datasets and more advanced empirical techniques, researchers should now be able to come closer
to isolating and quantifying the effect of lobbying expenditures on policy outcomes.
Progress in these first two areas of academic inquiry should allow us to make headway in
answering additional questions of public policy interest. To date, the data suggests that
businesses are represented slightly more than non-business interests in lobbying, but businesses
spend substantially more on lobbying. However, Baumgartner et al (2009) find that although
citizen groups lobby less and on fewer issues than business groups, they are more likely to be
considered an important actor in such advocacy efforts. Do asymmetries in numbers or spending
make a difference in influence? Or do businesses have to spend more on lobbying to make their
voices heard? Are the payoffs large to business interests for higher lobbying effort? Or is the
marginal return to business interests per dollar spent comparable to, or less than that, for citizen
interests? By answering the questions in the first two areas outlined above we will make
headway on these latter questions.
The third area that deserves more attention is quantifying the importance of “who you
know” (connections) and “what you know” (expertise) in lobbying. It seems likely that both
play a role in determining the value of interest group lobbying (Bertrand et al. 2012), but
understanding their relative importance in the lobbying process would be helpful. In particular,
we now have evidence that “who you know” generates substantial revenue for lobbyists (Blanes i
Vidal et al. 2012). However, we have no direct empirical tests of the value of “what you know.”
That is, there have not yet been direct tests incorporating the content of the lobbying message
provided to legislators.

37

One prevalent view is that campaign contributions provide access to politicians that are
the targets of lobbying activity (Austen-Smith 1995). It could also be the case that “who you
know” plays the same role as campaign contributions in providing access to politicians. Senators
could rely on former staffers to screen potential lobbyists based on the content of the interest
group’s information. Former staffers understand the preferences and utility function of the
legislator well, and they understand her time constraints, so they might serve as useful
gatekeepers of information for the politician. Once the interest group is before the senator, only
“what you know” may matter for outcomes obtained. Empirical studies of this phenomenon
would seem to be a promising agenda.
Fourth, it would be helpful to know how intensely different legislators are targeted.
Surveys have allowed researchers to identify who is targeted for lobbying by interest groups, but
little research has been done on how intensely they are targeted and what kinds of messages are
the most influential in a legislator’s decision. Further empirical work on this topic with more
sophisticated datasets is likely to yield substantial fruit.
Fifth, in a broader study of political influence, scholars would benefit from understanding
how interest groups allocate resources across different instruments (lobbying, campaign
contributions, grassroots organization, endorsements, media campaigns, etc.) and which types of
interest group pressure are most effective. This is a difficult question to answer because
unobserved factors that influence lobbying may also affect other instruments (such as campaign
contributions). Thus, very careful implementation of the quasi-experimental methods noted
earlier would seem to be essential to making any credible headway in this area.

38

A final and very important avenue for researchers to pursue is the empirical testing of the
implications of theoretical models (EITM). There are literally hundreds of theoretical models of
lobbying and influence, with many different and frequently opposing predictions. Careful testing
of the implications of some of these theoretical models where appropriate (as outlined in Clarke
& Primo 2012), has largely eluded researchers to date. Austen-Smith & Wright (1996), de
Figueiredo & Cameron (2012), Kang (2013), and Cameron & de Figueiredo (2013), all cited
earlier in this essay, provide examples of empirical papers tightly and clearly linking theory and
testing in a way that can be falsified. These papers help to support and reject broad classes of
theoretical models. More work along this vein of research will allow the field to cull the vast
theoretical literature into a set of core theoretical models that are most useful in explaining the
actual practice of lobbying.
The empirical research on lobbying has progressed substantially over the past decade.
New datasets, new methodologies, and new research designs together create the opportunity to
not only investigate some of the more tenuous results currently found in the literature, but also to
answer some core research questions. Employing these new techniques will advance empirical
research in lobbying substantially over the next decade.

39

REFERENCES
Abadie A, Grazebal J. 2003. The Economic Costs of Conflict: A Case Study of the Basque
Country. Am. Econ. Rev. 93(1): 113-132.
Abadie A, Alexis D, Hainmueller J. 2010. Synthetic Control Methods for Comparative Case
Studies: Estimating the Effect of California’s Tobacco Control Program. J. Am. Stat. Assoc.
105(490): 493-505.
Adelino, M, Dinc S. 2013. Corporate Distress and Lobbying: Evidence from the Stimulus Act.
Work. Pap. Avail. at SSRN: http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2360103.
Alt JE, Carlsen F, Heum P, Johansen K. 1999. Asset Specificity and Political Behavior of
Firms: Lobbying for Subsidies in Norway. Inter. Org. 53(1): 99-116.
Angrist JD, Lavy V. 1999. Using Maimonides' Rule to Estimate the Effect of Class Size on
Scholastic Achievement. Q. J. Econ. 114(2): 533-575.
Angrist JD, Imbens G, Rubin D. 1996. Identification of Causal Effects Using Instrumental
Variables. J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 91:444-472.
Angrist JD, Pischke J. 2010. The Credibility Revolution in Empirical Economics: How Better
Research Design is Taking the Con out of Econometrics. J. Econ. Persp. 24(2): 3-30.
Ansolabehere SD, de Figueiredo JM, Snyder JM. 2003. Why Is There So Little Money in U.S.
Politics? J. Econ. Persp.17(1) 105-130.
Ansolabehere S, Snyder JM, Tripathi M. 2002. Are PAC Contributions and Lobbying Linked?.
Bus. & Polit. 4(2).
Austen-Smith D. 1995. Campaign Contributions and Access. Am. Polit. Sci. Rev. 89 (3): 566582.
Austen-Smith D, Wright J. 1994. Counteractive Lobbying. Am. J. Polit. Sci. 38(1): 25-44.
Austen-Smith D, Wright J. 1996. Theory and evidence for counteractive lobbying. Am. J. Polit.
Sci.. 40(2): 543-564.
Baumgartner FR, Leech BL. 1996. The Multiple Ambiguities of ‘Counteractive Lobbying’. Am.
J. Polit. Sci.. 40(2): 521-542.
Baumgartner FR, Berry JM, Hojancaki M, Kimball DC, Leech BL. 2009. Lobbying and Policy
Change: Who Wins, Who Loses, and Why. Chicago: U. of Chicago Press
Baumgartner FR, Gray V, Lowery D. 2009. Federal Policy Activity and the Mobilization of State
Lobbying Organizations. Polit. Res. Q. 62(3):552-567
Baumgartner FR, Larsen-Price HA, Leech BL, Rutledge P. 2011. Congressional and Presidential
Effects on the Demand for Lobbying. Polit. Res. Q. 64(1): 3-16.

40

Baumgartner FR, Leech BL. 2002. Interest Niches and Policy Bandwagons: Patterns of Interest
Group Involvement in National Politics. J. Polit. 63(4):1191-1213
Baylis K, Furtan H. 2003. Free-Riding on Federalism: Trade Protection and the Canadian Dairy
Industry. Can. Pub. Pol. 29(2):145-161
Benz J, Kirkland JH, Gray V, Lowery D, Sykes J, Deason M. 2011. Mediated Density: The
Indirect Relationship between U.S. State Public Policy and PACs. State Polit. & Pol.Q.
11(4):440-459
Berkman MB. 2002. Legislative Professionalism and the Demand for Groups: The Institutional
Context of Interest Population Density Legis. Stud. Q. 26: 661-679
Bertrand M, Duflo E, Mullainathan S. 2004. How Much Should We Trust Differences-InDifferences Estimates? Q. J. Econ. 119(1): 249-275.
Bertrand M, Bombardini M, Trebbi F. 2012. Is it whom you know or what you know? An
empirical assessment of the lobbying process. NBER Work. Pap. 16765.
Blanes i Vidal J, Draca M, Fons-Rosen C. 2012. Revolving Door Lobbyists. Am. Econ. Rev.,
102(7): 3731-48.
Blau B, Brough T, Thomas D. Corporate Lobbying and the 2008 Troubled Asset Relief
Program. J. Bank. Fin. 37(8): 3007-3017.
Bombardini M, Trebbi F. 2011. Votes or Money? Theory and Evidence from the US Congress.
J. Pub. Econ. 95(7-8): 587-611.
Bombardini M, Trebbi F. 2012. Competition and political organization: Together or alone in
lobbying for trade policy? J. Inter. Econ. 87(1): 18-26.
Bonardi J-P. 2005. Corporate political strategies for widely salient issues. Acad. Manag. Rev.
30(3): 555-576.
Caldeira GA, Wright JR. 1998. Lobbying for Justice: Organized Interests Supreme Court
Nominations, and United States Senate. Am. J. Polit. Sci. 42(2): 499-523
Caldeira GA., Hojnacki M, Wright JR. 2000. The Lobbying Activities of Organized Interests in
Federal Judicial Nominations. J. Polit. 62(1): 51-69
Cameron CM, de Figueiredo JM. 2013. Informational Lobbying: Theory and Empirical
Evidence from the American States. Work. Pap., Princeton U.
Campos NF, Giovannoni F. 2007. Lobbying, Corruption and Political Influence. Public Choice
131(1/2) 1-21.
Carroll GR, Hannan MT. 1992. Dynamics of Organizational Populations: Density,
Legitimation, and Competition. New York: Oxford U. Press
Center for Responsive Politics. 2013. http://www.opensecrets.org

41

Clarke KA, Primo DM. 2012. A Model Discipline: Political Science and the Logic of
Representation. New York: Oxford U. Press
Comin D, Hobijn B. 2009. Lobbies and Technology Diffusion. Rev. Econ. Stat. 91(2): 229-44
de Figueiredo JM. 2002. Lobbying and Information in Politics. Bus. & Polit. 4(2): 125-129.
de Figueiredo JM. 2004. The Timing, Intensity, and Composition of Interest Group Lobbying:
An Analysis of Structural Policy Windows in the States. NBER Work. Pap. 10588.
de Figueiredo JM. 2014. The Timing of Lobbying in Corruption, Business Law, and Business
Ethics, ed. P Nichols. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
de Figueiredo JM, Cameron CM. 2012. Endogenous Cost Lobbying. NBER Work. Pap. <###>
deFigueiredo JM, Kim JJ. 2004. When do firms hire lobbyists? The organization of lobbying at
the Federal Communications Commission. Indus. Corp. Change. 13(6): 883-900.
de Figueiredo JM, Silverman BS 2006. Academic Earmarks and the Returns to Lobbying. J Law
Econ. 49(2): 597-625
de Figueiredo JM, Silverman BS. 2007. How Do We (Want to) Fund Science? Politics,
Lobbying, and Academic Earmarks Science and the University, ed. R Ehrenberg. Madison: U.
of Wisconsin Press
de Figueiredo JM, Tiller EH. 2001. The Structure and Conduct of Corporate Lobbying: How
Firms Lobby the Federal Communications Commission. J. Econ. Manag. Strat. 10(1): 91-122.
Drope JM, Hansen WL. 2004. Purchasing Protection? The Effect of Political Spending on U.S.
Trade Policy. Polit. Res. Q. 57(1):27-37
Duso T. 2005. Lobbying and Regulation in a Political Economy: Evidence from the U.S. Cellular
Industry. Public Choice. 122(3/4): 251-276
Ehrlich SD. 2008. The Tariff and the Lobbyist: Political Institutions, Interest Group Politics, and
U.S. Trade Policy. Inter. Stud. Q. 52(2):427-445
Evans D. 1996. Before the Roll Call: Interest Group Lobbying and Public Policy Outcomes in
House Committees. Polit. Res. Q. 49(2):287-304.
Facchini G, Mayda AM, Mishra P. 2011 Do interest groups affect US Immigration policy? J.
Inter. Econ. 85(1):114-128.
Faccio M. 2006. Politically Connected Firms. Am. Econ. Rev. 96(1): 369-386.
Federal Election Commission. 2013. Summary Report 2011-2012 Election.
http://www.fec.gov/press/press2013/20130419_2012-24m-Summary.shtml
Furlong SJ. 1998. Political influence on the bureaucracy: the bureaucracy speaks. J. Pub. Admin.
Res. Theory. 8(1), 39–65.

42

Gawande K, Krishna P, Olarreaga M. 2012. Lobbying Competition Over Trade Policy Inter.
Econ. Rev. 53(1):115-132
Gawande K, Krishna P, Robbins MJ. 2006. Foreign Lobbies and U.S. Trade Policy. Rev. Econ.
Stat. 88(3):563-571
Gehlbach S. 2006. The Consequences of Collective Action: An Incomplete-Contracts Approach.
Am. J. Polit. Sci. 50(3):802-823
Goldman E, Rocholl J, and So J. 2009. Do Politically Connected Boards Affect Firm Value?
Rev. Fin. Stud. 22(6): 2331-2360.
Grasse N, Heidbreder, B. 2011. The influence of Lobbying Activity in State Legislatures:
Evidence from Wisconsin. Legis. Stud. Q. 36(4): 567-589.
Gray V, Lowery D. 1996. The Population Ecology of Interest Representation: Lobbying
Communities in the American States. Ann Arbor: U. of Michigan Press.
Gray V, Lowery D. 1998. The Density of State Interest-Communities: Do Regional Variables
Matter? Publius. 28(2):61-79
Gray V, Lowery D, Wolak J. 2004. Demographic Opportunities, Collective Action, Competitive
Exclusion, and the Crowded Room: Lobbying Forms among Institutions. State Polit. & Pol. Q.
4(1): 18-54.
Groves RM., Fowler FJ, Couper MP, Lepkowski JM, Singer E, Tourangeau R. 2009. Survey
Methodology. New York: Wiley.
Guo B. 2009. Lobby or Contribute? The Impact of Corporate Governance on Firms' Political
Strategies. Work. Pap. Avail. at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1495143
Hall RL, Miler C. 2000. Interest Groups Subsidies to Legislative Overseers. J. Polit.. 70(4):
990-1005
Hall RL, Deardorff AV. 2006. Lobbying as Legislative Subsidy. Am. Polit. Sci.Rev. 100(1): 6984.
Hall RL, Reynolds ME. 2012. Targeted Issue Advertising and Legislative Strategy: The Inside
Ends of Outside Lobbying. J. Polit. 74(3): 888-902.
Hannan MT, Freeman J. 1977. The population ecology of organizations. Am. J. Soci. 82(5): 929964.
Hannan MT, Freeman J. 1984. Structural Inertia and Organizational Change. Am. Soci. Rev.
49(2): 149-164.
Hansen WL, Mitchell NJ, Drope, JM. 2004. Collective Action, Pluralism, and the Legitimacy
Tariff: Corporate Activity or Inactivity in Politics. Polit. Res. Q. 57(3): 421-429
Hansen WL, Mitchell NJ. 2000. Disaggregating and Explaining Corporate Political Activity:
Domestic and Foreign Corporations in National Politics. Am. Polit. Sci. Rev. 94(4): 891-903.

43

Harstad B, Svensson J. 2011. Bribes, Lobbying, and Development. Am. Polit. Sci. Rev. 105(1):
46-63.
Heberlig ES. 2005. Getting to Know You and Getting Your Vote: Lobbyists' Uncertainty and the
Contacting of Legislators. Polit. Res. Q. 58(3): 511-520.
Heckman JJ. 1979. Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error. Econometrica 47(1): 153161.
Heinz J, Laumann E, Nelson, R and Salisbury R. 1993. The Hollow Core: Private Interests in
National Policy Making. Cambridge: Harvard U. Press
Helland L. 2008. Lobbying with Conflicting Interests: Norwegian Local-central Relations. Euro.
J.Polit. Res. 47(2): 184-205.
Hill MD, Kelly GW, Lockhart GB and Van Ness RA. 2011. Determinants and Effects of
Corporate Lobbying. Work. Pap. Avail. at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1420224
Hillman AJ, Zardhooki A, Biearman L. 1999. Corporate political strategies and firm
performance: indications of firm-specific benefits from personal service in the U.S. government.
Strat. Manag. J. 20(1): 67-81.
Hochberg YV, Sapienza P, Vissing-Jørgensen A. 2009. A Lobbying Approach to Evaluating the
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002. J. Account. Res. 47(2): 519-583.
Hojnacki M, Kimball DC. 1998. Organized Interests and the Decision of Whom to Lobby in
Congress. Am. Polit. Sci. Rev. 92(4): 775-790.
Hojnacki M, Kimball DC. 1999. The Who and How of Organizations' Lobbying Strategies in
Committee. J. Polit. 61(4): 999-1024.
Hojnacki M, Kimball DC. 2001. PAC Contributions and Lobbying Contacts in Congressional
Committees. Polit. Res. Q. 54:161-80.
Holburn GLF, Vanden Bergh RG. 2004. Influencing Agencies Through Pivotal Political
Institutions. J. Law Econ. Org. 20(2): 458-483.
Holyoke TT. 2003. Choosing Battlegrounds: Interest Group Lobbying across Multiple Venues.
Polit. Res. Q. 56(3): 325-336.
Horgos D, Zimmermann KW. 2009. Interest Groups and Economic Performance: Some New
Evidence. Public Choice 138(3/4): 301-315.
Igan D, Mishra P, Tressel T. 2012. A Fistful of Dollars: Lobbying and the Financial Crisis.
NBER Macroecon. Ann. 26(1): 195-230.
Imbens GW, Lemieux T. 2008. Regression discontinuity designs: A guide to practice. J.
Econometrics 142(2): 615-635.
Jayachandran S. 2006. The Jeffords Effect. J. Law Econ. 49(2): 397-425.

44

Kang K. 2012. Policy Influence and Private Returns from Lobbying in the Energy Sector. Work.
Pap., Carnegie Mellon U., Avail. at:
http://www.contrib.andrew.cmu.edu/~kangk/kang_lobbyingforpower.pdf
Kerr WR, Lincoln E, Mishra P. 2013. The Dynamics of Firm Lobbying. Work. Pap., Harvard
Bus. School
Kelleher CA, Yackee SW. 2009. A Political Consequence of Contracting: Organized Interests
and State Agency Decision Making. J. Pub. Admin. Res. Theory 19(3):579-602.
Kollman K. 1997. Inviting Friends to Lobby: Interest Groups, Ideological Bias, and
Congressional Committees. Am. J. Polit. Sci. 41(2): 519-544.
Kollman K. 1998. Outside Lobbying: Public Opinion and Interest Group Strategies. Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press
La Pira TM, Thomas HF. 2013. Just How Many Newt Gingrich’s Are There on K Street?
Estimating the True Size and Shape of Washington’s Revolving Door. Presented at Annu. Meet.
Midwest. Polit. Sci. Assoc.
La Pira TM, Thomas HF, Baumgartner FR. 2012. The Two Worlds of Lobbying: The CorePeriphery Structure of the Interest Group System. Work. Pap., Avail. at
http://ssrn.com/abstract=2245065
Lee S-H, Baik Y-S. 2010. Corporate Lobbying in Antidumping Cases: Looking into the
Continued Dumping and Subsidy Offset Act. J. Bus. Ethics 96(3): 467-478.
Leech BA, Baumgartner FR, La Pira T, Semanko N. 2005. Drawing Lobbyists to Washington:
Government Activity and the Demand for Advocacy. Polit. Res. Q. 58: 19-30.
Lewis DC. 2013. Advocacy and influence: Lobbying and legislative outcomes in Wisconsin.
Interest Groups & Advocacy. 2: 206-226.
Lowery D and Gray V. 1998. The Dominance of Institutions in Interest Representation: A Test
of Seven Explanations. Am. J. Polit. Sci. 42(1): 231-255.
Lowery D, Gray V, Wolak J, Godwin E, Kilburn W. 2005. Reconsidering the CounterMobilization Hypothesis: Health Policy Lobbying in the American States. Polit. Behav. 27(2):
99-132.
Mahoney C. 2007. Lobbying Success in the United States and the European Union. J. Pub.
Policy 27(1): 35-56.
McKay A. 2011. The Decision to Lobby Bureaucrats. Public Choice. 147: 123-138.
McKay A, Yackee SW. 2007. Interest Group Competition on Federal Agency Rules. Am. Polit.
Res. 35(3): 336-357.
Mian A, Sufi A, Trebbi F. 2010. The Political Economy of the US Mortgage Default Crisis. Am.
Econ. Rev. 100(5): 1967-98.

45

Milbrath LW. 1963. The Washington Lobbyists. Chicago: Rand McNally & Co.
Milyo J, Primo D, Groseclose T. 2000. Corporate PAC Campaign Contributions in Perspective.
Bus. & Polit. 2(1): 75-88
Morris IL, Neeley GW. 2001. Regulation and ‘Rent-Seeking’: Understanding Attorney
Certification. State & Local Gov. Rev. 33(1): 42-51.
Naoi M, Krauss E. 2009. Who Lobbies Whom? Speical Interest Politics under Alternative
Electoral Systems. Am. J. Polit. Sci.. 53(4): 874-892.
Nelson, D., and S.W. Yackee. 2012. Lobbying Coalitions and Government Policy Change: An
Analysis of Federal Agency Rulemaking. J. Polit.. 74(2): 339-353.
Richter BK. 2011. ‘Good’ and ‘Evil’: The Relationship Between Corporate Social Responsibility
and Corporate Political Activity. Work. Pap, Avail. at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1750368
Richter BK, Samphantharak K, Timmons JF. 2009. Lobbying and Taxes. Am. J. Polit. Sci. 53(4):
893-909.
Roberts BE. 1990. A Dead Senator Tells No Lies: Seniority and the Distribution of Federal
Benefits. Am. J. Polit. Sci.. 34(1): 31-58.
Rosenbaum P, Rubin D. 1983. The Central Role of the Propensity Score in Observational
Studies for Causal Effects. Biometrika. 70:41-55.
Rotemberg JJ. 2003. Commercial Policy with Altruistic Voters. J. Polit. Econ.111(1): 174–201.
Sartori AE. 2003. An Estimator for Some Binary-Outcome Selection Models Without Exclusion
Restrictions. Polit. Anal. 11:111-138.
Schlozman KL, Tierney JT. 1986. Organized Interests and American Democracy. New York:
Harper & Row
Schone K, Koch E, Baumont C. 2013. Modeling Local Growth Control Decisions in a Multi-city
Case: Do Spatial Interactions and Lobbying Efforts Matter? Public Choice 154(1-2): 95-117.
Schuler DA. 1996. Corporate Political Strategy and Foreign Competition: The Case of the Steel
Industry. Acad. Manag. J. 39(3): 720-737.
Schuler DA, Rehbein K, Cramer RD. 2002. Pursuing Strategic Advantage through Political
Means: A Multivariate Approach. Acad. Manag. J. 45(4): 659-672.
Siegel JI. (2005). Can Foreign Firms Bond Themselves Effectively by Renting U.S. Securities
Laws? J. Fin. Econ. 75(2): 319–359.
Staiger D, Stock JH. 1997. Instrumental Variables with Weak Instruments. Econometrica 65(3):
557-586.
Stoyanov A. 2009. Trade Policy of a Free Trade Agreement in the Presence of Foreign
Lobbying. J. Inter. Econ. 77(1): 37-49.

46

Sukiassyan G, Nugent JB. 2011. Lobbying or Information Provision: Which Functions of
Associations Matter Most for Member Performance? East. Euro. Econ. 49(2): 30-63
Tavares SC. 2006. The Political Economy of the European Customs Classification. Public
Choice 129(1/2): 107-130.
Tung HH. 2011. Dynamic Career Incentive Versus Policy Rent-Seeking in Institutionalized
Authoritarian Regimes: Testing a Long-Run Model of Trade Policy Determination in China.
Work. Pap., Avail. at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1900644
Waterman RW, Rouse A, Wright R. 1998. Venues of influence: a new theory of political control
of the bureaucracy. J. Pub. Admin. Res. & Theory 8(1): 13–38.
Werner TD. 2011. The Sound, the Fury, and the Nonevent: Business Power and Market
Reactions to the Citizen United Decision. Am. Polit. Res. 39(1): 118-141.
Wright JR. 1990. Contributions, Lobbying, and Committee Voting in the U.S. House of
Representatives. Am. Polit. Sci.Rev.. 84(2): 417-438.
Wolak J, Newmark AJ, McNoldy T, Lowery R, Gray V. 2003. Much of Politics Is Still Local:
Multi-State Lobbying in State Interest Communities. Legis. Stud. Q. 27(4): 527-555.
Yackee SW. 2012. The Politics of Ex Parte Lobbying: Pre-Proposal Agenda Building and
Blocking during Agency Rulemaking. J. Pub. Admin. Res. Theory. 22:373-393.
Yackee JW, Yackee SW. 2006. A Bias toward Business? Assessing Interest Group Influence on
the Bureaucracy. J. Polit. 68: 128-139.
Yadav V. 2008. Business lobbies and policymaking in developing countries: the contrasting
cases of India and China. J. Pub. Aff. 8(1-2): 67-82.
Yu F, Yu X. 2011. Corporate Lobbying and Fraud Detection. J. Fin. Quant. Analysis. 46(6):
1865-1891.

47

