                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  SCHOOL, WHAT IS IT GOOD FOR? USEFUL HUMAN CAPITAL AND THE HISTORY
                OF PUBLIC EDUCATION IN CENTRAL EUROPE

                                            Tomas Cvrcek
                                           Miroslav Zajicek

                                        Working Paper 19690
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19690


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2013




We thank Jeremy Atack, Howard Bodenhorn, Timothy Guinnane, Alex Klein, Naomi Lamoreaux,
Peter Lindert, Melinda Miller, David Mitch, Joel Mokyr, Aldo Mussachio, Steven Nafziger, the participants
of Clemson Public Economics Workshop and of the Yale Economic History Workshop for their useful
comments. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Tomas Cvrcek and Miroslav Zajicek. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
School, what is it good for? Useful Human Capital and the History of Public Education in
Central Europe
Tomas Cvrcek and Miroslav Zajicek
NBER Working Paper No. 19690
December 2013
JEL No. H52,I25,N3,N43

                                                 ABSTRACT

The rise of education has featured prominently in the debate on the sources of modern long-term economic
growth. Existing accounts stress the positive role of public education and the importance of political
support for its provision. We argue that such an explanation for the spread of schooling is probably
a poor fit for many nations’ schooling histories and provide an example, using detailed data on schooling
supply from the Habsburg Empire. We show that while economic development made schooling more
affordable and widespread, the politics of demand for schools was not motivated by expectations of
economic development but by the ongoing conflict between nationalities within the Empire. We find
that public schools offered practically zero return education on the margin, yet they did enjoy significant
political and financial support from local political elites, if they taught in the “right” language of instruction.
Our results suggest that, for some countries at least, the main link, historically, went from economic
development to public schooling, not the other way round.


Tomas Cvrcek
Department of Economics
Clemson University
213 Sirrine Hall
Clemson, SC 29634
and NBER
tcvrcek@clemson.edu

Miroslav Zajicek
Katedra institucionální ekonomie
Národohospodáská fakulta
Vysoká škola ekonomická v Praze
nám. W. Churchilla 4
130 67 Praha 3
miroslav.zajicek@vse.cz
   1. Introduction

   Modern economic growth has been correlated with concurrent increase in schooling and

human capital accumulation. It has been investigated in numerous Barro‐style cross‐sectional

regressions and proposals regarding the provision of schooling count among core policy

recommendations issued to developing countries around the world (Sala‐i‐Martin, 1997). The

strong correlation between human capital and growth appears not only in the cross‐section but

also across time. It has become an integral part of theoretical modeling of industrialization, long‐

term growth and the accompanying demographic transition (Galor, 2011).

   There is less certainty about how the human capital is accumulated and what kind of human

capital exactly matters for growth. Formal schooling has long been considered one of the most

efficient channels (Easterlin, 1981). This line of argument, recently revisited by Lindert (2004),

Go and Lindert (2010), Mariscal and Sokoloff (2000) and others, sees modern growth as a

consequence of (among other things) the rise of national public systems of education which

themselves were the product of increased political voice and, eventually, electoral support for

tax‐based schooling. On closer inspection, any of these causal links becomes more complicated

(Mokyr, 2013). While Becker et al. (2009) claim that Prussia caught up with UK only thanks to

her schools, Mitch (1999) argues that Britain’s industrialization was orthogonal to her

educational system. Sandberg (1979) cites Sweden as a case of “impoverished sophisticate”

where human capital reportedly stood entirely out of proportion to the country’s level of income.

As for the link from political voice to education, the impulse for nation‐wide education may come

(and has come in many instances) not from savvy voters but from the ruling elites whose

motives had more to do with political control than economic development (Van Horn Melton,

1988). Even democratic politics must contend with questions about who may or may not enroll,




                                                 2
who pays for the schools, what is to be taught and it is far from obvious that the answer has

always been “more, better, broader” (Naidu, 2012; Palma & Reis, 2012; Troen, 1975).

    We aim to introduce more nuance to the argument by investigating these details of public

education decisions. Our research questions lie at the heart of the Easterlin‐Lindert story. Using

data from the Habsburg Empire, we ask: how well was its educational system responding to (and

thereby aiding) economic development? How did the provision of schooling infrastructure

interact with the Empire’s economic development? How important was educational politics vis‐

à‐vis economic factors? How did individuals respond to the public schooling provision and to the

local economic development in making their decisions about investing in human capital? In

contrast to the Easterlin‐Lindert story of credit‐constrained but newly enfranchised poor

parents wisely voting themselves more public school provision to be financed by stingy elites to

further the economic fortunes of their children and their country, we describe a system where

the local elite foists a politically‐motivated and economically irrelevant education on lukewarm

masses while making them pay for it mostly out of their own pockets.1 Our hypothesis is not new

(Lindert, 2004: 100‐103) but, as far as we are aware, ours is the first attempt to empirically test

it using historical statistical evidence.


    2. Explaining the rise of schooling

    A frequent point of departure for the literature on the provision of schooling and economic

growth is the high cross‐sectional variation among nation states (Easterlin, 1981). Lindert

(2004: 87‐88) opens by noting that Britain, the leader in school enrollment in early 19th century,

was overtaken by 1880 by France and Germany (Prussia). His explanation is that for a widely


1Easterlin (1981: 10‐11), citing the example of Church‐controlled Spanish educational system, is
aware of the fact that not all kinds of formal schooling are equally useful, yet he still sees the rise
of schooling primarily in the context of democratization of opportunity and of the political life,
noting that absolute monarchies are usually suspicious of mass education’s subversive potential.
                                                   3
available schooling system to develop, three ingredients had to come together: (i) local

autonomy so that local decision‐makers could appropriately respond to local economic

developments, (ii) political voice, i.e. a mechanism whereby broad public support for tax‐based

schooling could be converted into actual policy, and (iii) low‐cost provision which amounted to

cheap, abundant teaching staff. The reason why schooling almost always ended up being publicly

financed in spite of being among the most profitable private investments was that most of the

population was credit‐constrained and positive externalities were too weak to interest moneyed

local elites in generating critical mass of schooling through philanthropic activity. The argument

was further developed in Go and Lindert (2007, 2010) where it was tested on enrollment and

schooling data from US censuses of 1840 and 1850. This county‐level analysis used information

on votes cast in presidential elections and property restrictions on eligibility to state legislatures

as a measure of political voice and showed a positive effect of political voice on enrollment and

on public spending per pupil. Studies in similar vein have appeared or are under way for Britain,

Brazil, Russia, India and China (Mitch, 2012; Chaudhary et al., 2011; Musacchio et al., 2012).

   One recurring problem that these studies encounter is that they have to work around a lack

of suitable reliable data. An analysis of schooling provision would ideally require data that are

both sufficiently broad in scope to encompass all the necessary economic, political and

educational indicators and sufficiently detailed geographically so as to capture the local

variation. As it stands, educational statistics (enrollments, attendance records, age‐schooling

profiles) are often unreliable or incomplete; economic statistics, such as GDP per capita or real

wages, rarely exist on the sub‐national level; and measures of political voice are hard to

construct and interpret. As a result, both Chaudhary et al. (2011) and Musacchio et al. (2012)

have to stay at the level of federal states or corresponding units, which is a considerably greater

level of aggregation than Go and Lindert’s (2010) US counties. Go and Lindert (2007, 2010), on


                                                  4
the other hand, have no economic variables on the local county level and given that the whole

education‐growth nexus is riddled with endogeneity anyway, they propose to sidestep the issue

and estimate the demand (and supply) of education in reduced form.

   There is a further issue with measures of political voice. Go & Lindert’s (2010) choice of votes

cast in presidential elections makes sense in the context of American political institutions but for

most countries such measure is too restrictive, if it exists at all. Many European countries at the

time of Industrial Revolution had scarcely any democratic institutions and the variation in

suffrage, where it existed, was small across localities. This does not mean that various special

interests and segments of population had no way to voice their concerns; it does mean, however,

that their political voice was much less formalized and thus much harder to measure.

   How exactly that political voice would shape educational policies is also far from obvious. The

cited studies usually posit the issue in the form of a dichotomy between elites who were

ambivalent about educating the masses and strongly opposed to having pay for it and the general

population, which would demand more educational infrastructure, if only it had more political

clout. Musacchio et al. (2012), for example, show that exogenous positive shocks to various

states of the Brazilian federation had differential impact on local public spending on education

depending on whether the state’s institutions were more or less democratic. Similarly,

Chaudhary et al. (2011) blame low enrollment rates in early 20th century BRICs on absence of

mass political voice and correlate the provision of schooling with the characteristics of local

elites who did have political voice. But in many cases, among which the Habsburg Empire is one,

the original and continuing impetus for the spread of primary schooling came decidedly from the

top of the political hierarchy. Palma and Reis (2012), using Portugal as their example, go so far a

to argue that an authoritarian state may be, for various reasons, more effective in achieving

literacy than a republican regime. In other cases, the dichotomy between centralization and


                                                 5
decentralization is false, as many educational systems settled for some hybrid arrangement. Such

would be the case in Prussia (as well as the Habsburg Empire) where the oversight over content

of education was relatively centralized and tightly controlled while the school financing was

local. Under such circumstances, the local popular demand for more educational infrastructure

will likely depend on what kind of education the state deems allowable. Ficker (1873)

documents, for example, that for the whole first half of the 19th century, the Austrian government

pushed for the spread of primary schooling but resisted the growth of secondary, particularly

technical, schooling.

    All things considered, not all demand for education takes the form of public or political

action, nor does a political activity necessarily reflect widespread individual demand among the

local population. Our contribution is to attempt (i) to separate individual demand for more

education, driven presumably by rising returns to education, from the public/political demand

for more educational facilities and (ii) in analyzing the public demand for educational

infrastructure, to separate the influence of economic development from that of political

clout/voice.

    We exploit the rich detail of schooling information in the Habsburg school census of 1865 and

combine it with data on local economic development, such as industrial employment, local

railroad access and use of steam power. The descriptive statistics from the school census for

relevant variables are reported in Table 1. Not all provinces reported the full slate of variables.

Those that did we call “core provinces” – they happen to be the ones, which have lived under the

Habsburg scepter since at least the late Middle Ages (see Figure 1).2 The unit of observation is a



2In contrast, Galicia, Bukowina and Dalmatia came under the Habsburg rule between the
Partition of Poland (1772) and the Peace of Vienna (1815). We therefore call these the “new
provinces”. We also have no data on Hungary and the rest of the eastern half of the Empire
(Transleithania).
                                                  6
school district – an average district encompassed an area of about 363 km2 and was a home to an

average of 3.036 children aged 6‐12.3

                                          [Figure 1 here]

                                              [Table 1 here]

    We also have data on all secondary schools within the empire, so as to account for that part

of the returns to primary schooling that consisted in enabling a student to continue with his (but

not her!) education. We link our education data with information on local ethnic composition to

capture the political aspect of the problem: since education content was centrally determined

and school provision and attendance were compulsory by law, the language of instruction was

education’s most prominent feature of local political import.4 We use this factor to test the

importance of political voice in schooling.

    We merged this schooling dataset with information on the structure of employment,

contained in the 1869 census. This gives us share of workers employed in services, agriculture,

several different sectors of industry, as well as those who did not report any occupation.5 We use

it as our measure of economic development and as a measure of the human capital demand

arising from the local labor market in individual school districts.


    3. Education in the Habsburg Empire cca 1865

    From the start, the spread of primary education through the Empire was shaped by

government policy. The schooling law of 1774 was the foundational act of systematic primary


3 Considering that these age cohorts usually represent about 13‐14% of the total population, we
infer that the average district had about 22 – 24.000 inhabitants.
4 Other aspects, such as content and teaching methods, were determined centrally, not locally,

and local religious variation had ceased to be a political matter, given that school curriculum
allowed for separate religious instruction for Protestant children.
5 The 1869 census unfortunately does not differentiate employment by gender, reporting only

the total in each location and sector, so we supplement this information by using the 1880
census figures.
                                                    7
schooling. It introduced several basic features that survived until the next major reform of 1869,

such as the 6‐year compulsory schooling for both boys and girls aged 6 to 12, the stress on

religion and the trivium in education, the distinction between two‐grade country schools and 3‐

or 4‐grade town schools, the compulsory certification of teachers and the strict control of the

curriculum. An amendment of this law, promulgated in 1805 during the Napoleonic Wars,

tightened government control over the schooling system and, in consequence of the Habsburgs’

contempt for the ideas of the French Revolution, reinforced its conservative thrust. The system

also betrayed a preference for (though not insistence on) instruction in German.6 Cases where

“Romanian children were taught in Polish to read from a German textbook” (Prausek, 1868: 6)

opened the system to accusations of Germanization. The revolutions of 1848 produced a few

changes in legislation, most notably an explicit statement in favor of instruction in one’s mother

tongue, freedom of teaching methods, an expansion of primary schools from two grades to three

grades and an extension of teaching colleges from one year to two. But other attempts at liberal

education were soon quashed through the Concordat of 1855, which put the Church yet again

firmly in charge of the school supervision and teacher appointments. Even the language

provisions were less than perfectly enforced, as we shall see, and the freedom of teaching

method fell flat.7

    Until the secularization reforms of 1868‐69, the curriculum was saturated with religious

instruction. Pacher (2008) quotes a “recommended” school timetable where catechism and

biblical history took up six out of eighteen weekly lessons for the 9‐12 year‐olds and four out of


6 The local primary schools, even those with a Slavic language of instruction, were called
“German schools”.
7 The 1805 law recommended that teachers commit the teacher manual to memory so as to

minimize deviations from it in the classroom. It explicitly stated that “the Bell‐Lancaster method”
of peer learning, then popular in England, “was banished from our class‐rooms.” Post‐1848,
teachers were no longer bound by these provisions but, for various reasons, only few teachers
took up the opportunity to update their methods (Ficker, 1873: 40).
                                                 8
nine weekly lessons among the 6‐8 year olds. The law stipulated that a school day should

preferably begin and end with a lesson of religion (Helfert, 1860: 286). Writing, reading and

counting were next in importance, apportioned equally across the remaining weekly lessons,

with a few lessons spared for singing.

                                              [Figure 2]

   Figure 2 offers a rudimentary measure of the effectiveness of these schools. It plots the

average enrollment recorded for the generation born in the 1830s against the literacy rates of

that same cohort in the 1890 census. At first glance, the schools seem to have been adequately

successful in teaching literacy: the scatter plot by and large lies along the 45° line and simple

correlation between the two variables is 0.98 for men and 0.99 for women. But there are also

some worrying signs. Consider the case of Carinthian women (denoted KT). While 47.4% of them

enrolled in school during their school‐age years, only 30% reported themselves capable of

reading and writing in the 1890 census. Of course, historical literacy rates are susceptible to

biases such as education creep, selective mortality and selective migration. The first two of these,

however, bias literacy upwards (as illiterates die out faster than literates and surviving illiterates

report themselves more educated than they really are), so in the Carinthian case, one would have

to posit an enormous selective emigration of literate women (but not literate men who are much

closer to the 45° line) to generate the more than 17‐point shortfall in literacy relative to

enrollment. Clearly, the more plausible explanation is that the enrolled girls did not attend very

diligently, or if they did attend, they did not learn much, or even if they did learn, they later lost

their literacy skills for lack of use. None of these hypotheses bodes well for the effectiveness of

the educational system.

   Schooling was compulsory for children aged 6 to 12. Figure 3 suggests that at least in some

provinces the enrollment was successfully enforced. But it also shows a telling contrast with


                                                   9
enrollment rates reported during the same time period in those US states where school

attendance was not yet compulsory.8 The gradual arc of the American age‐enrollment profile

captures voluntary decisions, based presumably on one’s weighing the pros and cons of each

extra year of education. On the other hand, the sharp increase in enrollment at 6 and the sharp

decline at 12 in some Habsburg provinces suggests enrollment conforming not so much to the

schooling preferences of children or their parents but rather to the law’s demands. Together

with the Carinthian example of a shortfall in literacy, discussed earlier, this constitutes a

particularly damning indictment: a schooling system that underperforms in terms of education,

yet forces the population to devote time to it over and beyond its useful margin.

                                           [Figure 3 here]

    Apart from compelling pupils to attend, the law also required local communities to supply the

resources for school provision. This consisted of construction and maintenance of the school

building, paying teacher salary and providing teacher accommodation. In principle, wherever

100 school‐age children lived within half‐hour of walking distance, a school was to be built with

ideally 80 but certainly no more than 100 pupils per classroom. Table 1, column (ii) shows that,

with 12.04 classrooms per 1000 school‐age children on average, this regulation was upheld in

many districts but the high standard deviation around this average reveals that the legal

benchmark was far from universal.

    When a school was built, the area around it, usually corresponding to the parish, was

considered “covered” (eingeschult) and the school‐age children living there were obliged by law

to enroll and attend the particular local school.9 All core provinces were more than 80% covered,

although there were districts in the Austrian Littoral where coverage sank below 30%. Less than

8 The data for US states were kindly shared by Karen Clay and her co‐authors in Clay et al.
(2012).
9 When a village or an area was not covered, the local priest nonetheless had to report to his

superiors on the number of children in school age, which is how we came to know their numbers.
                                                 10
full coverage indicates that some communities did not meet the stipulations of the law. If a town

or a parish failed to provide schooling, the district authorities had at their disposal some carrots

in the form of subsidies and some sticks in the form of power to sequester a portion of the local

budget and assign it to schooling. The upper echelon of both public and church administration

expressed, however, a strong preference for using carrots and avoiding unnecessary conflict

between district supervisors and individual communities (Helfert, 1860: 19). Communities were

expected to enforce attendance. With overall enrollment reaching only 70.2% (Table 1), it is

clear that in some school districts – especially in the “new” provinces – schooling was

compulsory in name only.10

     As regards the ethnic/language question, post‐1848 official policy no longer endorsed

education in German explicitly but issues of language of instruction and of public support for

non‐German schools remained a sore spot practically to the end of the monarchy. Non‐German

nationalities continuously complained about the residual Germanizing tendencies of the

educational system, which was, after all, run by an overwhelmingly German civil and church

administrations and designed by German policy makers. Our 1865 dataset includes 22 school

districts with zero German students which nonetheless had at least one German or bilingual

school. The broad outlines of the situation are summarized in Table 2, which also reports simple

t‐tests for mean differences. The German‐majority districts did have almost everything better

and by a significant margin: more classrooms and teachers per 1000 school‐age children, more

public spending per child and better coverage by school infrastructure. Only the curriculum

extent, measured by the average number of grades per school, was comparable between German

and non‐German districts. The German districts fell behind, however, in provision of education in

10 Austrian statistics make no conceptual distinction between enrollment and attendance. The
figures reported in Table 1 come from statistics labeled “Schulbesuch” (school attendance) in the
original document. But from the context of the operation of the schools, it is clear that they were
enrollment numbers.
                                                 11
minority languages, i.e. in building schools for the local Slav minorities, while German minorities

in non‐German districts had almost certain access to instruction in their mother tongue.11 The

better school provision in German districts could be a result of their higher level of economic

development but the economic variables at the bottom of Table 2 cast some doubt on that: some

are better in German districts, some in non‐German ones, some show no significant difference.

                                           [Table 2 here]

     The German element undoubtedly had the strongest political voice among all the

nationalities, although in the Habsburg context it would be counterproductive to try to measure

it using electoral statistics.12 Table 2 suggests that the German political voice, however informal

and unobservable directly, may have had measureable impact on the disbursement of public

funds in matters of schooling and especially minority German schooling. Recall that the district

authorities – the political elites in our case – were not in a strong position to prevent a school

from being built by a determined community, but they could make it significantly easier and

cheaper by providing a subsidy to a within‐district minority who may not have been big enough

to support a school on its own.

     An important part of our empirical analysis is to see whether these plain differences in mean

along ethnic lines survive when we control for other local factors. The main lesson from our brief

outline of the Austrian educational system is that – unlike in the Easterlin‐Lindert story, where

political voice is an ally of economic development – in our case the two forces are, if not set

against each other, then certainly not pushing in the same direction. If the pro‐German

advantages do not survive controlling for economic variables, then apparently political voice

11 Note that these particular measures are calculated from a subsample of districts with more
than 100 minority students, i.e. those where a minority school may be reasonably justified.
12 As of 1865, the Empire had had experience with mere two nation‐wide elections (1848 and

1861), the suffrage was highly constrained and too complicated to interpret easily, falling into
four different electoral colleges of unequal importance; and in any case, it encompassed only a
tiny fraction of the public.
                                                 12
mattered less than development. If, on the other hand, economic variables turn out not to matter

in the presence of the ethnic variables, then it suggests that the school was not so much an

engine of growth as a cultural battlefield.


   4. Estimation

   We separate our empirical analysis into three parts. First, on the individual level, economic

development may potentially affect one’s demand independently of the provision of schooling.

That is, whether parents choose to enroll their child in a school, given some existing supply,

depends on the expected returns to education. Second, on the district level, the provision of

schooling may respond to economic development through two channels: by increasing the tax

base which will make public financing of local schools easier and presumably through greater

demand for such provision. Finally, to assess the importance of political voice relative to the

economy, we look for differences in the treatment of German minorities in non‐German districts

and non‐German minorities in German districts along the ethnic boundaries within the Empire.


   4.1.    Individual demand for education

   We investigate how enrollment in a district responded to economic changes, conditional on

the existing supply of schools. Ideally, one would like to know the expected returns to primary

education for individual children and see how these varied with development. We do not have

such detailed information and so we exploit the difference in post‐primary school careers open

to boys and to girls. For each district, we construct a dependent variable that measures

enrollment of boys and girls separately. Since this variation took place within districts, we are

able to include district‐level fixed effects that will capture district‐specific levels of law

enforcement, supervision and other characteristics of the school supply. Since boys and girls face

the same school supply and primary schooling was overwhelmingly coeducational in terms of


                                                   13
extent and content, any differences between boys’ and girls’ enrollment will be due to differences

in their expected returns to education: the post‐primary‐school prospects.13

      Girls did not continue with their education beyond primary school; secondary schools were

for boys only. We use the sum of all secondary schools’ entering class slots within 50km of a

district to measure the prospects of secondary education for boys; for girls, this value is set to

zero. Girls and boys also benefited differentially from economic modernization in their

employment prospects after graduation. While industrialization generated new employment

opportunities for men and women alike, some sectors were more feminized than others. We

measure the impact of economic development on private demand for education by constructing

what we call literacy content of local labor market: from the 1869 population census, we take

sectoral shares of employment within 50km of each school district, estimate proportions of

women in each sector and evaluate each occupation in terms of its literacy usage, using Mitch’s

(1992: 213‐4) classification for mid‐19th century jobs.14 The result is an index between 0 and 1

where 1 means that all local jobs required literacy and 0 means that literacy was not in any way

useful in the local labor market. Figure 4 displays the values for men and women in each district.

                                            [Figure 4 here]

      School attendance was compulsory by law and even though its enforcement was far from

perfect, the actual observed enrollments were presumably at least partially affected by the

existing threats of fines and other penalties. However, in all the districts in our dataset, actual

enrollments included children who were not under legal compulsion. First, there were children

who lived in villages currently not covered by school provision (nicht eingeschulte Ortschaften)

and it is clear from the data that in many places these did actually enroll in whichever school was



13   We also include a boys fixed effect to capture potential other, non‐economic, gender biases.
14   See Appendix 1 for more detail on the construction of this variable.
                                                  14
closest.15 Second, while compulsory education extended to age 12, all but three districts report

positive enrollment among children over 12. For these two groups, the enrollment was

voluntary, so as to avoid the problem of a censored dependent variable. We therefore use, as our

dependent variable Yis, enrollment per covered school‐age child. The presence of the two groups

of voluntary enrollees explains why in many districts this measure would exceed 1.

     Our specification is:

Eq. (1)                       Yis  1  2 ECis  3LCis  41(Boys)is   i Di   i

where ECis stands for secondary school entering classes within 50 km of the school district, LCis is

the literacy content of local labor market, 1(Boys)is is a gender fixed effect and Di is a vector of

school district fixed effects. Subscript i indexes school districts, subscript s genders.

                                              [Table 3 here]

     Table 3 presents the results of the least‐squares estimation. For comparison, we also present

a model with no fixed effects in column (i) and with diocese (but not district) fixed effects in

column (ii). Our baseline specification is in column (iii). Overall, the coefficients on literacy

content do not indicate a very large impact on enrollment. Using the standard deviation from

Table 1, increasing literacy content by 0.04 will increase enrollment by 2.5 percentage point.

Even the secondary school prospects have a weak impact.16 To see how robust these results are,

we re‐estimated the same specification on various subsamples, as presented in columns (iv) –

(vii). Perhaps the biggest worry, given our definition of the dependent variable, would be that

15 Coverage (Einschulung) meant that each child was assigned to a particular school. Teachers
were required to turn away pupils who were assigned to a different school but the law was silent
on children who were not assigned to any school.
16 Interestingly, given that the schooling law was ambiguous enough to allow for a certain age

overlap between primary and secondary schools, the negative sign of this coefficient suggests
that an increase in available secondary school slots produced no more than a relocation of some
pupils from primary schools to a secondary school. This corresponds also with the size of the
coefficient – one standard deviation increase in secondary school spots decreases enrollment
rate by about 1 percentage point – i.e. very little; and secondary school enrollment usually
hovered around 1‐2 percent of an age cohort (see Figure 3).
                                                     15
districts with already full coverage would inevitably show considerably less variation in

enrollment because voluntary enrollment can only happen there along the age margin, but not

the coverage margin. The last two columns of Table 3 give some credence to this. The difference

in the literacy content coefficients is a factor of three and a half. Still, even the large coefficient in

column (vii) would imply an increase in enrollment of 4.2 percentage points as a result of extra

0.04 increase in literacy content in the local labor market. In short, the effects in any of the

subsamples are effectively zero, and a fairly precisely estimated zero at that. If on average 95.2

out of every 100 covered school age children went to school, it was not the lure of labor market

payoff to literacy that was doing the heavy lifting.


   4.2.    Determinants of school supply

   The individual demand for education therefore does not seem to have responded very

strongly to economic development. Either the education offered in school was not a strong

complement to modern industry, or schools – and the enforcement that went with them – were

built “ahead of demand”, thereby placing a more or less binding constraint on who enrolled.

Since we do not have any direct measure of the strength of enforcement, which would be

captured by the district fixed effects anyway, and we know that an established teacher in a

school was the “first instance” of enforcement of compulsory attendance, this question ultimately

speaks to the determinants of the supply of schools: were the developed communities building

more schools because they proved useful to economic development in a way not captured by

Table 3? Or was the industrialization merely making compliance with the schooling law easier?

   We choose three school characteristics to capture the extent and quality of school provision.

These are all defined on the level of a school district. Our main measure of curriculum quality is




                                                    16
the average number of grades per school.17 The extent and density of school infrastructure is

measured by the number of (non‐priest) teachers per 1000 school‐age children.18 We also

include annual expenditure on teaching staff per school‐age child in a district, measured in

gulden of Austrian currency.19

     To analyze the intersection between economy and politics, we estimate, in Table 4, a system

of simultaneous equations where we allow the local industrial employment share to depend on

local stock of human capital, proxied by the supply of teachers and quality of primary schools.

The system is specified as follows:

Eq. (2a)       Ti =   α1 + β1INDi                         + θ11i(G) + λ 1Xi + DFE + εi1

Eq. (2b)       GRi = α2 + β2INDi                          + θ21i(G) + λ 2Xi + DFE + εi2

Eq. (2c)       Pi =   α3 + β3INDi                        + θ31i(G) + λ 3Xi + DFE + εi3

Eq. (2d)       INDi = α4            + γ4Ti + δ4GRi + ζ4Pi + θ41i(G)+ λ 4Xi + DFE + εi4



     where Ti is the number of teachers per 1000 school‐age children, GRi is the average grades

per school, Pi is the spending on teaching staff per school‐age child, INDi is the share of

employment in industry, 1i(G) is an indicator for a district with a German majority and Xi is a




17 Two‐grade schools followed the curriculum followed in Section 3. Communities could, in
agreement with church and civil authorities, extend it by introducing third and fourth grades
where subjects like Geography, Nature and Drawing were also included. Passing fourth grade
was a prerequisite for further secondary education.
18 We could also include classrooms per 1000 school‐age children among the endogenous

variables in this system of equations but it is highly correlated with the teacher measure.
19 Our measure of expenditure is equal to the total income received by the teacher. In case the

pay from public budget was insufficient, the community and the teacher could agree that the
teacher levy an additional fee from attending pupils, called Schulgeld. We do not have
information on spending on maintenance of infrastructure, but teacher salaries make up the bulk
of public spending on education (Go & Lindert, 2010).
                                                    17
vector of exogenous variables which ensure that the order conditions of identification be

satisfied.20 DFE stand for diocese fixed effects.

     The results are presented in Table 4 and they suggest a link from industrial development to

school supply but not necessarily the other way round. Share of industrial employment

positively impacts with all three measures of school provision; in equations 2b and 2c, the

impact is sizeable. One standard‐deviation increase in industrial share (13.9 percentage points –

or 0.139) would add 0.4 grades21 in each school in the district and increase the spending on

teaching staff by 0.68 gulden per school‐age child. On the other hand, the coefficients on the

school variables in column 2d are all imprecisely estimated and do not even operate in the same

direction. The positive effects of grades per school and spending on teachers are in fact more

than outweighed by the negative impact of teacher supply, when all three measures are

increased by one standard deviation. These conclusions are reinforced, when, in Panel B, we re‐

estimate the system without Vienna, a clear outlier along most dimensions (see Table 1, column

(iv)).

                                            [Table 4 here]

     The coefficients on the German dummy variable suggest that economic factors are unable to

account fully for differences in school provision between nationalities but the results are

somewhat ambiguous. German districts seem to enjoy significantly higher teacher supply per


20 The vector Xi must include enough exogenous shifters for the system to be identified. These
are: a measure of population dispersion in Eq. (2a), number of spots in local secondary schools in
Eq. (2b), distance to provincial capital in Eq. (2c) and total population living in urban centers
with more than 5000 inhabitants in Eq. (2d). These are determined exogenously (outside the
model) but have a direct bearing on the dependent variables. For example, population dispersion
will increase the demand for teachers because districts with many small villages will have to
build more smaller schools compared to a more concentrated district, even if they both have
comparable populations of school‐age children.
21 Given that grades are indivisible, perhaps a better way of expressing the result is that all

schools in a district would be raised from two‐grade schools to three‐grade schools – a big
change –, if industrial share increased by 35 percentage points.
                                                    18
child than non‐German district but they also seem to have a slightly lower quality of schools

(coefficient in column 2d is ‐0.22, statistically significant but small), with no difference in

spending on teachers (column 2c). But German districts happen to be more industrial (after

controlling for other factors), so on the basis of Table 4 alone one could argue that the

advantages of German districts, reported in Table 2 as unconditional means, were really a result

of different economic conditions, which correlate with German population.

   Overall, the evidence in Table 4 indicates a strong interaction between the local economy and

the local school supply. The extent of industrial development is positively and non‐trivially

correlated with investment in school quality as well as school quantity. The differences between

schools in German and non‐German districts do not quite go away after controlling for the

economic environment, although they are diminished along some dimensions.


   4.3.    Treatment of ethnic minorities: a spatial discontinuity regression

   To isolate the impact of (the pro‐German) political voice of the elites vs that of the local

masses as cleanly as possible, we go below the level of school districts and compare the

treatment of German minorities in non‐German districts against the treatment of non‐German

minorities in German districts. As mentioned before, district or higher authorities had scarcely

any official means to prevent a school from being established; in fact, they were expected to

enforce a law, which required full school coverage and full attendance. They could, however, be

more or less cooperative in providing a subsidy to small communities who expressed a desire to

build a school but claimed to lack sufficient means to sustain it. Such could reasonably be the

case of local ethnic minorities. If political voice mattered in this way, then we would expect –




                                                  19
since public administration was overwhelmingly German22 – that German minorities would be

more successful in securing such aid than non‐German ones.

     To explore this idea, we exploit the fact that the 1865 school census reported the language of

instruction for each school in each district, together with the number of students of each mother

tongue. Even when some minorities were too small to have their own schools, the record noted if

a local school was bilingual, providing at least a parallel class in the minority language. To

control for as much variation in other characteristics of these districts, we look for German and

non‐German districts straddling long‐standing ethnic boundaries within the Empire. We are

confident that these are exogenous to schooling provision, as they were a result of mediaeval

settlement patterns, and in the opinion of 19th century demographers they scarcely moved

(Rauchberg, 1905; Ficker, 1864; Czoernig, 1855). The boundaries were also quite sharp, so much

so that there were pairs of districts, no more than 15 miles apart, on either side of an ethnic

boundary that reported no minority students at all. However, we were able to locate 34 pairs of

German and non‐German districts such that they both contained a linguistic minority that either

had a school operating in its own language or was big enough that it should have had one (i.e. it

numbered over 100 students of a given mother tongue). Of these 34 matches, 27 are German‐

Czech in Bohemia, Moravia and Silesia, 5 are German‐Slovene in Styria, Carinthia and Carniola

and 2 are German‐Italian in South Tyrol.

     The 34 matches consist of 68 districts, each appearing in exactly one match, and each district

contributes two observations: one for the local majority schools and one for local minority

schools.23



22 Until 1880, German was the sole language of administration both internally and externally and
clerks of German mother tongue disproportionately outnumbered other nationalities (Jaszi,
1929: 273‐279)
23 Schools that offered both local languages of instruction are counted as minority schools.


                                                 20
Eq. (4)        Yi  11i (G)  21i (Min)  31i (GMin)  4 INDi  51i (U)   j D ji   i
                                                                                 j



Our regression specification includes dummy variables for a German majority district, 1i(G), for

minority status, 1i(Min), for a German minority school, 1i(GMin), as well as 34 match fixed effects,

Dj. The variable 1i(U) is a dummy for urban school districts. Since the districts are immediate

neighbors (average distance between their administrative centers being 11 miles), any local

specifics are likely to operate in both matched districts and will be captured by the match fixed

effect. We also include the local share of industrial employment, INDi, to control for within‐match

variation in economic development. Given this set‐up there are several ways in which the

importance of political voice can play out: (i) if β2 = β3 = 0, then we find no conclusive evidence of

minorities of either kind receiving any systematically different treatment, so it will be difficult to

argue that district authorities were playing favorites; (ii) if β2 ≠ β3 = 0, then minorities of any

kind are treated differently and the advantage of political voice rests with district majorities

rather than with Germans; (iii) if β3 ≠ 0, then the German minority is clearly getting a different

treatment (for better or worse) and so political voice matters.

   The simultaneous equations framework employed in previous section rested on the unstated

assumption that economic development, measured by INDi, could be endogenous to the school

supply. The stock of schooling infrastructure, available in 1865, is likely highly correlated with

past stock of schooling infrastructure (since school buildings, teaching staff and even public

budget items have certain inertia), which in turn affects local literacy levels and, by extension,

economic development. Consistency alone requires that the potential endogeneity we assumed

in Eqs. 2a‐2d be accounted for in the spatial discontinuity regression also, which is why we

instrument for INDi. Relying on an old empirical regularity, observed already by Austrian

contemporaries, that economic development follows a West‐East gradient, we instrument INDi

with longitude (Good, 1984: 11).
                                                      21
   The results are presented in Table 5. The instrument, though not perfect, seems to perform

reasonably well: the first‐stage F‐statistic is equal to 13.4. With 34 fixed effects and 8 other

variables in a regression counting 136 observations, statistical significance is inevitably going to

suffer. Yet in spite of that, some clear patterns emerge. Across the different specifications, we see

β1 either positive or a statistical zero, indicating that German‐majority districts had at least some

advantage, already seen in Tables 2 and 4. But it went deeper than that: β2 < 0 and is statistically

significant in all four regressions, while β3 > 0 in all and significant in three of them. The bottom

of Table 5 shows a series of t‐tests for β2 + β3 = 0, to see whether the German minorities had

enough clout to outweigh the otherwise negative effect of minority status. As it turned out, β2 +

β3 > 0 unambiguously in three specifications, i.e. the German minorities were actually doing

better in terms of the supply of teachers, classrooms and public funds per school‐age child than

the local majorities (in some aspects, they were even slightly better off than German schools in

German districts, β2 + β3 > β1). Overall, these results add up to a fairly consistent evidence of

significant advantage for the Germans – it means that when it came to a stand‐off between the

German elites and local Slav majorities, the elites were able to impress their preferences on the

ethnic mix of local schooling.

                                            [Table 5 here]

   Within the narrow confines of matched district pairs, the impact of economic development is

only imprecisely estimated because there is usually relatively little variation in industrial

employment (in contrast to the sharp ethnic boundary which district pairs straddle). The

coefficients are mostly positive (with the exception of column (iv)) but not practically

meaningful. Perhaps only for grades per school (column (i)) and spending per school‐age child

(column (ii)) can it be said to have a noteworthy impact: an increase in INDi by the standard




                                                  22
deviation of 0.143 in the subsample would add 0.21 florins to per‐child spending and add 0.25

grades to every school in a district.


   5. Conclusions

   The evidence reveals two important features of the Habsburg educational system. First, we

find stronger support for the claim that economic development enabled a more extensive supply

of educational facilities, perhaps through broadening of the tax base, than for the notion that

economic development generated a strong individual demand for public education, such as

through raising returns to primary education. Not that the Habsburg schools failed in imparting

literacy across the board – the correlations in Figure 2 are too strong for such a claim. But the

curriculum also included a lot of extra material that did not generate useful human capital.

Apparently, the Viennese government designed a flawed product, decreed that it be oversupplied

and burdened local communities with paying for it. We have no estimate of how much

deadweight loss this policy generated but we cannot find any positive effect of this policy on

economic development.

   Second – and closely related, the reason why economic considerations were sidelined is to be

found in the politics of schooling. Political voice seems to have played a role. Accounts of

Austrian political history show unequivocally that education, its extent, availability and language

of instruction were highly politicized matters. We find evidence that this nationalist politics

impacted educational choices made on the ground, even at the local level.

   Overall, this adds up to a different picture to that painted regarding the modern rise of public

education. While all the elements of the usual story – the industrialization, the public provision of

schools, the political voice of important pressure groups – are present in the Austrian case, they

combine in a way very different from how, for example, Go and Lindert (2007, 2010) have

described the rise of American public schooling. Rather than education and human capital

                                                 23
accumulation being among the drivers of economic growth, we see how economic development

provides the resources for the Habsburg Empire’s own version of “culture wars” whereby the

school district elites – far from withholding public resources from education – actively subsidize

that kind of schooling which corresponds to their ethnic preferences. For those who lacked

political voice – in our case, the non‐German nationalities – the road ahead did not pass first

through enfranchisement to public education and eventually to economic development but

exactly the other way: economic growth allowed them to catch up (at least in some respects) in

matters educational which – a generation later (and outside the scope of our paper) – led to their

political self‐assertion. And while this order of causation does not in anyway refute the more

traditional account, at least as it applies to the United States, for example, it highlights that the

interplay of education, politics and development can be much more varied.




                                                  24
Appendix 1 – Measuring literacy content of local labor market

       The variable “Literacy content of local labor market”, used in Table 3, is a combination of

three pieces of information. The first piece is the structure of employment of local labor market.

We draw on the data published in the 1869 Cisleithanian census (K.k. Statistische Zentral‐

Commission, 1871). It contains employment totals for each of 813 Gerichts‐bezirks, the smallest

administrative units then in existence, split into 50 occupations (see Table A1 below for detail).

Separate categories for men without an occupation, women without an occupation and children

under the age of 14 were also included so as to fully account for the whole population in each

Gerichts‐bezirk.

       Unfortunately, the occupations in the 1869 census were not disaggregated by gender.

Therefore, the second piece of information comes from the 1880 census, which provided gender‐

specific employment figures for broadly similar occupational categories. 24 These were available

for each province and they varied from zero share of women (among army officers) to zero share

of men (among nuns and midwives).

       The third and final piece of information came from Mitch (1992: 213‐214). It is a

classification of occupations by use of literacy for mid‐19th century England. We make the

assumption that the classification is applicable to the Habsburg Empire without major changes,

especially since most of the assignments are probably quite uncontroversial. One potentially

significant deviation from Mitch (1992) consists in reassigning farmers from the likely category

to the ambiguous category but it is a change that does not affect the results in Table 3 and only

leads to an increase in the literacy content measure across the board.




24Several gender compositions for some industrial sectors had to be supplied from the 1890
census.
                                                25
       These three factors are combined to produce the literacy content variable. For each

school district, we take the employment data in Gerichts‐bezirks that are within 50 km of the

school district, calculate the shares of employment separately for men and women and weigh

them by the assigned literacy weight L (noted in Table A1).

               Table A1 – Assignment of occupations to various literacy categories
Literacy required (L = 1)
Priests and nuns, public sector clerks, army officers, teachers, students, writers, artists, lawyers,
doctors, surgeons, midwives, pharmacists, sanitation workers, clerks in the private sector*,
entrepreneurs and business owners*, employees in finance
Literacy likely to be useful (L = 0.7)
Employees in the trading sector, rentiers and renters of real property
Occupations with possible (or ambiguous) use of literacy (L= 0.3)
Farmers, sharecroppers, laborers*, domestic service
Occupations unlikely to use literacy (L = 0)
Agricultural laborers and farm servants, fishermen, industrial laborers*, those without
occupation
Note: The assignments are based on Mitch (1992: 213‐214). The * denotes those occupations
which in the original document are further disaggregated into various sectors (e.g. 8 separate
industrial sectors).




                                                 26
References

Becker Sasha, Hornung Eric and Woessman, Ludger. “Catch me if you can: Education and
 Catch‐up in Industrial Revolution”, CESifo wp #2816, October 2009
Chaudhary L., Musacchio A., Nafziger S. and Yan Se. “Big BRICs, Weak Foundations: The
 beginning of Public Elementary Education in Brazil, Russia, India and China”, NBER wp
 #17852, February 2012
Clay Karen, Lingwall Jeff and Stephens, Melvin. “Do schooling laws matter? Evidence from the
  introduction of compulsory attendance laws in the United States,” NBER wp #18477, 2012
Czoernig, Karl von. Ethnographie der Oesterreichischen Monarchie. Kaiserliche & Kongliche
 Direction der Administrativen Statistik, Wien, 1857
Easterlin, Richard. “Why Isn’t the Whole World Developed?”, Journal of Economic History 41
 (1), 1981, pp. 1 – 19

Ficker, Adolf. Die Bevolkerung des Konigreichs Bohmen in ihren wichtigsten statistischen
  Verhaltnissen, Eduard Holzel’s Verlag, Wien and Olmutz, 1864
Ficker, Adolf. Bericht uber osterreichisches Unterrichtswesen. Aus Anlass der Weltausstellung
  1873. Alfred Holder, Wien, 1873
Galor, Oded. Unified Growth Theory. Princeton University Press, Princeton, 2011
Go, Sun and Lindert, Peter. “The Curious Dawn of American Public Schools”, NBER working
 paper # 13335, August 2007
Go, Sun and Lindert, Peter. “The Uneven Rise of American Public Schools to 1850,” Journal of
 Economic History 70 (1), March 2010, pp. 1 – 26
Good, David F. The Economic Rise of The Habsburg Empire, 1750 – 1914. University of California
 Press, Berkeley, 1984
Heiler, Bernhard and Lebman, Rosa. “Die Entwicklung der allgemeindebildenden
 Pflichtschulen in Oesterreich” in Geschichte und Ergebnisse der zentralen amtlichen Statistik in
 Osterreich 1829‐1979, Kommissionsverlag, Österreichische Staatsdruckerei, Vienna, 1979, pp.
 513 – 544
Helfert, Joseph Alexander von. Die österreichische Volksschule: Geschichte, System, Statistik –
 I. Band. Prague, 1860
Jaszi, Oszkar. The Dissolution of the Habsburg Empire, University of Chicago Press, Chicago,
  1929

K.K. Statistische Zentral‐Commission. “Die Dampfmaschinen der Oesterreichischen Monarchie
 nach de rim Jahre 1863 vorgenomennen Zahlung”, Mittheilungen aus der Gebiet der Statistik 11
 (2), Vienna 1864

K.K. Statistische Zentral‐Commission. Statistisches Jahrbuch der Oesterreichischen MOnarchie
 für das Jahr 1865. Kaiserlich‐Königliche Hof‐ und Staatsdruckerei, Vienna, 1867

K.K. Statistische Zentral‐Commission. Detail‐Conscription der Volksschulen der im Reichsrathe
 vertretenen Konigreichen und Landern nach dem Stande vom Ende des Schuljahres 1865. Vienna,
 1870
                                                27
K.K. Statistische Zentral‐Commission. Bevölkerung und Viehstand der im Reichsrathe
 vertretenen Königreiche und Länder, dann der Militärgrenze nach der Zählung vom 31. Dezember
 1869. Kaiser‐königliche Hof‐ und Staatsdrückerei, Vienna, 1871
K.K. Statistische Zentral‐Commission. Die Bevölkerung der im Reichsrathe vertretenen
 Königreiche und Länder nach Beruf und Erwerb: 3. Heft der Ergebnisse der Volkszählung und der
 mit derselben verbundenen Zählung der Häuslichen Nutzthiere vom 31. December 1880. In:
 Österreichische Statistik – Band 1: Heft 3. Kaiserlich‐Königliche Hof‐ und Staatsdruckerei,
 Vienna, 1882
Kohn, Ignaz. Eisenbahn Jahrbuch der Oesterreichischen‐Ungarischen Monarchie: Neue Folge –
 Dritter Jahrgang. Lehmann & Wentzel, Vienna 1881
Lindert Peter. Growing Public: Social Spending and Economic Growth since the Eighteenth
  Century. Cambridge University Press, 2004 – Chapter 5 – The Rise of Mass Public Schooling
  before 1914
Mariscal, Elisa and Sokoloff, Kenneth. “Schooling, Suffrage and the Persistence of Inequality in
 the Americas”, in Haber, Stephen. Political Institutions and Economic Growth in Latin America:
 Essays in Policy, History and Political Economy, Hoover Institution Press, 2000, pp. 159 – 218
Mitch, David. The Rise of Popular Literacy in Victorian England: the Influence of Private Choice
 and Public Policy. University of Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia, 1992
Mitch, David. The Role of Education and Skill in the British Industrial Revolution. In: Joel Mokyr
 (ed.), The British Industrial Revolution: An Economic Perspective, 2nd edition. Boulder: Westview,
 1999, pp. 241‐279
Mitch, David. “Landed Society, Farm Size, and Support for Public Schooling in Nineteenth
 Century England”, working paper 2012
Mokyr, Joel. “Human Capital, Useful Knowledge and Long‐Term Economic Growth”, Economia
 Politica: Journal of Analytical and Institutional Economics, forthcoming 2013
Musacchio, Aldo, Fritscher Andre M. and Viarengo M. “Colonial Institutions, Trade Shocks,
 and the Diffusion of Elementary Education in Brazil, 1889 – 1930” working paper, Dec 2012
Naidu, Suresh. “Suffrage, schooling and sorting in the Post‐Bellum U.S. South” NBER wp #18129,
 June 2012
Pacher, Lieselotte Maria. Die elementare Rechenunterrich in deutschsprachigen Lehrbuchern
 Oesterreichs von Maria Theresia bis zum Ende der Monarchie. Unpublished thesis, University
 of Vienna, Vienna, 2008
Palma, Nuno & Reis, Jaime. “A Tale of Two Regimes: Educational Achievement and Institutions
 in Portugal, 1910 – 1950”, working paper 2012
Prausek, Vinzenz. Die Verbesserung der Volksschule mi besondere Berucksichtigung
 Oesterreichs. Sallmayer & Co., Wien, 1868
Rauchberg, Heinrich. Der Nationale Besitzstand in Bohmen. Dunkler & Humblot, Leipzig, 1905
Sandberg, Lars G. “The Case of the Impoverished Sophisticate: Human Capital and Swedish
 Economic Growth before World War I”, Journal of Economic History 39 (1), March 1979, pp.
 225 – 241


                                                28
Troen, Selwyn K. The Public and the Schools: Shaping the St. Louis System, 1838 – 1920.
 University of Missouri Press, Columbia, 1975
Van Horn Melton, James. Absolutism and the eighteenth century origins of compulsory
 schooling in Prussia and Austria. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England, 1988




                                               29
                                 Table 1 - Descriptive statistics
                                               (i)              (ii)           (iii)        (iv)
                                               All             Core           New
                                            provinces       provinces       provinces     Vienna

Number of school districts                    730             546              184           1

                                              3036            2882             3491        37958
Number of school-age children
                                             [2514]          [2394]          [2797]
                                                              2.17                          3.91
Average number of grades
                                                             [0.48]
Non-priest teachers per 1000 school-          11.62           12.71            8.37        15.39
age children                                  [7.82]         [6.73]           [9.72]
Classrooms per 1000 school-age                                12.04                        12.17
children                                                      [6.2]
Teaching staff expenditure per school-                        2.16                          5.22
age child                                                     [0.9]
Percent school-age children covered by                        95.7                         100.0
school provision (school coverage)                           [9.69]
                                               70.2            84.1            29.1         86.1
Percent school-age children enrolled
                                             [29.53]        [17.31]          [17.49]
Enrollment per 100 covered school-age                         95.2                          96.0
children                                                    [16.92]
                                               4.0             5.0              0.7        156.0
# steam engines in school district
                                             [12.01]        [13.62]           [2.92]
Share of industrial employment (%)             19.2            22.7             8.9         65.0
(from 1869 census)                            [13.8]         [13.9]            [6.3]
                                               44.8           20.9            115.6          0.0
Distance to railroad (km)
                                             [75.44]        [22.15]         [120.27]
                                              191.2           220.1           105.2        920.9
Secondary school slots within 50 km
                                             [188.4]        [201.9]          [100.8]
                                              0.241           0.247           0.224        0.358
Literacy content of labor market (boys)
                                             [0.041]        [0.043]          [0.029]
                                              0.092           0.105           0.053        0.186
Literacy content of labor market (girls)
                                             [0.037]        [0.032]          [0.024]
Note: Core provinces are Lower Austria, Upper Austria, Salzburg, Styria, Carinthia, Carniola, the
Austrian Littoral, Tyrol and Vorarlberg, Bohemia, Moravia and Silesia. New provinces are Galicia,
Bukowina and Dalmatia.




                                              30
                    Table 2 - Comparison of education variables in core provinces
                                                            Means                 t-test p-value
                                                                   Non-German
                                              German (N=274)
                                                                     (N=272)
Average grades per school                           2.17                2.17      -0.04   0.96
Classrooms per 1000 school-age children             13.97              10.09      -7.69   0.00
Teachers per 1000 school-age children               15.06              10.34      -8.73   0.00
Spending on staff per child (in fl per year)        2.28                2.05      -3.09   0.00
School coverage                                     96.98              94.38      -3.16   0.00
*School with minority language of
                                                    70.40              87.10       2.46   0.02
instruction is present
*Parallel class with minority language of
                                                    85.20              95.30       2.09   0.04
instruction is present
Percentage of school-age children enrolled          90.10              78.04      -8.68   0.00
Number of steam engines                             4.82                5.26       0.38   0.70
Share of industrial employment (%)                  24.9                20.4      -3.78   0.00
1(railroad access)                                  37.50              30.30       1.78   0.08
Distance to railroad                                22.12              19.69      -1.28   0.20
Note: *based on 139 districts with at least 100 German students and 100 non-German students.




                                             31
                                     Table 3 - Individual demand for school enrollment (OLS)
                                      (i)          (ii)       (iii)       (iv)         (v)             (vi)                  (vii)
                               Dependent variable: Enrolled pupils per 100 covered school-age children
                                                    Full        Full     German      Non-German     Full-coverage     Districts with less
Sample:                            Full sample
                                                  sample      sample     districts     districts       districts      than full coverage
                                         -0.011     -0.010     -0.011       -0.003       -0.023          -0.006               -0.016
Secondary school slots
                                        [0.004]     [0.003]    [0.002]     [0.002]       [0.004]         [0.002]             [0.004]
                                       126.201      59.030     61.084      15.566        63.560          30.018              105.143
Literacy content of labor market
                                       [15.718]    [13.648] [10.871]       [9.942]      [18.317]        [15.432]            [15.827]
                                        -11.391      -2.097    -2.271        0.075        2.127           -0.403              -5.463
1(Boys)
                                        [2.212]     [1.850]    [1.495]     [1.227]       [2.820]         [2.359]             [1.992]
                                         79.700     86.776     86.559      97.617        80.707          92.658              79.194
Constant
                                        [1.811]     [1.515]    [1.182]     [1.216]       [1.734]         [1.596]             [1.781]
N                                         1092        1092      1092          548          544              506                 586
Adjusted R2                               0.067       0.609     0.856        0.841        0.856            0.826               0.874
Fixed effects                             None      Diocese    District    District      District        District            District
Note: “Secondary school slots” measures the number of entry-level spots in secondary schools within 50km of each school district.
“Literacy content of local labor market “ is a weighted index capturing the demand for literacy in the labor market within 50km of a
school district. It is based on data on employment composition in the 1869 census (see Appendix 1 for more detail). Diocese fixed
effects in column (ii) are 22 dummy variables for individual bishoprics. The estimation sample is limited to school districts in core
provinces. Standard errors in brackets. See text for further details.




                                                                 32
               Table 4 - Interdependence of school supply and economic development
                               Eq. 2a            Eq. 2b            Eq. 2c              Eq. 2d
                         Teachers per 1000      Grades       Staff expenditure   Share of industrial
                        school-age children per school per school-age child         employment
                                      Panel A. Full sample - Core provinces (N = 546)
 Teachers per 1000                                                                     -0.063
school-age children                                                                   [0.047]
Average number of                                                                       0.082
        grades                                                                        [0.303]
  Staff expenditure                                                                     0.130
per school-age child                                                                  [0.193]
 Share of industrial           0.215             2.857              4.875
    employment                [4.588]           [0.610]           [1.190]
                               2.745             -0.220            -0.106               0.221
     1(German)
                              [0.565]           [0.076]           [0.152]              [0.91]
                               0.867              0.026             0.262               0.023
      1(Urban)
                              [0.463]           [0.059]           [0.124]             [0.034]
     Population                0.003
     dispersion               [0.005]
 Secondary school                                 0.096
         spots                                  [0.042]
     Distance to                                                   -0.001
  provincial capital                                              [0.001]
                                                                                        0.000
  Urban population
                                                                                      [0.001]
                               8.329              1.557             0.757               0.350
      Constant
                              [1.345]           [0.223]           [0.366]             [0.676]
                                    Panel B. Core provinces, excluding Vienna (N = 545)
 Teachers per 1000                                                                     -0.071
school-age children                                                                   [0.045]
Average number of                                                                       0.125
        grades                                                                        [0.281]
  Staff expenditure                                                                     0.108
per school-age child                                                                  [0.172]
 Share of industrial           2.340             3.245              5.126
    employment                [4.591]           [0.639]           [1.186]
                               2.567             -0.255            -0.125               0.249
     1(German)
                              [0.568]           [0.081]           [0.154]             [0.093]
                               0.726              0.012             0.240               0.027
      1(Urban)
                              [0.458]           [0.065]           [0.124]             [0.034]
     Population                0.005
     dispersion               [0.005]
 Secondary school                                 0.074
         spots                                  [0.048]
     Distance to                                                   -0.001
  provincial capital                                              [0.001]
                                                                                        0.000
  Urban population
                                                                                      [0.002]
                               7.878              1.451             0.710               0.363
      Constant
                              [1.351]           [0.236]           [0.368]             [0.655]

                                                33
Note: “Secondary school slots” measures the number of entry-level spots in secondary schools
within 50km of each school district. “Population dispersion” is calculated as number of villages per
1000 school-age children in a district. “Urban population” is the total population in a district,
living in towns of more than 5000 inhabitants. Standard errors are in brackets.




                                                34
                               Table 5 - Regression results for spatial discontinuity regression (IV-2SLS)
                              (i)                       (ii)                                (iii)                       (iv)
                         Grades per       Spending on teaching staff per      Classrooms per 1000 school-    Teachers per 1000 school-
Dependent variable
                           school                school-age child                      age children                age children
sub-sample mean             2.191                     2.559                              10.852                       16.684
sub-sample s.d.             0.731                      1.32                                4.607                       7.062
1(majority German           0.026                     0.502                                1.695                       3.294
district)                 [0.152]                    [0.262]                             [0.888]                      [1.289]
                           -0.136                    -0.444                               -1.234                      -2.276
1(minority school)
                          [0.141]                    [0.243]                             [0.823]                      [1.194]
1(minority German           0.086                     1.295                                3.136                       5.268
school)                   [0.199]                    [0.344]                             [1.164]                      [1.689]
Share of industrial         1.811                     1.556                                5.089                      -1.773
employment                [2.044]                    [3.535]                            [11.974]                     [17.372]
                            0.483                     0.128                               -1.387                      -1.982
Urban dummy
                          [0.209]                    [0.361]                             [1.222]                      [1.773]
                            1.198                     1.457                                5.443                      12.748
Constant
                          [0.925]                    [1.600]                             [5.418]                      [7.860]
t-tests:
β2+β3=0                     0.13                     12.26                              5.34                          6.27
(p-val)                     0.72                     0.00                               0.02                          0.01
First-stage F:              13.42                    13.42                              13.42                         13.42
Note: Standard errors are in brackets.




                                                                  35
                                  Figure 1 – Map of the Habsburg Empire in its 1914 borders
                                                                                           Province                    Capital
                                                                                           Lower Austria               Vienna
                                                                                           Upper Austria               Linz
                                                                                           Salzburg                    Salzburg
                                                                                           Tyrol                       Innsbruck
                                                                                           Vorarlberg                  Bregenz
                                                                                           Styria                      Graz
                                                                                           Carinthia                   Klagenfurt
                                                                                           Carniola                    Ljubljana
                                                                                           Littoral                    Trieste
                                                                                           Bohemia                     Prague
                                                                                           Moravia                     Brno
                                                                                           Silesia                     Opava
                                                                                           Galicia                     Lwow
                                                                                           Bukowina                    Czernowitz
                                                                                           Dalmatia                    Zadar
                                                                                           Hungary                     Budapest
                                                                                           Transylvania                Cluj
                                                                                           Western Slovakia            Nitra
                                                                                           Eastern Slovakia            Košice
                                                                                           Croatia                     Zagreb
                                                                                           Slavonia                    Osijek
                                                                                           Banat                       Timisoara
                                                                                           Bosnia‐Hercegovina          Sarajevo


Note: Not all provinces were in existence at all times. Bosnia‐Hercegovina was an Austrian protectorate between 1878 – 1908, after
which it was annexed. Source: Wikimedia commons.

                                                                36
                                                         Figure 2 – Enrollment and literacy of the 1830‐1839 birth cohort
                                   1.0
                                                                                                                            BONO
                                   0.9                                                                                            OO TV
                                                                                                                                 MA
                                                                                                                                 OO
                                                                                                                           NO
                                                                                                                        BO    SITV
                                                                                                                     SB
                                                                                                                    SB
                                   0.8
                                                                                                                                 MA
                                   0.7
                                                                                                             ST             SI
    Literacy rates (1890 census)




                                   0.6
                                                                                                 KTST
                                   0.5
                                                                                                                            Men
                                   0.4                                   KS                                                 Women

                                   0.3                                                   KT
                                                                KI
                                   0.2                        GA
                                                             KS
                                                         BU
                                                          DA
                                                          KI
                                   0.1              GA
                                                    BU
                                               DA
                                   0.0
                                         0.0                       0.2           0.4               0.6               0.8              1.0
                                                                                Average enrollment (1836 ‐ 1851)
Note: Average enrollment is calculated as the average enrollment across years 1836‐1851 when the 1830 ‐
1839 birth cohort was in school age (6‐11.9 years old). Two‐letter abbreviations denote individual
provinces: BO – Bohemia, BU – Bukowina, DA – Dalmatia, GA – Galicia, KI – Carniola (Krain), KS – Austrian
Littoral (Küstenland), KT – Carinthia (Kärnten), MA – Moravia, NO – Lower Austria (Nieder‐Österreich), OO
– Upper Austria (Ober‐Österreich),SB – Salzburg, SI – Silesia, ST – Styria, TV – Tyrol & Vorarlberg
                                                                                                   37
                                    Figure 3 – Age‐enrollment profile in Austria (1865) and US (1850‐70)
                          1                                                                     Austrian provinces
                                                                                                Czech provinces
                         0.9
                                                                                                Some Adriatic provinces
                         0.8                                                                    US states (1850)
                                                                                                US states (1870)
                         0.7

                         0.6
   Proportion enrolled




                         0.5

                         0.4

                         0.3

                         0.2

                         0.1

                          0
                               <6     6       7      8      9     10      11     12     13     14     15     16      17
                                                                         Age
Note: US data come from Clay et al (2012). Austrian provinces = Lower Austria, Upper Austria, Salzburg,
Styria, Carinthia, Tyrol & Vorarlberg. Czech provinces = Bohemia, Moravia, Silesia. Some Adriatic provinces =
Austrian Littoral and Carniola. The post‐age‐12 enrollment for the Habsburg empire includes enrollment in
secondary schools, namely Gymnasia and Realschulen.
                                                                 38
                                                              Figure 4




Note: For construction of literacy content, see Appendix 1.




                                                                39
