                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 ARE COMMODITY FUTURES PRICES BAROMETERS OF THE GLOBAL ECONOMY?

                                             Conghui Hu
                                             Wei Xiong

                                        Working Paper 19706
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19706


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2013




This paper is prepared for Après le Déluge: Finance and the Common Good after the Crisis, edited
by E. Glen Weyl, Edward L. Glaeser, and Tano Santos. We are grateful to Mark Aguiar, Ing-haw
Cheng, Ed Glaeser, Lutz Kilian, Tano Santos, and Jose Scheinkman for helpful comments. Xiong
acknowledges financial support from Smith Richardson Foundation grant #2011-8691. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Conghui Hu and Wei Xiong. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Are Commodity Futures Prices Barometers of the Global Economy?
Conghui Hu and Wei Xiong
NBER Working Paper No. 19706
December 2013
JEL No. F3,F4,G1

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper analyzes whether commodity futures prices traded in the United States reveal information
relevant to stock prices of East Asian economies including China, Japan, Hong Kong, South Korea,
and Taiwan. We find significant and positive predictive powers of overnight futures returns of copper
and soybeans, albeit not crude oil, for stock prices of all these East Asian economies and across a broad
range of industries after mid-2000s. Our analysis establishes commodity futures prices as barometers
of global economic strength in recent years, but leaves open a deeper issue regarding whether through
this informational channel noise from futures market trading can feed back to the real economy.


Conghui Hu
Guanghua School of Management
Peking University
Beijing, China
huconghui@pku.edu.cn

Wei Xiong
Princeton University
Department of Economics
Bendheim Center for Finance
Princeton, NJ 08450
and NBER
wxiong@princeton.edu
                                          Introduction

Many commentators have argued that commodity futures prices are barometers of the global

economy. Is this argument relevant in practice? Addressing this basic question helps evaluate

the informational role of commodity futures prices. Due to the lack of centralized trading in spot

markets for commodities, centralized futures markets serve as an important platform for

aggregating dispersed information regarding supply and demand of commodities.

   In this paper, we focus on analyzing whether prices of various commodity futures contracts

traded in the U.S. reveal information that is relevant to stock prices of several East Asian

economies, including China, Hong Kong, Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan.                 The U.S.

commodity futures markets offer liquid futures contracts on a large set of commodities, which

are heavily traded by traders from all over the world. Our analysis focuses on three key

commodities, copper, soybeans, and crude oil, which represent three important commodity

sectors---industrial metals, grain, and energy. East Asia is one of the most vibrant parts of the

world economy. China and Japan are the second and third largest economies after the U.S. In

particular, as a result of its rapid economic growth in the last twenty years, China is widely

recognized as a main engine of world economic growth. As a whole, East Asia has also

imported a large fraction of the world’s commodity output in recent years.

   If U.S. commodity futures prices reveal useful information about the global economic

strength, we expect East Asian stock prices to react to the commodity futures prices. The time

zone difference between East Asia and the U.S. introduces asynchronous trading in the East

Asian stock markets and the U.S. futures markets, which in turn allows us to analyze whether the

lagged overnight returns of commodity futures traded in the U.S predict East Asian stock prices.

In our analysis, we also explicitly test whether the commodity futures prices reveal information
beyond what is contained in S&P 500 index futures price. We also control for commodity spot

prices.

   We find an evident change in the predictive power of U.S. commodity futures prices for East

Asian stock prices around mid-2000s. There is little evidence of the commodity futures prices

predicting stock prices in East Asian stock markets before 2005. In the latter period, there is

significant evidence of the lagged overnight futures returns of copper, soybeans, and crude oil

positively predicting index returns of all the East Asian stock markets. Interestingly, even after

controlling for the S&P 500 index futures return, the predictive powers of copper and soybeans

remain positive and significant, although that of crude oil becomes insignificant. By separately

examining stock returns of a set of industries in China, Japan and Hong Kong, ranging from

supply industries that produce a given commodity, consumer industries that demand the

commodity as an important production input, and other industries that are not directly related to

the commodity, we also find consistently positive and significant predictive powers of the lagged

futures returns of copper and soybeans for stock returns across all these industries, even after

controlling for the S&P 500 index futures return.

   The uniformly positive predictive powers of lagged futures returns for stock returns across

these commodity importing economies and across both commodity supply and consumer

industries indicate that in recent years commodity futures prices reveals information regarding

the strength of the global economy, rather than commodity supply shocks or idiosyncratic

demand shocks to the U.S.

   One might argue that the futures prices of copper and soybeans may simply reflect news that

exogenously arrives at the markets during the hours the East Asian stock markets are closed and

that East Asian stock prices would eventually incorporate the news regardless of the trading in
the U.S. commodity futures markets. It is difficult to forcefully trace the information revealed by

the futures prices of copper and soybeans directly to trading in these markets. Two features of

our analysis nevertheless highlight that the information is special. First, the predictive powers of

the lagged futures returns of copper and soybeans for stock returns of East Asian economies

remain robust even after controlling for the lagged return of S&P 500 Index futures. This

suggests that the futures prices of copper and soybeans contain information beyond that in the

S&P 500 Index. One shall not take this additional information for granted as S&P 500 index

futures price is a widely followed financial indicator of the U.S. stock market and the global

economy. Second, the futures prices of copper and soybeans have stronger predictive powers for

East Asian stock prices than their spot prices, which indicate that the futures prices are more

informative than the spot prices.      Taken together, futures prices of copper and soybeans

summarize information relevant to the East Asian economies even if the information is also

revealed by other sources.

   From a conceptual point of view, our results are consistent with commodity futures markets

serving the role of aggregating dispersed information among market participants across the world

regarding the global supply and demand of commodities (e.g., Grossman, 1989). From an

empirical point of view, our analysis echoes several existing empirical studies of the

informational role of commodity futures prices. The classic study of Roll (1984) shows that

futures price of orange juice efficiently reflects information about temperature in central Florida,

which produces most of juice oranges in the U.S. Garbade and Silber (1983) compare the roles

of futures markets and spot markets in information discovery for a set of commodities, and find

that it is common for futures markets to play a more important role than spot markets.
   In this light, our findings are perhaps not surprising at a first glance, but they lead to several

deeper questions. First, the large literature on the effects of oil price shocks on stock markets in

the U.S. and other countries often gives contradicting results. For example, Jones and Kaul

(1996), Nandha and Faff (2008), and Park and Ratti (2008) document that oil price increases

have a negative impact on equity returns across different countries and different industries,

although Huang, Masulis, and Stoll (1996) find little correlation between daily returns of oil

futures and various stock indexes in the U.S. To reconcile the difference in these findings,

Kilian and Park (2009) highlight different impacts of supply and demand shocks to oil on stock

prices by using a structural model to decompose oil price shocks. Building on this notion of oil

supply and demand shocks having different impacts on stock prices, our finding of East Asian

stock returns being negatively correlated with oil futures returns before 2005 but positively

correlated after 2005 indicates a potential structural change in the composition of oil shocks in

recent years. Similarly, our analysis also indicates a potential structural change in the

composition of shocks to copper and soybeans as their futures returns have a significant

predictive power for East Asian stock returns after 2005 but not before.

   What have caused this structural change? This change might be related to the quickly

growing commodity demand from East Asian economies, in particular China, reaching the

critical market share around mid-2000s. This timing also overlaps with the large inflow of

investment capital to the long side of commodity futures markets since mid-2000s, which totaled

over 200 billion dollars in 2008 according to an estimate of the report of U.S. Senate Permanent

Subcommittee on Investigations (2009). This investment flow, largely attracted by the appeal

that commodity futures returns are historically uncorrelated with U.S. stock returns and are

instead driven by the growth of emerging economies, might have further tightened the link
between commodity futures prices and East Asian stock prices. Precisely timing the structural

break together with a systematic identification strategy would be helpful for uncovering its

causes. We leave this analysis for future studies.

      Our analysis is also related to the ongoing debate regarding whether speculation in

commodity futures market in the form of index investment to commodity futures might have

affected commodity prices.1 In light of our finding that people across the world react to potential

information in commodity futures prices, it is possible for commodity futures prices to influence

the expectations of goods producers regarding the strength of the global economy and thus their

decisions to acquire commodities as production input (a la Hayek, 1945). Building on this

informational channel, Sockin and Xiong (2013) develop a model to show that noise introduced

by futures market trading can feed back to goods producers’ commodity demand and spot

prices.2 This feedback mechanism is premised on commodity futures prices as barometers of the

global economy. Did noise from futures market trading feed back to commodity demand and

spot prices during the commodity price boom in 2007-2008?                         This is a key question for

systematically evaluating the role of futures market speculation, which we leave for future

research.

      This paper is organized as follows: Section I describes our empirical design, and Section II

introduces the data. We report our findings in Section III and then conclude in Section IV.




1
    See Cheng and Xiong (2013) for a review of this debate.
2
  Interestingly, the European Central Bank (ECB) raised its key interest rate in July 2008---the eve of the most
severe world economic recession since the Great Depression. According to reports released by the ECB, it
interpreted the rising commodity prices as signals for strength of emerging economies and thus for strong inflation
risk in the Euro zone. This interpretation demonstrates the possibility for commodity price fluctuations to feed back
into the real economy through an informational channel.
                                      I. Empirical Design

   In this section, we first summarize commodity imports of East Asia. We then describe the

approach we use to examine information flow from U.S. futures prices to East Asian stock prices

and vice versa. Finally, we discuss how we interpret the information flow in light of demand,

supply, and financial market shocks to commodity markets.

A. Commodity Imports of East Asia

   Table 1 summarizes the imports of copper, soybeans and crude oil by different regions in

2010. Mainland China contributed 28.9%, 59.5%, and 10.9% of the total world imports of copper,

soybeans, and crude oil, Japan contributed 2.0%, 3.6%, and 7.9% of the total world imports of

these commodities, and South Korea contributed 3.9%, 1.3%, and 5.4%.

                                       [Insert Table 1 here]

   Figure 1 also plots the imports of these commodities across different regions in the recent

years. The rapid growth in imports by China in the past decade clearly stands out for all three

commodities. In imports of copper, despite the contraction by the U.S. and Europe during the

recent world economic recession from 2006 to 2009, China maintained a consistent, high growth

rate except for a brief slowdown in 2008. In imports of soybeans, despite being the largest

importer in the world, China had a steady growth after 2003 in sharp contrast to the flat curves of

all other regions. In imports of crude oil, China also maintained a steady and rapid growth rate,

and eventually passed Japan in 2008 to become the second largest importer after the U.S.

                                      [Insert Figure 1 here]

   Taken together, East Asian countries contribute to significant fractions of the world imports

of copper, soybeans and crude oil.      Their large demands of these commodities make the
interactions between their stock markets and commodity futures prices traded in the U.S.

interesting subjects to examine.

B. Identification of Information Flow

   Our empirical analysis focuses on examining how U.S. commodity futures price changes

predict East Asian stock prices. We take advantage of the time zone difference between the U.S.

and East Asia. As daytime in East Asia is nighttime in the U.S., the predictive powers for East

Asian stock prices by the return of U.S. commodity futures during the previous night reflect

information flow from U.S. commodity futures prices to East Asian stock prices.

                                       [Insert Figure 2 here]

   Panel A of Figure 2 illustrates the regular trading hours of Chinese stock markets and U.S.

futures markets. The Shanghai Stock Exchange opens at 9:30 a.m. (GMT + 8) and closes at 3:00

p.m. with a lunch break from 11:30 a.m. to 1:00 p.m., while the U.S. futures markets trade from

9:00 a.m. to 2:30 p.m. (GMT – 5). As the Shanghai time is 13 hours ahead of New York time

(12 hours when the U.S. adopts daylight savings time), the trading in the Shanghai stock market

closes even before it starts in the U.S. commodity futures markets.

   To examine information flow from R       _          ,   , the U.S. commodity futures return on

day t-1 (return from 2:30 p.m. of day t-2 to 2:30 p.m. of day t-1), to R      _    ,   , Asian stock

return on day t (price change from 3 p.m. of day t-1 to 3 p.m. of day t in Shanghai time), we run

the following regression:

            _       ,              _            ,          &    ,            _     ,             (1)

The term b R    _           ,   measures the information transmitted from the U.S. commodity

futures return during the U.S. trading hours to Asian stock prices after the Asian markets open

the next day.
   It is a relevant concern that the commodity futures prices may simply passively reflect

exogenous news during the U.S. trading hours, and East Asian stock prices may eventually

incorporate the news even without observing the commodity futures prices. Because we cannot

find a counterfactual of how East Asian stock prices would fluctuate without the commodity

futures markets, it is difficult to identify information actively acquired by traders in the

commodity futures markets. Instead, we use two strategies to show that information revealed by

the commodity futures prices is special. First, we include the overnight S&P stock index futures

return R   &   ,   in the regression as a control. If the coefficient b is still significant, it means

that the information revealed by the commodity futures return is not subsumed by the

information in the futures return of the S&P 500 Index, a widely followed indicator for the

strength of the U.S. and world economies. Second, we also include the spot return of the

commodity during the previous night to control for information contained by the commodity’s

spot price.

   Furthermore, to control for potential price momentum in East Asian stock markets, we also

include the return of the Asian stock on the previous day R       _     ,   .

   A nuanced issue in our analysis is overnight trading in U.S. commodity futures markets.

GLOBEX introduced overnight trading of commodity futures in 1994 and electronic trading

systems further facilitated trading during night sessions, although futures trading during night

sessions was light before 2005. With the introduction of overnight trading, U.S. commodity

futures markets are open for almost 24 hours a day, which means trading in East Asian stock

markets overlaps with night sessions of U.S. futures markets.

   For the sample after 2005, tick-by-tick transaction data of U.S. commodity futures prices and

S&P 500 Index futures prices are available. We use this high-frequency data to construct returns
of a commodity’s futures and S&P 500 index futures during hours overlapping and non-

overlapping with each East Asian stock market in our sample. Specifically, we divide each day

into two sub-intervals, one that overlaps with the trading hours of an East Asian stock market

(for example, the Shanghai stock market) and the other that does not overlap with the trading

hours of the East Asian market. Note that the division of these sub-intervals may vary across

different East Asian markets. Panel B of Figure 2 illustrates the overlapping trading hours and

marks the division of the two sub-intervals.

    Then, we regress the return of the East Asian stock market on the commodity futures return

and S&P 500 Index futures return during the lagged non-overlapping trading hours,

R   _         ,       and R   &   ,   , to examine information transmitted from these markets:

                  ,                   _         ,                   _       ,        &   ,       (2)

                                                    _       ,           .

To control for information transmitted by the spot price of the commodity, we also add the

lagged spot return from the previous day        _       ,       to the regression.

C. Interpretation of Information Content

    To interpret information flow between U.S. commodity futures prices and East Asian stock

prices, it is important to have a clear view of determinants of commodity futures prices. We can

loosely classify determinants of commodity futures prices into several categories: supply shocks,

demand shocks and financial market shocks. These shocks originate from different sources and

have different implications for commodity futures prices and their joint dynamics with stock

prices. We briefly describe these shocks and summarize the extent to which the joint dynamics

of East Asian stock prices and U.S. commodity futures prices reflect these shocks.
C.1 Supply Shocks

   Economists have long recognized that shocks to oil supply are important drivers of oil price

fluctuations, which in turn can have significant real effects on the economy. Hamilton (1983)

shows that disruptions to oil supply and dramatic oil price increases preceded almost all of the

U.S. recessions after World War II. Mork (1989) and Hamilton (2003) further document that the

relation between oil price changes and GDP growth is nonlinear---oil price increases have much

more important effects than oil price decreases. Backus and Crucini (2000) provide evidence

that oil price increases exacerbate international business cycles through the term of trades

between countries. Davis and Haltiwanger (2001) find that oil price increases significantly

reduce U.S. manufacturing jobs although oil price decreases do not lead to job creation in the

same magnitude. More recently, by using a new measure of exogenous oil supply shocks, Kilian

(2008a) show that oil supply shocks made little difference for the evolution of the U.S. economy

since the 1970s, although they did matter for some historical episodes. Blanchard and Gali (2010)

also emphasizes that the real effects of oil shocks changed over time and were much smaller after

1984.

   Suppose that a supply shock drives up the futures price of a commodity. The price increase

raises commodity import costs to East Asian economies. As a result, the supply shock should

push down the overall East Asian stock prices. The effect of the supply shock may vary across

industries in that it hurts consumer industries that demand the commodity as production input but

it benefits supply industries that produce the commodity.

C.2 Demand Shocks

   Several recent studies highlight that demand shocks might also play an important role in

driving oil prices. Kilian (2009) uses a global index of dry cargo freight rates to measure global
economic activity and develops a structural VAR model for the dynamics of global oil

production, global economic activity, and oil price. By decomposing the shocks in the economy

to three orthogonal sources: an oil supply shock, an aggregate demand shock, and an oil specific

demand shock based on certain identification restrictions, this study finds that the aggregate

demand shock has a bigger impact on the oil market than previously thought. Furthermore,

many economists argue that strong demand confronting stagnating world production was a major

factor for the run-up of oil prices in 2007-2008, e.g., Kilian (2008b) and Hamilton (2009).

   In discussing the effects of commodity demand shocks on East Asian stock prices, it is useful

to differentiate between idiosyncratic demand shocks to the U.S. and global demand shocks. For

example, the popularity of SUVs in the U.S. may increase U.S. oil consumption and thus oil

futures prices. As this demand shock is associated with the U.S. economy, the subsequent oil

price increase represents an increase in cost of oil imports to East Asian economies. Like supply

shocks, the local U.S. demand shock should drive down the overall stock prices in East Asian

industries, with a particularly strong effect on consumer industries that directly demand the

commodity, although the shock would benefit supply industries that produce the commodity.

   Global demand shocks have rather different effects.         For example, the rapid economic

expansion of emerging economies has led to growing demand for many commodities, such as oil,

copper, iron ore, and soybeans. While growing global demand drives up the futures prices of

these commodities, the booming global economy should lead to higher stock prices in East Asia

despite the increased cost of commodity imports. In this case, we expect East Asian stock prices

across all industries to rise with commodity futures prices.
C.3. Financial Market Shocks

   Due to the large inflow of investment capital into commodity futures markets during the last

decade, commodity futures prices are now more exposed to financial market shocks. See Cheng

and Xiong (2013) for a detailed review of specific economic mechanisms for financial market

shocks to affect commodity futures markets.

   Financial market shocks tend to induce positive correlations among prices of financial assets.

For example, consider commodity index traders (CITs)--large portfolio investors who have

invested hundreds of billions of dollars into commodity futures markets in recent years (e.g.,

Tang and Xiong, 2012). A positive shock to CITs’ other asset holdings, such as U.S. stocks,

would increase their portfolio values and risk capacities, and induce greater demands for

investing in commodity futures. Such greater investment demands would in turn drive up

commodity futures prices.     To the extent that the shock may also induce CITs and other

institutional investors to demand more East Asian stocks, the shock induces commodity futures

prices to become positively correlated with East Asian stock prices. Basak and Pavlova (2013)

develop a dynamic equilibrium model to describe such a mechanism through index investors’

discount rate.

   Two considerations allow us to isolate effects of financial market shocks in our analysis. First,

due to stringent capital controls that prevent capital from freely moving across the Chinese

border, China’s financial markets are largely segmented from the world financial markets. Thus,

we do not expect outside financial market shocks to directly impact Chinese stock prices through

the trading of CITs and other institutional investors. Second, we expect the return of S&P 500

index to control for financial market shocks in our analysis of price reactions of other East Asian

stocks.
    In summary, different shocks to commodity futures prices have different implications for East

Asian stock prices. In practice, neither market participants nor economic researchers like us

observe the nature of shocks that drive commodity futures price fluctuations. Nevertheless, by

analyzing the predictive powers of U.S. commodity futures prices for East Asian stock prices

over a period of time, our study can uncover how participants of East Asian stock markets on

average interpret information revealed by fluctuations of U.S. commodity futures prices. As the

economic environment in the commodity markets and the global economy is likely to change

over time, the composition of shocks to the economy might also change over time. As a result,

we expect the information transmitted from the U.S. commodity futures markets to East Asian

stock markets to vary over time as well.

                                                   II. Data

A. Commodity Prices

    We obtain daily futures prices of copper, soybeans and crude oil from the Global Financial

Database (GFD). The GFD uses a rolling contract for its futures data. In most of analysis, we

use returns of rolling across the most actively traded futures contracts of these commodities.

These contracts are typically front-month contracts.3 For robustness, we also examine returns of

more distant contracts. The results are similar to those obtained from front-month contracts.

    Copper futures returns are measured as log changes of daily prices of the high grade copper

futures contracts traded in COMEX. Soybean futures returns are calculated as log changes of

daily prices of soybean futures traded in CBOT. Crude oil futures returns are measured as log


3
 An exception is copper. In recent years, COMEX expanded the set of copper contracts from the initial five
contracts that mature in March, May, July, September, and December to 12 contracts maturing in each month of the
year. Nevertheless, the newly added contracts remained inactive even when they were front-month contracts. In our
analysis, we skip these contracts by rolling into the most active contracts based on trading volume.
changes of daily prices of West Texas Intermediate (WTI) light crude oil futures contracts traded

on NYMEX. For copper and soybeans, daily futures data starts in January 1959, while crude oil

futures data is only available after March 1983.

   GLOBEX introduced overnight trading of commodity futures in 1994 and the emergence of

electronic trading systems further facilitated trading during night sessions. For copper and crude

oil, open outcry trading on NYMEX goes from 9:00 a.m. to 2:30 p.m. eastern time on weekdays.

Electronic trading starts at 6:00 p.m. eastern time on Sunday and closes at 5:15 p.m. on Friday. It

stops trading from 5:15 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. each day. For soybeans, open outcry trading on CBOT

goes from 9:30 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. central time. Electronic trading goes from 5:00 p.m. central

time on Sunday to 2:00 p.m. on Friday with a daily break from 2:00 p.m. until 5:00 p.m.

   As shown by Ulibarri (1998) and Lin and Tamvakis (2001), futures trading during night

sessions was rather light in the early years. For the sample before 2005, we compute daily

futures returns using closing prices of the most active contracts of each commodity during

regular outcry sessions. For the sample after January 2005, Tick Data gives use intraday prices

of copper, soybeans, and crude oil futures, as well as intraday prices of S&P 500 Index futures.

The data in this database is presented tick-by-tick, and delivered in compressed ASCII files with

the TickWrite software that allows clients to quickly and easily output time series data in ASCII

format. TickWrite also makes it easy to create continuous futures data. We use the AutoRoll

method recommended by TickWrite to roll futures contracts. AutoRoll computes daily tick

volume for the most active and other contracts and rolls to a back contract when the daily tick

volume of the back-month contract exceeds the daily tick volume of the current most-active

month contract.    As discussed in the previous section, we split the daily return of each
commodity futures into overlapping and non-overlapping parts in accordance with trading hours

of each Asian stock market by using the tick-by-tick data.

    We obtain metal bulletin copper high-grade cathode spot prices (MBCUUSHG) from

Bloomberg. Daily spot prices of soybeans and crude oil are obtained from the GFD. The

soybean spot prices are based upon the closing prices in Southeast Iowa that are offered to

producers as of 2:30 p.m. local time. This daily price report is prepared by the Marketing Bureau

of Iowa Department of Agriculture and Land Stewardship. Spot prices of crude oil are closing

prices for West Texas Intermediate crude oil offered at Cushing, Oklahoma at 2:30 p.m. local

time. The sample period starts in January 2005 and ends in September 2012.

B. East Asian Stock Prices

    We obtain daily prices of East Asian stock indices from the GFD. We choose the most

comprehensive and diversified stock index available for each market. For Japan, we use the

Tokyo Price Index (TOPIX), which is a capitalization-weighted price index of all first section

stocks traded in the Tokyo Stock Exchange. Daily prices of TOPIX are available from 1959 on.

The morning trading session of TOPIX goes from 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. Tokyo time (GMT + 9)

and the afternoon session is from 12:30 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.

    For Hong Kong, we use the Hang Seng Index, which includes the 33 largest firms in Hong

Kong and represents about seventy-five percent of equity capitalization of the Stock Exchange of

Hong Kong (SEHK). The Hang Seng Index is a value-weighted arithmetic index. Daily prices

of the Hang Seng Index are available from 1972 on. The morning session of SEHK is from

10:00 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. and the afternoon session is from 2:30 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. (GMT + 8).4



4
  On March 7, 2011, SEHK extended its trading hours in the first of two phases. The morning session was changed
to from 9:30 a.m. to 12:00 noon, followed by a ninety-minute lunch break and an afternoon session from 1:30 p.m.
   The Korea Composite Stock Price Index is a capitalization-weighted price index including all

stocks listed on the Seoul Stock Exchange. Daily prices of the Korea Composite Stock Price

Index are available from 1962 on. The regular trading session of the Seoul Stock Exchange goes

from 9:00 a.m. to 15:05 p.m. (GMT + 9) with a lunch break in the middle.

   We use the Shanghai Market Index and the Taiwan Market Index to represent stocks traded in

mainland China and Taiwan. Both indices are value-weighted arithmetic indices including all

stocks traded in these markets. The data for the Taiwan Market Index starts in 1969, while the

Shanghai Market Index became available only after 1991. In Shanghai, the morning session

goes from 9:30 a.m. to 11:30 a.m. (GMT + 8) and the afternoon session goes from 1:00 p.m. to

3:00 p.m. In Taiwan, the regular trading session goes from 9:00 a.m. to 1:30 p.m. (GMT + 8).

   In Section III.C, we also use returns of individual stocks to construct returns of a set of

industries in the stock markets of Japan, Hong Kong, and mainland China.

                                           III. Empirical Results

   We first examine the weekly return correlations between the three commodity futures traded

in the U.S. and East Asian stock indices. We then study the predictive powers of the lagged

overnight return of each of the commodity futures for East Asian stock prices at both market and

industry levels.

A. Weekly Return Correlation

   To get an overall picture of the joint movements of U.S. commodity futures prices and East

Asian stock prices, we plot correlations of weekly returns of the futures prices of copper,

soybeans, and crude oil with index returns of the five East Asian stock markets in our sample

to 4:00 p.m.. On March 5, 2012, the lunch break was cut to sixty minutes, with the afternoon session running from
1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m.
based on two-year rolling windows. We choose correlations of weekly rather than daily returns

to mitigate effects of asynchronous trading hours between U.S. markets and East Asian markets.

For comparison, we also plot the weekly return correlations of the three commodity futures with

the S&P 500 Index futures.

   Figure 3 depicts the return correlations of copper, soybeans, and oil futures with the six stock

market indices in Panels A, B, and C, respectively. The starting year of each plot varies due to

availability of data.

   In the first plot of Panel A, the return correlation between copper futures and the S&P 500

Index futures varies substantially over time. The correlation is particularly high in two periods,

one in the late 1970s and early 1980s and the other in recent years--after the mid-2000s. It is

well known that during the former period stagflation caused both high inflation and slow

economic growth in the U.S. and other advanced economies.              The high return correlation

between copper futures and S&P Index futures reflects the stagflation at the time. The high

correlation in the latter period, as pointed out by many commentators, may reflect the

dependence of both copper prices and the U.S. economy on the rapid economic growth of

emerging economies such as China and India. The correlation in these two periods rises above

0.5, while outside these two periods, it is small and insignificant from zero.

                                       [Insert Figure 3 Here]

   The return correlations of copper futures with the stock indices of Japan and Hong Kong also

have two peaks, one in the late 1970s and early 1980s and the other in recent years. The peak in

the latter period was particularly high--higher than 0.5 and the previous peak. These two peaks

likely reflect the same forces responsible for driving the correlation of copper futures with the

S&P Index, as discussed earlier. Outside these two periods, the correlation is small. The return
correlations of copper futures with the stock indices of the Taiwan, South Korea, and Shanghai

markets remain small and insignificant from zero until the mid-2000s, when they all experienced

large increases and reached levels above 0.5. The absence of any pronounced correlation

increase in late 1970s and early 1980s for these markets may reflect the fact that their economies

were in the early stages of development at the time. The economies of Taiwan and South Korea

reached an advanced level and became well integrated to the world economy only in 1990s.

China’s economy reached this stage even later, as China did not have a stock market until the

early 1990s. Despite the different stages of development of these East Asian economies, their

stock markets all experienced the same large increases in correlations with copper futures in

recent years. The focus of our analysis is to examine this common correlation increase.

   Panel B of Figure 3 depicts the return correlations of soybean futures with the six stock

market indices. There are two notable points. First, the correlations of soybean futures with

stock prices are more variable than the corresponding correlations of copper futures. Second,

despite the greater variability, the correlations of soybeans futures with the stock market indices

also experienced a common increase after the mid-2000s. This common increase resembles the

increases in the correlations of copper futures with these stock market indices in the same period.

   Panel C of Figure 3 depicts return correlations of crude oil futures with the six stock market

indices. As WTI crude oil futures started trading only in 1983, the correlation plots for all stock

markets start in 1985, except the plot for China starts in 1995. There are also two notable

episodes in these plots. First, in early 1990s, we observe large drops in the correlations of oil

futures with the stock indices of the U.S., Japan, Hong Kong, and South Korea to significantly

negative levels. These drops were driven by the Gulf War, which caused oil prices to spike and

stock markets across the world to decline. As widely recognized by the literature (e.g., Hamilton,
2003), this episode reflects the effect of an oil supply shock. Second, since the early 2000s, there

is a common increasing trend in the correlations of oil futures with these different stock market

indices. In particular, at the peak in 2010, the correlations with the S&P 500, Hong Kong, and

Taiwan indices have risen above 0.5. The increases in correlations with other market indices are

more modest but nevertheless significant.

   Taken together, Figure 3 demonstrates a clear pattern that despite the large heterogeneity in

the three commodities and the six stock markets, the return correlations between these

commodity futures and stock market indices have all experienced large increases and become

significantly positive in recent years. These largely increased correlations are consistent with the

finding of Tang and Xiong (2012) and Büyükşahin and Robe (2012) and motivate our study of

information flow between commodity future markets and stock markets.

B. Reactions of East Asian Market Indices to U.S. Commodity Futures Prices

   We now analyze the predictive powers of U.S. commodity futures prices for East Asian stock

prices. We first report results at the market index level in this subsection and then provide some

additional results at the industry level in the next subsection.

   Table 2 reports results from analyzing the regression specified in (1) of Section I for the

sample before 2005, during which we have only daily data on commodity futures returns. Panel

A summarizes the results from using the lagged copper futures return to predict the daily index

return of each East Asian stock market. We find a significant predictive power of the copper

futures return for East Asian stock indices without controlling for the S&P 500 Index futures

return. The estimate of the response coefficient b is positive in each market and is statistically

significant in Japan, Hong Kong and South Korea.             However, the estimate of b becomes

insignificant for all markets after including the lagged S&P 500 Index futures return in the
regression, indicating that before 2005, copper futures prices do not contain additional

information beyond what is in S&P 500 Index. Furthermore, all East Asian stock market indices

except the Shanghai Market Index respond positively and significantly to the lagged S&P 500

Index return.

                                       [Insert Table 2 Here]

   Panel B reports the results on the predictive power of the soybean futures return. We find little

predictive power for these stock markets with an exception in Hong Kong, where the Hang Seng

Index has a positive and marginally significant response to the lagged soybeans futures return

without controlling for the lagged S&P 500 Index futures return. Overall, there is little evidence

before 2005 for the lagged futures returns of either copper or soybeans predicting East Asian

stock prices after controlling for the lagged S&P 500 Index futures return.

   Panel C summarizes the predictive power of the crude oil futures return. In contrast to the

responses to lagged copper and soybeans returns, the responses of the East Asian market indices

to the lagged crude oil return are mostly negative except for the Shanghai Market Index.

Without controlling for the lagged S&P 500 Index futures return, the estimate of b is

significantly negative for Japan, Taiwan and South Korea. After controlling for the lagged S&P

500 Index futures return, the estimate of b remains significantly negative for Japan and Taiwan.

In light of our discussion in Section I.B, the negative responses indicate that crude oil futures

returns reveal information regarding supply shocks of crude oil and that most Asian market

indices react negatively to such information. This result is also consistent with the studies

referenced in the introduction, which find that crude oil prices tend to have negative return

correlations with stock prices across the world.
   For the sample period in 2005-2012, we are able to use tick-by-tick data to construct futures

returns of the three commodities and S&P 500 Index in two sub-intervals of each day, one for

overlapping hours and the other for non-overlapping hours with each East Asian stock market.

In Table 3, we examine the reactions of the East Asian market indices to the lagged U.S.

commodity futures return during the non-overlapping hours by running the regression specified

in (2) of Section I. Panels A, B, and C report the reactions to the lagged return of copper,

soybeans and crude oil, respectively.

                                        [Insert Table 3 Here]

   In sharp contrast to the results before 2005, we find positive and significant responses for all

East Asian market indices to the lagged returns of both copper and soybean futures even after

controlling for the lagged return of S&P 500 stock index futures. The estimate of b in each

market with respect to the lagged futures return of either copper or soybeans is not only

substantially larger in magnitude relative to the corresponding estimate reported in Table 2 for

the pre-2005 sample but also statistically significant. Taken together, these results imply that

after 2005, the futures prices of copper and soybeans contain information beyond what is

revealed by the price of S&P 500 Index futures and that East Asian stock markets respond

significantly to price fluctuations of copper and soybeans futures.        Given the tremendous

popularity of S&P 500 Index futures among financial institutions as a key indicator of the

economic growth of the U.S. and the world, one would have expected S&P 500 Index futures

prices to serve as a sufficient statistic of information revealed by the commodity futures prices.

Thus, it is rather striking to observe that the futures prices of copper and soybeans contain

additional information.
   While our main analysis uses rolling returns of the active futures contracts of the three

commodities, we have also examined predictive powers of returns of distant futures contracts of

these commodities. The results are similar. This is not surprising as it is well known that the

prices of distant contracts move very closely with the front-month contracts. Our analysis

suggests that distant contracts do not provide additional information relative to front-month

contracts.

   What kind of information is revealed by the futures prices of copper and soybeans? In section

I.C, we classify four types of shocks to commodity futures prices: supply shocks, idiosyncratic

demand shocks, global demand shocks, and financial market shocks.             To the extent that

commodity price increases driven by supply demands have adverse effects on commodity import

economies, the positive reactions of East Asian market indices to futures prices of copper and

soybeans cannot be explain by information regarding supply shocks of these commodities.

Neither can the positive reactions be explained by information regarding idiosyncratic demand

shocks of these commodities. This is because high commodity prices driven by idiosyncratic

demand shocks in the U.S. would also boost commodity import costs of East Asian economies

and should thus generate negative price reactions in East Asian stock markets.

   It is possible for financial market shocks to cause a positive correlation between commodity

futures return and Asian stock market returns. However, it is difficult for this mechanism to

fully explain the positive predictability of copper and soybean futures returns for China’s market

return. As China’s stock market is largely segmented from the outside world due to its capital

controls, one would not expect trading by outside investors to directly affect the Shanghai

Market Index. Furthermore, as we have controlled for the return of S&P 500 index, which
would have captured financial market shocks, it is also difficult to attribute the positive

responses of other East Asian stock markets.

   The positive reactions of East Asian market indices to the lagged copper and soybean futures

returns are likely to reflect information regarding global demand shocks to these commodities,

which is ultimately related to the strength of the global economy. This is because a stronger

global economy leads to higher stock prices in East Asian economies despite their greater

commodity import costs. In the next subsection, we further explore the stock price reactions of

different industries to the lagged returns of commodity futures.

   Panel C of Table 3 reports the predictive power of the lagged oil futures return for East Asian

market indices. There is a dramatic change after 2005. Without controlling for the lagged S&P

500 Index futures return, the responses of all East Asian market indices to the lagged oil futures

return are positive and significant, as opposed to the negative reactions before 2005 shown in

Table 2. These positive responses are broadly consistent with decreased effects of oil supply

shocks documented by Blanchard and Gali (2010) and with the potentially more important

effects of global oil demand shocks emphasized by Kilian (2009). However, after controlling for

the lagged S&P 500 Index futures return, the responses of all markets become insignificant. This

indicates that information revealed by the oil futures return is subsumed by that in S&P 500

Index futures return. As we discussed before, as one would have expected the S&P 500 Index

futures market to reflect most of the information about the global economy, this result is not so

surprising. However, this result does make the significant amount of information revealed by

copper and soybean futures prices even more striking.

   One might argue that the information revealed by copper and soybean futures prices may

simply reflect passive news that hits the public domain during the hours when the U.S. futures
markets are open and the East Asian stock markets are closed. It is difficult to directly trace the

information revealed by futures prices of copper and soybeans to active acquisition of traders in

the U.S. futures markets. We can nevertheless compare the ability of futures and spot prices of

these commodities in predicting the East Asian stock prices. If the futures prices have stronger

predictive powers, the information in the futures prices is superior to that in the spot prices, and

thus cannot be taken for granted.

   In Table 4, we compare the information in the futures prices and spot prices of copper,

soybeans and crude oil in the post-2005 sample. Specifically, we run the regression specified in

(2) of Section I, which adds the lagged spot return of the commodity from the previous day. Due

to the lack of high-frequency data on spot prices, we cannot construct spot returns during the

non-overlapping trading hours as we do for the futures return. The spot return from the previous

day should nevertheless be sufficient to capture information contained in the spot prices.

                                       [Insert Table 4 Here]

   Panel A of Table 4 reports the results from using both lagged futures and spot returns of

copper to predict the return of each of the East Asian market indices. We find that if the lagged

futures return is not included in the regression, the lagged spot return of copper is able to predict

stock index returns of some markets such as Japan and Taiwan. However, once the lagged

futures return is included, the lagged spot return of copper becomes insignificant in all markets

except Taiwan, while the lagged futures return is significant in Japan, Hong Kong and Shanghai.

It is clear that the lagged futures return of copper has stronger predictive power than the lagged

spot return.

   Panel B of Table 4 reports the results from using both lagged futures and spot returns of

soybeans to predict the return of each East Asian market index. The superior predictive power of
the futures return of soybeans is even more evident. When lagged futures and spot returns are

both included in the regression, the lagged futures return has significant predictive power in all

markets, while the lagged spot return is insignificant in all markets.                  Taken together, Table 4

shows that futures prices of both copper and soybeans contain information superior to spot prices

of these commodities.

C. Price Reactions of East Asian Stocks: An Industry-Level Analysis

      Our analysis in the previous subsection shows significant and positive predictive powers of

lagged futures returns of copper and soybeans for East Asian stock market indices after 2005.

An analysis of the predictive powers for stock prices in different industries can further sharpen

our understanding of the type of information revealed by the futures prices of copper and

soybeans to East Asian stock prices. For example, price increases of copper futures driven by

supply shocks should hurt industries that consume copper as production input but benefit

industries that produce copper, whereas price increases driven by global demand shocks

represent a stronger global economy and thus may boost stock prices of all industries, despite the

increased copper consumption costs for consumer industries.

      We use the Thomson Reuters Business Classification (TRBC) codes to classify firms into

different industries. TRBC, which is owned and operated by Thomson Reuters, gives an industry

classification of global companies.5 We focus on a set of industries listed in Table 5 with the

corresponding TRBC codes. We further group these industries into three categories: 1) supply

industries that directly profit from sales of a given commodity; 2) consumer industries that

heavily rely on a given commodity as production input; 3) other unrelated industries that are not

directly connected to a given commodity in production and operation. To ensure that there are

5
    See http://thomsonreuters.com/products_services/financial/thomson_reuters_indices/trbc/ for more details.
sufficient firms in each industry, we perform the industry-level analysis only in the three largest

stock markets in our sample: Japan, mainland China and Hong Kong.

                                      [Insert Table 5 Here]

   Table 6 reports results of the industry-level analysis, which uses the same regression

specification as Table 3. Panel A displays the results from using the lagged futures return of

copper as the predicting variable. As expected, the price responses of supply industries in the

stock markets of Japan, Hong Kong, and Shanghai are all positive and significant. Among

consumer industries, such as electric equipment and electronics industries, we also observe

positive and mostly significant stock price responses to the lagged copper futures return,

although the estimate of the reaction coefficient b is noticeably smaller than that of the supply

industries. We also examine a set of other unrelated industries, ranging from cyclical industries

such as steel and real estate to stable, non-cyclical industries such as telecoms or healthcare.

Our regression result shows that even the stock prices of these industries that are not directly

related to either production or consumption of copper have positive and significant responses to

the lagged copper futures return. This pattern is stable and consistent across all three stock

markets.

   Taken together, our industry-level analysis of the predictive power of the lagged copper

futures return for East Asian stock prices shows that our earlier result of significantly positive

predictive power at the market index level is robust with consistent support across different

industries.   The fact that even consumer industries and other unrelated industries exhibit

significantly positive stock price responses to the copper futures return underlies a clear message

that East Asian stock markets consistently interpret futures prices of copper as a barometer of the

global economy.
                                      [Insert Table 6 Here]

   Panel B of Table 6 reports results from using the lagged futures return of soybeans as the

predicting variable. Overall, the industry-level stock price responses to the lagged soybean

futures return are consistently positive and significant across supply industries, consumer

industries and other industries in both Hong Kong and mainland China, similar to the responses

to the lagged copper futures return. The industry-level results for Japan are somewhat weaker.

We do not find significant price responses to the lagged soybean futures return in supply and

consumer industries, although there are significantly positive responses in some other industries,

such as those in steel and auto equipment. Perhaps this is because the Japanese economy is less

involved in producing agricultural products and Japanese investors do not pay as much attention

to agricultural commodity prices as investors in Hong Kong and mainland China.

   Panel C of Table 6 reports results from using the lagged futures return of crude oil as the

predicting variable. We only find significant price responses to the lagged crude oil futures

return in supply industries. Supply industries in Japan, Hong Kong and mainland China all

exhibit significantly positive stock price responses to the lagged crude oil futures return. On the

other hand, across all three stock markets, consumer industries and other unrelated industries do

not show any significant response, except steel industry in Japan. The lack of price response

outside supply industries is consistent with the weak market-level responses to the lagged crude

oil futures return. Taken together, these results show that oil futures prices do not transmit much

information to East Asian stock prices.

                                          IV. Conclusion

   This paper provides evidence of significant and positive predictive powers of the lagged

overnight futures returns of copper and soybeans, albeit not crude oil, for stock prices across all
East Asian economies and across a broad range of industries after mid-2000s. Our findings

highlight significant information flow from daily futures returns of copper and soybeans to East

Asian stock markets and establish the futures prices of these commodities as barometers of the

global economy.
References

Backus, David K., and Mario J. Crucini. 2000. “Oil Prices and the Terms of Trade.” Journal of
International Economics 50: 185-213.
Basak, Suleyman and Anna Pavlova. 2013. “A Model of Financialization of Commodities.” Working
paper, London School of Business.
Blanchard, Olivier, and Jordi Gali. 2010. “Labor Markets and Monetary Policy: A New Keynesian Model
with Unemployment.” American Economic Journal-Macroeconomics 2: 1-30.
Büyükşahin, Bahattin and Michel Robe. 2012. “Does Paper Oil Matter? Energy Markets’ Financialization
and Equity-Commodity Co-movements.” Working paper, CFTC.
Cheng, Ing-haw and Wei Xiong. 2013. “The Financialization of Commodity Markets.” Annual Review of
Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Davis, Steven J., and John Haltiwanger. 2001. “Sectoral Job Creation and Destruction Responses to Oil
Price Changes.” Journal of Monetary Economics 48: 465-512.
Garbade, Kenneth and William L. Silber. 1983. “Price movements and price discovery in futures and cash
markets.” Review of Economics and Statistics 65: 289-97.
Grossman, Sanford. 1989. The Informational Role of Prices (Wicksell Lectures). Cambridge: MIT Press.
Hamilton, James D. 1983. “Oil and the Macroeconomy since World War II.” Journal of Political
Economy 91: 228-48.
Hamilton, James D. 2003. “What is an Oil Shock?.” Journal of Econometrics 113: 363-98.
Hamilton, James D. 2009. “Causes and Consequences of the Oil Shock of 2007-08.” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity 1: 215-83.
Hayek, Friedrich. 1945. “The Use of Knowledge in Society.” American Economic Review 35:
519-30.
Huang, Roger, Ronald Masulis, and Hans Stoll. 1996. “Energy Shocks and Financial Markets.” Journal
of Futures Markets 16: 1-27.
Jones, Charles M., and Gautam Kaul. “Oil and the stock markets.” Journal of Finance 51: 463-91.
Kilian, Lutz. 2008a. “Exogenous Oil Supply Shocks: How Big Are They and How Much Do They Matter
for the US Economy?.” Review of Economics and Statistics 90: 216-240.
Kilian, Lutz. 2008b. “The Economic Effects of Energy Price Shocks.” Journal of Economic Literature 46:
871-909.
Kilian, Lutz. 2009. “Not All Oil Price Shocks are Alike: Disentangling Demand and Supply Shocks in the
Crude Oil Market.” American Economic Review 99: 1053-69.
Kilian, Lutz, and Cheolbeom Park. 2009. “The Impact of Oil Price Shocks on the US Stock Market.”
International Economic Review 50: 1267-87.
Kyle, Albert and Wei Xiong. 2001. “Contagion as a Wealth Effect.” Journal of Finance 56: 1401-40.
Lin, Sharon, and Michael Tamvakis. 2001. “Spillover Effects in Energy Futures Markets.” Energy
Economics 23: 43-56.
Masters, Michael. 2008. “Testimony before the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental
Affairs.” US Senate. May 20. www.hsgac.senate.gov/public/_files/052008Masters.pdf.
Mork, Knut Anton. 1989. “Oil and the Macroeconomy When Prices Go Up and Down - an Extension of
Hamilton Results.” Journal of Political Economy 97: 740-44.
Nandha, Mohan, and Robert Faff. 2008. “Does Oil Move Equity Prices? A Global View.” Energy
Economics 30: 986-97.
Park, Jungwook, and Ronald A. Ratti. 2008. “Oil Price Shocks and Stock Markets in the US and 13
European Countries.” Energy Economics 30: 2587-608.
Roll, Richard. 1984. “Orange Juice and Weather.” American Economic Review 74: 861-80.
Singleton, Kenneth. 2012. “Investor Flows and the 2008 Boom/Bust in Oil Prices, Working paper,
Stanford University.
Sockin, Michael and Wei Xiong. 2013. “Informational Frictions and Commodity Markets.” Working
paper, Princeton University.
Tang, Ke and Wei Xiong. 2012. “Index Investment and Financialization of Commodities.” Financial
Analysts Journal 68 (6): 54-74.
Ulibarri, Carlos. 1998. “Is After-hours Trading Informative?.” Journal of Futures Markets 18: 563-79.
US Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations. 2009. “Excessive Speculation in the Wheat
Market.” Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs. June 24.
http://www.hsgac.senate.gov/subcommittees/investigations/hearings/excessive-speculation-in-the-wheat-
market.
                          Figure 1: Commodity Imports across Regions

This figure plots the recent trends in imports of copper, soybeans and crude oil by various regions of the
world. The data on copper is provided by the United Nations Commodity Trade Statistics Database,
which records the dollar-denominated imported value of copper and articles by countries. The data on
soybeans and crude oil is obtained from the CRB Commodity Yearbook 2011 and International Energy
Statistics, respectively.
                              Figure 2: Trading Hours

                Panel A: Trading Hours without Overnight Trading


                              _       ,                                _       ,



  Shanghai                                Open                                 Open
             3:00 pm          9:30 am           3:00 pm                9:30 am         3: 00 pm



                                            _             ,


New York
             3:00 am          9:30 pm           3:00 am                9:30 pm         3: 00 am
                       Open                               Open


               9:00 am 2:30 pm                      9:00 am       2:30 pm


               Panel B: Trading Hours with Overnight Trading


                              _       ,                                    _       ,


                                          Open                                     Open
  Shanghai
             3:00 pm          9:30 am           3:00 pm                9:30 am         3: 00 pm


                                  _             ,             _            ,


New York
             3:00 am          9:30 pm           3:00 am                9:30 pm         3: 00 am
 Figure 3: Weekly Return Correlations between US Commodity Futures Prices and Stock
                                       Indices

This figure depicts two-year rolling weekly return correlations of U.S. commodity futures prices with the
S&P 500 Index (sp), the Tokyo Price Index (tp), the Hang Seng Index (hk), the Taiwan Market Index (tw),
the Korea Composite Stock Price Index (kor), and the Shanghai Market Index (sh). Panels A, B, and C
report the correlations of copper (hg), soybeans (sy), and oil (cl), respectively.



                                          Panel A: Correlations of Copper Futures with Stock Indices


                                           hg and sp                                                    hg and tp                                                 hg and hk
                   1




                                                                               1




                                                                                                                                           1
       S pearm an C orrelation




                                                                   spearm a n C orre latio n




                                                                                                                               spearm a n C orre latio n
                      .5




                                                                                   .5




                                                                                                                                               .5
             0




                                                                        0




                                                                                                                                    0
                   -.5




                                                                               -.5




                                   1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                               1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010               -.5             1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
                                                Year                                                        Year                                                      Year


                                           hg and tw                                                   hg and kor                                                 hg and sh
                   1




                                                                               1




                                                                                                                                           1
       sp ea rm an C o rrelation




                                                                   sp ea rm an C o rrelation




                                                                                                                               sp ea rm an C o rrelation
                         .5




                                                                                     .5




                                                                                                                                                 .5
              0




                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                      0
                   -.5




                                                                               -.5




                                                                                                                                           -.5




                                   1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                                     1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                                   1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
                                              Year                                                        Year                                                       Year
                                      Panel B: Correlations of Soybean Futures with Stock Indices


                                        sy and sp                                                      sy and tp                                                    sy and hk
             .6




                                                                            .6




                                                                                                                                           .6
S pe arm an C orrelatio n




                                                               sp ea rm a n C o rre latio n




                                                                                                                              sp ea rm a n C o rre latio n
                     .4




                                                                                       .4




                                                                                                                                                      .4
              .2




                                                                               .2




                                                                                                                                              .2
        0




                                                                        0




                                                                                                                                       0
 -.2




                                                                -.2




                                                                                                                               -.2
             -.4




                                                                            -.4




                                                                                                                                           -.4
                               1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                                  1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                                  1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
                                            Year                                                           Year                                                         Year


                                        sy and tw                                                     sy and kor                                                    sy and sh
             .6




                                                                            .6




                                                                                                                                           .6
sp ea rm a n C o rre latio n




                                                               sp ea rm a n C o rre latio n




                                                                                                                              sp ea rm a n C o rre latio n
                        .4




                                                                                       .4




                                                                                                                                                      .4
                .2




                                                                               .2




                                                                                                                                              .2
         0




                                                                        0




                                                                                                                                       0
 -.2




                                                                -.2




                                                                                                                               -.2
             -.4




                                                                            -.4




                                                                                                                                           -.4




                               1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                                        1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                                      1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
                                          Year                                                           Year                                                          Year
                                             Panel C: Correlations of Oil with Stock Indices


                                      cl and sp                                                 cl and tp                                                 cl and hk
             1




                                                                       1




                                                                                                                                 1
S pe arm an C orrelatio n




                                                          sp ea rm a n C o rre latio n




                                                                                                                    sp ea rm a n C o rre latio n
                 .5




                                                                             .5




                                                                                                                                       .5
       0




                                                                 0




                                                                                                                           0
             -.5




                                                                       -.5




                                                                                                                                 -.5
                               198519901995200020052010                                  198519901995200020052010                                  198519901995200020052010
                                          Year                                                      Year                                                      Year


                                      cl and tw                                                 cl and kor                                                cl and sh
             1




                                                                       1




                                                                                                                                 1
sp ea rm a n C o rre latio n




                                                          sp ea rm a n C o rre latio n




                                                                                                                    sp ea rm a n C o rre latio n
                   .5




                                                                             .5




                                                                                                                                       .5
       0




                                                                 0




                                                                                                                           0
             -.5




                                                                       -.5




                                                                                                                                 -.5




                               198519901995200020052010                                  198519901995200020052010                                  1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
                                          Year                                                      Year                                                     Year
                                           Table 1: Commodity Import in 2010 by Regions

This table describes imports of copper, soybeans and crude oil by various regions of the world in 2010. The data on copper is provided by the
United Nations Commodity Trade Statistics Database, which records the dollar-denominated imported value of copper and articles by countries.
The data on soybeans and crude oil is obtained from the CRB Commodity Yearbook 2011 and International Energy Statistics, respectively.

              Units                               World        Mainland China      Japan      South Korea     Taiwan       U.S.      Europe
Copper        Billion USD                         48.3              25.1            0.5           3.1                       4.4       14.6
              % of World Import                  100.0%            51.9%           1.0%          6.5%                      9.0%      30.2%
Soybeans      Thousands of Metric Tons           95,869           57,000           3,450         1,260         2,500                 14,000
              % of World Import                  100.0%            59.5%           3.6%          1.3%          2.6%                  14.6%
Crude Oil     Thousand Barrels Per Day           43,677            4,754           3,472         2,372          886       9,213
              % of World Import                  100.0%            10.9%           7.9%          5.4%          2.0%       21.1%
                              Table 2: Predictive Powers of U.S. Commodity Futures Prices before 2005

This table reports regression results on predictive powers of U.S. commodity futures prices for East Asian stock indices using daily returns before
2005. For each pair of stock market index and commodity in our sample, we run the following regression:

                                    _     ,               _          ,          &     ,               _    ,        .

The sample period of each regression varies with the availability of data. Panels A, B and C display regression results with the futures return of
copper, soybeans, or crude oil as the predicting variable. In each panel, we report regression results without or with the control of the
contemporaneous S&P 500 Index return ( &          ,   ). The t-statistics adjusted for heteroskedasticity and serial correlations using the Newey-
West method with five lags are reported in parentheses. We use *, **, *** to indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
                  (1)           (2)   (3)       (4)      (5)        (6)       (7)        (8)     (9)     (10)
VARIABLES               Japan           Hong Kong               Taiwan         South Korea         Shanghai
                                                        Panel A: Copper
     b1          0.0119*   0.000170 0.0274** 0.00308     0.0159      0.00553  0.0162*  0.00749 0.00829 0.00653
                   (1.80)    (0.03)   (2.16)    (0.26)    (1.58)       (0.55)   (1.91)   (0.88) (0.31)  (0.24)
     b2                    0.268***           0.458***               0.205***          0.181***        0.0262
                            (10.08)            (14.25)                 (9.89)            (7.05)         (0.78)
     b3         0.0836*** 0.0615*** 0.0100     -0.0127 0.0726*** 0.0684*** 0.0890*** 0.0859*** 0.0427 0.0428
                   (3.69)    (3.01)   (0.41)   (-0.49)    (4.59)       (4.39)   (2.90)   (2.78) (1.60)  (1.60)
Observations       9,999     9,976     6,980    6,979     8,770        8,748    9,849    9,830  3,092   3,091
  Adj R2           0.008     0.082     0.001    0.068     0.006        0.023    0.009    0.017  0.002   0.002
                                                       Panel B: Soybeans
     b1          0.00447   -0.00142  0.0293*   0.0189    0.0144       0.0110  0.00144  -0.00188 0.0340 0.0339
                   (0.73)   (-0.25)   (1.93)    (1.26)    (1.48)       (1.14)   (0.14)  (-0.18) (1.01)  (1.00)
     b2                    0.266***           0.454***               0.204***          0.179***        0.0270
                            (10.06)            (14.27)                 (9.92)            (7.06)         (0.82)
     b3         0.0912*** 0.0682*** 0.0110     -0.0123 0.0718*** 0.0661*** 0.0909*** 0.0875*** 0.0434 0.0435
                   (3.96)    (3.24)   (0.45)   (-0.48)    (4.54)       (4.24)   (2.98)   (2.83) (1.63)  (1.63)
Observations      10,060    10,027     7,012    7,007     8,812        8,784    9,913    9,884  3,107   3,103
  Adj R2           0.009     0.081     0.001    0.067     0.006        0.023    0.009    0.017  0.002   0.002
                                                       Panel C: Crude Oil
     b1        -0.0268*** -0.0168** -0.00439 0.00938 -0.0442*** -0.0361*** -0.0229**    -0.0140 0.0117 0.0132
                  (-3.56)   (-2.44)   (-0.46)   (1.03)   (-3.14)      (-2.70)  (-2.09)  (-1.33) (0.73)  (0.83)
     b2                    0.372***           0.500***               0.272***          0.296***        0.0315
                            (10.23)            (13.09)                 (9.95)           (10.18)         (0.96)
     b3         0.0649**    0.0280   -0.0383 -0.0728** 0.0922*** 0.0873*** 0.0587*** 0.0469** 0.0443* 0.0444*
                   (2.13)    (1.07)   (-1.21)  (-2.18)    (4.69)       (4.51)   (3.04)   (2.52) (1.66)  (1.66)
Observations       4,591     4,590     4,507    4,506     5,089        5,089    5,078    5,077  3,094   3,093
  Adj R2           0.008     0.128     0.002    0.108     0.013        0.040    0.005    0.044  0.002   0.002
                               Table 3: Predictive Powers of U.S. Commodity Futures Prices After 2005

This table reports regression results on reactions of Asian stock indices to US commodity futures prices using daily returns from January 2005 to
September 2012. For each pair of stock market index and commodity in our sample, we regress the Asian stock index return on the lagged non-
overlapping return of the commodity futures:

                                 _     ,                   _            ,           &     ,                     _     ,

Panels A, B and C display regression results with the futures return of copper, soybeans, or crude oil as the predicting variable. In each panel, we
report regression results without or with the control of the S&P 500 Index return (           &       ,   ), which is contemporaneous to the commodity
return    _          ,   . Due to the different trading hours of the Asian markets in our sample, the non-overlapping sub-interval for computing
the returns of U.S. commodity futures (     _          ,       ) and S&P 500 Index futures (      &       ,   ) varies across different stock markets. The
t-statistics adjusted for heteroskedasticity and serial correlations using the Newey-West method with five lags are reported in parentheses. We use
*, **, *** to indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
                 (1)           (2)     (3)      (4)           (5)      (6)      (7)       (8)       (9)      (10)
VARIABLES              Japan            Hong Kong                  Taiwan        South Korea          Shanghai
                                                               Panel A: Copper
     b1        0.284*** 0.0977*** 0.327*** 0.103***         0.195*** 0.0393* 0.221*** 0.0701*** 0.176*** 0.100***
                (11.23)    (4.23)  (10.40)    (3.53)          (7.91)      (1.75)  (6.88)   (2.58)   (6.84)   (3.40)
     b2                 0.608***            0.679***                    0.495***         0.460***          0.231***
                          (17.46)            (15.18)                     (13.27)           (9.62)            (4.41)
     b3         0.0347    0.0370   -0.0410   -0.0643         0.0458      0.0529* 0.112** 0.109**  0.00848   0.0130
                 (0.87)    (0.99)   (-0.91)   (-1.38)         (1.64)      (1.93)  (2.47)   (2.49)   (0.30)   (0.46)
Observations     1,796     1,796     1,833     1,833          1,842       1,842   1,825    1,825    1,828    1,828
  Adj R2         0.135     0.372     0.124     0.326          0.072       0.242   0.080    0.196    0.028    0.047
                                                             Panel B: Soybeans
     b1        0.188***   0.0600**   0.249*** 0.0968**      0.151*** 0.0552** 0.159*** 0.0601*    0.188*** 0.137***
                 (5.41)     (2.35)     (5.86)    (2.53)       (5.95)      (2.34)  (4.69)   (1.91)   (5.72)   (3.81)
     b2                   0.654***             0.720***                 0.506***         0.489***          0.260***
                           (19.68)              (16.90)                  (14.50)          (10.59)            (5.44)
     b3         0.0126     0.0311     -0.0392   -0.0645      0.0420 0.0544** 0.113**     0.110**   0.0163   0.0199
                (0.29)      (0.82)     (-0.83)   (-1.41)      (1.52)      (1.98)  (2.49)   (2.52)   (0.56)   (0.69)
Observations     1,794      1,794       1,832     1,832       1,841       1,841   1,823    1,823    1,826    1,826
  Adj R2         0.040      0.364       0.052     0.324       0.030       0.244   0.037    0.194    0.023    0.052
                                                             Panel C: Crude Oil
     b1        0.173***    0.0280    0.188***     0.0114    0.125*** 0.0105 0.122*** 0.00317 0.0683*** 0.000448
                 (8.06)     (1.64)     (7.30)     (0.54)      (6.45)      (0.61)  (5.03)   (0.15)   (2.87)   (0.02)
     b2                   0.654***              0.741***                0.514***         0.504***          0.297***
                           (19.72)               (17.01)                 (14.66)          (10.97)            (5.82)
     b3        0.00649     0.0286    -0.0594     -0.0686     0.0291      0.0507* 0.102** 0.107**  0.00487   0.0133
                (0.15)      (0.75)    (-1.21)     (-1.44)     (1.06)      (1.86)  (2.25)   (2.45)   (0.17)   (0.46)
Observations    1,796       1,796      1,833       1,833      1,842       1,842   1,825    1,825    1,828    1,828
  Adj R2        0.066       0.361      0.056       0.316      0.040       0.240   0.041    0.191    0.006    0.040
                  Table 4: Comparing Predictive Powers of U.S. Commodity Futures and Spot Prices (2005-2012)

This table reports regression results for comparing the predictive powers of U.S. commodity futures and spot prices for East Asian stock indices
from January 2005 to September 2012. For each pair of commodity and East Asian market index, we run the following regression:

                           _      ,                _          ,             _     ,       &     ,               _      ,


Panels A, B, and C report regression results with the futures and spot returns of copper, soybeans and oil as the predicting variables. The t-
statistics adjusted for heteroskedasticity and serial correlations using the Newey-West method with five lags are reported in parentheses. We use *,
**, *** to indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                          (1)            (2)           (3)      (4)             (5)     (6)          (7)       (8)           (9)      (10)
     VARIABLES                  Japan                   Hong Kong               Taiwan                South Korea              Shanghai
                                                                           Panel A：Copper
            b1                        0.0956***              0.142***                 0.0267                 0.0653*                  0.155***
                                        (2.74)                 (3.00)                 (0.69)                  (1.95)                    (3.25)
            b2         0.107*** 0.0916***          0.0623         0.0401   0.0729*** 0.0693**       0.0535    0.0440       -0.00720   -0.0259
                         (3.32)   (2.98)           (1.23)         (0.86)     (2.84)    (2.19)       (1.27)    (1.10)        (-0.20)    (-0.73)
            b3         0.643***       0.581***    0.696*** 0.600***        0.462***   0.444*** 0.461*** 0.418*** 0.299*** 0.197***
                        (17.49)        (13.78)     (15.22)  (10.77)         (11.80)     (9.47)   (8.42)   (6.85)   (6.28)   (3.09)
            b4         -0.0305         -0.0107     -0.102     -0.0809       0.0118    0.0154        0.0579    0.0660       0.0188      0.0223
                        (-0.58)        (-0.20)     (-1.51)     (-1.27)      (0.34)    (0.45)        (0.94)    (1.08)       (0.47)      (0.57)
      Observations       1,024          1,024       1,048       1,048       1,067     1,067         1,051     1,051        1,043       1,043
        Adj R2          0.416           0.425      0.312          0.324      0.242     0.243        0.193     0.197         0.054      0.068
                 (1)           (2)   (3)      (4)      (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)      (9)      (10)
VARIABLES              Japan          Hong Kong            Taiwan           South Korea         Shanghai
                                                      Panel B: Soybeans
     b1                 0.0618**           0.110***            0.0684***          0.0801**          0.135***
                          (2.26)             (2.96)               (2.61)            (2.47)            (3.53)
     b2         0.0128  -0.00970 0.00960    -0.0297 -0.00550     -0.0294 -0.0164  -0.0438*  0.0407  -0.00653
                 (0.74)  (-0.53)   (0.32)    (-1.04) (-0.31)     (-1.53)  (-0.65)  (-1.73)   (1.40)   (-0.22)
     b3        0.672*** 0.657*** 0.740*** 0.713*** 0.513*** 0.498*** 0.510*** 0.490*** 0.285*** 0.254***
                (20.51)  (19.60)  (17.63)   (17.00)  (14.89)     (14.46) (11.02)   (10.47)  (6.16)    (5.33)
    B4          0.0245   0.0312   -0.0733   -0.0638  0.0518* 0.0586** 0.107** 0.114*** 0.00663        0.0146
                 (0.63)   (0.79)   (-1.52)   (-1.42)  (1.91)      (2.15)   (2.43)   (2.60)   (0.23)    (0.51)
Observations     1,770    1,765     1,801     1,800   1,811       1,808    1,799    1,794    1,798     1,794
  Adj R2         0.362    0.365     0.315     0.323   0.236       0.241    0.192    0.196    0.040     0.049
                                                      Panel C: Crude Oil
     b1                  0.0106              0.0252             -0.00199          0.0838**            0.0402
                          (0.40)             (0.61)              (-0.07)            (2.33)            (1.02)
     b2         0.0241*  0.0168  0.00534    -0.0123  0.0118      0.0131  -0.0265 -0.0827** -0.0108   -0.0372
                 (1.67)   (0.75)   (0.25)    (-0.30)  (0.78)      (0.54)  (-1.41)  (-2.48)  (-0.51)   (-1.20)
     b3        0.656*** 0.653*** 0.735*** 0.727*** 0.506*** 0.507*** 0.511*** 0.483*** 0.293*** 0.279***
                (19.77)  (19.73)  (17.02)   (17.31)  (14.69)     (14.55) (10.97)   (10.52)  (6.20)    (5.51)
    B4          0.0205   0.0223   -0.0767   -0.0722   0.0449      0.0445 0.105** 0.118*** 0.00557 0.00869
                 (0.53)   (0.57)   (-1.61)   (-1.50)  (1.62)      (1.61)   (2.35)   (2.60)   (0.19)    (0.30)
Observations     1,752    1,752     1,793     1,793   1,798       1,798    1,784    1,784    1,784     1,784
  Adj R2         0.361    0.361     0.316     0.316   0.237       0.237    0.190    0.193    0.039     0.039
                         Table 5: Industry Categories and TRBC Codes

We use the Thomson Reuters Business Classification (TRBC) codes to classify firms into different
industries. TRBC, which is owned and operated by Thomson Reuters, gives an industry classification of
global companies. This table lists names and TRBC codes of different industries analyzed in this paper.

                                        Names of Industries    TRBC Codes

                          Oil Production Related Industries    501020;501030
                               Diversified Metals & Mining     51201010;51201030;51201050
                       Electrical Components & Equipment       52102030;52102040
                                      Consumer Electronics     53204020
                                            Semiconductors     571010
                                                    Farming    54102010
                                                   Beverage    541010
                                                       Food    54102020
                                                  Chemicals    511010
                                             Transportation    5240
                                     Construction Materials    51202010
                                                       Steel   51201020
                                       Industrial Machinery    52102010;52102020
                                   Auto Parts & Equipment      531010
                                      Real Estate Activities   554020
                                        Food and Beverages     541010;54102020;543010
                                                  Healthcare   5610;5620
                                    Software & IT Services     5720
   Table 6: Predictive Powers of US Commodity Futures Prices: Cross-Industry Analysis

This table reports the regression results on the predictive powers of U.S. commodity futures prices for
industry-level stock prices of East Asian economies. We classify industries based on Thomson Reuters
Business Classification (TRBC) codes described in Table 5. We then group industries into three
categories: 1) supply firms; 2) consumer firms; 3) other firms. To ensure that there are sufficient firms in
each industry, we perform the industry-level analysis only in the three largest stock markets in our sample,
which includes Japan, Hong Kong, and mainland China. The regression specification is the same as that
used in Table 3. To save space, we only report the estimate of the coefficient for each industry return.
Panels A, B and C display regression results with the futures return of copper, soybeans, or crude oil as
the predicting variable. The t-statistics adjusted for heteroskedasticity and serial correlations using the
Newey-West method with five lags are reported in parentheses. We use *, **, *** to indicate significance
at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.



                                              Japan               Hong Kong                Shanghai
                                           Coef      t-stat       Coef    t-stat          Coef    t-stat
                                            Panel A: Copper
                  Supply Industries
        Diversified Metals & Mining      0.118***     (4.66)    0.123***     (3.13)    0.392***      (7.89)
              Consumer Industries
Electrical Components & Equipment        0.113***     (4.71)    0.134***     (2.97)    0.0812**      (2.51)
               Consumer Electronics      0.0724**     (2.05)     0.0571      (1.46)     0.0493       (1.25)
                     Semiconductors     0.0625***     (3.69)    0.0691**     (2.32)    0.0697*       (1.95)
        Other Unrelated Industries
              Construction Materials    0.0929***     (4.03)   0.131***      (2.63)    0.0959***     (2.69)
                                Steel    0.152***     (4.75)   0.0984***     (2.72)     0.0619**     (1.97)
                Industrial Machinery     0.096***     (4.14)    0.0490*      (1.73)     0.0813**     (2.34)
            Auto Parts & Equipment       0.131***     (3.36)   0.0843***     (3.02)    0.0722***     (2.92)
               Real Estate Activities   0.0587***     (2.74)   0.0656***     (2.69)      0.0454      (1.56)
                  Food and Beverage     0.0364***     (3.18)    0.0835**     (2.55)     0.0725**     (2.34)
                         Health Care    0.0451***     (2.63)   0.0664***     (2.77)     0.0562**     (2.31)
            Software and IT Services     0.0411**     (2.19)     0.0500      (1.62)      0.0442      (1.58)
                                         Japan             Hong Kong               Shanghai
                                      Coef     t-stat     Coef     t-stat        Coef     t-stat
                                        Panel B: Soybeans
             Supply Industries
                        Farming      -0.0157    (-0.86)   0.0994***   (3.35)    0.217***   (3.60)
         Consumer Industries
                       Beverage     0.000881     (0.04)     0.0658    (1.58)    0.136***   (3.42)
               Food Processing      -0.00632    (-0.35)   0.0988***   (4.24)    0.209***   (3.41)
    Other Unrelated Industries
         Construction Materials      0.0389    (1.23)     0.0721      (1.23)    0.151***   (3.68)
                           Steel    0.0746**   (1.97)   0.0888**      (2.16)    0.138***   (3.00)
           Industrial Machinery      0.0460    (1.48)    0.0661**     (2.16)    0.182***   (3.71)
       Auto Parts & Equipment       0.0525*    (1.74)   0.0771***     (2.73)    0.151***   (3.26)
          Real Estate Activities     0.0167    (0.54)   0.0824***     (3.30)    0.117**    (2.45)
                    Health Care      0.0236    (1.13)   0.0750***     (2.83)    0.153***   (3.42)
       Software and IT Services      0.0259    (1.08)   0.0786***     (2.62)    0.133***   (3.19)
                                        Panel C: Crude Oil
              Supply Industries
Oil Production Related Industries   0.0709***   (4.39)    0.0669***   (3.16)    0.116***   (2.63)
          Consumer Industries
                       Chemicals     0.0265     (1.54)     0.0159     (0.86)    0.00506    (0.16)
                  Transportation     0.0114     (0.79)     0.0225     (1.07)    -0.0463    (-1.55)
               Other Industries
          Construction Materials      0.0176    (1.00)     0.0525     (1.32)    -0.00263   (-0.27)
                            Steel   0.0632***   (2.82)     0.0506     (1.54)     -0.0214   (-0.59)
            Industrial Machinery     0.0337*    (1.79)     0.0280     (1.32)     -0.0164   (-0.50)
        Auto Parts & Equipment        0.0239    (1.32)     0.0248     (1.10)     -0.0466   (-1.45)
           Real Estate Activities     0.0176    (0.90)     -0.0129    (-0.62)    -0.0363   (-1.10)
              Food and Beverage       0.0172    (1.17)     -0.0241    (-1.09)   -0.00994   (-1.38)
                     Health Care      0.0100    (0.73)     0.0213     (1.14)     -0.0276   (-0.96)
        Software and IT Services     0.00584    (0.36)     0.0364     (1.33)     -0.0264   (-0.94)
