                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            AFTER THE DROUGHT:
THE IMPACT OF MICROINSURANCE ON CONSUMPTION SMOOTHING AND ASSET PROTECTION

                                         Sarah A. Janzen
                                         Michael R. Carter

                                        Working Paper 19702
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19702


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                             December 2013, Revised February 2018




    This publication uses data collected through a collaborative project of the International
    Livestock Research Institute, Cornell University, Syracuse University and the BASIS
    Research Program at the University of California at Davis. This project was made possible
    by the generous funding of the UK Department for International Development through FSD
    Trust Grant SWD/Weather/43/2009, the United States Agency for International
    Development grants No: EDH-A-00-06-0003-00 and the World Bank’s Trust Fund for
    Environmentally and Socially Sustainable Development Grant No: 7156906. The authors
    wish to thank the following individuals for the critical contributions they made to this
    research: Stephen Boucher, Sommarat Chantarat, Munenobu Ikegami, Travis Lybbert,
    Andrés Moya and Andrew Mude. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are
    those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
    Economic Research.

    NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not
    been peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that
    accompanies official NBER publications.

    © 2013 by Sarah A. Janzen and Michael R. Carter. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
    not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
    credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
After the Drought: The Impact of Microinsurance on Consumption Smoothing and Asset Protection
Sarah A. Janzen and Michael R. Carter
NBER Working Paper No. 19702
December 2013, Revised February 2018
JEL No. G22,O12,O16

                                          ABSTRACT

To cope with shocks, poor households with inadequate access to financial markets can sell assets
to smooth consumption and, or reduce consumption to protect assets. Both coping strategies can
be economically costly and contribute to the transmission of poverty, yet limited evidence exists
regarding the effectiveness of insurance to mitigate these costs in risk-prone developing
economies. Utilizing data from an RCT in rural Kenya, this paper estimates that on average an
innovative microinsurance scheme reduces both forms of costly coping. Threshold econometrics
grounded in theory reveal a more complex pattern:(i) wealthier households primarily cope by
selling assets, and insurance makes them 96 percentage points less likely to sell assets following a
shock; (ii) poorer households cope primarily by cutting food consumption, and insurance reduces
by 49 percentage points their reliance on this strategy.


Sarah A. Janzen
Department of Economics
Montana State University
Bozeman, MN 59717; USA
sarah.janzen@montana.edu

Michael R. Carter
Department of Agricultural and Resource Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
mrcarter@ucdavis.edu
   Poor households in developing rural economies are in many places highly vulnerable,
exposed to climatic and other shocks that can slash incomes and destroy productive assets.
For many, binding credit constraints and missing insurance markets limit coping options to
the sale of remaining assets or to cuts in family consumption, both of which can have serious
long-term economic repercussions. In this paper we assess the impact of a novel satellite-
based microinsurance contract on households’ reliance on these costly coping strategies in
the horn of Africa.
   Microinsurance has been heralded over the past decade as a market-based risk trans-
fer mechanism with the potential to act as a safety net, preventing catastrophic collapse.
Although a number of microinsurance pilot projects have appeared in the last few years,
relatively little is known about their impacts. There is a modest body of evidence showing
that microinsurance can influence households’ ex ante resource allocation by encouraging
them to take on riskier, but higher returning activities. However, less is known about the
effectiveness of insurance after a shock is realized for the simple reason that these impacts
are observable only after an insured population receives a shock. This analysis offers one of
the first empirical assessments of the impact of a market-based index insurance contract on
a household’s ability to cope with shocks ex post.
   Since 2010, pastoralists in northern Kenya have had the opportunity to purchase an
index-based livestock insurance (IBLI) contract to protect against livestock mortality due
to drought. A harsh drought swept the Horn of Africa in 2011 activating IBLI payouts.
We use households’ reported coping strategies at the time of the payout and randomly
distributed price discount treatments to cleanly identify the impacts of insurance on con-
sumption smoothing and asset protection.
   We first consider the average impact of insurance on household coping strategies. Our
results show insurance leads households on average to radically reduce their dependence
on two costly coping strategies that are likely to impair their future productivity. With
insurance, households are on average: (i) 61 percentage points less likely to anticipate selling
livestock in the wake of the 2011 drought, improving their ability to generate income after
drought. (ii) 12 percentage points less likely to reduce meals. Only the former estimated
impact is statistically significant.
   There are a number of reasons to expect these averages obscure a more complex pattern of
heterogeneous impacts. In particular, asset poor households are likely to forfeit consumption
(rather than smooth consumption as is often assumed) in times of crisis in order to protect
their limited productive assets and subsequent future income-generating capacity. While we
might expect asset rich households to modestly reduce consumption in response to a shock
that reduces their permanent income, they should in theory be more willing to sell assets in
order to smooth consumption in the wake of a shock.
   Motivated by this expectation of bifurcated coping behavior, we employ the Caner and
Hansen (2004) threshold estimation method to provide evidence of a behavioral threshold
in wealth in this setting: consumption smoothing is more common above an estimated
threshold, and asset smoothing is more common below an estimated threshold. This finding,
interesting in and of itself, implies that simply estimating the average effect of insurance
may be misleading. The results of our threshold-based impact analysis show that:



   1. Households holding assets above the estimated threshold, who are most likely to sell
      assets, are (a statistically significant) 96 percentage points less likely to anticipate doing
      so when an insurance payout is available. Insurance has no significant impact on meal
      reductions by these predominantly consumption smoothing households.

   2. Households holding assets below the estimated critical threshold, who are prone to
      destabilizing consumption, are (a statistically significant) 49 percentage points less
      likely to anticipate doing so with insurance. Relative to wealthier households, insurance
      has a dampened (54 percentage points), yet still significant, impact on asset sales by
      these asset smoothing households.



                                                 2
Together, these results suggest that insurance can help households to protect assets during
crises, without having a deleterious effect on human capital investments.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 1 first provides an overview of the
literature studying the impacts of insurance on both ex ante risk management decisions and
ex post risk coping strategies. Section 2 then provides essential background on the research
setting and available data. This is followed by Section 3, which outlines our identification
and estimation strategies and presents our main findings on the impact of insurance on asset
and consumption smoothing strategies. Section 4 concludes.




1     Evidence on the Impacts of Microinsurance

    A growing literature has been devoted to studying the benefits of insurance for poor
households in low income countries. This type of insurance (targeted to poor households,
and available at low cost) has become known as microinsurance. Barnett et al. (2008), Dercon
et al. (2008), Miranda and Farrin (2012), Cole et al. (2012) and Jensen and Barrett (2016)
provide summaries of the literature. The literature highlights two primary avenues through
which insurance might bring about positive impacts. These avenues reflect the fact that
households make both ex ante risk management decisions and ex post risk coping decisions.
    Most of the empirical literature has focused on the impact of insurance on ex ante invest-
ment decisions. A common response to uninsured risk is to simply allocate resources toward
activities with lower risk despite the fact that these lower-risk activities generally produce a
lower return (Rosenzweig and Binswanger, 1993). There is growing evidence that insurance
encourages investment in higher risk activities with higher expected profits. Mobarak and
Rosenzweig (2012) provide evidence that farmers in India with access to insurance shift into
riskier, but higher-yielding rice production. Cai et al. (2015a) find that insurance for sows
significantly increases farmers’ tendency to raise sows in southwestern China, where sow


                                               3
production is considered a risky production activity with potentially large returns. Karlan
et al. (2014) show that farmers who purchase rainfall index insurance in Ghana increase
agricultural investment. Elabed et al. (2014) find that cooperatives with access to area-
yield index insurance for cotton increased risky cotton production (and subsequent cotton
inputs) in Mali. Cai (2016) demonstrates that tobacco insurance increases the land tobacco
farmers devoted to risky tobacco production by 20% in China. Similarly, Cole et al. (2017)
find rainfall insurance induces farmers to increase land and input usage applied to castor
and groundnut production, two risky cash crops, in India. With regards to IBLI in the
same context we study, Jensen et al. (2017) show insurance increases productivity-increasing
investments in livestock.
   While the impacts of insurance on ex ante risk management decisions are important,
few papers are able to empirically assess how an insurance payout directly influences the
ability of poor households to recover after a shock. Ex post, households in the wake of a
shock can choose to draw down assets to defend their consumption standard (consumption
smooth),1 or they can preserve assets and destabilize their consumption (asset smooth). The
findings regarding microinsurance’s impact on consumption smoothing are mixed. Karlan et
al. (2014) show insured agricultural producers in Ghana are less like to have missed a meal,
evidence of improved consumption smoothing. In contrast, Cole et al. (2017) find no evi-
dence of improved consumption smoothing among insured households in India who receive
an insurance payout. With regards to asset smoothing, Bertram-Huemmer and Kraehnert
(2017) and Jensen et al. (2017) demonstrate how IBLI (in Mongolia and Kenya respectively)
helps livestock-rearing households avoid selling livestock in the midst of drought, evidence of
improved asset smoothing. These empirical findings on IBLI support the simulation-based
findings of Chantarat et al. (2017) who demonstrate how, at least for non-poor households,
IBLI is expected to protect livestock-rearing households from potentially harmful asset de-
cumulation.
   Our analysis makes an important contribution to this small literature on the ex post


                                              4
impacts of microinsurance. To guide our analysis, we first turn to the rich empirical and
theoretical literature on ex post risk coping strategies. One key message of this literature is
that heterogeneous households respond to shocks differentially, and the differential response
is often tied to wealth. For example, in early empirical work on coping strategies, both
Townsend (1994) and Jalan and Ravallion (1999) note that poor households less effectively
smooth consumption than do wealthier neighbors. In later work, Hoddinott (2006) provides
evidence that in the wake of the 1994-1995 drought in Zimbabwe, richer households sold
livestock in order to maintain consumption. In contrast, poor households with one or two
oxen or cows were much less likely to sell livestock, massively destabilizing consumption
instead. In Ethiopia, Carter et al. (2007) also find evidence of asset smoothing by the poor,
as households coping with a drought attempted to hold onto their livestock at the cost of
consumption. Similarly, Kazianga and Udry (2006) find that poor and wealthy households
in Burkina Faso manage their savings and assets differently in the face of shocks, with poor
households enduring large consumption shorfalls in order to protect livestock. Building on
Kazianga and Udry’s work in Burkina Faso, Carter and Lybbert (2012) show that house-
holds above an estimated asset threshold almost completely insulate their consumption from
weather shocks by drawing down assets, whereas households below the threshold do not,
despite having the assets to do so. While asset smoothing strategies may be instrumentally
rational for some households, they likely come at the cost of immediately reduced consump-
tion, with potentially irreversible losses in child health and nutrition (Carter et al., 2007).2
   These empirical findings on differential consumption and asset smoothing are consistent
with a number of theoretical perspectives. For example, a standard asset accumulation model
with a concave production function predicts convergence towards a steady state equilibrium.
In the event that a shock pushes an individual away from the steady state, the standard
model predicts that those further from the steady state will optimally give up consumption
in order to accumulate assets more quickly (asset smoothing). As one approaches the steady
state, she will be more likely to smooth consumption. Multiple equilibrium poverty trap


                                               5
models (e.g., see discussion in Barrett and Carter, 2013), in which accumulation behavior
bifurcates around a critical minimum asset threshold, amplify this asset smoothing logic.
Specifically, for households in the vicinity of this threshold, assets have a strong dynamic
value that incentivizes asset smoothing.
    In other words, both standard and poverty trap models indicate that we should expect
consumption and asset smoothing behavior to coexist in a population with strictly positive,
but heterogeneous, levels of assets. In the subsequent analysis, we’ll use our understanding
of heterogeneous responses to shocks to establish a theoretically-driven empirical approach
to study the impacts of microinsurance on ex post risk coping. Of the existing literature
regarding ex post insurance impacts, the Chantarat et al. (2017) simulation-based findings
on the anticipated welfare impacts of IBLI is best able to study heterogeneous treatment
effects. The study predicts IBLI to be most valuable for vulnerable households who have the
most to gain from additional asset protection, with no gains for the poorest households and
only moderate gains for the wealthy. However, the study focuses only on asset accumulation,
ignoring impacts related to the protection of consumption, and relies on strong assumptions
regarding bifurcated asset dynamics. Building on the predictions of the Chantarat et al.
(2017) model, while also relaxing some of the assumptions, we will empirically estimate
heterogeneous impacts of IBLI on both consumption and asset smoothing behaviors.


2     Research Setting and Data

    This impact evaluation utilizes data from the index-based livestock insurance (IBLI) pilot
project in northern Kenya’s arid and semi-arid lands (ASALs). This section provides back-
ground information about the research setting, the insurance pilot, and summary statistics
from the available data.




                                              6
Drought Risk and the IBLI Insurance Pilot in Northern Kenya

   Prone to periodic climatic shocks, and relatively isolated with sparse financial market
development, northern Kenya and southern Ethiopia are archetypes of rural vulnerability,
as recently witnessed humanitarian crises have shown. With limited alternative produc-
tion technologies, pastoralism represents the primary livelihood in this region, and livestock
the primary productive resource. To manage spatiotemporal variability in forage and water
access, pastoralists in this region regularly and opportunistically move with their herds. Pas-
toralists may also choose to invest in veterinary services, which have been shown to reduce
livestock mortality and herd lactation rates, although such investments are not common. De-
spite these ex ante risk management strategies, when extreme drought strikes this region, the
effects can be devastating. Livestock weaken and die. Households also experience decreases
in current (and future) income flows generated from consumable livestock by-products such
as milk (McPeak, 2004). Ex post, as in other settings, households often have a choice between
protecting consumption standards or selling assets (in this case, selling livestock). However,
both to cope with income losses and to avoid pending mortality loss, distressed sales of live-
stock commonly flood the market, causing downward pressure on livestock prices (Barrett
et al. 2003; Kerven 1992). This further debilitates a pastoralist households’ main productive
resource, making recovery after the drought even more challenging.
   Previous research has shown that asset losses in this environment have severe and long-
lasting consequences. Lybbert et al. (2004) and Barrett et al. (2006) use different data and
methods to demonstrate nonlinear asset dynamics in the ASALs, such that when livestock
herds fall below a critical threshold, recovery becomes difficult, and herds tend to move
toward a low level equilibrium. Santos and Barrett (2011) show that access to informal
credit in this region is uneven across households. Poor households are excluded not only
from formal credit markets, but also from informal credit markets, limiting their ability to
borrow for investment thereby prohibiting growth. Toth (2015) argues that these nonlinear



                                              7
asset dynamics stem from a critical herd size necessary to support mobility. Small herds are
restricted to town centers, where rangeland is regularly degraded, limiting herd productivity
and growth. Although broad-based empirical evidence of poverty traps globally has been
mixed (Subramanian and Deaton, 1996; Kraay and McKenzie, 2014), in a recent review,
Kraay and McKenzie (2014) conclude the strongest evidence for poverty traps comes from
rural remote regions like the ASALs of northern Kenya.
   In January 2010 the index-based livestock insurance (IBLI) pilot project was launched
in Marsabit District of northern Kenya in an effort to help pastoralists manage drought
risk. Unlike traditional insurance, index-based insurance provides compensation based on
an index rather than realized losses. Doing so eliminates the usual moral hazard and adverse
selection challenges related to insurance while simultaneously reducing the cost of insurance.
The IBLI index, predicted average livestock mortality, was established using longitudinal
observations of household-level herd mortality fit to satellite-based normalized difference
vegetation index (NDVI) measures of available vegetative cover within a particular region.
The IBLI index was originally shown to be highly correlated with actual livestock mortality
losses experienced by pastoralists in the region so that basis risk, the difference between the
index and realized individual losses, was perceived to be minimal, a necessary requirement
for a quality index-based insurance product (see Chantarat et al., 2012 for details regarding
the design and performance of the index).3
   The IBLI premium depends on the risk associated with the geographic region in which
the pastoralist household resides (for example, Upper Marsabit is more susceptible to ex-
treme drought than Lower Marsabit, so households insuring in Upper Marsabit pay a higher
premium). Households who wish to insure choose the number of livestock (goats, sheep,
cattle, and camels)4 to insure for a given period. Insured households receive a payout at the
end of each dry season (i.e. at the beginning of October and/or early March) if the predicted
average livestock mortality rate reaches the minimum payout level (15%), with the payout
equal to the value of all predicted losses greater than 15%.


                                              8
   In order to study the impact of this insurance, IBLI was rolled out only in randomly
selected districts within Kenya’s arid and semi-arid lands. Within these treatment areas,
households were randomly selected to receive price discounts meant to encourage purchase
of the insurance. As part of this encouragement design, in each sales period 60% of surveyed
households were randomly selected to receive coupons offering a 10-60% discount on the first
15 tropical livestock units (TLUs) insured. Using the identification strategy described in
section 3, our analysis utilizes exogenous variation from coupons distributed for the sales
period in early 2011.
   Figure 4.1 depicts fortnightly NDVI averaged across the insured areas of Marsabit district
over the 2010-2011 period in which the drought occurred. The measures are normalized
by their long-term seasonal averages, so that if conditions had been statistically normal,
the NDVI curve would appear in the graph as a horizontal line at zero. As can be seen,
rangeland conditions began to deteriorate in late 2010 with the failure of the “long rains.”
Figure 4.1 shows how the situation deteriorated throughout much of 2011 as a harsh drought
swept across the Horn of Africa. According to the data used for this paper, during this time,
families lost on average more than one third of their animals. The cumulative effect of these
below average conditions triggered the first IBLI payouts in October-November 2011, as
the predicted livestock mortality rose above the 15% deductible in all five insurance zones.
These payouts were made to households who had purchased insurance earlier in the year.
Households in our study received an average payout of about 10,000 Kenyan Shillings, or
roughly $120. This equates to roughly 2/3 the value of a single TLU (or approximately seven
goats) using the average TLU price reported in our data at that time (1 TLU = 15,011
Kenyan Shillings).5 With a median family annual cash income of only $260 in the study
area, these payments were a substantial boost to families’ cash on hand.


Data and Descriptive Statistics

   The data available include household-level information collected annually (beginning in

                                             9
2009) for 673 randomly selected households living in various sub-locations across Marsabit
district, all with access to IBLI. In each round of the survey, households were asked to answer
questions about health, education, livestock holdings, herd migration, livelihood activities,
income, consumption, assets, and access to credit. Each household also participated in an
experiment to elicit their risk preferences. In the surveys following the baseline, households
were also asked questions about insurance purchases, access to information about insurance,
and tested on their level of insurance understanding.
   The third round of the panel survey coincided with the October-November 2011 IBLI
payout. At that time, every household was asked about the ways in which they had been
coping with the drought over the three months prior to the survey (Q3 of 2011, as shown in
Figure 4.1), and how they anticipated coping with the drought over the 3 months following
the survey (Q4). Specifically, households were asked about reliance each period on common
coping behaviors, including selling livestock, reducing meals and relying on food aid. Insured
households were asked about anticipated fourth quarter coping behavior after the enumerator
told them exactly how much they would receive as an insurance payment. In a few cases,
households had already received the payment prior to the interview. Most received the
payment a week or two after the survey.
   The data available for this analysis are thus a mix of conventional reports on behavior
that has already taken place and behavior anticipated to take place in the near future. It
would of course been nice to have also collected data on coping strategies three months after
the insurance payout rather than contemporaneously. However, the remoteness of the area
and finite research budgets rendered such a strategy infeasible. The usefulness of responses
to hypothetical questions for predicting actual behavior has been the source of much debate.
The most widely-used application in economics is contingent valuation (CV) with some ar-
guing that any CV surveys are misleading and their use misguided (Diamond and Hausman,
1994), while others have argued that CV can sometimes be a reliable source, and often the
only source, of important information (Hanemann, 1994; Carson et al., 2001). In social psy-


                                              10
chology, the widely cited theory of planned behavior suggests that behavioral intentions do
indeed result in actual behavior (Ajzen, 1991). Three meta-analyses of empirical evidence
(Albarracin et al., 2001; Sheeran, 2002; Webb and Sheeran, 2006) support the importance
of stated intentions for predicting actual behavior. These studies and others acknowledge
the limitations of using intentions, as do we, but we agree with them that such intentions
are not completely irrelevant for understanding actual behavior. Importantly, reports on
anticipated behavior in quarter 4 of 2011 line up in a sensible way with households’ reports
on their actual behavior in quarter 3 of 2011.
   Another reason we might be interested in these results is precisely because they are based
on a household’s expectations for improved or degrading circumstances. The most important
question is arguably, “Does insurance protect households in the midst of a shock (i.e. as
conditions continue to deteriorate)?” If households expect the situation to worsen, then
their response should reflect that. The data suggest this to be the case - 86% of households
anticipated observing some goat or sheep mortality within the herd in the near future, with an
average of 22% mortality anticipated. Similarly, 78% of households anticipated some cattle
mortality, and 67% expected to observe camel mortality despite the perceived resilience of
camels. In reality, predicted livestock mortality (as measured by the IBLI index) across
the region decreased shortly after the payout as the drought lessened and the vegetative
conditions improved. On one hand, this may mean the actual impacts are smaller than our
results reflect. But if our results reflect the impact if the conditions had actually continued
to deteriorate, then they are still relevant from a policy perspective.
   Table 1 reports summary statistics on key variables disaggregated by whether a household
was insured during the 2011 drought. All households had the opportunity to insure, but
only 24% had actually purchased insurance. The table provides no evidence that wealthier
individuals (as measured by livestock wealth and a non-livestock asset index6 ) are more likely
to purchase insurace, although uninsured households are likely to have a higher dependency
ratio (the ratio of children less than 15 years, adults greater than 55 years, disabled or


                                              11
chronically ill household members) and be recipients of a cash transfer targeted to the poorest
households in the region. Education levels, risk attitudes, credit constraints and savings also
vary little between the groups, as do both realized and expected livestock losses. Insured
households are more likely to participate in social groups, which could mean they are more
connected and informed.
   While it is perhaps surprising that there are not stronger differences in observable char-
acteristics between those who did and did not purchase insurance, these two groups may
still differ along unobserved dimensions. Table 2 reports values for the discount coupon
treatments that were randomly offered across the entire population. Discount coupons were
effective in boosting up-take. Fully 88% of insurance purchasers received a coupon, whereas
only 55% of non-purchasers received a coupon. The value of the coupon received also dif-
fers sharply between the two groups. As will be discussed in the section that follows, this
encouragement design provides useful instruments for our endogenous regressor (insurance),
being highly correlated with the decision to insure yet uncorrelated with the outcomes of
interest except through purchase of insurance.
   Finally, Table 3 previews the coexistence of consumption and asset smoothing in the
northern Kenya study area. The data show the percent of surveyed households that reported
reducing daily meals and selling livestock during the third (Q3) and fourth (Q4) quarters
of the 2011 drought year at the peak of rangeland decline. As can be seen in the first
column of the table, on average, 60 to 70% of households reduced their daily meals, while
less than 30% reported selling livestock in a given quarter to cope with the drought. 95% of
all surveyed households had some livestock that they could in principle have sold had they
wished. Despite holding assets that could be used to smooth consumption, these households
were not smoothing consumption.
   While Table 3 shows that asset and consumption smoothing coexist, it also shows that the
relative deployment of these strategies varies by household wealth. Columns 2 and 3 of the
table display the coping strategy employed by households in the lowest and highest quartiles


                                              12
of the livestock wealth distribution. Lower wealth households are roughly 32 percentage
points less likely to sell assets than higher wealth households. While substantial numbers of
higher wealth households report some reliance on meal reduction as a coping strategy (61%
in Q3),7 more than 80% of poorer households rely on this coping strategy. These differences
in means are statistically significant by a standard t-test.
    In this context, insurance that indemnifies against large losses would seem to provide
protection for consumption smoothing households against losing productive assets, while af-
fording asset smoothing households a coping strategy that does not impair the human capital
of current and future generations. The last three columns of Table 3 report the difference
between insured and uninsured households’ ability to smooth consumption and assets be-
fore and after receipt of an insurance payout. As can be seen, with the exception of Q3
(pre-payout) livestock sales, insured and uninsured households behave quite differently. The
differences are particularly pronounced for Q4 meal reductions (33% of insured households
report cutting meals, whereas 71% of uninsured households report an intention to rely on
that strategy), and Q4 animal sales (11% versus 32%). While these differences are statis-
tically significant, the key question of course is whether they represent a causal impact, or
simply a spurious correlation induced by the fact that different types of households chose to
purchase insurance. The rest of this paper is dedicated to correctly identifying the causal
relationship between insurance and these costly coping strategies.


3     Estimation Strategy and Results

    While the descriptive statistics signal a statistically significant correlation between in-
surance coverage and third and fourth quarter coping strategies, these differences cannot
be given a causal interpretation because the decision to purchase insurance was endogenous
and perhaps correlated with factors expected to independently influence coping strategies.
The goal of this section is to identify the causal impact of insurance by econometrically ex-



                                              13
ploiting a set of randomly distributed encouragements designed to boost insurance uptake.
After explaining the basic identification strategy based on these instruments, we present the
average treatment effect of insurance on household coping strategies. We then lay out a
threshold-based method of testing for the presence of consumption and asset smoothers, and
for the differential impacts of insurance on the behavior of these two groups. We first present
the results utilizing a threshold that has been identified in the empirical literature. We then
employ the Caner and Hansen (2004) GMM threshold estimator to statistically identify the
existence and location of the asset-based threshold.


Estimating the Average Impact of Insurance on Coping Strategies

   The analysis of the impacts of insurance would be simplest if we could compare a cohort
of households randomly assigned to an insurance “treatment” with a control group denied
access to insurance. Although IBLI was implemented with a randomized spatial rollout, the
data needed for the analysis here are available only within the treatment area (see Section
2 above). For this analysis we are thus limited only to a population in which all households
had the opportunity to insure their livestock, though not all households chose to do so. Since
households must self-select into purchasing insurance, we must account for selection into the
insurance treatment.
   Because the endogenous decision to insure is likely to depend on unobservables, we employ
an instrumental variables (IV) approach similar to Karlan et al. (2014). The encouragement
design implemented with IBLI (as described above) provides two suitable instruments: re-
ceipt and value of an insurance discount coupon received in early 2011. The distribution of
coupons was random, so neither receipt nor value should be correlated with coping strategies
except through the purchase of insurance, but we expect both to be correlated with insurance
uptake. Although some individuals within the same village received vouchers while others
did not, we assume the household’s decision to insure is independent of coupons received (or
not) by others.8

                                              14
   The descriptive statistics reported in Table 2 suggest that the coupon (both its receipt
and value) is indeed highly correlated with the decision to insure, and thus constitutes a good
instrument. The right hand columns of Table 1 also checks the balance of the covariates,
to ensure that the receipt of the coupon was indeed random. As would be expected, few
statistically significant differences are observed. Coupon recipients are three years younger
on average and are more likely to have participated in social groups. They are also more
likely to report difficulty in acquiring a loan, but equally as likely to have actually taken out
a loan. Less than a quarter of households have any savings, and coupon recipients are less
likely to save. But if they do save, the amount of savings is not significantly different from
non-coupon recipients. As measured by the non-livestock asset index, they do appear to be
slightly less wealthy, but herd size is equivalent across the two populations, and wealth is often
kept as livestock in this region. Despite the fact that coupons were distributed randomly,
a regression of all household characteristics included in Table 2 on coupon receipt suggests
that these variables are jointly significant (F = 4.12). Since the imbalanced variables are
also likely related to coping strategies, in the estimation that follows, we will control for all
characteristics of observable imbalance in our vector of controls Xij as suggested by Bruhn
and McKenzie (2009).
   Using IV we obtain the local average treatment effect (LATE) of insurance on coping
strategies. To obtain this effect, we estimate the following first stage regression equation,
where Iij is an indicator variable equal to 1 if household i in location j purchased insurance,
Zij is a vector of instrumental variables (including receipt and value of coupon), Xij is a
vector of covariates that influence a household’s drought-coping behavior, and γj represents
a location fixed effect:9


                               Iij = Zij δ + Xij θ + γj + vij                               (3.1)


We then estimate the impact of insurance (β) on ySi , a binary indicator of household i’s use



                                               15
of a particular coping strategy S in the post-insurance payout period, using the following
second stage regression:




                              ySij = βS Ibij + Xij φS + γj + εij ,                            (3.2)


where predicted insurance uptake (Ibij ) is obtained from the first stage estimation 3.1.
   As with any encouragement design, there may be some concern that the encouragement
itself induces an artificial selection into the program. Identification stems from those actually
moved by the instrument, and when you change the price of insurance it may incentivize
different types of people. For example, households expecting less benefit from the insurance
may purchase it only because of the discount coupon. This may introduce a downward bias
in estimated impacts relative to the impacts that would occur if coupons had not been used
and only those willing to pay higher prices had purchased the insurance. However, ultimately
evaluating what is or is not bias depends on what the policy relevant treatment effect is.
In this case, the government of Kenya has decided to scale-up IBLI through provision of
free insurance under the Kenya Livestock Insurance Program (KLIP) scheme (Janzen et al.,
2016). As such, it isn’t clear if the policy relevant treatment effect is for the population willing
to pay the market price or those who will only take up insurance when it is provided for free.
By estimating the effect across a range of prices, our LATE estimates appropriately identify
an impact somewhere in between these two extremes. In addition, in this circumstance the
bias may be offset by greater precision. As analyzed in Mullally et al. (2013) and Mullally
(2012), in program evaluations plagued by low participation (such as insurance programs in
which demand has repeatedly been shown to be low), an encouragement design is likely to
substantially reduce the mean square error of impact estimates relative to a research design
based on randomized eligibility.
   Moreover, as we will show, the variation in price affects demand much less than the



                                                16
coupon itself, regardless of value. In this context (using a longer time series), Jensen et al.
(2014) estimate relatively inelastic demand (-.43). Other research has shown that barriers
to the uptake of index insurance in similar contexts are often non-price factors including
trust and understanding of the contract, risk aversion, wealth and financial liquidity, and
access to informal risk sharing networks, rather than heterogeneous willingness to pay for
insurance (Gine et al., 2008; Patt et al., 2010; Mobarak and Rosenzweig, 2012; Cole et al.,
2013; McIntosh et al., 2013; Dercon et al., 2014; Cai et al., 2015b). Given the observed price
inelasticity in this context and our understanding of demand for microinsurance in general, we
conclude non-price factors matter most, boosting our confidence that any existing selection
effect is not related to wealth.
   Because the assumptions necessary for IV are minimal given the available data, this is
our preferred approach. However, several alternatives to IV exist. Although we do not
discuss or present alternative methods in this paper, we obtain very similar results using
both matching (following an approach similar to Bertram-Huemmer and Kraehnert, 2017)
and Heckman selection methods (see footnotes 10 and 11).
   Table 4 presents the first stage regression used to obtain the IV estimates. Column
(1) includes location fixed effects to control for location-specific rangeland conditions. This
approach is used in almost all specifications. Column (2) presents the same first stage
without location fixed effects for reasons described later. The first stage results demonstrate
a strong correlation between receiving a coupon and insurance uptake. It also demonstrates
a minimal (if any) price effect.
   Table 5 presents our main impact estimates. We focus on the impact of an insurance
payout on two primary outcomes of interest: anticipated fourth quarter livestock sales and
anticipated reduction in the number of daily meals consumed in quarter 4. Selling livestock
reflects a willingness to destabilize asset holdings, and meal reduction suggests an inability
to smooth consumption. In the first column of each table we present population average
impacts for each outcome of interest using IV as described above. In the following sections


                                              17
we describe our approach for analyzing threshold-disaggregated impacts; these results are
presented in columns (2)-(6) in each table.
   Considering first the impact of insurance on curbing the sale of productive assets, the
results presented in the bottom panel of Table 5 suggest that an insurance payout substan-
tially reduces the probability that a household intends to sell livestock. The average impact
results presented in Column (1) of Table 5 imply a large 61 percentage point reduction in
the number of households who anticipated selling livestock in the short run in order to cope
with the 2011 drought.10 As discussed earlier, when poor households endeavor to maintain
scarce productive assets during a shock, it often imposes a high cost on consumption. The
top panel of Table 5 reports the estimated impact of insurance on meal reduction as a coping
strategy. Focusing first on the local average treatment effect in Column (1), an insurance
payout results in a 12 percentage point drop in the number of households that anticipate
decreasing the number of meals eaten each day when under stress from a drought.11 Al-
though the average result for meal reduction is not statistically significant, we show in the
next section that the average results may be masking a heterogenous response, as predicted
by theory. We turn to that analysis now.


Consumption versus Asset Smoothing

   As discussed in Section 1, a number of theoretical perspectives suggest that less wealthy
households may hold on to (productive) assets in the wake of a shock rather than liquidate
them to smooth consumption. Table 3 shows that both asset and consumption smoothing
behaviors are observed in the data. The key question is whether all households pursue a
mixed strategy, or whether there are really two distinctive behavioral regimes, as some earlier
work has suggested is likely (e.g., Carter and Lybbert (2012)). In the latter case, estimated
average treatment effects (β in equation 3.2) are a data-weighted average of the behavior in
the two regimes disguising how microinsurance actually impacts a population comprised of
both asset and consumption smoothers.

                                              18
   Drawing on the theoretical perspectives summarized in Section 1, we hypothesize that
coping behavior will shift as we move along a wealth or asset continuum. We expect the
relatively asset rich households to largely smooth their consumption by destabilizing their
asset stocks during a shock (excepting for consumption adjustments due to decreases in
permanent income). We would thus expect that microinsurance will result in a reduction
of asset sales for these asset rich households if insurance helps them to better protect their
assets. In contrast, asset poor households would find that the intertemporal value of assets
is extremely high, and thus be unwilling to part with their productive assets even at the cost
of hunger. We would expect that microinsurance will help these asset poor households to
better smooth consumption during a shock, even as they cling to their current asset stocks. In
terms of our measures, insurance should lead to fewer meal reductions for these households,
reducing current hunger and better protecting the human capital of their children.
   As can be seen in the descriptive statistics reported in Table 3, data on actual third quar-
ter coping strategies match this expectation of wealth-differentiated coping strategies.12 As
already noted, our quarter 4 outcome variables are measures of intended rather than realized
behavior. Although this reliance on reported intentions is a limitation, its consistency with
the data on actual behavior in the preceding quarter gives confidence in the reliability of the
fourth quarter data.13
   While we could potentially devise a specification to test if there is a smooth transition
from asset to consumption smoothing, we follow the lead of earlier empirical (e.g., Hoddinott
(2006), Carter et al. (2007), and Carter and Lybbert (2012)) and theoretical (Zimmerman
and Carter, 2003) work and test for a sharp break in coping behavior along the wealth
continuum using the following model:
                            
                             β ` Ibij + Xij φ` + γ l + ε`      if Aij < A∗
                            
                               S              S     j     Si
                   ySij   =                                                               (3.3)
                             βSu Ibij + Xij φuS + γju + εuSi
                                                               if Aij ≥ A∗


where Ic
       ij is again the instrumented insured variable,
                                                      14
                                                         Aij is the wealth variable, A∗ is the

                                                  19
wealth threshold around which coping strategies split, and superscripts ` and u indicate the
parameter vectors for the lower and upper wealth regimes respectively. Our primary interest
is in βSl and βSu , including testing for whether the two parameters are different. In the next
sections, we explore two alternative methods for performing this test and identifying the
critical wealth threshold. The first draws on the relatively rich empirical literature regarding
the northern Kenya livestock system which identifies a relatively precise prior on the value
of A∗ . The second approach more conservatively employs threshold estimation techniques
(based on Caner and Hansen, 2004) to simultaneously estimate both A∗ and the parameter
vectors of interest.

Threshold based on Prior Knowledge


   The livestock-based economic system in the northern Kenyan rangelands, the location
of this study, have been the subject of substantial empirical investigation. Three studies
stand out as using distinct methods to identify a critical asset threshold where economic
behavior changes. Lybbert et al. (2004) use panel data to non-parametrically estimate a
threshold around which accumulation strategies bifurcate, with households below the esti-
mated threshold heading to a low-level, poverty trap, equilibrium, and those above heading
towards a higher level asset equilibrium. Santos and Barrett (2011) hypothesize that informal
credit and insurance transactions will be sensitive to the presence of a poverty trap and test
indirectly for the presence of a critical asset threshold by examining data on informal trans-
actions. Finally, Toth (2015) hypothesizes that if a poverty trap exists in this environment,
it would be driven by a non-convexity in the production function due to minimum herd size
necessary to undertake high return seasonal herd migration. He then examines production
data directly to identify the existence of such a minimum scale for seasonal migration.
   While distinctive in their approaches, these studies all detect asset thresholds in the
neighborhood of approximately 8-12 tropical livestock units.15 Based on these findings, we
employ the mid-point of this range (10) as the asset threshold. Consistent with the theoretical


                                              20
analysis of Ikegami et al. (2016) and Carter and Janzen (2015), we anticipate a conservative
asset smoothing strategy as households approach this tipping point. However, given the
severity of risk in the system (where single drought events can destroy upwards of 40%
of household livestock assets), Ikegami et al. (2016) and Carter and Janzen (2015) predict
continued asset smoothing behavior by households just above the tipping point as they seek
first to reduce their vulnerability, before later shifting behavior toward less conservative
consumption smoothing. Using the empirical and theoretical literature as our guide, we thus
propose to test model 3.3 using a value of A∗ = 15 as the behavioral threshold. Sensitivity to
the use of this pre-established threshold is addressed through the more conservative threshold
estimation approach employed in the following subsection.
   Returning to Table 5, columns 2 and 3 display the impact of insurance on quarter 4
consumption smoothing and asset protection for households above and below a threshold
value of 15 tropical livestock units. The second panel shows the estimated average insurance
impact (61 percentage point reduction) on livestock sales masks a larger impact for wealthier
households (a 71 percentage point reduction) and a smaller reduction (41 percentage points)
for less wealthy households. Impacts for both groups are statistically significant, although
a z-test for a difference in coefficients above and below the threshold value is marginally
insignificant.
   As shown in the top panel of Table 5, the differential impact of insurance is sharper
for meal reduction. The average effect of a statistically insignificant 12 percentage point
reduction (column 1) is shown to be the result of a statistically significant 31 percentage
point reduction for less wealthy households and a near-zero impact for households above the
15 TLU wealth level. A z-test reveals this difference in estimated impacts on meal reduction
above and below the threshold is statistically significant at the 5% level.16
   These heterogeneous impact results indicate that insurance works differently for house-
holds of different wealth levels. Insurance allows secure households to reduce their reliance
on asset sales as a consumption smoothing coping mechanism. For the poor and vulnerable,


                                              21
insurance has a modest impact on livestock sales and a strong impact on meal reduction as
an asset smoothing coping strategy.

Estimated Threshold


   While the existing literature provides surprisingly consistent guidance on the location of
an asset threshold in the pastoral regions in the Horn of Africa, we can also use our data
to directly test for the existence of a threshold. Some earlier empirical literature (Carter et
al. (2007) and Carter and Lybbert (2012)) relied on Hansen (2000) to test for the presence
of an asset threshold as it relates to differentiated coping strategies. Here, because our key
variable (being insured) is instrumented using discount coupon treatments from a randomized
controlled trial, we rely on the approach of Caner and Hansen (2004) who develop GMM
methods to extend Hansen (2000) to the case of an endogenous explanatory variable for
which a set of valid instruments exist. As in the Hansen (2000) paper, the Caner and
Hansen estimation method tests each possible threshold value Â (splitting the sample into
upper and lower regimes around each Â) and devises a statistic to test whether splitting
the sample at Â is statistically significant as compared to a null hypothesis that no such
threshold exists.
   Figure 4.2 graphs the relevant test statistic against each possible asset value shown on
the horizontal axis. The dashed horizontal line in the figure is the 90% critical value of the
test statistic, and for values of the test statistic below that critical level, we can reject the
null. The preferred estimate of the threshold is the asset level with the lowest value of the
test statistic. When the data indicate a sharp discontinuity, we would expect to see a sharp
v-shaped pattern in the test statistic. A less precise discontinuity might yield a flatter, or
u-shaped relationship.
   As can be seen in Figure 4.2a, the test statistic for reduced consumption reveals a rel-
atively sharp discontinuity, with candidate threshold values ranging from about 8 to 12
tropical livestock units. The best estimate is a threshold of 9.3 TLU, as reported in the top


                                               22
panel of Table 5. While somewhat lower than the pre-established threshold of 15 TLU de-
rived from prior literature, splitting the data at this point reveals a much stronger difference
in the impact of insurance between lower and higher wealth households.
   Figure 4.2b indicates that the discontinuity in the regression regimes for livestock sales
is much less sharply identified. Statistically significant asset threshold values span the range
from about 14 to 25 TLU, with a best estimate of 22.4 TLU. The inter-regime insurance
impact is again stronger under the estimated threshold (a 42 percentage point difference
versus a 30 percentage point difference under the threshold based on prior knowledge). It is
surprising that this best estimate is higher than the best estimate of the threshold at which
meal reduction changes. However, as seen clearly in Figure 4.2b, the available data do not
pin down sharply livestock sales threshold, signalling that some unobserved heterogeneity
is at work. The theoretical analyses of Ikegami et al. (2016) and Carter and Janzen (2015)
hypothesize that skill differentials are a potentially important source of such heterogeneity
indicating that high skill, lower asset households may be more reluctant to sell assets than
their lesser skilled counterparts.
   The asymptotic standard errors reported in columns 4 and 5 of Tables 5 are estimated
using the methods developed by Caner and Hansen (2004). These robust standard errors
indicate insurance significantly reduces reliance on livestock sales for both lower and upper
regime households, but only reduces reliance on meal reduction for lower regime house-
holds. While inference based on these standard errors is asymptotically valid (as sample size
approaches infinity), Caner and Hansen note that the small sample performance of these
standard errors is somewhat poor. Intuitively, they note the asymptotic standard errors do
not account for the fact that the threshold is itself a noisy estimate (again, especially in
small samples). They thus suggest a statistically conservative approach in which the slope
coefficients are calculated for every candidate threshold value whose likelihood ratio statistics
indicates rejection of the null at the 80% level. In the case of the meal reduction regression,
this procedure involves calculating the confidence interval for every candidate threshold value


                                               23
between approximately 8 to 12 TLU. The suggested conservative confidence interval is the
union of the set of confidence intervals (or extreme values) that emerges from this exercise.
The third rows in both the top and bottom panels of Table 5 give the 90% interval estimates
for the impact of insurance on coping. For the lower wealth group, this confidence interval
includes zero, despite a relatively small asymptotic standard error.
    Especially in the case of the livestock sales regression, calculation of these asymptotically
conservative confidence intervals requires estimation across a broad domain of candidate
threshold values. For some of these values (those at the extreme ends of the domain), the
underlying GMM estimation breaks down for reasons of collinearity when location fixed
effects are included.17 While this problem did not emerge for the meal reduction regression
with its more precisely estimated threshold, it did prove to be a problem for the livestock
sales regression. We thus report results in the bottom panel of Table 5 only for the case of no
location fixed effects. While not ideal, we find that inclusion or exclusion of location effects
has no noticeable effect on the estimated parameters of the model with the pre-determined
threshold. For both low and high wealth groups, the asymptotically conservative confidence
intervals exclude zero, indicating statistically significant heterogeneous impacts even after
using the more conservative approach.
    In summary, these results indicate that receipt of an insurance payment allows house-
holds to reduce their reliance on often costly autarkic coping strategies. For modestly better
off households, insurance allows households to continue to defend their usual consumption
standard without relying on costly livestock sales at depressed prices. For less well-off house-
holds, insurance allows them to better smooth consumption while holding on to stocks of
productive assets.


4     Conclusion

    When adverse shocks strike in developing countries, poor households are often forced to



                                               24
choose between drawing down consumption or their physical productive assets. As Hod-
dinott (2006) points out, consumption is an input into the formation and maintenance of
human capital, implying that regardless of the choice made, uninsured risk may have long-
term consequences that undermine future productivity.18 In this paper we assess whether
insurance can function as a safety net, protecting assets and smoothing consumption, thereby
improving the human capital of future generations. Our findings suggest that IBLI insurance
payouts in Marsabit district of northern Kenya during the drought of 2011 provided substan-
tial immediate benefits to insured households. On average, insured households who receive
a payout are much less likely to sell livestock, improving their chances of recovery. Insured
households on average also expect to maintain their current food consumption, rather than
reduce meals as their uninsured neighbors do.
   Consistent with the rich theoretical literature on ex post risk coping strategies (e.g.
Townsend, 1995; Kazianga and Udry, 2006), we also show that households in our sample
behave quite differently depending on their asset holdings. Using the Caner and Hansen
(2004) threshold estimator, we cannot reject at the 1% level the hypothesis that there are
two, quite distinctive behavioral regimes, with distinctive insurance impacts. Livestock-
poor households were more likely to smooth assets and destabilize consumption, whereas
livestock-rich households were more likely to smooth consumption during the 2011 drought.
This behavior is consistent with a number of theoretical perspectives.
   These findings indicate that simply estimating the average effect of insurance masks
an interesting heterogeneous impact of insurance. The threshold-disaggregated estimates
show that insurance helps stop the households most likely to give up productive assets from
reducing their asset base, otherwise harming the household’s future income-earning potential.
In addition, insurance helps prevent those households most likely to reduce consumption
from doing so, thereby protecting vulnerable household members from undernutrition and
malnutrition, and improving the human capital of future generations. Considered jointly,
these impacts imply that insurance functions as a flexible safety net, allowing smoothing


                                             25
of consumption and nutrition, while preserving productive assets and future livelihoods.
In this way, insurance promotes asset smoothing without having the deleterious long term
consequences of destabilized consumption.
   These results come at a critical time for policymakers. In recent years we have observed
a push from development agencies to scale up microinsurance pilots with the goal of reaching
a larger number of households. This push has transpired in spite of an incomplete under-
standing of microinsurance impacts. The results presented here provide some of the first
empirical evidence that insurance can improve outcomes when negative strikes occur. We
recognize that our main results are based on immediate expectations regarding a specific
insurance pilot project, and are therefore not immediately generalizable. Indeed, further
impact analyses will help to generalize the results more broadly. However, this research
provides an important first step. If the declared intentions of pastoralists in northern Kenya
closely follow their true behavior, then the highly anticipated long term positive welfare
impacts of IBLI and other similar microinsurance projects are likely to be observed in the
near future.




                                             26
References
Ajzen, Icek, “The Theory of Planned Behavior,” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
  Processes, 1991, 50, 179–211.

Albarracin, Dolores, Blair T. Johnson, Martin Fishbein, and Paige A. Muellerleile,
  “Theories of Reasoned Action and Planned Behavior as Models of Condom Use: A Meta-Analysis,”
  Psychological Bulletin, 2001, 127 (1), 142–161.

Alderman, Harold, John Hoddinott, and Bill Kinsey, “Long term consequences of early
  childhood malnutrition,” Oxford Economic Papers, 2006, 58 (3), 450–474.

Barnett, Barry J., Christopher B. Barrett, and Jerry R. Skees, “Poverty Traps and Index-
 Based Risk Transfer Products,” World Development, 2008, 36 (10), 1766 – 1785.

Barrett, Christopher B. and Michael R. Carter, “The Economics of Poverty Traps and
 Persistent Poverty: Empirical and Policy Implications,” Journal of Development Studies, 2013,
 49 (7), 976–990.

  , Francis Chabari, DeeVon Bailey, Peter D. Little, and D. Layne Coppock, “Livestock
  Pricing in the Northern Kenyan Rangelands,” Journal of African Economics, June 2003, 12 (2),
  127–155.

  , Paswel Phiri Marenya, John McPeak, Bart Minten, Frank Place, Jean Claude
  Randrianarisoa, Jhon Rasambainarivo, and Justine Wangila, “Welfare dynamics in rural
  Kenya and Madagascar,” Journal of Development Studies, 2006, 42 (2), 248–277.

Bertram-Huemmer, Veronika and Kati Kraehnert, “Does Index Insurance Help Households
 Recover from Disaster? Evidence from IBLI Mongolia,” American Journal of Agricultural Eco-
 nomics, January 2017, 100 (1), 145–171.

Bruhn, Miriam and David McKenzie, “In Pursuit of Balance: Randomization in Practice in
  Development Field Experiments,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2009, 1 (4),
  200–232.

Cai, Hongbin, Yuyu Chen, Hanming Fang, and Li-An Zhou, “The Effect of Microinsur-
 ance on Economic Activities: Evidence from a Randomized Field Experiment,” The Review of
 Economics and Statistics, May 2015, 97 (2), 287–300.

Cai, Jing, “The Impact of Insurance Provision on Households’ Production and Financial Deci-
 sions The Impact of Insurance Provision on Households’ Production and Financial Decisions,”
 American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, May 2016, 8 (2), 44–88.

  , Alain de Janvry, and Elisabeth Sadoulet, “Social Networks and the Decision to Insure,”
  American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, April 2015, 7 (2), 81–108.

Caner, Mehmet and Bruce Hansen, “Instrumental Variable Estimation of a Threshold Model,”
 Econometric Theory, 2004, 20, 813–843.

                                             27
Carson, Richard T., Nicholas E. Flores, and Norman F. Meade, “Contingent Valuation:
 Controversies and Evidence,” Environmental and Resource Economics, 2001, 19, 173–210.

Carter, Michael R. and Sarah Janzen, “Social Protection in the Face of Climate Change:
 Targeting Principles and Financing Mechanisms,” World Bank Policy Research Report WPS7476,
 World Bank 2015.

   and Travis J. Lybbert, “Consumption versus asset smoothing: testing the implications of
  poverty trap theory in Burkina Faso,” Journal of Development Economics, 2012, 99 (2), 255 –
  264.

  , Peter D. Little, Tewodaj Mogues, and Workneh Negatu, “Poverty Traps and Natural
  Disasters in Ethiopia and Honduras,” World Development, 2007, 35 (5), 835 – 856.

Chantarat, Sommarat, Andrew G. Mude, Christopher B. Barrett, and Calum G. Tur-
 vey, “Welfare impacts of index insurance in the presence of a poverty trap,” World Development,
 2017, 94, 119–138.

  , , , and Michael R. Carter, “Designing Index-Based Livestock Insurance for Managing
  Asset Risk in Northern Kenya,” Journal of Risk and Insurance, 2012, pp. no–no.

Cole, Shawn, Gautam Gustav Bastian, Sangita Vyas, Carina Wendel, and Daniel Stein,
 “The effectiveness of index-based micro-insurance in helping smallholders manage weather-related
 risks,” Technical Report, EPPI-Centre, Social Science Research Unit, Institute of Education,
 University of London 2012.

  , Xavier Gine, and James Vickery, “How does risk management influence production deci-
  sions? Evidence from a field experiment,” The Review of Financial Studies, June 2017, 30 (6),
  1935–1970.

  , , Jeremy Tobacman, Robert Townsend, Petia Topalova, and James Vickery, “Barri-
  ers to Household Risk Management: Evidence from India,” American Economic Journal: Applied
  Economics, 2013, 5 (1), 104.

Deaton, Angus, “Saving and liquidity constraints,” Econometrica, 1991, 59 (1221-1248).

Dercon, Stefan, Martina Kirchberger, Jan Willem, and Jean Philippe Platteau, “Liter-
 ature review on microinsurance,” Technical Report 1, International Labour Office, Geneva 2008.

  , Ruth Vargas Hill, Daniel Clarke, Ingo Outes-Leon, and Alemayehu Taffesse, “Offering
  Rainfall Insurance to Informal Insurance Groups: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Ethiopia,”
  Journal of Development Economics, 2014, 106, 132–143.

Diamond, Peter A. and Jerry A. Hausman, “Contingent Valuation: Is Some Number better
  than No Number?,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 1994, 8 (4), 45–64.

Elabed, Ghada, Michael R. Carter, Marc F. Bellemare, and Catherine Guirkinger, “Ex
  Ante Impacts of Agricultural Insurance: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Mali,” 2014.

Fafchamps, Marcel, Christopher Udry, and Katherine Czukas, “Drought and saving in
  West Africa: are livestock a buffer stock?,” Journal of Development Economics, 1998, 55 (2),
  273–305.

                                               28
Gertler, Paul and Jonathan Gruber, “Insuring Consumption Against Illness,” American Eco-
 nomic Review, March 2002, 92 (1), 51–70.

Gine, Xavier, Robert Townsend, and James Vickery, “Patterns of Rainfall Insurance Par-
  ticipation in Rural India,” World Bank Economic Review, 2008, 22 (3), 539–566.

Hanemann, W. Michael, “Valuing the Environment through Contingent Valuation,” The Journal
 of Economic Perspectives, Autumn 1994, 8 (4), 19–43.

Hansen, Bruce E., “Sample Splitting and Threshold Estimation,” Econometrica, May 2000, 68
 (3), 575–603.

Hoddinott, John, “Shocks and their consequences across and within households in Rural Zim-
 babwe,” Journal of Development Studies, 2006, 42 (2), 301–321.

Ikegami, M., Michael R. Carter, Christopher B. Barrett, and Sarah Janzen, “Poverty
  Traps and the Social Protection Paradox,” in “The Economics of Asset Accumulation and Poverty
  Traps” NBER 2016.

Jalan, J. and M. Ravallion, “Are the poor less well insured? Evidence on vulnerability to income
  risk in rural China,” Journal of Development Economics, 1999, 58 (1), 61–81.

Janzen, Sarah A., Michael R. Carter, and Munenobu Ikegami, “Valuing Asset Insurance
  in the Presence of Poverty Traps,” September 2015.

  , Nathan D. Jensen, and Andrew G. Mude, “Targeted social protection in a pastoralist
  economy: case study from Kenya,” OIE Scientific and Technical Review, 2016, 35 (2), 587–596.

Jensen, Nathan D., Andrew G. Mude, and Christopher B. Barrett, “How Basis Risk
  and Spatiotemporal Adverse Selection Influence Demand for Index Insurance: Evidence from
  Northern Kenya,” December 2014.

Jensen, Nathaniel, Christopher Barrett, and Andrew Mude, “Cash Transfers and Index
  Insurance: A Comparative Impact Analysis from Northern Kenya,” Journal of Development
  Economics, 2017, 129, 14–28.

Jensen, Nathaniel D. and Christopher B. Barrett, “Agricultural Index Insurance for Devel-
  opment,” Applied Economic Perspectives and Policy, 2016.

  , , and Andrew G. Mude, “Index Insurance Quality and Basis Risk: Evidence from Northern
  Kenya,” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 2016, 98 (5), 1450–1469.

Karlan, Dean, Robert Darko Osei, Isaac Osei-Akoto, and Christopher Udry, “Agricul-
 tural Decisions after Relaxing Credit and Risk Constraints,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 2014, pp. 597–652.

Kazianga, Harounan and Christopher Udry, “Consumption smoothing? Livestock, insurance
 and drought in rural Burkina Faso,” Journal of Development Economics, April 2006, 79 (2),
 413–446.

Kerven, Carol, Customary Commerce: A historical reassessment of pastoral livestock marketing
 in Africa, Overseas Development Institute, 1992.

                                              29
Kraay, Aart and David McKenzie, “Do Poverty Traps Exists? Assessing the Evidence,” Journal
 of Economic Perspectives, 2014, 28 (3), 127–148.

Lybbert, Travis J., Christopher B. Barrett, Solomon Desta, and D. Layne Coppock,
  “Stochastic wealth dynamics and risk management among a poor population,” The Economic
  Journal, 2004, 114 (498), 750–777.

Martorell, Reynaldo, “The nature of child malnutrition and its long-term implications,” Food &
 Nutrition Bulletin, 1999, 20 (3), 288–292.

McIntosh, Craig, Alexander Sarris, and Fotis Papadopoulos, “Productivity, Credit, Risk
 and the Demand for Weather Index Insurance in Smallholder Agriculture in Ethiopia,” Agricul-
 tural Economics, 2013, 44 (4-5), 399–417.

McPeak, John, “Contrasting Income Shocks with Asset Shocks: Livestock Sales in Northern
 Kenya,” Oxford Economic Papers, April 2004, 56 (2), 263–284.

Miranda, Mario J. and Katie Farrin, “Index Insurance for Developing Countries,” Applied
 Economic Perspectives and Policy, 2012, 34 (3), 391–427.

Mobarak, Ahmed Mushfiq and Mark Rosenzweig, “Selling Formal Insurance to the Informally
 Insured,” Working Paper 97, Yale University, Department of Economics February 2012.

Morduch, Jonathan, “Income Smoothing and Consumption Smoothing,” Journal of Economic
 Perspectives, Summer 1995, 9 (3), 103–114.

Mullally, Conner, “Perceptions and Participation: Research Design with Low Program Enrollment
 and Heterogeneous Impacts in Development,” April 2012.

  , Steve Boucher, and Michael Carter, “Encouraging Development: Randomized Encour-
  agement Designs in Agriculture,” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 2013, 95 (5),
  1352–1358.

Patt, Anthony, Pablo Suarez, and Ulrich Hess, “How do Small-Holder Farmers Understand
  Insurance, and how much do they want it? Evidence from Africa,” Global Environmental Change,
  2010, 20 (1), 153–161.

Paxson, Christina H., “Using Weather Variability to Estimate the Response of Savings to Tran-
  sitory Income in Thailand,” American Economic Review, 1992, 82 (1), 15–33.

Rosenzweig, Mark R. and Hans P. Binswanger, “Wealth, Weather Risk and the Composition
 and Profitability of Agricultural Investments,” Economic Journal, January 1993, 103 (416), 56–
 78.

   and Kenneth I. Wolpin, “Credit Market Constraints, Consumption Smoothing and the Ac-
  cumulation of Durable Production Assets in Low-Income Countries: Investment in Bullocks in
  India,” Journal of Political Economy, 1993, 101 (2), 223–244.

Rubin, D. B., “Bayesian Inference for Causal Effects,” The Annals of Statistics, 1978, 6, 34–58.

Santos, Paulo and Christopher B. Barrett, “Persistent poverty and informal credit,” Journal
  of Development Economics, 2011, 96 (2), 337–347.

                                               30
Sheeran, Paschal, “Intention-Behavior Relations: A Conceptual and Empirical Review,” European
  Review of Social Psychology, 2002, 12 (1), 1–36.

Subramanian, Shankar and Angus Deaton, “The Demand for Food and Calories,” Journal of
  Political Economy, 1996, 104 (1), 133–162.

Toth, Russell, “Traps and Thresholds in Pastoralist Mobility,” American Journal of Agricultural
  Economics, November 2015, 97 (1), 315–332.

Townsend, Robert M., “Risk and Insurance in Village India,” Econometrica, May 1994, 62 (3),
  539–591.

  , “Consumption Insurance: An Evaluation of Risk-Bearing Systems in Low-Income Economies,”
  Journal of Economic Perspectives, Summer 1995, 9 (3), 83–102.

Webb, Thomas L. and Paschal Sheeran, “Does Changing Behavioral Intentions Engender
 Behavior Change? A Meta-Analysis of the Experimental Evidence,” Psychological Bulletin, 2006,
 132 (2), 249–268.

Zimmerman, Frederick J. and Michael R. Carter, “Asset smoothing, consumption smoothing
  and the reproduction of inequality under risk and subsistence constraints,” Journal of Develop-
  ment Economics, 2003, 71, 233–260.




                                               31
Notes
   1
       Classic studies of consumption smoothing include (Deaton, 1991; Paxson, 1992; Rosenzweig and Wolpin,
1993; Morduch, 1995; Townsend, 1995; Fafchamps et al., 1998; Gertler and Gruber, 2002)
   2
       The outcomes of undernutrition and malnutrition are well known. In children, these conditions can
lead to muscle wastage, stunting, increased susceptibility to illness, lower motor and cognitive skills, slowed
behavioral development, and increased morbidity and mortality (Martorell, 1999). Those that do survive
suffer functional disadvantages as adults, including diminished intellectual performance, work capacity and
strength. For example, Alderman et al. (2006) show persistent effects of drought shocks in Zimbabwe that
caused lower height-for-age scores and lower educational outcomes, presumably due to lower consumption.
In women, undernourishment during childhood can be the cause of lower adult body mass, which means
increased risk of delivery complications and lower birthweights for the next generation (Martorell, 1999).
These outcomes set the stage for a pernicious intergenerational cycle of undernutrition and its destructive
effects.
   3
       More recent evidence presented by Jensen et al. (2016) suggests that basis risk may more important
than originally though - the authors estimate that IBLI policyholders are left with an average of 69% of their
original risk due to high loss events.
   4
       The IBLI contract is expressed in tropical livestock units (TLUs). A goat or sheep is equal to .1 TLU,
cattle are equal to a single TLU, and a camel is equal to 1.4 TLU.
   5
       A single TLU (one cow or ten goats) in a typical non-drought season is valued at approximately 20,000
Kenyan Shillings.
   6
       A non-livestock asset index was constructed from the first principle component using factor analysis.
Variables used to generate the asset index include housing characteristics (such as materials used in the wall
or for flooring in the house), cooking appliances, access to water, and possession of large assets such as a
motorbike, boat, sewing machine, grinding mill or television.
   7
       Given that households lost on average 35% of their productive wealth in the 2011 drought, it is perhaps
not surprising to see consumption cut-backs by even wealthier households who must have experienced some
drop in their permanent income due to the shock. Moreover, as discussed in footnote 2 above and in the
appendix, we would expect even wealthier households to at least partially destabilize consumption given that
livestock prices drop sharply in the face of drought and that shocks are modestly autocorrelated.
   8
       The Stable Unit Treatment Value Assumption (SUTVA, Rubin (1978)) requires that potential outcomes
are unrelated to the treatment status of others. In this context it seems unlikely that receipt of a coupon by
someone else in the same community would affect one’s decision to insure, especially as insurance discount



                                                      32
coupons were distributed privately. One might also worry that that an insured household induced to buy
insurance with a coupon might share an insurance payout with an uninsured peer who did not receive a
coupon. This kind of spillover externality would bias our results downward (the comparison group would be
better off as a result of insurance), such that our results are conservative.
   9
       Because households in different geographic locations face different risks and hold their wealth in different
species–e.g., more camels in the more arid locations–location fixed effects have a potentially important role to
play. We note that demand is actually quite complicated, and leave a more rigorous treatment and discussion
of insurance demand to other work. Janzen et al. (2015) provide a theoretical discussion and Jensen et al.
(2014) provide a detailed empirical analysis in this setting.
  10
       Heckman selection methods yield an estimate of a 27% point drop, while matching methods yield an
average impact of a 30% point drop. Full results are available from the authors.
  11
       Both Heckman and matching methods estimated the average impact of insurance to be a 37% point
drop in reliance upon meal reductions as a way to cope with the drought.
  12
       Results available upon request from the authors show that this same pattern of wealth-differentiated
coping strategies is visible when the third quarter data are used to estimated threshold models akin to those
developed below for the fourth quarter data.
  13
       One could worry that respondents may have exaggerated the impact that insurance was going to have on
their coping strategies in quarter 4 in order to please the interview team. This concern is no different than
the worry that respondents might similarly exaggerate the impact of a program by exaggerating behavior
that has already taken place. Were this to have happened in this case, estimated impacts will overstate
the true impacts, irrespective of whether data reflect intended or already realized behaviors. However, such
exaggeration should have no particular impact on this paper’s primary findings that coping strategies, and
the impact of insurance upon them, is differentiated by household wealth level.
  14
       We do not assume a threshold for the first stage equation.
  15
       Santos and Barrett (2011) estimate a threshold of 7-10 tropical livestock units per household. Lybbert et
al. (2004) estimate the threshold to be between 10-15 tropical livestock units per household. Toth (2015) finds
an estimated threshold of 5 tropical livestock units per adult male, which can be converted to approximately
7.5 tropical livestock units per household.
  16
       Intuitively, the more hypotheses we check, the higher the probability of making a Type I error. The
Bonferroni-Holm correction is a conservative approach to address this issue of a familywise error rate. We
employ the Bonferroni-Holm correction assuming two hypotheses tests (heterogeneous impacts for low and
high wealth households) using the calculated p-values for the threshold-disaggregated insurance impact
coefficients. Using this method, the estimated heterogeneous impacts remain statistically significant.


                                                         33
  17
       In any given location, there is a minimum and maximum herd size observed in the data. At more
extreme threshold values, all observations within a location may fall into a single regime, causing estimation
to break down.
  18
       Specifically, Hoddinott suggests, “The true distinction lies in households’ choices regarding what type
of capital - physical, financial, social or human (and which human) - that they should draw down given an
income shock.”




                                                      34
Figure 4.1: Timeline of IBLI Sales, Surveys, Payouts and Standardized NDVI



          Standardized	  
          NDVI	  
                                                                                                                       Household	  	  
                            Household	  	                         Household	  	                                      Survey	  R3	  
                            Survey	  R1	                          Survey	  R2	                                          and	  	  
                   2	  
                                                                                                                  Index	  Triggered:	  
              1.5	                                                                                              IBLI	  Payouts	  Made	  
                   1	  

              0.5	  

       (Avg)	  0	  

             -­‐0.5	  

                 -­‐1	  

             -­‐1.5	                   IBLI	  	                                      IBLI	  	  
                                        Sale	  	                                      Sale	                              Q3	                 Q4	  

                             2009       	
      	
   	
   2010   	
   	
   	
       	
      	
   	
   	
2011	
            	
   	
            	
	





                                                                          35
Figure 4.2: Significance Test for Asset Threshold in Coping Strategies
           (a) Coping via Reduced Consumption




               (b) Coping via Livestock Sales




                                    36
                                     Table 1: General Summary Statistics

                                                     By Insurance Purchase                By Discount Coupon
                                                                   Difference       Received   No      Difference
Variable                                      Insured Uninsured     in Means        Coupon Coupon      in Means
Permanently Settled                             .50       .48          -.025          .50      .46        -.042
(dummy=1 if true)                              (.04)     (.02)        (.045)         (.02)    (.03)      (.040)
Livestock Owner                                  .95      .95           -.001          .94       .96         .016
(owns at least some livestock)                  (.02)    (.01)         (.020)         (.01)     (.01)       (.017)
Number of TLU Owned                            16.22     18.86          2.64          18.07    18.49         .420
(Oct. 2010)                                    (1.40)    (1.29)        (2.42)         (1.32)   (1.69)       (2.15)
TLU Owned per capita                            2.70     3.54           .85*          3.19      3.59         .404
(Oct. 2010)                                     (.24)    (.25)         (.457)         (.22)     (.37)       (.407)
Number of TLU Lost                              7.67     7.53          -0.137         7.66      7.40         -.265
(between Oct. 2010-2011)                        (.49)    (.90)         (1.00)         (.54)     (.69)       (.884)
Expected TLU Losses                             6.99     7.43           .442          7.71      6.68         -1.03
(between Oct. 2011-2012)                        (.61)    (.36)          (.73)         (.39)     (.51)       (.645)
Farmer                                           .25      .21           -.041          .21       .25         .034
(farms any agricultural land)                   (.03)    (.02)         (.038)         (.02)     (.03)       (.033)
Non-livestock Asset Index 2011                   .15      .00           -.150          -.02      .14        .161*
(from factor analysis)                          (.10)    (.05)         (.098)         (.05)     (.08)       (.086)
Credit Constrained                               .42      .37           -.039          .42       .34       -.078**
(difficulty acquiring a loan)                   (.04)    (.02)         (.044)         (.02)     (.03)       (.039)
Borrower                                         .33      .36           .038           .36       .34         -.024
(Borrowed in past year)                         (.04)    (.02)         (.043)         (.02)     (.03)       (.038)
Savings                                          .18      .16           -.017          .14       .21        .072**
(Any current household savings)                 (.03)    (.02)         (.034)         (.02)     (.03)       (.030)
Amount of savings                              28890   71498            42608         40353   83441         43088
(If any savings)                              (11942) (18337)          (32063)        (9906) (27600)       (27988)
Lender                                           .07      .06           -.004          .07       .06         -.008
(Loaned any money)                              (.02)    (.01)         (.022)         (.01)     (.01)       (.020)
HSNP                                             .32      .43          .103**          .42       .37         -.057
(cash transfer recipient)                       (.04)    (.02)         (.044)         (.02)     (.03)       (.039)
Dependency Ratio                                 .50      .54          .047***         .54       .53         -.009
(<15yrs, >55yrs, disabled, chronic ill)         (.01)    (.01)          (.017)        (.01)     (.01)       (.015)
Cell Phone                                       .45      .51           .058           .48       .53         .045
(uses at least monthly)                         (.04)    (.02)         (.045)         (.02)     (.03)       (.040)
Social groups                                    .86      .70          -.161**         .78       .66        -.121*
(Number of groups participating in)             (.06)    (.04)          (.077)        (.04)     (.05)       (.068)
Muslim                                           .26      .26           .003           .27       .23         -.040
(dummy=1 if true)                               (.04)    (.02)         (.040)         (.02)     (.03)       (.035)
Christian                                        .30      .42          .117***         .38       .40         .018
(dummy=1 if true)                               (.04)    (.02)          (.045)        (.02)     (.03)       (.040)
Literate                                         .09      .12           .033           .11       .13         .021
(write a simple letter in English)              (.02)    (.01)         (.029)         (.02)     (.02)       (.026)
Years of Education                               .76     1.18           .416          1.03      1.16         .131
(household head)                                (.21)    (.15)         (.294)         (.15)     (.21)       (.259)
Risk-taking                                      .24      .29           .049           .28       .28         -.007
(dummy=1 if risk-taking)                        (.03)    (.02)         (.041)         (.02)     (.03)       (.037)
Risk-moderate                                    .50      .45           -.054          .45       .48         .032
(dummy=1 if risk-moderate)                      (.04)    (.02)         (.046)         (.02)     (.03)       (.040)
Age                                            46.22     49.15         2.93**         47.06    50.87      3.803***
(household head)                               (1.22)    (.74)         (1.49)         (.75)    (1.14)      (1.313)
Female                                           .42      .36           -.059          .37       .37         -.001
(household head)                                (.04)    (.02)         (.044)         (.02)     (.03)       (.039)

Observations                                    161       514                          426      249

        Standard errors, including the standard errors of the difference in means, are reported in parentheses.
                          For the difference in means tests: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

                                                         37
             Table 2: Summary Statistics for Potential Instruments

                                                            By Insurance Purchase
                                                                               Difference
          Variable                                    Insured     Uninsured    in Means



          Received IBLI Discount Coupon                 .88          .55         -.321***
          (dummy=1 if true)                            (.03)        (.02)          (.042)
          Value of IBLI Discount Coupon               23.79         16.46        -7.33***
          (of: 0, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60)             (1.83)        (.96)          (1.98)

          Observations                                 161           514

Standard errors, including the standard errors of the difference in means, are reported in parentheses.
                  For the difference in means tests: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                 38
                  Table 3: Consumption and Asset Smoothing in Northern Kenya

                                                      By Livestock Wealth                      By Insurance Purchase
                                    Average    Lowest      Highest     Difference                                Difference
Variable                            Response   Quartile    Quartile    in Means          Insured    Uninsured    in Means

Asset Smoothing
Q3 Probability Reduce Meals (%)       72          82           61          21***           64            75          10.9***
(prior to payout)                    (1.7)       (3.0)        (3.8)        (4.9)          (3.8)         (1.9)         (4.0)
Q4 Probability Reduce Meals (%)       62          72           51          21***           33            71          37.9***
(after receiving payout)             (1.8)       (3.5)        (4.0)        (5.3)          (3.7)         (2.0)         (4.1)


Consumption Smoothing
Q3 Probability Sell Livestock (%)     29          12           44          32***           34            28           -.053
(prior to payout)                    (1.7)       (2.6)        (3.9)        (2.5)          (3.7)         (1.9)         (4.1)
Q4 Probability Sell Livestock (%)     27          12           42          30***           11            32          20.7***
( after receiving payout)            (1.7)       (2.6)        (3.9)        (4.7)          (2.5)         (2.0)         (3.9)

Observations                          675        163           161                         161          514

           Standard errors, including the standard errors of the difference in means, are reported in parentheses.
                             For the difference in means tests: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                            39
Table 4: Demand for Insurance: First Stage Linear Probability Model Selection Regression

                                                                (1)                    (2)
               Received IBLI discount coupon                 0.29∗∗∗                0.30∗∗∗
                                                             (0.061)                (0.053)
               Value of IBLI discount coupon                 -0.0011                -0.0012
                                                            (0.0013)               (0.0012)
               Years of education (head)                    -0.016∗∗               -0.019∗∗
                                                            (0.0063)               (0.0067)
               Risk-taking                                   0.0021                  -0.023
                                                             (0.037)                (0.034)
               Risk-moderate                                  0.015                   0.017
                                                             (0.023)                (0.028)
               Non-livestock asset index                      0.059∗                  0.050
                                                             (0.028)                (0.029)
               TLU Owned                                     -0.0011              -0.0011∗∗
                                                           (0.00064)              (0.00040)
               TLU losses in past year                      0.0025∗                  0.0019
                                                            (0.0014)               (0.0017)
               Expected TLU losses                           -0.0012                -0.0017
                                                            (0.0017)               (0.0021)
               Credit Constrained                              0.025                  0.033
                                                             (0.035)                (0.044)
               Household currently has savings                 0.038                  0.017
                                                             (0.039)                (0.044)
               Age (head)                                   -0.0016∗              -0.0023∗∗
                                                           (0.00080)              (0.00084)
               Number of group memberships                    0.0048                  0.034
                                                             (0.013)                (0.025)
               Constant                                       0.0068                0.18∗∗∗
                                                             (0.055)                (0.057)
               Location fixed effects                           yes                    no
               Observations                                     627                    627
               R2                                              0.245                  0.125
                                                 ∗               ∗∗               ∗∗∗
               Standard errors in parentheses.       p < 0.10,        p < 0.05,         p < 0.01.




                                                 40
                    Table 5: Insurance Impacts on ex post coping strategies

                                            Pre-established Threshold         Estimated Threshold
                                   (1)          (2)          (3)               (4)           (5)
                                 Average       Low          High               Low          High

 Panel A: Meal Reduction
                                                <15           >15              <9.3            >9.3

 Insured                           -0.12      -0.31**         -0.05           -0.49**          0.004
                                  (0.11)       (0.16)        (0.03)            (0.23)          (0.17)
                                     -            -             -           [-.91, .03]     [-.36, .30]

 Location fixed effects            yes          yes           yes              yes              yes
 Observations                      627          381           246              303              324
 R-squared                         0.21         0.26          0.23               -               -
 Test equality of coefficients                          1.65**                        1.72**



 Panel B: Livestock Sales
                                                <15           >15             <22.4            >22.4

 Insured                         -0.61***     -0.41**       -0.71***         -0.54***        -0.96***
                                  (0.16)       (0.20)        (0.16)            (0.17)         (0.24)
                                     -            -             -           [-.85, -.11]   [-1.46, -.47]

 Location fixed effects           yes             yes        yes                 no            no
 Observations                     627            381         246                459           168
 R-squared                        0.12           0.13        0.24                 -             -
 Test equality of coefficients                          1.14                          1.42*
 Standard errors in parentheses. * p<0.10; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01.
Columns (1) - (3) report cluster robust standard erros, while columns (4) & (5) report asymp-
totic standard errors and asymptotically conservative 90% confidence intervals in brackets. All
estimations include the following control variables: number of years of education (household head),
a dummy variable for risk-taking, a dummy variable for risk-moderate, non-livestock asset index,
number of TLU owned, number of TLU losses in the past year, number of expected TLU losses, a
dummy variable for credit constrained, a dummy variable for if the household currently has savings,
age (head), number of group memberships.




                                                41
