                       NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      BUDGET DEFICITS, TAX RULES,
                        AND REAL INTEREST RATES




                           Martin Feldstejn




                        Working Paper No. 1970




                 NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                       1050 Massachusetj-5 Avenue
                          Cambridge, MA 02138
                              July 1986




The research reported here is part of the NBER
in Financial Markets and                           research programs
and Taxation. Any         Monetary Economics, Economic Fluctuations,
                   opinions expressed are those of the author and
not those of the National
                           Bureau of Economic Research.
             Budget Deficits, Tax Rules, and Real Interest Rates




                                     ABSTRACT


       This paper examines three sources of the fluctuations
                                                                  in real interest
  rates during the past three
                                decades: changes in
                                                       budget deficits, changes in
  tax rules, and changes
                           in monetary policy.    The evidence indicates
                                                                           that budget
 deficits and
                monetary policy have had a
                                             strong influence on the level of
 long-term interest rates but fails to identify
                                                     any effect of changes in
 corporate tax rates and investment
                                       incentives.
      The analysis shows that it is projected future
                                                         budget deficits rather
 than the current level of the actual or
                                             structural deficit that influence
 long-term interest rates.
                              Each percentage point increase in the five-year
projected ratio of budget
                             deficits to GNP raises
                                                      the long-term government bond
rate by approximately 1.2
                             percentage points while the ratio of the current
deficit to GNP (either
                         actual or structural) has
                                                      no significa effect.      The
specific parameter estimates
                                imply that the increase in
                                                             projected budget
deficits was responsible
                           for about two-thirds of the rise in the interest
rates between 1977-78 and 1983-84.




                                                 Martin Feldstein
                                                 NBER
                                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                                                         May 28, 1986

                 BUDGET DEFICITS, TAX RULES, AND REAL INTEREST RATES


                                    Martin Feldstejn*


       The rise in the real long-term
                                         interest rate has been one of the most
  significant and contentious
                                economic events of the 1980s. The interest rate
  on 10 year Treasury bonds
                            rose from 8.2 percent in the second half of the
 1970s to 12.4 percent in 1984
                                even though inflation fell from an average of
 8.2 percent in the years 1975—79 to 4.0 percent in
                                                     1984. By any reasonable
 measure, the real long-term interest
                                       rate has been much higher in the first
 half of the 1960s than in
                           any previous five-year period in this century. The
 high level of real interest
                                rates affected not only domestic
                                                                   interest_sensitive
 industries but also, by
                            raising the international value of
                                                                 the dollar, caused
 an Unprecedented rise in the
                                U.S. merchandise trade deficit.l
      Understanding the cause of the high
                                            real interest rates is central to an
 analysis of the appropriate
                               policy response. One leading view has been that
 the high real interest rates reflect the large
                                                current and projected
government deficits and that those
                                      deficits should be reduced
                                                                   substantially or
eliminated.2 An alternative
                              view emphasizes the increased emand for
investment funds that resulted from the investment incentives
                                                                in the 1981 tax
legislation arid concludes that
                                deficit reduction would have little effect on
real long-term interests rates.3
                                   Although I had previously noted
                                                                       (Feldstein,
1980b) and still believe that a
                                  pro-investment tax reform would raise real
interest rates as well as
                          investment my judgment before doing the present
research was that the increase in
                                  the government's demand for funds has been
far more important as a cause of the high real interest
                                                          rates in recent years.
                                     —2—


The primary purpose of the present paper is to assess the relative importance

of budget deficits and tax changes as causes of the rise in real interest

rates.

     It is, of course, impossible to discuss the movement of interest rates

during the past decade without considering the changes in inflation and

expected inflation that have also occurred during this same period. The

effect of inflation on nominal and real interest rates depends on the

structure of both the individual income tax and corporate income tax rates

(see Feldstein, 1976 and 1983). An important secondary purpose of the present

paper is to show how to incorporate both the personal and corporate tax rules

in an econometric specification and to assess the implied effect of inflation

on nominal and real interest rates. Although there have been a number of

empirical studies of the interaction of tax rules and inflation, each study

has looked only at either the personal tax rate or the corporate tax but never

at the interaction between the two.4 As the analysis developed below (and in

Feldstein, 1976 and Feldstein, Green and Sheshinski, 1978) makes clear, a

failure to include the effects of both tax systems has caused previous

researchers to conc:de incorrectly that the interest rate is not as

responsive to inflation as the theory suggests.

     The empirical analysis in the present paper also considers the effects on

interest rates of changes in monetary policy and in business cycle

conditions.

     Although there have now been a number of studies of the effects of

deficits on interest rates, the present study is novel in three important

ways. First, the empirical analysis emphasizes the importance of expected
                                            —3—


     future deficits rather than
                                  concurrent deficits. Second, the analysis
     assesses the change in investment
                                        incentives since 1981 as an alternative
     explanation of the subsequent rise in real interest
                                                          rates. Third, the effect
     of inflation is incorporated
                                   in a way that includes both the personal and
     corporate tax Systems.

          The paper begins with a brief discussion and
                                                         empirical analysis of the
     conditions that could in
                             theory eliminate any relation between the budget
  deficit and the level of real
                                  interest rates. The next two sections discuss
  the theory and empirical
                            implementation of the key determinants of interest
  rates. Section 2 also considers
                                     the reasons for believing
                                                                that expected budget
 deficits rather than, or in addition to, the stock of
                                                           national debt should
  influence the level of real
                               interest rates. The third section discusses the
 effect on the level of interest
                                   rates of changes in tax rules and of the
 interaction of corporate tax rules and expected inflation.
                                                                 The analysis shows
 how persona] and corporate taxes combine in interest
                                                         rate determination.
Section 4 presents a
                       general specficat-jon of the
                                                    estimation equations, while
Section 5 discusses the data
                                definitions and sources. The empirical estimates
of the basic equation and
                            of several variants are
                                                     presented and discussed in
Section 6. There is a brief
                               concluding section.


1.
        The Theoretical Case that There Is No Relation Between
                                                               Deficits


       Much of the confusion in the
                                      popular debate about the relation between
deficits and interest rates reflects a failure to
                                                  distinguish between nominal
and real interest rates and
                            between cyclical and structural budget deficits.
                                     —4-


But even when we focus properly on the relation between structural deficits

and real interest rates, there are logically correct theoretical reasons why a

higher deficit might not raise interest rates.

     Within the traditional IS—LM framework, an increase in the budget deficit

will not raise interest rates in three extreme cases: an infinitely elastic

demand for money with respect to the interest rate; a zero elasticity of

demand for money with respect to the level of nominal income; and an infinite

elasticity of real demand with respect to the interest rate. In addition, a

rise in the budget deficit caused by a tax cut would have no effect on

interest rates if the marginal propensity to consume out of disposable income

were zero. There is, of course, overwhelming evidence that none of these four

conditions is even remotely true. Thus, within the conventional IS—LM

framework, there is no empirically relevant case for the proposition that an

increased structural budget deficit should not affect interest rates.5


1.1 The Ricardian Equivalency Hypothesis

     Barro (1974) suggested a further reason why budget deficits, or, more

accurately, budget deficits arising from temporary tax cuts, might have no

effect on the level of interest rates. In Barros analysis, individuals

regard a tax cut as equivalent to a postponed tax liability that does not

alter the budget constraint of the individual and his descendants taken

together. Since they start with what they regard to be an optimal

intergenerational allocation, they will not alter their consumption and will

therefore save the entire tax cut. With no reduction in national saving, the

interest rate should remain unchanged. This is the essence of what has come
                                          —5--



  to be cal led the Ricardjan
                                equivalence proposition although it is an idea that
  Ricardo (1951) rejected as empirically false
                                               (O'Oriscolj, 1977).
       The effect of a budget
                              deficit caused by a temporary rise in government
  spending is more ambiguous. If the
                                        government spending provides a service
  that the individual would
                              otherwise have bought
                                                      privately, the government
  spending is essentially equivalent to a tax cut. The individual
                                                                       reduces
  personal consumption by the amount of the current rise in
                                                                government spending
 and the previous conclusion
                             remains. If, however, the individual gets little
 or no benefit from the increased
                                  government spending but recognizes that the
 budget deficit implies a future
                                   tax liability, the individual will feel poorer
 and will reduce his
                       personal consumption      But the concurrent reduction in
 personal consumption will be less than the increased deficit
                                                              unless the
 increased annual deficit is permanent.

      Barro's equivalence
                           proposition requires a number of questionable
 assumptions. it assumes in particular
                                          that all individuals choose to make
 positive bequests and that the level of the bequest is
                                                          selected by maximizing
 a function in which their
                            children's utility is an argument. Bequests must
not be made because the individual
                                      gets pleasure in giving or seeks to retain
the affection of his children
                                or dies prematurely. Abel (1985) has shown that
the equivalence result also
                              precludes various types of uncertainty and
imperfections -in annuity markets.
                                     Bernheim (1985) has recently shown that,
since grandchilr and other future descendants are the
                                                      result of marriages
that 1-ink each family to
                         currently unidentified other families, Barro type
altruism has the implausible
                             implication that each individual should be
indifferent about lump sum taxes that transfer wealth from
                                                           himself to any
                                     -6-



other individual. Empirical tests of the implications of Barro's theory based

on aggregate time series data have not been decisive; Barro (1978) and

Kormendi (1983) conclude that the theory is consistent with postwar U.S.

experience while FeIdstein (1982) and Kotlikoff and Boskin (1985) conclude

that it is inconsistent.

     The recent experience provides no support for the Barro view that an

increased budget deficit does not raise interest rates because the increased

deficit as such induces an equal rise in private saving. Table 1 shows that

the budget deficit, which varied between -0.1 percent of GNP and 2.4 percent

of GNP in the five year periods 1950 to 1979 jumped to 3.9 percent for the

years 1980 to 1984. Although part of this rise in the deficit reflects the

sharp recession, the cyclically adjusted deficits6 (shown in column 2 of

Table 1) also indicate an unusually large rise, from an average of 1.2 percent

of GNP -in the years 1950 to 1979 to 2.4 percent of GNP from 1980 to 1984 and

4.0 percent of GNP in 1984.

     Almost all of the increase in the deficit between the 1970's and the

first half of the 1980s was due to the rise in transfer payments and to

increased interest n the national debt. Column 3 of Table I shows that

federal spending on goods nd services averaged 8.0 percent of GNP in the

1970s and remained at that level in the first half of the 1980s. Although

there were year to year fluctuations, the 1984 level was 8.1 percent of GNP.

Federal tax receipts as a percent of GNP actually rose slightly between the

1970s (19.5 percent of GNP) and the first half of the 1980s (20.1 percent of

GNP), falling only to 19.2 percent of GNP in 1984. Thus, of the 3.0 percent of

GNP rise in the deficit between the 1970s and 1984, only 0.1 percent was due
                                                 Table   1

                                Government Deficits and Private
                                                                Saving
                                         as Percentage of GNP




                    Struc-    Government
                    tural     Spending on                                  Net       Net Non-   Net
          Budget    Budget    Goods and   Tax        Transfer   Personal   Private   federal
          Deficit   Deficit   Services                                                          National
Years                                     Receipts   Payments   Saving     Saving
           (1)       (2)        (3)                                                  Saving     Saving
                                           (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)       (8)        (9)

1950—54   -0.1       1.1        12.4      18.5           2.9     6.8        7.0       6.9        7.0
1955—59   —0.1       0.3       11.3       18.2        3.7        6.8        7.3       7.0        7.1
1960-64   0.3        0.2       10.8       18.7        4.5        6.0        7.2       7.2        5.9
1965—69   0.3        2.0       10.6       19.3        4.9        7.1        8.4       8.5        8.1
1970-74   1.2        1.8        8.5       19.3        6.9        7.9        7.4       8.0        6.8
1975-79   2.4        1.8        7.4       19.6        8.9        6.7        7.0       8.1        5.7
1980-84   3.9        2.4        6.0       20.1        9.8        6.0        6.0       7.3        3.4
1980      2.3        1.8        7.5       20.6        9.4        6.0
1981      2.2        1.3                                                    5.4       6.6        4.2
                                7.7       21.1        9.5
1982                                                             6.7        6.1       7.3
          4.8        2.2        8.4                                                              5.2
                                          20.1       10.3        6.2       5.4        6.5
1983      5.4        2.9        8.2                                                             1.6
                                          19.4       10.2        5.0       5.9        7.2
1984      4.8        4.0        8.1                                                             1.8
                                          19.2        9.4        6.1       7.4       8.9        4.1
                                      —7—


to the rise in government spending on goods and services and 0.3 percent was

due to the fall in tax receipts. Of the remaining 2.6 percent of GNP deficit

 increase, 1.5 percent of GNP was the rise in transfer payments (from 7.9

percent in the 1970s to 9.4 percent in 1984, shown in column 5) and 1.1 percent

was the increase in net interest paid by the federal government.

     Since the rise in spending on goods and services was such a small part of

the increased deficit, the equivalence theorem implies that nearly all of the

rise in the deficit should have been matched by an increase in private saving.

The data in columns 6 through 8 of Table 1 show that no such increase in

private saving occurred. On the contrary, net saving by any measure was lower

during the first half of the 1980s than it had been in the previous three

decades. Personal saving (column 5) averaged 6.0 percent of disposable

personal income during the period 1980-84, lower than in any of the successive

five year periods since 1950. The broader measure of net private saving as a

percentage of GNP (column 7) also averaged 6.0 percent, an even bigger decline

relative to past years. The even broader measure that combines private saving

and the surpluses of state and local governments (column 8) shows a decline

from the past.

     The data in Table 1 lend no support to the equivalence hypothesis or to

the proposition that the increased deficit did not raise interests rates

because it induced an equal rise in private saving. Of course, since other

influences on saving were also changing during this period, the evidence

cannot definitively reject the equivalence hypothesis. For example, the sharp

rise in the stock market might have been expected to reduce saving while the

higher real rate of -interest, lower personal tax rates, more rapid
                                          -8-


   depreciation, and the universal
                                     availability of individual retirement accounts
  might have expected to raise
                               the saving rate.7 But despite the possible
  ambiguity about the correctness of
                                     the equivalence hypothesis, there is no
  doubt that during the
                          years 1980 to 1984 the sharp rise
                                                               in the budget deficit
  was not offset by a
                      Corresponding rise in private saving and, as a result, the
  net national saving rate (column 9) fell
                                           substantially

  1.2 The Inflow of Foreign Capital

       A decline in the U.S.
                               national saving rate would not increase the U.S.
  real rate of interest if
                             there is perfect capital
                                                        mobility in the world and
 the U.S. savings shortfall is small relative to
                                                    world saving and to the stock
 of capital that is mobile in the short-term. Under
                                                         these conditions capital
 would flow into the United
                               States to maintain the same rate of interest here
 and abroad. However, if U.S. assets are not a
                                                  perfect Substitute for foreign
 assets, an actual rise in the U.S.
                                      real interest rate relative to the interest
 rate abroad (or a fall in the relative risk of investing in
                                                             the United States)
 will be necessary to induce a capital inflow.8

      The U.S. experience since
                                  1980, shown in Table 2 with
                                                                budgetary data
for the entire floating
                          rate period that began in 1974, ind1ates that there
 is Substantial short—term
                            capital mobility but that U.S. and foreign assets
 are not perfect substitutes.
                                 Although foreign capital has come to the United
States, the net capital inflow
                                  (column 2) has not been enough to offset the
fall in the net national
                          saving rate (column 1). The net
                                                             national saving rate
declined from 5.8 percent of
                               GNP in 1974-79 to 3.4 percent of GNP in 1980-84,
while the net capital inflow
                               rose from essentially zero ifl 1974-79 to
                                          Table 2

                  National Saving, International Capital Flows
                               and Interest Rates



          Net          Net                           Real Interest       Real Interest
       National      Capital      Net               Rate on 10—Year    Rate on Long—Term
        Saving       Inflow    Investment           Government Bonds     German Bonds
Year    (1)           (2)           (3)                  (4)                 (5)



                Percentage of GNP

1974     6.5         -0.2            6.5                  0.1                 4.9

1975     3.8         —1.2            3.0                 —1.7                 2.4

1976     4.8         -0.3            4.8                  1.8                 1.7

1977     5.9          0.7            6.7                  1.4                 0.6

1978     7.0          0.7            7.6                  2.0                 0.4

1979     6.8          0.1            6.9                  2.4                 2.5

1980     4.2         -0.2            4.1                  3.9                 3.7

1981     5.2         —0.2            5.2                  5.9                 5.9

1982     1.6          0.2            1.8                  6.0                 4.9

1983     1.8          1.0            2.9                  5.5                 3.8

1984     4.].         2.6            6.6                  6.9                 3.9
                                           —9-


   0.7 percent of GNP in
                            1980—84; the increased capital
                                                               inflow offset one third
   of the saving decline.
                              As a result, net investment as a share of GNP
   (column 3) has declined,
                           despite the tax changes in the 1981 tax legislation
  and the fall of inflation,
                             both of which significantly
                                                         raised the after-tax
  return on investment.

       The capital inflow
                             was achieved only with the help of a substantial rise
  in the real long-term
                           rate of interest in   the   United States (column 4),9
  both relative to its own
                          past values and relative to the real rate of interest
  abroad. Column 5 presents the real interest rate
                                                   on German bonds as
  representative of the real yield
                                     available on foreign assets.10      By the method
 used here, the real long-term
                                  interest rate in the United States rose from
 1.0 percent in the 1974-79
                               period to 5.5 in the
                                                        years 1980—84, an increase of
 4.6 percentage points.     During the same period, the real rate in Germany rose

 only 1.7 Percentage points, from 2.7 Percent to 4.4
                                                       percent. The flow of
capital to the United thus
                             reflects not only a rise in the U.S. real return
but also an increased
                       return relative to the yield
                                                     on foreign securities.
      The flow of capital to the
                                  United States was also
                                                          encouraged during this
period by a number of other influences. The
                                               disinflationary shift in monetary
policy and the subsequent
                           success in bringing inflation down reduced the
perceived exchange rate risk of investing in dollar bonds. The
                                                                 problems in
Latin America caused
                     substantial capital flight to the United States, as well
as a reluctance by American
                            banks to continue net
                                                  lending in Lat-in America
after 1982. The slowdown
                            of economic activity and
                                                         domestic investment in
Japan increased the flow of
                               Japanese capital to the United States. And the
decline of the real price of
                               oil brought an end to the OPEC nation's surplus
                                        -10-


and its investment abroad. Although it is difficult to assess the relative

importance of each of these, my belief is that on balance these additional

factors increased the net flow of capital to the United States.

     What is clear, however, is that the flow of foreign capital to the U.S.

was not sufficient to maintain the previous net investment share of GNP even

though real and relative U.S. interest rates rose during the period. More

generally, the analysis of the present section indicates that neither the

international mobility of capital, nor the response of personal saving to

budget deficits, nor the properties of the LM and IS schedules suggest that

the budget deficit could rise without an increase in the rate of interest.

The remainder of this paper will attempt to assess how much of the observed

rise in the real interest rate since 1980 has been due to the current and

projected budget deficits and how much of that rise has been due to tax

changes and other factors.



2.   The Basic Interest Rate Equation


     At least since the work of Patinkin (1965) and Tobin (1969), economists

have recognized that the full set of interest rates and equity yields are

determined simultaneously with the quantities of all private financial assets.

In a simple static framework, the demand for each type of financial asset and

the supply of each type of private financial asset is a function of all

interest rates and equity yields, as well as of the level of income (as a

measure of the level of economic activity and a proxy for private wealth).11

This model can then be solved for the reduced form set of equations in which
                                           —11—


 each interest rate and the
                                 quantity of each type of private security is a
 function of the two exogenously determined
                                                   asset levels (money and government
 bonds), the level of real income, and the price level.

         In particular, the simplest Static equation for the interest rate on

 government bonds (i) is:



 (2.1)       i =   F[   !,   ,
 where M is the stock of money or the
                                      monetary base, B is the stock of
 government debt, Y is the level of nominal income,
                                                           and p measures the price
 level. Conventional analysis shows that i is a decreasing function of
                                                                       M/p and
 an increasing function of B/p and Y/p. Since we are now looking at a

static equilibrium, there is no inflation and therefore no distinction between

real and nominal interest rates.
                                      Although the price level is endogenous in
the longer term, since asset yields
                                        adjust more rapidly than the prices of
goods, we can treat the price level as predetermined in this short—run

equilibrium, thereby allowing the government to alter M/p and B/p temporarily

by changing M and B.'2

     This static analysis is inadequate because financial markets are forward

looking. Anything that is currently expected to affect the future supply and

demand for financial assets, and therefore
                                                  future interest rates, will affect
current interest rates as well. The equilibrium condition in financial

markets is that, except for the effects of risk aversion, the expected total

yield (including both the current yield and the anticipated real appreciation

in value) must be the same for all assets. The current interest rate on
                                        —12—


long-term bonds must therefore change to maintain this equilibrium whenever

future changes in asset supply and demand are expected to change future

interest rates. Similarly, an increase in the expected rate of inflation

induces a rise in the long-term interest rate because the inflation raises the

nominal return on physical capital.

        The reduced form equation that reflects these forward looking

considerations includes not only the current values of M, B, Y, and p but also

the expected future values:


                         M      e B    e V     e
(2.2)        i, =   F[   —s-,     —,               ir]

where the variable x refers to the future values of x anticipated at time t

and e is the expected rate of inflation.

        In principle, these expectations relate not to a single future date but

to all future values. In practice, of course, financial investors do not have

such disaggregated expectations of future values but use at most a few summary

measures of future conditions. The current section discusses the role of

current and expect•i government debt and the way that the concept of expected

future debt is made operationl. The operation equivalents of expected

inflation and the expected monetary growth are discussed in Section 5.


2.1 Anticipated Future Deficits

    Anticipated future budget deficits are the link between the current

government debt and its future value. If Dt is the deficit during year t and

Bt is the stock of debt at the end of period t, it follows by definition that
                                               —13—


                +
  Bt =   Bt_i       D.   An increase in   the expected future deficits implies
                                                                                 a larger
  future debt. This higher future value for the government debt
                                                                implies a
  higher value of the future interest
                                      rate. A higher expected future interest
  rate raises the current value of
                                           the long-term rate because failure to do so
  would leave current bondholders
                                          with an anticipated capital loss and a lower
  total expected return than
                                  they could get by temporarily holding money or
  short—term securities.

         More concretely, an anticipated
                                              future budget deficit means a smaller
 amount of funds at that future date
                                             to finance investment in plant and
 equipment. Restricting that investment will require a higher real
                                                                   rate of
 interest. Similarly, the anticipated budget deficit means that
                                                                 individuals
 will have to be offered a
                           higher yield in the future to induce them to hold
 the larger amount of government debt in their portfolios.
                                                                    Both of these
 effects raise the expected future
                                           interest rate and therefore, in order to
 satisfy the intertemporal arbitrage
                                            condition, they raise the current
 long-term rate as well.

      The longer that the rise in the
                                             budget deficit is expected to last, the
greater will be the resulting rise in the
                                          interest rate. A transitory budget
deficit of    for one period can be balanced
                                             by postponing current investment
until the deficit shrinks and then
                                   substituting a fraction of the postponed
investment over a period of
                            years for a small portion of the investment that
would otherwise have occurred in that year. In this
                                                     way, a one year deficit
is equivalent in its impact
                                 on private investment to a much smaller
                                                                           multi-year
deficit. The interest rate increase
                                            required to postpone a single year's
private investment in this way and to reduce the original investment of
                                     -14-


subsequent years to permit most of the postponed investment to occur will be

much smaller than the interest rate increase that would be required to induce

firms to abandon permanently a flow of investment equal to Dt per year for

several years.

     It is clear from this discussion that it -is wrong to relate the rate of

interest to the concurrent budget deficit without taking into account the

anticipated future deficits. It is significant that almost none of the past

empirical analyses of the effect of deficits on interest rates makes any

attempt to include a measure of expected future deficits.13 Similarly, it is

inappropriate to relate the interest rate to the value of the government debt

without taking into account the anticipated future budget deficits.14


2.2 Budget Deficits Versus the Stock of Debt

     Budget deficits are, however, more than a link between current debt and

future debt. Indeed, there are three reasons for expecting interest rates to

be more sensitive to annual budget deficits than the link between deficits and

debt would imply. The first of these reasons, stressed by Blarichard (1985),

is that budget deficits raise aggregate demand and, through the resulting

increase in the demand for money, raise interest rates. Anticipated future

budget deficits therefore imply future increases in aggregate demand and

interest rates which in turn raise the current long—term real rate of interest.

     The second link between budget deficits and interest rates is through

anticipated inflation and inflation uncertainty. Financial investors may fear

that a sustained increase in the budget deficit would, by raising real

interest rates, cause pressures on the Federal Reserve to ease money with the
                                        —15—


  aim of reducing interest rates.   If the Federal Reserve succumbed to those

 pressures, the result would be a rise -in inflation and in nominal interest

 rates. Financial investors may reduce their demand for long—term bonds in the

 face of an enlarged budget deficit
                                    because they actually anticipate a higher
 rate of inflation or because the increased
                                            probability of such an inflationary
 policy makes long-term fixed interest securities a riskier asset. In

 contrast, the level of the national debt does
                                                  not create such concerns about a
 shift in monetary policy because the Federal Reserve has already demonstrated

 a willingness to accept the resulting level of interest rates.
                                                                    it is the
 uncertainty about the future consequences of sustained
                                                           future high budget
 deficits that causes the deficit to have
                                            an effect that goes beyond the effect
of the enlarged debt per Se.

     The final distinction between the effect of a higher level of national

debt and a higher level of the annual deficit reflects the adjustment costs



capital stock is optimal when the marginal
                                               product of capital is equal to the
real rate of interest, the optimal rate of interest at any time reflects also

the cost of adjusting the capital stock
                                          (Hayashi, 1982; Abt-' 1980; Summers,
1981). For any given size of the capital stock and therefore the associated

marginal product of capital (f'), the rate of investment will depend on the

real interest rate (r) and on the cost of increasing the rate of investment,

c(I) where c(I) is the cost of installing investment
                                                        at rate I per period and
c(I) is therefore the cost of installing one extra unit of capital in the

period. In the short run, a rise in the rate of investment increases the cost

of investing: c"(I) > 0.   If
                                                 -16-


good is 1, the cost of increasing the capital stock by one unit is 1 +              c(I).
The optimal rate of investment at time t therefore satisfies


(2.3)        f'(Kt) =    r   [1 +
                                    c'(I)].
In words, the marginal product of capital must be equal not to the interest

rate but to the product of the interest rate and the cost of increasing the

capital stock by one unit.

        Consider now the effect of a temporary budget deficit that reduces the

investable funds at time t. How does r have to vary to maintain the

equilibrium condition of 2.3 when It is reduced? Totally differentiating 2.3

yields15


(2.4)       f"dkt =     (1+c')dr    +
                                        rc"dI.
Since the reduced investment in period t causes an equal reduction in the

canital stock, dkt =         dlt.   Solving 2.4 and using 1+c' =   f'/r   (from (2.3)

yields


(2.5)       1 dr      f"
                                    <0.



The first term on the right hand side reflects the fact that the increased

f;cit reduces the capital stock and therefore raises the marginal product of

cp-tal. The second term reflects the fact that a lower rate of investment

reduces the cost of investing. Since the lower cost of investing would raise

the desired rate of investment above the level that can be financed, the lower

cost of investment must be balanced by a higher rate of interest.
                                            —17—


      Note that only the first of these two effects, the change in the
                                                                       marginal
 product of capital, is associated with
                                        a change in the size of the national
 debt caused by a p budget deficit.           This effect is likely to be relatively
 small. For example, with a
                                   Cobb—Douglas technology, equation 2.5 implies that
 dr/r =   -(1-a)(dk/k)   where a is the capital share coefficient
                                                                    and dk/k is the
 proportional reduction in the capital stock
                                                   caused by the change in the
 national debt. Even a relatively
                                         large change in the capital has only a
 modest effect on the equilibrium rate
                                            of interest. For example, with
 dk/k = —0.1 and a =     0.3,   the change in the equilibrium interest rate is
 dr =   0.07r   or about 0.75 percentage points.

        In contrast, a change in the rate of investment also changes the

concurrent interest rate through the second
                                                   channel by changing the cost of
 installing capital. This effect may be powerful since the very limited

evidence on the costs of adjustment
                                          suggest that they are quite significant.16
Of course, any change in the long-term interest rate must be consistent with

financial investors' expectations about future interest rates. A
                                                                 very
transitory increase in the budget deficit would
                                                      therefore raise only the
short—term interest rate significantly,
                                              thereby inducing business investors to
postpone investment. But a rise in the budget deficit
                                                             that is expected to be
sustained for a number of years could
                                           substantially raise interest rates on
bonds with that duration. A substantial increase in medium-term interest

rates would, of course, also raise the interest rate on longer—term securities.

     The evidence that is presented is Section
                                                     5 of this paper supports the
view that the level of interest rates is more sensitive to the budget deficit

than to the stock of national debt. No
                                             attempt -is made in the current
                                         -18-


analysis to assess the relative importance of the aggregate demand, inflation

uncertainty, and adjustment cost reasons for that difference. The empirical

analysis also confirms that interest rates are more sensitive to deficits that

are expected to be sustained for a number of years than to very short-term

fluctuations in the budget deficit.

     Estimating the model described in this section requires time series data

on the expected future values of budget deficits, of inflation and of the

other variables identified in equation 2.2. Before discussing the

implementation of these expectations, I turn in the next section to the role

of taxes in determining the rate of interest.



3.   Tax Rules and Inflation


     Taxes affect interest rates in two principal ways.     The corporate tax

rate and the tax depreciation rules influence the demand for funds by altering

the interest rate that firms can afford to pay for funds to finance any given

investment. The personal tax rate influences the supply of funds by putting a

wedge between the gross interest rate that firms pay and the net return that

households receive.

     Moreover, because tax rules are written -in terms of nominal interest

rates and depreciation instead of real interest rates and depreciation,

changes in the rate of inflation can have very significant effects on the

equilibrium real interest rate. The most obvious effect is that borrowers

deduct their nominal interest costs. If this were the only effect of

inflation, any change -in   the expected rate of inflation would cause nearly
                                         —19—


 twice as big a change in the nominal interest
                                                  rate. For example, if in the
 absence of inflation firms paid a 5 percent rate of interest and had a

 46 percent corporate income tax, the real net cost of those funds would be

 2.7 percent. If inflation rose to 5 percent, the pretax rate of interest

 would have to rise from 5 percent to
                                        14.3 percent to Continue to leave firms
 with a real after-tax cost of funds of 2.7 percent.

      One reason that such sensitivity of interest
                                                     rates to inflation is not
 seen in practice is that inflation also reduces the real value of depreciation

 allowances, thereby making projects less prof itable and reducing the real rate

 of interest that firms can afford to pay to finance those projects. Feldstein

 and Summers (1978) showed that under the tax rules prevailing in the late

 1970s these two effects were of
                                   approximately equal magnitude for projects

that were financed completely by debt, causing the interest rate to rise by

the increase in the rate of inflation.
                                           With partial debt finance, the

analysis is more complex and implies that an increase in inflation causes a

greater than equal rise in the nominal interest
                                                   rate (see Feldstein, Green and
Sheshinski, 1978).

     Since individual purchasers of corporate bonds must pay tax on their

nominal interest income, a constant real pre—tax interest rate means a lower

after—tax real rate of interest as inflation rises. For example, an

individual with a 30 percent marginal tax rate has a real after—tax interest

rate of 3.5 percent when there is no inflation and a 5 percent rate f

interest. If inflation rises to 5 percent and the interest rate to

10 percent, that individual's real pre—tax rate of return remains constant but

the after-tax rate falls to 2.0 percent.
                                      —20-


     Since 1981, depreciation rules have become more generous, and both

inflation and personal tax rates have declined. The more generous

depreciation rules would in themselves tend to raise the real interest rate

that corporations can pay, a point that I developed in Feldstein (1980). The

fall in the rate of inflation also increased the value of depreciation

allowances and therefore the real return that firms can afford to pay. Both

of these changes would therefore have led to higher interest rates in recent

years. At the same time, however, the fall in personal tax rates and the

decline -in inflation increased the real after—tax return that capital

providers received at any given pre—tax real cost of funds to the borrowers.

This increased the supply of debt capital and this in itself would have led to

lower real interest rates since 1981. The net effect of these two

countervailing pressures depends on the relative magnitude of the two effects

and on the relative elasticities of saving and investment. This section

discusses how these effects can be measured and the econometric evidence

section shows the size of the net impact on actual market interest rates.


3.1 The Maximum Potential Interest Rate

     The effect of tax rules and inflation on the corporate demand for funds

can be summarized by the maximum potential interest rate (MPIR), a concept

that -is a natural generalization of the familiar internal rate of return

(IRR).   In an economy without taxes, the IRR measures the rate of interest

that a firm could pay to finance a particular investment that is financed

solely by debt. When a corporate income tax system is introduced, the MPIR100

measures the rate of interest that the firm can pay to finance a particular
                                                      —21—


  investment if the investment is 100 percent debt financed.

          More explicitly, consider a project that:                  (1) has pre-tax real net
 output of x per dollar of plant and equipment
                                                                    initially invested and nominal
 pre-tax net receipts of
                                ptxt; (2) is permitted depreciation allowances for tax
 purposes of at; (3) and pays tax on nominal output less interest expenses and

 depreciation allowances at rate r. The price level of the firm's net output

 is assumed to move in proportion to the
                                                        general price level of the economy.
 The firm investing in this project needs initial cash per dollar of the

 project equal to one dollar minus the investment
                                                                      tax credit. Thereafter, the
 loan balance (Lt) is reduced by the project's after-tax income but grows by an

 annual amount equal to the product of the net—of—tax rate of interest and the

 previous year's loan liability.

         Thus, the MPIR100 =        i*   satisfies the equation:


 (3.1)         It =
                       (1+i*)Lt_i        Ptxt + T(ptxt_at_i*Lt_i)

                 = [1    +                   -                 -
                                                 (l-T)ptxt         Ta

subject to the condition that L0 =               1   minus the investment tax credit per
dollar of investment and that the loan is repaid when the
                                                          project is scrapped
(LT =    0).   In the absence of taxation (T =               0),   the solution of this d i fference
equation for i* is equiva lent to the traditional IRR formula.

        More generally, the project will not be financed exclusively by debt
                                                                             but
debt will be a proportion b of the total finance and equity the
                                                                                    remaining
fraction, i —     b.     In this case, the firm's net nominal cost of funds will
                                                                                 be
                                                             —22—


 (3.2)            n =   b(1-T)i       +       (1—b)(e+it)

 where e is the real cost of equity capital (i.e., the
                                                                        earnings price ratio)
 and ir is the expected rate of inflation. When there is partial debt finance,

 equation (3.1) defines the maximum potential net return (MPNR); that is,

 letting n* denote the MPNR and substituting n* for (1—r)i* in
                                                                               equation (3.1)
 yields the maximum nominal cost of funds (with interest net of the corporate

 tax) that the firm can afford to pay.

        For any given MPNR, the maximum potential interest rate depends on the

 relation between the rate of interest and the return on equity. The behavior

of portfolio investors maintains a rough relation between the expected real

net-of-tax rate of interest and the corresponding expected real net return on

equity. The real net rate of interest is


(3.3)             i = (1—O)i      —       it

where    e   is   a weighted average of the marginal tax rates paid by individuals

and institutional holders of corporate securities. The corresponding real net

return on equity is


(3.4)         e =       (1—O)d.e          +                  —
                                               (lOg)(1_d)e       egit

where d is the fraction of real earnings paid as dividends and 0g is the

effective tax rate on capital gains. The form of equation (3.4) assumes

that retained earnings cause a corresponding amount of real accrued capital

gain. In addition, shareholders pay capital gains tax on the nominal

appreciation caused by inflation.
                                              —23-


          If the net yield on equity is
                                           equal to the net yield on debt plus a risk
  premium (5),


  (3.5)       e = in   +   5,

 the definitions of
                          i and e in (3.3) and (3.4) provide a relation between the
 pre—tax equity and debt returns, e and i:


 (3.6)        [(1—e)d +              = (1—e)i —              + S
                           (1Og)]e                (1_Og)fl

 Combining this equation with the definition of
                                                          the firm's net cost of funds in
 equation (3.2) provides two equations that
                                                     together determine the maximum
 potential interest rate (MPIR) and the
                                              corresponding maximum potential equity
 return as a function of the MPNR
                                        (i.e., the value of n* that is the Solutior
 of equation (3.1)) and of the
                                     tax rates, expected inflation and corporate
finance parameters (b and d).

      The MPIR values have been derived
                                              on the assumption that the basic
investment project is a "sandwich" of
                                             equipment and structures that lasts for
34 years and replicates the
                                 average mixture of equipment and structures in the
capital stock of the non—financial
                                          corporate sector. More specifically, the
sandwich Consists of an initial investment
                                                     of 33 dollars of structures and
33 dollars of equipment. The
                                     output associated with the structures is assumed
to decay at a rate of 3 percent a year; at the end of 34 years, the
                                                                             remaining
structure is scrapped without value. The output associated with the equipment

decays more rapidly, at 13 percent per year, and the equipment is scrapped

without value at the end of 17
                                     years. At year 17, a new equipment investment
is made with real value (in the
                                      prices of year 1) of 33 dollars; this then
                                     -24-


decays in the same way as the initial equipment investment and is scrapped at

the same time as the structure.

     The first-year net output values of the structure and of the equipment

are set to satisfy two conditions. First, the overall pretax rate of return

on the investment sandwich is 10.3 percent.17 Second, the after-tax rates of

return on the two types of investments are equal under the tax rules

prevailing in a base period (chosen to be 1960). These conditions and the

decay schedules described in the previous paragraph uniquely determine the

x. values of equation (3.1).

     The expected inflation rates for equations (3.2) through (3.6) and the

expected price levels for equation (3.1) are obtained from Box-Jenkins'

forecasts of consumer price index inflation using an AR1 specification. For

each date, the forecast uses only data available at that time. The resulting

"rolling" ARI forecasts of inflation are then summarized by a single measure

of expected inflation by calculating a present value of future inflation

rates. A summary of these expected inflation rates -is   presented in column 2
of Table 3; individual annual values are presented in Appendix Table A-i. For

comparison, the average values of the 5-year inflation rates expected by

financial market participants are shown in column 3•18 The rolling AR1

inflation forecasts are quite close to the financial market participants'

expectations during the recent years for which comparisons are possible.

     The appropriate value of the debt share of investment (the parameter b

in the above equations) is ambiguous. Although it could be argued that any

marginal investment might be financed solely by debt, the observation that

firms have maintained a relative constant ratio of debt to capital suggests
                                    Table 3

                         Inflation Rates and Tax Rules


            Interest
            Rate on                                               Interest
            5—Year                                                Rate for
                        ARIMA      Inflation   Maximum Potential
          Government                                              Constant
                       Inflation   Forecast      Interest Rates
            Bonds                                                 After-tax
                       Forecast     Survey     MPIR33
Years                                                    MPIR100 Real Return
             (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)     (5)        (6)


1960—64     3.9         2.0          n.a.        3.5     15.1       3.5
1965—69     5.4         2.3          n.a.        4.5     15.9       3.9
1970—74     6.8         4.8          n.a.        7.4     19.0       7.4
1975—79     8.0         7.0          n.a.       11.8     24.4      10.5
1980—84    12.3         6.7          7.4        13.5     25.6      10.9
1980       11.5         7.6          9.4        13.6     25.1      11.4
1981       14.2         8.0          8.2        16.3     28.2      14.0
1982       13.0         7.0          6.8        14.7     26.8      12.3
1983       10.8         5.6          6.4        12.7     24.3       8.6
1984       12.2         5.5          6.2       10.4      23.8       8.4
                                         —25—


that firms' borrowing levels are determined by their equity base in a way that

makes the true effective marginal debt-capital ratio similar to the average

ratio. The analysis that follows experiments with two different MPIR values

corresponding to two possible marginal debt shares: MPIR100 corresponds to

pure debt finance, b = 1; MPIR33 corresponds to b =     .33.
       Finally, the MPIR values assume that dividends are 44 percent of real

equity earnings and that the equity risk premium (6) is 6 percentage points.

During the period 1960 to 1984, the dividend payout ratio averaged 0.xx.

Although the ratio varied cyclically during this period, successive five year

averages show no trend. Alternative calculations were done with 6 = 0.04 and

6 =   0.08;   the results are not sensitive to the choice of risk premium.

       Columns 4 and 5 of Table 3 present the MPIR values corresponding to the

two different assumptions about the marginal debt to capital ratio. Since the

equity yield is required to be higher than the yield on debt, a higher debt

share corresponds to a higher and more volatile MPIR value.


3.2 The Net Return to Portfolio Investors

      The changing values of the MPIR that firms can afford to pay represent

shifts in the demand for funds and therefore only half of the story of the

effect of inflation and tax rules on the rate of interest. The other half of

the story is the shifts in the supply of funds that result from changes in the

difference between the pre—tax interest rate that firms pay and the net-of-tax

interest rate that savers receive.19

      To measure the shifts in supply, it is useful to calculate the changes in

the pre-tax rate of interest that would be required to maintain a constant
                                         -26—


  real net—of—tax return to the holders
                                          of corporate debt. This "fixed net
  return" method is analogous to the fixed pre—tax return used to calibrate the

 MPIR calculations. Column 6 of Table 3 shows the pre—tax interest
                                                                   rate that
 corresponds to an after-tax real rate of 0.4
                                                 percent, the average rate during
 the period 1960—84.

      Note that during the second half of the 1970s, when inflation was
                                                                        high
 and the maximum personal tax rate
                                   was 70 percent, a pre—tax interest rate of
 10.5 percent was required to yield the
                                          average 0.4 percent after—tax real
 return. By comparison, the combination of reduced inflation and lower
                                                                       tax
 rates meant that the same net real
                                      return could be achieved in 1984 with a
 pre-tax interest rate of only 8.4
                                     percent. A comparison with the expected
 inflation rates of column 2 shows that
                                          this represents a fall in the required
 real pre—tax interest rate as well as in the nominal pre—tax interest
                                                                         rate;
the implied real pre—tax required rate of interest fell from 3.5
                                                                 percent in
1975-79 to 2.9 percent in 1984.


3.3 Changes in the Equilibrium Interest Rate

     Figure 1 illustrates the shift in the demand and supply of funds between

the 1970s and the first half of the
                                       1980s. The interest rate on the vertical
axis is the gross pre-tax interest
                                      rate paid by corporate borrowers minus the
expected rate of return. The increase in the
                                                MPIR implies that the demand
schedule for debt capital shifted
                                     up. A real MPIR33 (i.e., the MPIR33 of
column 4 minus the expected rate of
                                      inflation of column 2) schedule drawn with
an arbitrary slope is shifted up by the observed 3.1 percentage point rise.

The rise in the real interest rate
                                     required to maintain a fixed 0.4 percent
           Figure 1




Real
Interest
Rate
                                  SI


                                       S




                          It
                                           a

                      Saving, Investment
                                          —27—


  net real return is shown as an
                                   upward shift by 1.1 percentage points in an SS
  supply curve. The relative importance of the
                                                    shifting supply and demand
 curves Obviously depends on the slopes of the
                                                    two curves. Although they are
 drawn here in a way that attributes
                                       most of the rise to the shift of the

 investment demand schedule, that is simply a result of the slopes that have

 been assumed.

        To assess the actual effect of the shifts in the demand and supply of

 funds requires an explicit model in which the MPIR is a function of the
                                                                         volume
 of investment and the supply of funds is a function of the real net rate of

 interest. Such a model is developed in the remainder of this section. The

 next section extends this analysis to include the effects of government debt

 and deficits and other factors that affect the rate of interest.

        The MPIR derived in section 3.1 shows
                                                 how changes in tax rules and
 inflation alter the interest rate that
                                          firms can pay to finance a hypothetical
project with a fixed real rate of return. An
                                                  increase in the overall volume of
investment reduces the pretax return
                                       on the marginal project. If we
approximate this relation between the actual MPIR at time t(i)and the MPIR

at the initial pretax rate of return (i) as a linear function of the

difference between the actual rate of investment
                                                           and the initial rate of
investment at which the fixed rate of return is calculated
                                                                     we have:20

(3.7)          =
                       a1(I_I0)

By inverting this relationship, the level of investment can be written as a

function of the associated MPIR:
                                                          —28--




(3 8)        I       =   I0   —   1 (j*_i*
                 t                a1 t Ot


        The supply of funds schedule can be similarly approximated as a linear

relation between the actual supply of funds (St), the initial supply of funds

(S0), and the difference between the actual real net return ((1-O)i —                              71e)   and

the initial real net return (R0):

                                               —
(3.9)        St = So +            a2[(l_G)i            7T - R0]


        By setting 1 = S. and equating the maximum potential interest rate that

firms pay to the pre-tax market return that savers receive (i.e., setting
                                                                                                          i
in (3.8) equal to i. in equation (3.9)), we obtain an equation for the market

interest rate:

                         I-S+aR                    a                     a
(3.10)
                         a2(1_ø)+a3
                                        +
                                            a2(1_O)+a3        7   +
                                                                      a2(1_e)+a3    t
where, for notational convenience, I substitute a3 for 1/a1.

     This expression shows how corporate tax rules, inflation and the personal

tax rate all influence the equilibrium market rate of interest. Consider first

the effect of a change in depreciation provisions or other corporate tax

rules.    In the extreme case in which the supply of funds is fixed (a2 =                            0),
a change in tax rules alters the market interest rate by the same amount as it

changes the MPIR on the standard project (di/di =                            1).   More generally, with

the supply of funds an increasing function of the net return (a2 >                           0),   the

market interest rate rises by less than the increase in the MPIR on the

standard project.21
                                                  —29—


          An increase in the rate of expected
                                                         inflation affects the market interest
 rate in two ways. There is the effect that
                                                           works through the supply of funds,
 represented by the second term in (3.10). In addition, a rise in inflation

 changes the MPIR in a way that reflects both the
                                                                 erosion of the real value of
 depreciation and the deductibility of nominal
                                                              interest payments in the
 calculation of tax liabilities. As
                                                 already noted, the tax rules of the late
 1970s made these two effects
                                          approximately equal for 100 percent debt-financed
 projects (implying as an approximation that               difl/dir =   1) while with partial
 debt finance d/dlTe > 1.            Combining these two terms implies that



              dit       a2+a3(di*/d)
 (3.11)             =                     > 1
                                 +
                        a2(1_e       a3


A rise in the expected inflation rate thus raises the nominal interest rate
                                                                            by
more than one percentage point for each percentage point rise in expected

inflation in order to offset in part the fact
                                                            that the suppliers of funds must
pay tax on the increased inflation premium in the interest
                                                                             rate. The precise
magnitude of the nominal interest rate rise depends on the debt-equity mix,

the elasticities of supply and demand for funds, and the effective tax rates

paid by the suppliers of funds. An increase in the
                                                                   demand elasticity relative
to the supply elasticity (i.e., a greater value of a3/a2) is likely to reduce

the sensitivity of the interest rate relative to the expected rate of

inflation.

     Equatiori (3.10) could be estimated directly if the only factors affecting

the interest rate were inflation and tax
                                                    rules. To incorporate the effect of
                                     -30-


budget deficits and monetary policy as well requires a richer specification.

The next section develops that specification.



4.   A General Specification


     A complete specification of the behavior of the interest rate must

combine the portfolio and budget deficit effects discussed in Section 2 with

the tax and inflation effects of Section 3. The reduced form specification

developed in this section uses the MPIR variable to capture the effects of the

corporate tax rules (including depreciation rules and corporate tax rates) and

the interaction of corporate tax rules and inflation. The non-linear econometric

equation, which extends the specification of equation (3.10), also takes into

account the role played by the personal tax rate on portfolio income.

     Any reduced form specification that incorporates all of these effects

must inevitably simplify reality. Nevertheless, the equation presented below

does capture the four main determinants of the interest rate (government debt

and anticipated deficits; monetary policy; tax rules; and expected inflation).

It also uses the theory developed in Section 3 to impose a structure that

incorporates the complex tax rules and the tax-inflation interaction in an

appropriate way.22

     The analysis of Sections 2 and 3 imply that the supply of funds to the

bond market can be written as a function of the real net-of-tax interest rate,

the real stock of government debt (B/p), the expected future real budget

deficits (0/)e the real monetary base (M/p), the rate of change of the

monetary base, and the expected rate of inflation. Each of the asset variables
                                                    —31—


 will be expressed as a ratio to real GNP (as a measure of wealth and of
                                                                         the
 scale of real transactions):



 (4.1)
             St        S0 +                —
                                               ir   —
                                                        R0]
                                                               +
                                                                   2(Bt/ptvt)
                   +
                       3(D/pY)   +
                                     4(Mt/pYt)          +
                                                            5(A/M)     +
                                                                           6t
 Note that (D/pY) refers to future deficits expected at time t. The
                                                                       separate
 inflation variable enters because of the effect of expected inflation
                                                                                           on the
demand for money balances. Additional variables will be considered in the

empirical analysis of the next section.

        The nominal interest rate that
                                                borrowers are willing to pay depends on
the tax rules, financing conventions, and inflation expectations
                                                                 as

represented by the MPIR(1), on the volume of
                                                                   investment (through its effect
on the marginal product of capital), and
                                                            on the existing debt and expected
future budget deficits:



                                                                           e
(4.2)       i =          - iUt1o)      +
                                           12(Bt/ptYt)         +




    Solving       (4.2) for      and equating 1 to S, of (4.1) yields the reduced
form equation for the interest rate:
                                                         —32—




 43       i   =    I0+1R0-S0       +
                                                   _f1                1* +
                                                                      .
                                                                                       ___________       .( Bt t   )
                         —°)'.

                  ___________      D       e       ___________                         Mt
                                   p
                                                                                      Pt t



              —   ___________      A
                                               +
                                                         16               —i
                                                                                  e




With only 7 variables, it is clearly not possible to estimate all 8

parameters. In particular,                 and               cannot be estimated separately, only

their ratio. Dividing the numerator and denominator of each term of (4.3) by

   yields the equation:



              =
                     C
                         0
                              +
                                       C
                                           1             .
                                                                  +
                                                                          C
                                                                              2
                                                                                            rBti,
                                                                                            I
                                                                                                          C
                                                                                                              3        De
(4.4)
                  ci+(l_Ot)       ci+(1_8t) It                        c1+1—6                {pJ
                                                                                                     +
                                                                                                         C1+1O    (py
                    C                          C              •                   C
              —
                                  +                                   +
                                                                                                ir
                                       1e+C1                              1_e:+c1


This is the basic specification that has been estimated with annual data for

the 25 years from 1960 through 1984. Before turning in Section 6 to the

estimates of this equation and of the several variants that have also been

estimated, -it is necessary to discuss the specific operational definitions of

the variables used to represent the terms in equation 4.4.
                                            —33—


  5.    Data Definitions and Sources


      The interest rate that is analyzed in the current paper is the
                                                                     yield on
 Treasury bonds with five years to
                                   maturity. The five year maturity was
 selected because that is the maximum
                                           period for which the government and
 private forecasters prepare forecasts of future budget deficits.
                                                                           Many of the
 equations have also been reestimated with
                                                   10—year interest rates and very
 similar results obtained. A
                                   summary of this variable appears in column i of
 Table 3; annual values are
                                 presented in Appendix Table A—i.
        The construction of the MPIR variable
                                                         has been described in
 Section 2. The basic regression has
                                           been estimated with three different
 assumptions about the marginal debt
                                         capital ratio (one—third; two—thirds; and
 100 percent) and three different
                                      assumptions about the debt—equity risk
differential (4 percent; 6 percent; and 8 percent). In addition, the

assumption that the pretax profitability of
                                                    investment of the standard project
remains constant at 10.3 percent has
                                          been replaced with the assumption that
the projected profitability varies annually with the observed Profitability of

capital. The MPIRVP (for MPIR with
                                        varying profitability) is based on annual
profitability calculated as the ratio of the
                                                    total pretax capital income to
the replacement value of the capital stock.23

       Government debt is the stock of
                                          publicly held government debt during
the calendar year, an
                         average of the beginning and end of year values.        This
series, which -is   derived   from Office of Management and
                                                              Budget (1985) is
presented in Appendix Table A-i.       In the regression equations the nominal debt
is divided by full-employment nominal GNP.
                                      —34-


     The anticipated future budget deficits variable is an average of the

projected deficit-to-GNP ratio for the five subsequent years including the

concurrent year. Although five—year deficit and GNP forecasts have been made

in recent years, comparable forecasts are not available for the earlier years

of the sample. The analys s here therefore assumes that, for the years for
                           •1




which it is available, the actual deficit is the best estimate of the deficit

that individuals had previously anticipated. For the years 1985 and beyond.

the projected deficit is measured by the July 1985 forecasts published by

Data Resources, Inc.24 For recent years, the five years projected deficits

are a combination of actual experience and DRI forecasts; e.g., the five years

forecast for 1982 combines the actual def icits for 1983 and 1984 with the DRI

forecasts for 1985, 1986 and 1987. The h istoric deficit data on a calendar

year basis is obtained from Office of Management and Budget (1985).

     Since the 5-year deficit forecast is only a proxy for long-term deficit

expectations, it is appropriate to eliminate the cyclical component of the

deficit and to focus on the structural component. The structural deficit is

calculated here as the deficit that would prevail if the economy were at the

inflation—threshho d level of unemployment.   I take this "natural rate" level

to have increased 1 inearly from 5.5 percent in 1960 to 6.5 percent in 1980 and

to have remained at 6.5 percent since that date. The cyclical deficit is

calculated from the difference between the actual unemployment rate and the

inflation threshold unemployment rate by using the rule of thumb that each

percentage point of cyclical unemployment reduces GNP by 2.2 percent and that

the cyclical deficit increases by 37 percent of the d if ference between actual

and cyclical ly—adusted "full employment" GNP.25 The calculation combi nes the
                                          —35—


  observed unemployment rates through 1984 with the DRI forecasts of

  unemployment through 1989.

       For each year in the five
                                   year projection period, the structural deficit
  is divided by the projected
                               measure of full—employment nominal GNP, i.e.,
  the nominal GNP at the inflation
                                    threshold level of unemployment.
                                                                      Anticipated
  GNP is assumed to be the actual
                                   GNP through 1984 and the DRI forecasts are
 used for the years after that. The correction to a
                                                      full-employment basis is
 made with the procedure described
                                     in the preceding paragraph. Column 4 of
 Table 4 summarizes the
                         projected structural_defic.jt_to_GNP ratios; individual
 annual values are presented in Appendix Table A-i.

      Separate estimates have also been made
                                                 using the actual deficit rather
 than the structural deficit. The
                                      results are quite similar although the
 explanatory power of the structural deficits
                                                  is greater. The five-year
projected values of the actual-clef
                                                  ratio are summarized in column 3
of Table 4.

     Finally, for comparison the regressions
                                                 substitute the current year
actual and structural deficit—GNp
                                    ratios for the 5-year projected future
deficit-GNp ratios. As expected, these
                                          series have a much smaller impact on
interest rates and much weaker
                                 explanatory power than the five year projected
deficits. The basic data are
                                presented in columns i and 2 of Table 4.

     The basic monetary variable is the monetary base divided
                                                              by nominal GNP.
In addition to this ratio, the
                               empirical analysis also includes the rate of
change of the monetary base.

     The expected inflation variable is the same "rolling" ARI forecast
                                                                        of
the GNP deflator used in
                         constructing the MPIR variable and presented in Table
                                      Table 4

                        Actual and Projected Budget Deficits
                                as Percentage of GNP


              Actual                Structural           Five Year Projection
              Deficit               Deficit             Actual      Structural
Years           (1)                   (2)                (3)           (4)


1960—64         0.3                   0.2                0.4           1.0

1965—69         0.3                   2.0                0.7           2.1

1970—74         1.2                   1.8                1.9           1.8

1975—79         2.4                   1.8                2.3           1.7

1980—84         3.9                  2.4                 4.4           3.0

1980            2.3                  1.8                3.9            2.3
1981            2.2                   1.3               4.4            2.8
1982            4.8                  2.2                4.9           3.2
1983            5.4                  2.9                4.6           3.4
1984            4.8                  4.0                4.2           3.3


Structural deficits are expressed as percentages of full-employment GNP.
                                        -36-


 Table 3. As a less—restrictive alternative, the
                                                    linear regressions presented
 in the next section also use a
                                  variety of polynomial distributed lag
 specifications.



 6.    The Empirical Estimates


       The parameter estimates presented in this section provide strong evidence

 that expected future budget deficits have a large and statistically

 significant effect on the interest rate on government bonds. The evidence

 also confirms a substantial negative effect
                                               of liquidity (the level of the
 monetary base relative to nominal GNP and the rate of change of the monetary

 base) and a positive effect of the expected rate of inflation. In contrast,

changes in the demand for funds that result from shifts
                                                           in corporate tax rules
or from the interact-ion of the tax system and inflation
                                                           do not appear to have
a significant effect on interest rates.

      These basic findings are quite robust to the specification of the

interest rate equation, to the measurement of expected inflation, and to the

inclusion of a dummy variable designed to absorb any special factors that

raised the level of interest rates in the first half of the 1980s.

      The analysis also shows the importance of focusing on the expected

deficits over several future years rather than
                                                 a single year's deficit. When
the basic variable that measures the average deficit over the next five years

is replaced with the ratio of the current deficit to GNP or the current

structural deficit to GNP, the coefficient becomes small and insignificant.

      Equation (6.1) is a typical example of the parameter estimates obtained

with the nonlinear specification of the type derived as equation (4.4) in

Section 4. For simplicity, the algebraic
                                                  —37-


                                          0.07                           0.54
                =                  -                               +
(6.1)
                    1—0—0.07
                          (0.06)
                                       le_ (0.06)
                                            0.07 MPIR336t
                                                                       1—e_
                                                                              0.07 DEFEXt
                                                                              (0.06)


                          0.029                      1.87                        0.38
                                                    (0.26)
                    +
                        i_::0i
                            (0.06)
                                       BONOSt -
                                                         (0.06)
                                                                  MBASEt -
                                                                              18.o7 MBGROt
                          0.24
                    +
                        i_°1°o7        INFEXt
                                                              1960—84            =   0.972, DWS = 1.52
                            (0.06)



variables of equation (4.4) are replaced with the following mnemonics DEFEX

is the average of the five year projected ratio of structural budget deficits

to GNP; BONDS is the ratio of the publicly held government debt to nominal

GNP; MBASE is the ratio of the monetary base to nominal GNP; MBGRO is the rate

of growth of the monetary base; INFEX -is the expected inflation variable

obtained from the rolling ARIMA procedure; and MP1R336 is the maximum

potential interest rate defined in Section 2 and calculated for equation 6.1

on the assumption that debt represents 33 percent of additional funds and that

the real yield difference between debt and equity is 6 percent.

        The effect of changes in corporate tax rules and in the interaction

between inflation and the corporate tax system is reflected in the MPIR

variable. The contraint implied by the derivation of equation (4.4) makes the

numerator of the coefficient of the MPIR variable the same as the parameter in

the denominator of each of the coefficients; this parameter was denoted c1.

The estimated value of c1 in this specification is -0.07 with a standard

error of 0.06; the parameter is therefore not significantly different from
                                         —38—


 zero and has the wrong sign. Evaluating the
                                                  coefficient of MP1R336 at the
 mean value of the relevant personal tax rate (9 =
                                                       0.3)   implies a value of
 —0.11 with an approximate standard
                                       error of 0.11. Thus the overall coefficient
 is also small (implying that
                                 a full percentage point shift in the demand for
 funds only moves the interest rate
                                      by 11 basis points), insignificant and of
 the wrong sign.

      The small size and the incorrect
                                         sign of the MPIR variable is a common
 finding of a variety of alternatives to the
                                                 specification of equation (6.1).
 It suggests that the underlying data do
                                           not indicate any effect on interest
 rates of changes in effective
                                 corporate tax rates. Although a tax effect may
well be present, it is apparently too small or too erratic to be measured
                                                                                   by
this model. Even the tax changes
                                     enacted in 1981-82 only implied a rise in
the investment—GNp ratio of less than
                                         one percentage point (Feldstein and Jun,
1986), substantially less than the concurrent shift in the national saving

rate implied by the rise of the budget deficit or even by the apparently

autonomous shift of personal saving. The tax effect might also be too complex

for corporations and financial markets
                                         to recognize immediately and may
therefore only have its impact on interest rates after a lag that is too long

to be measured by this model of
                                  concurrent annual observations. The market's
ability to perceive the effects of tax changes may also vary with the nature

of the change. These possibilities deserve
                                                further analysis but for now it
must be concluded that there is no evidence that the rapid rise in real

interest rates in the 1980s was caused
                                         by the changes in corporate tax rules
and in the interaction of inflation and the corporate tax structure.26

    The coefficient of the expected deficit variable has a numerator of 0.54
                                      —39-


 (with a standard error of 0.15) and a denominator with a mean value of 0.63.

This coefficient implies that an increase of one percentage point in the ratio

of the expected deficit to GNP raises the five-year bond rate by 0.86

percentage points. Between 1977-78 and 1983-84, the expected deficit—GNP

ratio rose from 1.6 percent to 3.4 percent, implying a 1.5 percent rise in the

interest rate. Since the interest rate on five year bonds rose from 7.6

percent to 11.5 percent during this same interval, equation (6.1) implies that

the rise in the projected deficit accounts for about 45 percent of the

observed interest rate increase. During the same interval, the implied real

interest rate (the difference between the five year bond rate and INFEX) rose

4.5 percentage points, implying that the rise in the projected deficit

accounts for 40 percent of the rise in the real interest rate. The

alternative specifications presented below generally imply a somewhat larger

effect, indicating that the rise in the deficit was responsible for about half

of the increase of interest rates in the 1980s.

     Before looking at those alternative specifications, I will comment

briefly on each of the other coefficients in equation (6.1). The coefficient

of BONDS implies that a rise in the ratio of publicly held government debt to

GNP has an additional positive effect on the level of interest rates. Each

percentage point increase in the ratio of debt to GNP raises the interest rate

by an estimated 4.6 basis points. Since the debt-GNP ratio rose from

25.6 percent in 1977—78 to 40.6 percent in 1983-84, this coefficient implies a

6.9 basis point rise -in the interest rate. The combined effect of the rise in

projected deficits and the rise in the government debt implies an interest

rate increase of 2.2 percentage points or about 55 percent of the observed
                                       -40-


 interest rate increase.

      The coefficient of the MBASE variable indicates
                                                        that a higher ratio of
 the monetary base to nominal GNP reduces the rate of interest, with each

 percentage point rise in the monetary base-GNP ratio
                                                        reducing the interest
 rate by nearly three percentage points.   However, the actual changes in MBASE
 during the 1980s have been rather small. MBASE was 5.8 percent in 1984, 6.0

 percent in 1980 and 6.3 percent in 1977-78. Equation
                                                         (6.1) therefore implies
 that the reduction in MBASE raised the interest rate by 50 basis points

 between 1980 and 1983-84 and by a full percentage point between 1977—78 and

 1983—84.

      The rate of increase of the monetary base (MBGRO) also has a negative

coefficient with a value that implies that each
                                                  one percentage point increase
-in the rate of growth of the monetary base reduces the concurrent interest

rate by 60 basis points. Although the rate of growth of the monetary base

declined temporarily in 1981 and 1982, it was essentially the same at the end

of the period as it had been in the late 1970s. The fluctuations in the fate

of growth of the monetary base can therefore account for some of the sharp

rise in interest rates in the early 1980s but not for the higher level of

rates -in 1983—84 than in 1977—78.

     Finally, the ARIMA forecast of expected inflation has a positive

coefficient with a mean value of 0.38. This value is too low -if it is

interpreted as a measure of the effect on the rate of interest of a permanent

rise in past inflation. But given the data from which the estimate is obtained

it can only be interpreted -in a more limited way as the partial effect on

expected inflation of the past history of observed inflation rates. Financial
                                             Table 5

                 Alternative Specifications of Nonlinear Interest Equations




                    MPIR    DEFEX    BONDS     MBASE   MBGRO   INFEX     RU     Const.
       (1)          (2)      (3)      (4)       (5)     (6)     (7)     (8)      (9)      DWS


15.1   MP1R336      -0.07    0.54    0.029     -1.87   -0.38    0.24             17.7    0.972
                    (0.06) (0.15) (0.014) (0.26)       (0.08) (0.09)             (2.7) 1.522
                   —0.11     0.86    0.046     -2.97   —0.60    0.38             28.].

T5.2   MPIR336VP —0.14    0.66   0.034  —1.49   —0.30   0.28                     13.9    0.983
                  (0.03) (0.11) (0.010) (0.19) (0.05) (0.05)                     (2.0) 2.054
                   —0.25     1.18    0.060    —2.66    -0.54    0.50            24.8
15.3   MPIR100     —0.09     0.52    0.033    -1.80    -0.35    0.19            17.9     0.974
                    (0.05) (0.14)    (0.014) (0.24) (0.07) (0.06)                (2.3) 1.624
                   -0.15     0.85    0.054    —2.95    —0.57    0.31            29.3

15.4   MPIR100VP —0.10    0.64   0.033  —1.54   —0.31           0.26            15.7     0.982
                  (0.02) (0.12) (0.011) (0.21) (0.06)          (0.05)            (2.0) 2.153
                   —0.17     1.07    0.055    -2.57    —0.52    0.43            26.2
T5.5   MPNRVP      -0.17     0.59    0.031    -1.35    —0.26    0.24            13.6     0.984
                   (0.03) (0.10) (0.009) (0.19) (0.03) (0.04)                   (1.8) 2.012
                   —0.32     1.11    0.058    —2.55    -0.49    0.45            25.5
15.6   MPNRVP      —0.17     0.59   0.042     —1.34    —0.26    0.26    —0.06   13.3     0.984
                   (0.03)   (0.10) (0.015)    (0.19) (0.05) (0.05) (0.06)        1.8     1.907

                   -0.32    1.11     0.079    —2.13    —0.49    0.49    -0.11   25.1
15.7   MPIR100VP -0.14    0.59   0.066   -0.90           --     0.33             8.5     0.951
                  (0.03) (0.18) (0.014) (0.24)                 (0.07)           (2.1) 1.841
                   —0.25    1.05     0.118    —1.61            0.59             15.2
15.8   MPIRIOOVP —0.13                ——      -0.69      —-
                            0.85                               0.3].             8.5
                   (0.05)   (0.26)            (0.34)           (0.11)           (3.1) 0.823
                   —0.23    1.44              —1.21            0.54             14.8
                                      —41-


  investors and corporate borrowers also base their inflation forecasts on their

 observations of monetary and fiscal policies
                                                  and their expectations of future
 monetary and fiscal policies. The INFEX variable rose from 6.2 percent in

 1977—78 to 8.0 percent in 1981 and fell to 5.5 percent by 1984.

        Because of the nonlinear specification and
                                                     the normalization that has
 been chosen, no coefficient is estimated for the
                                                  personal tax rate variable.
 The specification implies that an increase in the value of the personal tax

 rate causes an increase in the interest rate. This reflects the fact that
                                                                           an
 increase in the personal tax rate reduces the net return for any given

 interest rate and therefore reduces the demand for bonds. More specifically,

 the form of the equation implies that di/d 0 =
                                                   i/(1-O.i-c1).     At i   0.1,
 O =   0.3   and c1 = —0.07, this implies that dud 9 =
                                                         0.16.     Thus a rise in 0
from 0.3 to 0.4 would raise i from 0.10 to 0.116. With these parameter

values, an increase in e causes a small rise in
                                                     the net—of—personal tax rate
of interest; with C1 equal to zero, the net rate of interest is unaffected by

changes in the personal tax rate.

       Table 5 shows the coefficient estimates for
                                                     a variety of alternative

specifications. The primary emphasis is on alternative definitions of the

MPIR variable but some of the specifications show the effect of omitting

particular variables. Column 1 indicates the definition of the MPIR variable.

MP1R336 is the variable used in equation
                                             (6.1) and corresponds to 33 percent
debt finance at the margin and a 6 percent difference in the real net yields

required on debt and equity. MPIR336Vp implies that the MPIR is based on a

varying profitability rate (as described in Section 3) while the absence of

the letters VP implies a fixed rate of return is assumed in calculating the
                                     —42—


maximum potential interest rate. MPIR100 indicates 100 percent debt finance

at the margin; in this case, there is no need to specify the difference

between the equity and debt yields. MPNR indicates the maximum potential net

return return that the corporation can afford to pay and does not explicitly

derive the decomposition of this into a debt and equity return.

     Each entry in Table 5 contains three numbers:     the coefficient in the

numerator of the structural equation corresponding to that variable (e.g.,

-0.07 corresponds to c1 and 0.029 corresponds to c2)     the standard error of

that coefficient estimate shown in parentheses; and finally the composite

coefficient value obtained by dividing the numerator by c1 +   I   - 0   where

8 is the mean value of the personal tax average over the entire sample

period. The coefficients of equation (15.1) reproduce the figures already

presented in equation (6.1). Equation (15.2) differs because the maximum

potential interest variable has been calculated on the assumption that the

annual demand for funds (as represented by the MPIR) varies in response to

changes in current pretax real profitability as well as to changes in tax

rules and inflation. The explanatory power of the equation is somewhat better

and the Durbin-Watson statistic indicates no remaining serial correlation of

the residuals. The individual parameter estimates are very similar to those

of equation (15.1). The coefficient of the MPIR variable is again relatively

small and of the wrong sign, although now substantially larger than its

standard error. The expected deficit variable is again quite large; the

composite coefficient of DEFEX is 1.18, implying that each percentage point

increase in the expected ratio of deficit to GNP raises the long-term interest

rate by 1.18 percentage points. From 1977-78 to 1983—84, the implied increase
                                        -43-


 in the interest rate is 2.1
                               percentage points. In addition, the rise in the
 debt-GNp ratio over this period implies a further interest rate increase of a

 a further 0.7 percentage points. The other coefficients are similar enough to

 their values in equation (5.1) that no further comment is warranted.

      Equations (5.3) and (5.4) use an MPIR variable derived on the assumption

 that the marginal project is financed solely by debt (MPIR100 with fixed

 pretax profitability and MPIR100vP when variations in pretax profitability are

 taken into account).

     One of the difficulties of measuring the maximum
                                                        potential interest rate
 is that the calculation must specify not only the share of debt finance on the

marginal project but also the relation between the yields on debt and equity.

Equations (15.5) and (15.6) avoid these problems by relating the market

interest rate to the maximum potential net return to debt and equity combined

that firms can afford to pay rather than the
                                               maximum potential interest rate.
Equation (T5.6) also introduces the rate of unemployment as an indicator of

cyclical changes in the demand for funds; its coefficient is insignificant; a

similar result is obtained when the unemployment variable is introduced into

other specifications. The estimated effects of the other variables are again

quite similar to those in the earlier equations.

     Finally, equations (15.7) and (T5.8) show the effect of dropping the

variables representing the growth of the monetary base and the ratio of

government debt to GNP. Omitting the growth of the monetary base reduces the

coefficient of ratio of the monetary base to GNP but leaves the other

coefficients essentially unchanged. Dropping the ratio of debt to GNP

variable further reduces the coefficient of the monetary base—GNP variable but
                                          —44-


 raises the coefficient of the deficit variable.

       In summary, the coefficients of Table 5 indicate a strong effect of

 budget deficits and monetary policy but cannot isolate a positive effect of

 changes in the demand for funds induced by changes in tax rules. The

 significant negative coefficients of the MPIR variable raises the
                                                                      possibility
 that all of the specifications of Table 5 have been incorrect.     In particular,

 the nonlinear specification derived in section 4 forces the coefficient of the

MPIR variable to be the same as the coefficient that appears in each of the

denominators. An alternative linear specification has therefore been

explored. The results with that specification, presented below, imply that

the MPIR has a positive, small and statistically insignificant effect on the

market interest rate. Those linear specifications confirm the conclusion that

while a tax effect on interest rates may have occurred, the budget arid mone-

tary effects have been much more important.

      Before turning to that linear specification, I present in Table 6 some

additional variations on the basic nonlinear specification
                                                               reflecting
different definitions of the budget deficit variable.      Equation (T6.1)

replaces the five-ycr expected ratio of deficit to GNP by the current value

f the deficit to GNP ratio (denoted DEF). The small and insignificant

cczfficient of the   concurrent   deficit shows the importance of correctly

F;using on expected future deficits. Replacing the current deficit with the

current structural deficit (DEFS in equation (16.2)) does not alter this

coriclus ion.


      As I noted above, the five year expected deficit ratio (DEFEX) has been

calculated on the assumption that, when the actual observed deficit ratios are
                                             Table 6

                               Alternative Deficit Variables in
                                 Nonlinear Inherent Equations




         MPIR      Deficit MPIR      Deficit BONDS     MBASE   MBGRO   INFEX   Const.    R2
          (1)        (2)      (3)     (4)      (5)      (6)     (7)     (8)      (9)     DWS

16.1   MPIR336Vp   DEF     —0.03     —0.05     0.05    —2.39   —0.34   0.11    22.1     0.957
                            (0.06)   (0.09) (0.02) (0.31) (0.10) (0.08) (3.03)          0.977
                           —0.04     —0.07     0.07    —3.57   -0.51   0.16    33.0
T6.2 MP1R336Vp     DEFS    —0.04      0.02     0.05    —2.33   —0.35   0.10    21.8     0.957
                           (0.06)    (0.11) (0.02) (0.31) (0.10) (0.08) (3.03)          1.037
                           —0.06      0.03     0.08    —3.53   —0.53   0.15    33.0
16.3 MPIR336Vp     DEFALT -0.15       0.60     0.04    -1.51   —0.28   0.29    14.0     0.979
                           (0.03)    (0.12) (0.01) (0.22) (0.06) (0.05) (2.03)          1.758
                           —0.27      1.09     0.07    —2.75   —0.51   0.53    25.5
16.4 MPIR100Vp     DEFALT —0.11       0.59     0.04    —1.55   -0.29   0.27    15.8     0.979
                           (0.03)    (0.13) (0.01) (0.23) (0.06) (0.06) (2.2)           1.917
                           —0.19      1.00    0.07     —2.63   —0.49   0.46    26.8
                                      -45-


available, they are the best proxy for what people had previously thought.

Although this approach appears to work relatively well for the sample as a

whole, it is not very plausible as a description of expectations in the years

just before the sharp deficit increase of the early 1980s.   I have therefore

reestimated the basic equations with a modified expected deficit variable

(OEFALT) that is equal to DEFEX in every year except 1977 through 1980 when

the forecast is assumed to project continuation of the 1980 structural deficit

to GNP ratio for all years after 1980. For example, DEFALT for 1978 combines

the actual structural deficit ratios for 1978, 1979, 1980 and then susbtitutes

the 1980 ratio for 1981 and 1982 as well.

     Substituting DEFALT for DEFEX in equations (T6.3) (with MPIR33VP) and

(T6.4) (with MPIR100VP) shows that the substitution improves the overall

goodness of fit, increases the estimated impact of expected deficits, and

leaves the qualitative properties of the other coefficients generally

unchanged. Although DEFALT seems a better variable a priori and works better

in practice, I will not pursue this variable further here to avoid the

appearance that a variable has been constructed to increase the estimated

effect of the budget deficit.

     I turn finally to Table 7 and the linear approximations of the basic

specification of equation (4.4). Each of the variables now enters linearly,

including the personal tax rate 0. The first three equations of Table 7

use the five-year projected ratio of structural deficits to GNP while the last

two equations use the one year concurrent ratio of the structural deficit to

GNP (equation (T7.4)) or the ratio of the actual deficit to GNP (equation

(T7.5)).   It is also possible in this linear format to replace the constrained
                                                         Table 7

                           Alternative Specifications      of     Linear Interest Equations


           Variable
         Definitions
 Eq.   MPIR      Deficit     MPIR                                                                                     R2
                                     Deficit    BONDS      MBASE      MBGRO    INFPDL    THETA    DUM8084    Const    DWS

17.1   MPIR336VP   DEFEX    0.020      1.36               -1.62      -0.60     0.36     40.1                 5.65    0.987
                           (0.065)    (0.28)              (0.50)     (0.08)   (0.26)    (9.3)                        2.123
17.2   MPIR336VP   DEFEX    0.023     1.37     -0.004     -1.60      -0.61     0.38     40.5                 5.53    0.986
                           (0.074)    (0.33)   (0.042)    (0.56)     (0.11)   (0.27)    10.4                         2.150
17.3   MPIR336VP   DEFEX   —0.007     0.88                —1.80      —0.56     0.32     29.5     1.22       10.73    0.991
                           (0.056)   (0.29)               (0.42)     (0.08)   (0.22)    (8.7)    (0.44)              2.264
T7.4   MPIR336VP   DEFS     0.104     0.10      0.090     -3.64      -0.40    —0.47     45.1                20.43    0.970
                           (0.109)   (0.17)    (0.057)    (0.53)     (0.16)   (0.27    (15.1)                        1.245
T7.5   MPIR336VP   DEF      0.016     0.03     0.125      -3.54      -0.38    -0.20     38.0                19.97    0.967
                           (0.091)   (0.15)    (0.059)    (0.52)     (0.18)   (0.20)   (15.6)                        1.019
                                           -46-


 ARIMA inflation forecast variabl e with a more general polynomial distri
                                                                          but   ed

 lag on past infl at-ion rates. Si nce the distributed lag specification
                                                                             a third
 order polynomial over a six year
                                  lag) typically has greater explanatory power,
 this is the speci fication presented; using the ARIMA
                                                       forecast of inflation
 instead does not substantially alter the coefficients
                                                       of the other variabi es.
      The striking thing about these linear equations is that
                                                              in every case the

coefficient of the MPIR variable (defined here as MPIR33vp is much smaller

than its standard error and in all but one case it is positive.
                                                                      This supports
the conclusion that the estimated negative coefficients of the MPIR variable

in the nonlinear equations of Tables 5 and 6 are the result of the nonlinear

constraint that forced the estimated parameter in the numerator of the MPIR

coefficient to be the same as the parameter in the denominator of all of the

coefficients. it also implies even more convincingly than the nonlinear

equations that the tax effect has been less important as a determinant of the

interest rate than either the budget deficits or the changes in monetary

policy and inflation.

     In the linear specification, the ratio of national debt to GNP (i.e., the

BONDS variable) is generally small and insignificant when the multiyear

projected DEFEX variable -is included. The coefficient of DEFEX is

approximately 1.35 and 'is   unaffected   by whether or not the BONDS variable is

-in the equation. This coefficient is quite similar to the total coefficient

of DEFEX in equation (15.8) when the BONDS variable is excluded.

     The coefficients of the monetary variables (MBASE and MBGRO) are quite

similar to the va1ues implied by the nonlinear specifications. The choice
                                   —47-


 between the ARIMA inflation forecast and the polynomial distributed lag

 specification is also inconsequential.

      The linear specification also permits an independent estimate of the

 effect of the personal tax rate. The estimate coefficient implies that an

 increase in the personal tax rate raises the rate of interest. The specific

 parameter estimate implies an effect approximately two and a half times as

 large as the effect implied by the nonlinear
                                                specification. However, the
 calculated variation in 9 during the sample period was very small; the

 standard deviation of 2.3 percentage points implies a variation in the

 interest rate of 0.9 percentage points.
                                           Moreover, between 1975-79 and
 1983-84, the value of B only rose from 0.319 to 0.326, implying a 28 basis

 pont increase in the interest rate.

     Equation (17.3) provides a very strong test of whether the rise in the

 interest rate in the 1980s was due to changes in the structural economic

variables (and particularly the rise in the expected deficit) or was caused by

some unknown factor operating in these years. The equation introduces an

additional variable equal to one in the years 1980 to 1984 and zero otherwise.

This dummy variable is significant and indicates
                                                   a 1.22 percentage point rise
in the interest rate in these five years for reasons not already specified in

the equation. Two things about this equation should be noted. First, the

other coefficients, are modified only modestly by including this dummy

variable. Even the budget deficit variable remains at 0.88 with a standard

error of 0.29. Second, the coefficient of this dummy variable is not

subject to the usual tests of statistical inference since the
                                                                dummy variable
was created because the interest rates are known to have
                                                           been unusually high
                                      -48-


 in these years. The effect of this variable is therefore to "overcorrect" for

 temporary random effects and causes the true coefficients of other variables

 that were important in the 1980s to be underestimated.

      Equations (17.4) and (17.5) confirm that the concurrent deficit variable

 is inferior to the projected future deficit as a determinant of the level of

 interest rates. The overall explanatory power of equations (17.4) and (17.5)

are lower than in the other equations and the Durbin-Watson statistic

 indicates substantial serial correlation of the residuals.



7.   Conclusion


     This paper has examined three sources of the fluctuations in real

interest rates during the past three decades: changes in budget deficits,

changes in tax rules and changes in monetary policy. The evidence indicates

that budget deficits and monetary policy have had a strong influence on the

level of long term interest rates but fails to identify any effect of changes

in corporate tax rates and investment incentives.

     The analysis shows that it is projected future budget deficits rather

than the current level of the deficit that influences long—term interest

rates. Each percentage point increase in the five-year projected ratio of

budget deficits to GNP raises the long—term government bond rate by

approximately 1.2 percentage points while the ratio of the current deficit to

GNP (either actual or structural) has no significant effect. The specific

parameter estimates imply that the increase in projected budget deficits in

the early 1980s was responsible for about two-thirds of the rise in the
                                     —49—


interest rate between 1977—78 and 1983—84.

     There are at least three interesting directions for future research along

the lines developed in this paper. First, it would be useful to extend the

present analysis by looking at the effects of fiscal policies on the level of

interest rates and exchange rates regarded as jointly dependent variables.

     Second, the impact of the federal deficit variable could be decomposed to

see whether there are different effects of government spending on goods and

services, transfer payments and tax receipts.

     And, third, it would be useful to extend the sample to include the years

after 1984 when the interest rates began to decline.   I believe that interest

rates fell in 1985 and 1986 because of a combination of declining inflation

expectations, the anticipation of progress on budget deficits, and the easing

of monetary policy. If this is correct, the experience of 1985 and 1986

supports the inferences of the present analysis. A brief word about this

conjecture is therefore an appropriate conclusion to this paper.

     Many financial market participants had expected an acceleration of

inflation in early 1985 because of the rapid growth of the monetary aggregates

a year earlier. When inflation remained low, inflation expectations were

revised and interest rates fell. The expectation of lower inflation was

strongly reinforced in early 1986 by the fall in the price of oil.

      Although budget deficits of more than five percent of GNP were predicted

for the remainder of the decade in February of 1985, by the summer of that

year it was clear that the Congress would pass a budget resolution that cut

projected deficits substantially. This occurred and the trend to lower

deficits was reinforced by the subsequent passage of the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings
                                      -50-


ammendment. By February 1986, the Congressional Budget Office was predicting

a current services deficit of about 3.5 percent of GNP for 1988 and smaller

deficits for the end of the decade.

     Finally, the Federal Reserve in 1986 reduced the discount rate twice and

permitted the growth of Ml to substantially exceed the upper end of the target

range.

     It would be useful to try to separate these influences and to assess

whether the sudden shift in the prospect for tax legislation in the spring of

1986 had any impact on interest rates.


Cambridge, Mass.
June 1986
                                                 Appendix

                                                Table A-i

                              Annual Values of Individual Data Series



                    Federal                         5-Year
                     Debt,                        Projected                  Maximum         Full
       Expected    Privately     Structural       Structural    5-Year      Potential     Employment
       Inflation     Held         Deficit        Deficit to    Interest   Interest Rate      GNP
        (INFEX)    (8 billion)    ($ billion)    GNP Ratio       Rate       (MPIR33)      ($ billion)
1960      2.2        203.7          —3.2             0.2          4.1          2.4          507.0
1961      2.1        209.4          —1.0             0.5          3.8          2.3          537.7
1962      2.1        214.2           4.4             0.9          3.7          4.1          564.6
1963      2.0        216.0          —0.2             1.5          3.8          4.1          596.6
1964      1.7        219.2           6.].            2.0          4.1          4.7          630.1
1965      1.6        219.3           5.5            2.1          4.2           4.9          672.1
1966      1.8        225.2          14.2             2.3          5.1          5.1          722.6
1967      2.1        231.5          26.2            2.3           5.1          3.6          764.2
1968      2.7        245.6          22.7            2.0           5.7          3.4          828.4
1969      3.3        251.4          10.5            1.8          6.9           5.5          892.9
1970      3.7        257.8          20.6             1.8         7.4           4.8          970.5
1971     4.0         254.3          22.9            1.9          6.0           5.3         1075.3
1972      4.1        270.2          21.6            1.8          6.0           7.5         1172.9
1973     4.5         289.0          19.5            1.8          6.9           8.0         1288.7
1974      7.5        311.6          18.0            1.8          7.8          11.6         1416.6
1975     9.7         388.5          41.2            1.8          7.8          15.0         1625.0
1976      5.8        449.2          33.5            1.7          7.2          10.2         1770.9
1977     6.0         494.2          34.9            1.5          7.0          10.4         1947.8
1978      6.4        548.6          35.3            1.6          8.3          11.0         2148.0
1979     7.0         639.6          27.9            1.8          9.5          12.5         2385.9
1980      7.6        746.8          46.8            2.3         11.5          13.6         2670.8
1981     6.0         862.7          37.4            2.8         14.2          16.3         3030.4
1982     7.0        1070.6          68.4            3.2         13.0          14.7         3284.7
1983     5.6        1297.4          95.7            3.4         10.8          12.7         3528.9
1984     5.5        1534.7         145.8            3.3         12.2          10.4         3744.1
                                        —51—


                                      Footnotes


      * Professor   of Economics, Harvard University and President, National

 Bureau of Economic Research.    I am grateful to Donald T. Regan for persuading

 me of the importance of this subject and to Andrew Berg for help with all

 aspects of the calculations presented in this paper. This research is part

 of the NBER Study of the Government Budget and the Private Economy.

 1.   The link between high real interest rates and the dollar has also been a

 controversial subject. Although the theoretical rationale for the relation

 is clear (see, e.g., Dornbusch, 1976 and 1983), empirical research has been

ambiguous. For supporting evidence see Frenkel (1979), Sachs (1985) and the



 (1985) find no statistical support for the dollar-interest
                                                              rate relationship.
See Feldste-in (1986) for an empirical analysis of the issue that avoids the

problems inherent in measuring the real interest rate on long-term bonds.

2.    This is the position taken in the Economic Report of the President for

1983 and 1984. The link between budget deficits
                                                   and interest rates is a
standard result of Keynesian IS—LM analysis (see, e.g., Dorbusch and Fischer,

1984). Blanchard (1985) correctly stresses the importance of anticipated

future deficits, an issue to which I return below. It is also an implication

of the full—employment framework of Conventional neoclassical growth theory

(Diamond, 1965; Feldstein, 1980a). Empirical support of the link between

deficits and interest rates is mixed, as the survey by Seater (1985)

demonstrates. No relation or a very small effect is reported by Evans (1985),

Plosser (1982) and by Tanzi
                                     —52-


relation between interest rates and the deficit is either the induced increase

in savings stressed by Barro (1974) or a perfectly elastic supply of capital

from abroad; both of these arguments are considered in more detail in

Section 1 below.

3.   This position is presented in the U.S. Treasury (1983) and in the

1985 Economic Report of the President.

4.   Among those who have estimated interest rate equations with a single tax

are Tanzi (1980), and Feldstein and Summers (1978).

5.   This point is worth stressing only because the 1983 Treasury study of

budget deficits and interest rates emphasized that the traditional IS-LM

theory does not point unambiguously to a theoretical relationship between

interest rates and deficits (U.S. Treasury, 1983). While this is true at a

formal theoretical level, it has no empirical relevance.

6.   The cyclicafly adjusted budget deficit is calculated at an unemployment

rate of 6.5 percent for the period since 1980 using the approximation that

each percentage point of excess unemployment reduces GNP by 2.2 percent and

that each dollar decline of GNP raises the actual deficit by 37 cents.   The

analysis assumes that the natural rate of unemployment rose gradually between

1960 and 1980 and therefore calculates the cyclically adjusted deficit at

unemployment rates that rise from 5.5 in 1960 to 6.5 in 1980 at a rate of

0.05 percent per year.

7.   Some of these effects are actuall y ambiguous. Feldstein and Feenberg

 (1983) noted that the short-run effect of providing universal IRA eligibility

might be to depress savings since, for many individuals, that would raise

disposable income and lifetime wealth without changing the marginal return on

 saving until existing liquid assets available for transfer to IRA accounts
                                       -53-


 were exhausted. Bernhe-im and Shoveri (1985) showed that the rise in real

 interest rates permitted corporations to reduce their contributions to

 defined benefit plans, a component of personal saving.

 8.
      In Feldstejn (1983), I presented a model of international portfolio

 adjustment and evidence that international capital flows follow a stock

 adjustment process with limited long—run
                                            substitutability.
 9.   The real rate of interest is calculated here as the nominal interest

 yield on 10 years government bonds minus the average of inflation in the

 current and three past years. Although a more sophisticated measure of

 expected inflation is used in the econometric analysis in subsequent

 sections, the four year average is an easy basis for comparing U.S. and

 German real yields.

 10. The real rate of interest on German bonds is the difference between the

 interest rate on German government bonds cited
                                                  in the Morgan Guaranty Trust
Company World Financial Markets and a 4 year average rate of inflation. More

sophisticated analyses show a similar increase in U.S. rates relative to

foreign rates; see the 1984 Economic Report of the
                                                     President, Chapter 2.
11. The role of taxes is ignored in the present section and developed in

Section 3.

12. This is the answer to Sargents (1976) criticism that the

Feldstein-Eckstein (1970) analysis treated M/p as exogenous.

13. An exception is Sinai and Rathjens (1983).

14. Feldstein and Eckstein (1970) made the mistake of using only the

concurrent ratio of debt to GNP, a specification that
                                                        makes it impossible to
assess the effect of current and future budget deficits.
                                     -54-


15. This is a simplification because it assumes that future values of r

remain constant.

16. See Abel (1980) and Summers (1981) and the evidence that costs of

adjustment cause firms to respond only very slowly to changes in the optimal

capital stock.

17. This was the average pre-tax rate of return on capital in the

non-financial sector, net of state and local property taxes. Those taxes are

subtracted as a cost to the firm for present purposes even though they should

not be subtracted in calculating the social return on private investment.

18. These expectations, collected by Richard Hoey and distributed by Drexel

Burnham Lambert, are only available for the period since 1978. The annual

values used in Table 3 are simple averages of the monthly values presented by

Hoey.

19. Feldstein and Summers (1978) studied the effect on the interest rate of

changes in the NPIR but did not allow for the effects of changes 'in inflation

and tax rules on the supply of funds. The Feldstein-Summers study also did

not deal with the effect of budget deficits.

20. This holds precisely only if the investment is 100 percent debt financed

or the investor tax rates on dividends and capital gains are equal. When

these conditions are not satisfied, a1 is a function of the personal and

corporate tax rates and the corporate financial behavior.

21. Note that if projects are financed in part by equity the MPIR depends

also on the personal income and capital gains tax rates.

22. There is, of course, always the risk that imposing a particualr

nonlinear structure causes spurious results. The next section therefore also
                                      —55-


 presents estimates of a linear equation in which the data are more free to

 "speak for themselves."

 23. This series is based on calculations presented in Feldstejn and Jun

 (1986); it represents profitability before federal tax but after state and

 local taxes.

24. At an earlier stage of this research, the projected deficits of the

Congressional Budget Office were used but these are not available publicly on

a calendar year basis. The results were very similar to those presented

below.

25. For a more extensive discussion of these relationships, see Office of

Management and Budget (1984).

26.   In an earlier paper, Lawrence Summers and I (1978) estimated a very much

simplified form of equation (6.1) that only included the MPIR and INFEX

variables. In that specification we found a small but positive effect of MPIR

on the rate of interest. We explained the small size of the effect by the

fact that corporate borrowing represents only a small part of the total funds

raised by all borrowers in the U.S. financial market.
                                     —56—


                                Bibliography

Abel, Andrew, "Empirical Investment Equations: An Interpretive Framework,"
     Journal of Monetary Economics, Carnegie-Rochester Series on Public
     Policy, 1980.

__________ "Precautionary Saving and Accidental Bequests," American Economic
     Review, September 1985, 75, 777—91.

Barro, Robert, "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?" Journal of Political
     Economy, November 1974.

Bernheim, Douglas and Shoven, John, "Pension Funding and Saving," National
     Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 1622, 1985.

__________ Shleifer, Andrei, and Summers, Lawrence, "Bequests as a Means of
     Payment," Journal of Political Economy, December 1985.

Blanchard, 0., "Debts, Deficits and Finite Horizons," Journal of Political
     Economy, April 1985, 92, 223—47.

Boskin, Michael and Kotlikoff, Laurence, "Public Debt and U.S Saving: A New
     Test on the Neutrality Hypothesis," National Bureau of Economic Research
     Working Paper No. 1646, 1985.

Diamond, Peter, "National Debt and Neoclassical Economic Growth," American
     Economic Review, 1965, 55, 1125—50.

Dornbusch, Rudiger, and Fischer, Stanley, Macroeconomics, New York:
     McGraw—Hi 11, 1984.

Eckstein, 0. and Feldstein, Martin, "The Fundamental Determinants of the
   Interest Rate," Review of Economics and Statistics, November 1970, 52, 4.

Evans, P., (1985a), "Do Large Deficits Produce High Interest Rates?" American
     Economic Review, March 1985.

_________   (1985b), "Is the Dollar High Because of Large Budget Deficits?"
     mimeo, September 1985.

Feldstein, Martin, "Inflation Income Taxes and the Rate of Interest: A
     Theoretical Analysis, American Economic Review, 1976.

_________   (1980a), "Fiscal Policies, Inflation and Capital Formation."
     American Economic Review, September 1980, 70, 636-50.

_________   (198Db), "Tax Rules and the Mismanagement of Monetary Policy,"
     American Economic Review, May 1980, 70, 182-86.

__________• "Government Deficits and Aggregate Demand," Journal of Monetary
     Economics, January 1982, 9, 1—20.
                                   —57—

             (1983a), "Domestic Saving and International Capital Movements in
      the Long Run and the Short Run," European
                                                Economic Review, 21, 129-51.

             (1983b), Inflation Tax Rules and Capital Formation,
                                                                 Chicago:
      University of Chicago Press.

 _________   "The Budget Deficit and the Dollar," in NBER Macroeconoics
      Annual, 1986, September 1986.

             and Feenberg, Daniel, "Alternative Tax Rules and Personal
      Savings Incentives: Microeconomic Data and Behavioral Simulations," in
      M. Feldstein, ed., Behavioral Simulations Methods in Tax Policy
      Analysis, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1983.

 __________ Green, Jerry, and Sheshinski, Eytan, "Inflation and Taxes in
                                                                          a
      Growing Economy with Debt and Equity Finance," Journal of Political
      Economy, 1978.

 __________ and Jun, Joosung, "The Effects of Tax Rules on Nonresidential
      Fixes Investment: Some Preliminary Evidence from the 1980's," National
      Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 1857, 1986, in M.
      Feldstein, ed., The Effects of Taxation on Capital Formation,
      forthcoming.

__________ and Summers, Lawrence, "Inflation, Tax Rules and the
                                                                 Long-Term
     Interest Rate," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1978, 1, 61-109.

Frankel, Jeffrey, "On the Mark: A Theory of Floating Exchange Rates Based on
     Real Interest Differentials," American Economic Review, September 1979.

Hayashi, F., "Tob-in's Marginal q and Average q: A Neoclassical
     Interpretation," Econometrica, 1982.

Kormend-i, Roger, "Government Debt, Government Spending and Private," 1983.

Meese, R. and Rogoff, K., "Was is Real? The Exchange Rate-Interest
     Differential Relation, 1973-1984," National Bureau of Economic Research
     Working Paper No. 1732, 1985.

O'Driscoll, Gerald, "The Ricard-jan Noneqtjjoalence Theoreum," Journal of
     Political Economy, 1977, 85, 207-10.

Office of Management and Budget, Executive Office of the President, Historical
     Tables: Budget of the U.S. Government FY 1986, Washington, DC: U.S.
     Government Printing Offices, 1985.

Patinkin, Don, Money, Interest and Prices, 2nd ed., New York: Harper and Row,
     1965.

Plosser-, C., "Government Financing Decisions and Asset Returns," Journal of
     Monetary Economics, May 1982.
                                      -58-


Ricardo, David, The Works and Correspondence of David Ricardo, P. Sraffa, ed.,
     Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1951.

Sachs, Jeffrey, "The Dollar and the Policy Mix: 1985," National Bureau of
     Economic Research Working Paper No. 1636, 1985, in the Brookings Papers
     on Economic Activity, forthcoming.

Sargent, Thomas, "Interest Rates and Expected Inflation: A Selective Summary
     of Recent Research," Explorations in Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.:
     National Bureau of Economic Research, Summer 1976, 3, 303-25.

Seater, J. 3., "Does Government Debt Matter?" Journal of Monetary Economics,
     1985, 16, 121—31.

Sinai, A. and Rathjens, P., "Deficits, Interest Rates, and the Economy," Data
     Resources U.S. Review, June 1983, 1.27- .41.

Summers, Lawrence, "Taxation and Corporate Investment: A q—Theory Approach,"
     BrookinQs Papers on Economic Activity, 1981, 67-127.

Tanzi, Vito, "Fiscal Deficits and Interest Rates in the United States: An
     Empirical Analysis," IMF Staff Papers, December 1985, 32, 551-76.

The Economic Report of the   President,   for 1983 and 1984.

Tobin, James, "A General Equilibrium Approach to Monetary Theory," Journal of
     Money. Credit and Banking, 1969.

United States Treasury Department, The Effects of Deficits an Prices of
     Financial Assets: Theory and Evidence, Washington, DC: U.S
     Government Printing Offices, March 1984.
