                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      FINANCIAL DEPENDENCE AND INNOVATION:
                      THE CASE OF PUBLIC VERSUS PRIVATE FIRMS

                                          Viral V. Acharya
                                            Zhaoxia Xu

                                        Working Paper 19708
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19708


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2013




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Viral V. Acharya and Zhaoxia Xu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Financial Dependence and Innovation: The Case of Public versus Private Firms
Viral V. Acharya and Zhaoxia Xu
NBER Working Paper No. 19708
December 2013
JEL No. G31,G32,O16,O30

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper examines the relationship between innovation and firms' dependence on external capital
by analyzing the innovation activities of privately-held and publicly-traded firms. We find that public
firms in external finance dependent industries generate patents of higher quantity, quality, and novelty
compared to their private counterparts, while public firms in internal finance dependent industries
do not have a significantly better innovation profile than matched private firms. The results are robust
to various empirical strategies that address selection bias. The findings suggest that public listing is
beneficial to the innovation of firms in industries with a greater need for external capital.


Viral V. Acharya
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-84
New York, NY 10012
and CEPR
and also NBER
vacharya@stern.nyu.edu

Zhaoxia Xu
Department of Finance and Risk Engineering
New York University
6 MetroTech Center,
New York, NY 11201
zhaoxiaxu@nyu.edu
1     Introduction

While innovation is crucial for businesses to gain strategic advantage over competi-

tors, financing innovation tends to be difficult because of uncertainty and information

asymmetry associated with innovative activities (Hall and Lerner (2010)). Firms with

innovative opportunities often lack capital. Stock markets can provide various benefits

as a source of external capital by reducing asymmetric information, lowering the cost

of capital, as well as enabling innovation in firms (Rajan (2012)). Given the increasing

dependence of young firms on public equity to finance their R&D (Brown et al. (2009)),

understanding the relation between innovation and a firm’s financial dependence is a

vital but under-explored research question. We fill this gap in the literature by investi-

gating how innovation depends on the access to stock market financing and the need for

external capital.

    We use a firm’s public listing status to capture the access to stock markets and

investigate its impact on innovation. While firms can gain an access to a large pool

of low cost capital by trading on exchanges, they also face the pressure from myopic

investors to generate short-term profits (Stein (1989)). Therefore, we expect that the

effect of public listing on innovation will depend on the trade-off between the benefits

and costs associated with listing on stock markets, which vary across firms with different

degrees of dependence on external finance.

    By analyzing the innovation activities of a large sample of private and public firms

between 1994 and 2004, we observe that public firms on average have patents of higher

quantity, quality, and novelty than private firms. After considering the need for external

                                             1
finance, we find that only public firms in external finance dependent (EFD) industries

have a significantly better innovation profile than private firms, not firms in internal

finance dependent (IFD) industries. Industries that rely on external (internal) finance

for their investments are considered as EFD (IFD) industries.

   To understand why public firms in industries with a greater need of external capital

perform better in innovation, we explore four potential explanations. One potential

explanation could be that public listing relaxes the financial constraints faced by those

firms. If this is the case, one would expect that firms with a higher propensity to

innovate will benefit more from obtaining access to stock market financing. Consistent

with this conjecture, we find that firms in more innovation intensive industries with

a greater need for external capital are more likely to go public compared to firms in

less innovation intensive industries and they are more innovative when having access to

public equity capital compared to firms without such access.

   The observed difference in innovation may also be driven by the variation in firms’

ability to use R&D to generate patents. To explore this second possibility, we test

whether public and private firms differ in their innovation efficiency measured as the

natural logarithm of one plus the number of patents per dollar R&D investment. We

find a higher innovation efficiency for public firms in industries dependent on external

finance, but no significant difference for private and public firms in IFD industries.

   Third, a part of the literature has argued that public firms are prone to agency

problems given the separation of ownership and control. Under the pressure of myopic

investors, managers have incentives to pursue short-term performance (Stein (1989),


                                            2
Bolton et al. (2006)).1 In light of the short-termism model, we investigate public firms’

real earnings management activities in relation to their degree of external finance de-

pendence and innovation. We find that more innovative public firms in EFD industries

engage less in earnings management through their alteration of their real activities. To

the extent that real earnings management represents firms’ myopic behavior, innova-

tive firms with a greater need for external capital appear less likely to boost short-term

earnings at the expense of long-term values.

       Fourth, the better innovation profile of public firms in EFD industries may be a

result of patent acquisitions outside firm boundaries. Recent studies provide evidence

that public firms have incentives to purchase patents and new technologies through

mergers and acquisitions (Bena and Li (2013), Seru (2013)). Sevilir and Tian (2013)

show that acquiring innovation can enhance the innovative output of the acquirers.

Since the access to stock markets can provide the capital needed for patent purchase,

this acquisition-based explanation is actually consistent with the view that public listing

provides financing benefits for innovation.

       Overall, our results suggest that financing benefits coupled with innovation efficiency

and innovative firms’ lower incentives to behave myopically help to explain the difference

in the innovation of public and private firms in EFD industries.

       Perhaps the biggest challenge of our empirical design is the concern that a firm’s

decision to gain access to stock markets may be an endogenous choice driven by other
   1
     In September 2009, the Aspen Institute along with 28 leaders including John Bogle and Warren Buf-
fett called for an end of value-destroying short-termism in U.S. financial markets and an establishment
of public policies that encourage long-term value creation (Aspen Institute (2009)).




                                                  3
observed and unobserved factors. To overcome this selection bias, we adopt several

identification strategies enabled by our large panel dataset of U.S. private and public

firms. Our fixed effects estimation explicitly controls for observable time-series and cross-

sectional variables that are related to innovation and the decision of going public. We

then employ an econometric method to directly adjust for selection bias from unobserv-

ables. Specifically, we estimate the treatment effect model using an inverse Mills ratio to

explicitly correct for selection bias.2 Furthermore, we adopt several quasi-experimental

designs to alleviate the concern about the non-randomness of public and private firms.

       The first quasi-experiment applies the propensity score matching method to identify

a sample of firms that transition from private to public (treatment group) and a sample of

similar firms that remain private (control group). The difference-in-differences approach

is then used to isolate the treatment effect by differencing out the influence of cross-

sectional heterogeneity or common time trends on the innovation activities of the treated

and the controlled groups. Identification of this approach relies on the assumption that

the closely matched private firms act as a counterfactual for how the transition firms

would have performed without going public. We observe a positive treatment effect in

the patent portfolios for firms in EFD industries, while the effect is mostly insignificant

for firms in IFD industries.

       To ease the concern that a firm may go public at a specific stage of its life cycle, we

adopt a second quasi-experiment, which we construct two groups of firms: a treatment
   2
     We also estimate an instrumental variable model using the percentage of public firms in the industry
in a given year as an instrument for being public. A firm is more likely to go public as their peers in the
same industry sell their shares publicly (Scharfstein and Stein (1990)), but its innovation activities are
unlikely to be affected by the percentage of publicly-traded firms in the same sector other than through
the publicly listing channel. The results are reported in the Appendix Table A.1.


                                                    4
group consisting of firms that eventually completed the initial public offering (IPO) af-

ter the withdrawal of the initial registration statement with Securities and Exchange

Commission (SEC) and a control group of firms that ultimately did not go public af-

ter the initial withdrawal.3 Applying the triple differences approach in a multivariate

framework, we find an increase in the quantity and originality of patents for firms that

successfully transition from private to public. Furthermore, this improvement in patent

portfolios is concentrated in firms in EFD industries.

       The triple differences approach relies on the assumption that the average outcome

variables follow a parallel trend over the pre-treatment period. The validation of this

parallel trend assumption is verified in our graphical test. Figure 1 shows that the trends

in patents for both treatment and control groups are similar during the pre-withdrawn

and pre-IPO eras, while the number of patents in the treatment group increases sig-

nificantly after an IPO. Our multivariate test also confirms that there is no systematic

difference in the trend of patents between the treatment and control group during the

pre-treatment era.

       The third quasi-experiment involves a fuzzy regression discontinuity design exploit-

ing the discontinuous nature of NASDAQ listing requirements for assets. The NASDAQ

requires that a listed firm have a minimum number of net tangible assets.4 Identifica-

tion of this design relies on the assumption that observations close to the discontinuity
   3
     The process of going public in the U.S. requires filing security registration documents with the
SEC. After the registration, the filers still have the option to withdraw their offering before issue.
Withdrawals of registered IPOs are not uncommon. Dunbar and Foerster (2008) examine the 1985-
2000 period and document that about 20% of firms withdrew their IPO filings and 9% of the withdrawn
firms successfully complete the process later.
   4
     See Section 5.4 for details of the requirement.



                                                  5
threshold are similar. We first conduct a graphic analysis of the relationship between

patent portfolios and the forcing variable (normalized net tangible assets in the IPO

year) around the threshold. Figure 2 shows that firms with net tangible assets above

the cutoff have a better patent portfolio than firms with net tangible assets below the

cutoff. Moreover, the placebo analysis that uses normalized net tangible assets in a

random year as the forcing variable exhibits no jump in patent portfolios at the thresh-

old (Figure 3). Our formal fuzzy regression discontinuity estimations indicate that IPO

firms listed on the NASDAQ have a relatively stronger innovation profile compared to

private firms with net tangible assets very close to the minimum listing requirements of

the NASDAQ.

       Our study is related to the nascent literature on identifying various economic factors

driving firm innovation. The literature shows that innovation is affected by the develop-

ment of financial markets (Amore et al. (2013), Chava et al. (2013), Hsu et al. (2013)),

legal system (Brown et al. (2013)), bankruptcy laws (Acharya and Subramanian (2009)),

labor laws (Acharya et al. (2013)), competition (Aghion et al. (2005)), investors’ toler-

ance for failure (Tian and Wang (2012)), institutional ownership (Aghion et al. (2013)),

and private equity (Lerner et al. (2011))5 . Differing from previous work focusing on

public firms, we analyze a large sample of private and public firms and find that the

innovation capacity of firms in external finance dependent industries is influenced by
   5
     Lerner et al. (2011) find no evidence that private equity sacrifices innovation to boost short-term
performance using a sample of 472 leveraged buyout (LBO) transactions during 1980-2005. In a similar
spirit, we identify firms that experienced LBOs based on our sample (1994-2004) and explore changes in
innovation of these firms in comparison with the matched public firms based on firm characteristics. Our
unreported results from propensity score matching coupled with difference-in-differences estimations
show no significant difference in changes in innovation during the transition between the LBO firms
and the controlled public firms.


                                                   6
access to stock market financing.

       This paper also adds new evidence to the recent surge of debate on the trade-off

between public listing and staying private and its influence on firms’ real activities. On

the one hand, the benefits of an easier access to cheaper capital allow public firms to

conduct more mergers and acquisitions (Maksimovic et al. (2012)), to raise more equity

capital (Brav (2009)), and to pay more dividends (Michaely and Roberts (2012)) than

private firms. Public firms can take better advantage of growth opportunities and are

more responsive to changes in investment opportunities than their private counterparts

(Mortal and Reisel (2012)). On the other hand, the agency conflicts resulting from

divergent interests between managers and investors at public firms distort their cash

holdings (Gao et al. (2013)), investments (Asker et al. (2011)), and innovation (Bernstein

(2012)).6 Our findings suggest that the lower cost of capital associated with public

listing are important for innovation of firms with large capital needs, while the financing

benefits of stock markets are weaker for innovation of firms in internal finance dependent

industries.

       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We develop hypotheses in Section 2. In

Section 3, we describe the data, innovation, and external finance dependence measures.

Section 4 presents differences in innovation of private and public firms. In Section 5,
   6
     Differing from Bernstein (2012) who focuses only on the innovation activities of IPO firms, we
investigate the innovation of public and private firms in general and link it to their financial dependence.
Among the battery of identification strategies that intend to address the endogeneity concern, one of
our analyses involves a subsample of firms that experience the IPO transition. Distinct from Bernstein
(2012)’s comparison of patents of successful IPO firms with IPO withdrawn firms, we investigate a group
of firms with shared experience, that is, firms that eventually completed the IPO process following the
withdrawal of their initial filings and firms that ultimately did not go public after the withdrawal. Our
results suggest that the effect of public listing on innovation depends on firms’ need on external capital.




                                                     7
we exploit several quasi-experimental designs to isolate the treatment effects. Section 6

discusses the potential explanations for the observed difference in innovation of private

and public firms. We conclude in Section 7.




2    Theoretical Motivation and Empirical Hypothesis

The theoretical literature presents two opposing views on the impact of stock markets

on innovation. One view focuses on the myopic nature of stock markets and/or man-

agers. These models of short-termism argue that stock markets tend to be obsessed with

short-term earnings and such myopia could induce public firms to invest sub-optimally

(Stein (1989); Bebchuk and Stole (1993)). With their compensation linked to stock

performance, managers of public firms have incentives to sacrifice long-term investments

in order to boost short-term stock returns. Innovation typically requires a substantial

amount of investments for a long period of time and the probability of success is highly

uncertain. Holmstrom (1989) and Acharya et al. (2013) suggests that managers, un-

der the pressure to establish a good performance record in capital markets, have few

incentives to undertake long-term investments such as innovation. Moreover, with the

assumption of observable cash flows and no tolerance for failures in public companies,

Ferreira et al. (2012) develop a model to demonstrate that managers of public companies

are rationally biased against innovative projects, which usually have a higher failure rate.

An implication of these models is that stock markets hinder managers from investing in

innovation.



                                             8
   The other view focuses on the financing advantages of stock markets for innovation.

First, stock markets are an important source of financing for innovation. Allen and Gale

(1999) model indicates that public equity markets, which allow investors with diversified

opinions to participate, enable the financing of innovative projects with uncertain prob-

abilities of success. As illustrated in the model of Rajan (2012), the ability to secure

captial alters the innovative nature of firms. Equity markets play an essential role in

providing the capital and incentives that an entrepreneur needs to innovate, transform,

create enterprise, and generate profits. He argues that firms with an easier access to

equity capital are more likely to conduct capital-intensive fundamental innovation.

   Second, the literature suggests that equity is preferable to debt in financing innovative

projects. Hall and Lerner (2010) suggest that intangible assets and knowledge created

by innovation are difficult to quantify as collateral for debt financing. The uncertainty

and volatile return of innovative projects also make them unattractive to many creditors

(Stigliz (1985)). Moreover, Rajan (2012) points out that the possibility of losing the

critical asset to creditors in the event of project failure discourages entrepreneurs to

innovate. In contrast, equity capital is a favorable way to finance innovation since it

allows investors to share upside returns and does not require collateral.

   Third, the listing in a stock market lowers the cost of capital as investors’ portfolios

become more liquid and diversified (Pagano et al. (1998); Benninga et al. (2005)). It

also helps to lower borrowing costs because of the reduced asymmetry of information

(Schenone (2010)) and increased lender competition (Saunders and Steffen (2011)).

   Given the contrasting predictions of the two streams of research, it becomes an empir-


                                             9
ical question as to how stock markets actually affect innovation. With the implications

of theoretical models in mind, we conjecture that the impact of listing in stock markets

on innovation varies with the degrees of external finance dependence. Rajan and Zin-

gales (1998) argue that industries differ in their demand for external financing due to the

differences in the scale of the initial and continuing investments, the incubation period,

and the payback period. For firms with excess cash flows over their investment needs,

the infusion of public equity should not affect the marginal cost of capital and therefore

may not increase their innovation. With the exposure to stock market short-termism,

going public might even potentially stifle the innovative activities of those firms. How-

ever, for firms with insufficient internal cash flows for their investments, the additional

capital raised from stock markets could relax their financial constraints and facilitate

innovation. Consequently, stock markets should matter more for firms in industries with

a greater need for external funds. Considering the differential needs for external capital,

we hypothesize that public listing should promote the innovation of firms in industries

dependent more on external finance.




3     Data and Innovation Measure

3.1    Data

To measure innovation activities, we collect firm-year patent counts and patent citations

data from the latest edition of the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER)

Patent Citation database. The database contains information on every patent granted by


                                            10
the United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) from 1976 to 2006, including

patent assignee names, the number of citations received by each patent, a patent’s

application year, a patent’s grant year, and the technology class of the patent, among

other items.

      The financial data on U.S. private and public firms are obtained from S&P Capital IQ

for the 1994-2004. The sample stops in 2004 because the average time lag between patent

application date and grant date is two to three years (Hall et al. (2001)).7 S&P Capital

IQ categorizes a firm as public or private based on its most recent status. For example,

Google Inc. is classified as public in 2002 although it went public in 2004. We reclassify

a firm’s private (or public) status with IPO date from Compustat, Thomson One, Jay

Ritter’s IPO database, the first trading date information from CRSP, and delisting date

information from Compustat. Financial institutions and utilities (SIC code 6000-6999

and 4900-4999) and firms with no SIC codes are excluded. We require non-missing data

on total assets and non-negative value on total revenue. Firm-years with total assets

less than $5 million USD are excluded. Cash, leverage, capital expenditure ratios, and

R&D ratios are winsorized at 1% and 99% to avoid the effect of outliers.

      We merge financial data with the patent database by GVKEY and by company names

when GVKEY is unavailable. We manually check the names to ensure the accuracy of

the match. In cases where the names are not exactly identical, we conduct internet

searches and include the observation only if we are confident of the match. Following

the innovation literature (e.g. Atanassov (2013)), the patent and citation counts are
  7
      Using a sample period of 1994 to 2003 yields similar results.




                                                    11
set to zero when no patent and/or citation information is available. Including firm-year

observations with no patents alleviates the sample selection concern. The final sample

has 2,392 private firms and 8,863 public firms.

       Previous studies have shown that innovation varies substantially across industries

and by firm size (Acs and Audrestsch (1988)). To minimize the differences in industry

and size distributions, we identify an industry-and-size-matched sample of private and

public firms. Specifically, for each private firm from the beginning of the sample period,

we find a public firm closest in size and in the same four-digit SIC industry.8 The time-

series observations for each match are kept in order to preserve the panel structure of

the data. This procedure results 1,717 matched pairs of private and public firms.



3.2       Innovation Measure

We use R&D spending to measure innovation input and patent-based metrics to measure

innovation output (Hall et al. (2001, 2005)). The first measure of innovation output is

the number of patents applied by a firm in a given year. The patent application year

is used to construct the measure since the application year is closer to the time of the

actual innovation (Griliches (1990)). Patent innovation varies in their technological and

economic significance. A simple count of patents may not be able to distinguish break-

through innovations from incremental technological discoveries (Trajtenberg (1990)).

Thus, we use the citation count each patent receives in subsequent years to measure the
   8
    Closest in size means that two firms have the smallest ratio of their total assets (TA). The ratio of
total assets is defined as max(T Aprivate , T Apublic )/min(T Aprivate , T Apublic ). Asker et al. (2011) use a
similar method to identify firm’s closest in size.




                                                      12
importance of a patent. Citations are patent-specific and are attributed to the applying

firm at the time of application, even if the firm later disappears due to acquisition or

bankruptcy. Hence, the patent citation count does not suffer survivorship bias. Hall

et al. (2005) show that the number of citations is a good measure of the quality of an

innovation.

       However, the patent citation is subject to a truncation bias. This is because citations

are received over a long period of time, but we only observe the citations up to 2006.

Compared to patents created in earlier years, patents created in later years have less

time to accumulate citations. Additionally, the citation intensities of patents might

vary across different industries. Lerner et al. (2011) suggest that the frequency of patent

citations, as well as patents in technologically dynamic industries have increased in recent

years. To correct for this time trend in citations, we scale the raw patent citation counts

by the average citation counts of all patents applied in the same year and technology

class following Hall et al. (2001, 2005).9 This measure shows the relative citation counts

compared to matched patents after controlling for time and technology fixed effects.

       Innovative projects differ in their novelty. Fundamental research tends to be risky

and produce more influential innovations. Following Trajtenberg et al. (1997), we use

the originality and generality of patents to measure the novelty of innovation. These

two proxies also reflect the degree of risk that firms are bearing in their pursuit of R&D.
   9
     An alternative way to adjust patent citations for truncation bias is to weight the number of citations
with the estimated distribution of citation-lag. That is, each patent citation is adjusted using the citation
truncation correction factor estimated from a diffusion model. The weakness of this adjusted citation
is that it does not measure the relative importance of the patent compared to similar patents. Using
this truncation-bias-adjusted citation yields similar results.




                                                     13
Originality is computed as the Herfindahl index of cited patents:
                                                       ni
                                                       X
                                  Originalityi = 1 −        Fij2 ,
                                                        j

where Fij is the ratio of the number of cited patents belonging to class j to the number

of patents cited by patent i. The originality of a patent indicates the diversity of the

patents cited by that patent. A patent that cites a broader array of technology classes

has a higher originality value.

   Similarly, generality is measured as the Herfindahl index of citing patents:
                                                       ni
                                                       X
                                  Generalityi = 1 −         G2ij ,
                                                       j

where Gij is the number of patents citing patent i belonging to class j scaled by the

number of patents citing patent i. The generality of a patent indicates the diversity of

the patents citing that patent. A patent that is cited by a broader array of technology

classes has a higher value of generality.



3.3    External Finance Dependence Measure

Rajan and Zingales (1998) argue that the degree of dependence on external financing

varies across different industries. Industries such as biotechnology rely more on external

capital, while industries such as tobacco are less external capital dependent. To construct

an industry’s dependence on external finance, we follow Rajan and Zingales (1998)

and first measure a firm’s need for external finance in a year as the fraction of capital

expenditure not financed through internal cash flow. The time series industry-level

external finance dependence is constructed as the median value of the external finance


                                             14
needs of all firms in the two-digit SIC code industry in each year. We then measure each

industry’s external finance index as a percentile ranking of its time series median during

1994-2004.10 An industry with a higher index value of external finance dependence relies

more on external capital to finance its investment.




4        Empirical Analysis

4.1       Univariate Analysis

In Table 1, we compare firm characteristics and innovation activities of private and

public firms in the full sample (Panel A) and the matched sample (Panel B). In the

full sample, public firms on average are bigger in size and older compared to private

firms. Age is defined as the difference between current year and founding year of a

firm.11 Private firms have more tangible assets and higher sales growth. In terms of

cash holdings, private firms hold a lower percentage of their assets as cash (14.66% of

total assets), while public firms reserve a higher percentage of cash (18.89% of total

assets). The average return on assets (ROA) of private firms is lower than that of public

firms. Private firms have a capital expenditure ratio of 7.20% relative to total assets,

while public firms have a ratio of 6.31%.

       As for innovation activities, Panel A of Table 1 shows that public firms have a slightly

lower R&D ratio, defined as R&D expenses as a ratio of total assets, than private firms.
  10
    Hsu et al. (2013) use a similar approach to measure an industry’s dependence on external finance.
  11
    To compute firm age, we cross-check the founding year data in Capital IQ and Jay Ritter IPO
databases to ensure accuracy.



                                                 15
The ratio of R&D expenditure to total assets is 5.48% for private firms, while the ratio

is 4.93% for public firms. In terms of the outcome of investments in innovation, private

companies on average have significantly fewer patents compared to public firms (1 vs.

7). The patents applied by public firms are on average of better quality than those of

private companies as measured by the truncation bias adjusted citations. The patents

of public companies receive more citations compared to those of private companies (0.32

vs. 0.18). The difference in the average number of citations to the patents of private and

public firms is statistically significant. Public firms also tend to produce more original

patents with wider applications.

   Similar differences between private and public firms are observed in the matched

sample, with a few exceptions. Panel B of Table 1 shows that the matched private and

public firms are similar in size after we match firms on size and industry. Public firms

have fewer tangible assets, lower sales growth, fewer tangible assets, more cash, lower

ROA, and lower capital expenditure ratios than otherwise similar private firms. For the

size-and-industry matched sample, public firms on average have a higher R&D ratio.

The patent profile of matched public firms is better than their private counterparts. For

example, the average number of patents generated by public firms is 2, while it is fewer

than 1 for matched private firms.



4.2    Multivariate Analysis

The univariate analysis indicates that public firms on average outperform private firms

when it comes to their innovation activities. However, the difference in innovation


                                           16
outcome between private and public firms may be confounded by the difference in firm

characteristics. To control for the distinctness in observable firm attributes and the

influences of industry characteristics and time on innovation, we estimate the following

panel data model:

      Yikt = α + βP ublici + γXikt + ηk + ζt + εikt ,                                   (1)

where Yikt measure innovation activities. The measures include R&D ratio, number

of patents, truncation bias adjusted citations, originality, and generality. P ublici is a

dummy variable equal to one for public firms and zero for private firms; Xikt is a set

of characteristic variables that affect a firm’s innovation activities, including ln(Sales)

(log of total revenue), T angible (tangible assets scaled by total assets), Cash (total cash

scaled by total assets), Age (the difference between current year and founding year);

Capex (capital expenditures scaled by total assets), S.Growth (the first difference of

the natural logarithm of total revenue), ROA (EBITDA divided by total assets); ηk

control for industry effects based on two-digit SIC codes; and ζt control for year fixed

effects. The coefficient β estimates the effect of public listing on innovation while the

confounding variables are controlled.

   Since the full sample and the industry-and-size matched sample yield similar results,

we report the main results based on the matched sample. In Panel A of Table 2, the first

specification has R&D ratio as the dependent variable. The coefficient on the dummy

variable P ublic is positive, indicating that public firms spend more on R&D than private

firms once the confounding effects have been controlled. R&D ratio of public firms is

0.48% higher than matched private firms. With regard to the outcome of investments in

                                             17
innovation, there is a significant difference between the two types of firms. The estimated

coefficients on P ublic are positive and significant in all specifications. Public firms on

average have one more patents than private firms. The patents of public firms are also

more influential in terms of citations compared to those of private firms. The originality

and generality of the patents developed by public firms are also higher than those by

private firms.

   As for control variables, we observe that larger firms tend to have a higher R&D

ratio, produce more patents, receive more citations to their patents, and have more

novel innovation. Firms with more tangible assets produce more patents that have a

broader impact. The coefficients on Cash are positive and significant, which suggests

that firms with more cash are more innovative. The incentives to invest in innovation

may vary among firms during different stages of their lifecycles. We use the age variable

to control for a firm’s lifecycle effects. Mature firms tend to have lower R&D spending

as a percentage of total assets. Regarding innovation outcome, there is no significant

difference between older and younger firms in terms of patent quantity and citations.

However, patents produced by older firms are more novel. The coefficients on Capex are

positive but insignificant in general. The coefficients on ROA are negative, while those

on sales growth are mixed.



4.3    Treatment Effect Model Estimation

The panel data estimations provide suggestive evidence that the public listing status of

a firm is associated with its innovative ability. Clearly the decision of being public or


                                            18
staying private is not random. The effect of treatment (being public) may differ across

firms and may affect the probability of firms going public. To establish causality, we

need to control for unobservables that could drive both innovation and the decisions to

go public. To address the potential endogeneity of the treatment dummy, we estimate

the treatment effect model that explicitly corrects for selection bias using the inverse

Mills ratio.

   The treatment effect model includes two equations. The first one is the outcome

equation (equation (1)) with the dummy variable P ublic indicating the treatment con-

dition (i.e., being public).   The coefficient β denotes the average treatment effect:

AT E = E(Yi |P ublic = 1) − E(Yi |P ublic = 0). The second one is the selection equation:
                
                 1 if P ublic∗i > 0
                
                
     P ublici =                              P ublic∗i = π + δZi + υi                 (2)
                               ∗
                
                 0 if P ublici ≤ 0
                

where Z is a set of firm characteristic variables that affect a firm’s decision to go public.

The treatment model is estimated with a two-step approach. The first step estimates

the probability of being public from the probit model in equation (2). The second-step

includes the inverse Mills ratio (M ills) to equation (1) in order to adjust for the self-

selection bias. We report the first step of the estimation in the first column of Table A.2.

The results for the second step of the estimation are reported on Panel B of Table 2.

The negative coefficient on the inverse Mills ratio indicates that the covariance between

the error terms in the selection and outcome equations is negative. Firms are more likely

to choose go public when the impact on innovation is smaller. The coefficients on the

P ublic dummy are all positive and significant. After correcting for selection bias, public


                                             19
firms still appear to spend more on R&D, get more patents, and have higher quality and

more novel innovation. Public firms’ R&D to total assets ratio is 1.24% higher than the

size-and-industry matched private firms. Public firms on average produce three more

patents per year compared to their private counterparts.



4.4    External Finance Dependence and Innovation

To investigate the relationship between innovation and a firm’s access to stock market

financing conditional on its need for external finance, we classify firms into external

finance dependent and internal finance dependent industries. We regard industries with a

positive value of the external finance dependence measure as external finance dependent,

while those with a negative value as internal finance dependent.

   We first compare the characteristics and innovation of private and public firms in

external and internal finance dependent industries. Table 3 shows that the differences

in characteristics between private and public firms are similar among industries with

differential levels of dependence on external finance. Regarding innovation activities,

public firms produce significantly more patents than private firms and their patents are

more important and of better quality too. The differences between private and public

firms are larger in EFD industries than in IFD industries. The average difference in

patent is 1.54 for public and private firms in EFD industries, while the difference is 0.23

for those in IFD industries.

   We then estimate the treatment effect model separately for firms in EFD and IFD

industries. Table 4 shows that the coefficients on the dummy variable P ublic are pos-


                                            20
itive and significant for firms in EFD industries, but are insignificant for firms in IFD

industries.12 The result suggests that being publicly listed has a stronger impact on

innovation in industries with a greater need for external capital. For example, public

firms on average have about 4 more patents than private firms in EFD industries, while

the difference between public and private firms is negative and insignificant in industries

dependent less on external capital. The patents of public firms in the EFD industries

are also more important. Additionally, the differences in the originality and generality

of patents produced by public and private firms are only significant in EFD industries.

       To test whether the impact of public listing on innovation is significantly different

between EFD and IFD industries, we include several interaction terms to the second

step of the treatment effect model. The estimated model is as following:


Yikt = α+βP ublici +δEF Dik +θP ublici ×EF Dik +γXikt−1 +λXikt−1 ×EF Dik +φM illsi +εikt ,

                                                                                                     (3)

where EF Dik is the industry external finance index. Panel C of Table 4 reports the

coefficients on θ. The coefficients are positive and significant, indicating that the im-

pact on innovation of being publicly listed is stronger in EFD industries than in IFD

industries. Overall, the results are consistent with the view that having a public listing

status positively affects the innovation of firms with a greater need for external capital.
  12
    To ease the concern about the imbalance in the number of firms in EFD and IFD industries, we
divide firms in external finance dependent industries into tertiles and estimate the treatment effect
model using firms in the top tertile. The results are reported in Table A.3. We still observe that public
firms in external finance dependent industries have relatively better innovation profiles than private
firms and the difference is statistically significant.




                                                   21
5     Quasi-Experiments

The estimations so far are based on the treatment effect model, which directly controls

for selection bias through an inverse Mills ratio. To further ease the concern about

the non-randomness of public and private firms, we explore three quasi-experimental

designs: (1) the propensity score matching (PSM) combined with the difference-in-

differences (DD) approach that compares firms transitioning from private to public with

those remain private, (2) the triple differences (DDD) approach investigating firms that

experienced withdrawal of an IPO, and (3) a fuzzy regression discontinuity approach

investigating discontinuity in the probability of going public as a function of NASDAQ

listing requirement for net tangible assets. These quasi-experiments are used to isolate

the causal effect of public listing on innovation .



5.1    Difference-in-Differences

The first quasi-experiment uses the DD approach involving two groups: a treatment

group consisting of firms transitioning from private to public during the sample period

and a control group including firms that remain private. To estimate the treatment

effect, we compare the changes in the outcome variables of the treatment group (before

and after the implementation of the treatment) with those of the control group.

    Following the suggestion of Blundell and Dias (2000), we combine the PSM with

the DD approach. To investigate the dynamics, we require firms to have at least four

consecutive years of data and require IPO firms to have data at least two years before



                                            22
and one year after the IPO. We use the PSM method to match the IPO firms and private

firms by the propensity scores of being public from the logit regression based on their

total assets, capital expenditure, ROA, and leverage.13 The matched firms are required

to operate in the same industry. The sample used for the logit regression includes 961

IPO firms and 695 private firms. We use the year that an IPO firm goes public as the

fictitious IPO year for its matched private firm. The matched sample consists of 370

pairs of private and IPO firms; 318 pairs are in external finance dependent industries.

      After obtaining the closely matched treatment and control groups, we apply the

DD approach to difference out the cross-sectional heterogeneity or common time trend

that affects both groups of firms. Panel A of Table 5 presents the results from the DD

analysis for firms in EFD industries. We compute the DD estimator as the difference

of changes in the average patent portfolios of the treatment and control groups around

the IPO. For external finance dependent industries, firms that transition from private

to public experience an increase in the number of patents, and patent citations, as well

as the originality of the patents, while firms that remain private experience a marginal

decrease in patents. R&D as a percentage of total assets declines slightly after firms

go public, although the dollar amount of spending on innovation development increases.

The DD for the treatment and the control groups in EFD industries are statistically

significant, except for generality (Panel A). However, the DD for patent portfolios of the

treatment and control groups in IFD industries are generally insignificant (Panel B). To

the extent that the innovation activities of the private firms represent the counterfactual
 13
      We use propensity score matching with no replacement and a caliper of 0.25×standard deviation.




                                                  23
scenario if the IPO firms did not go public, the results provide no evidence that going

public impairs a firm’s ability to innovate, especially for firms in EFD industries.



5.2    Triple Differences

A potential concern with the first quasi-experiment is that the treatment effect may be

confounded by a firm’s choice of the timing of its IPO. Therefore, we explore the second

quasi-experiment which involve firms that withdrew their IPO registrations for reasons

unrelated to innovation and adopt a DDD approach. The treatment group includes firms

that eventually completed the IPO after the initial withdrawal (success sample). The

control group comprises of firms that ultimately failed to go public (withdrawn sample).

The withdrawn sample can act as a counterfactual for how the success sample would

have performed if they failed to go public.

   We focus on firms that experienced withdrawal of an initial registration statement

for two reasons. First, it eases the concern that a comparison of innovation dynamics

of IPO firms around the transition with the matched private firms may simply reflect

the difference in the lifecycles of those firms. Second, it minimizes the concern that

a comparison of the innovation activities of IPO firms without the experience of IPO

filing withdrawal with those of withdrawn firms may be confounded by endogeneity of

the decision to withdraw.

   We identify firms that withdrew their initial registrations from S&P Capital IQ and

Thomson One equity issuance databases and apply the DD and DDD estimations. Our

identification strategy compares innovation activities (1) before and after IPO, (2) across


                                              24
the success and withdrawn samples, and (3) across firms in the EFD industries and the

IFD industries. The DDD estimating equation is thus:

      Yikt = α + βSuccessi + δSuccessi × Af terit + θAf terit + δEF Dik               (4)

          + θSuccessi × EF Dik + κSuccessi × Af terit + ρSuccessi × Af terit × EF Dik

          + γXikt−1 + λXikt−1 × EF Dik + φM illsi + εikt ,

where Yikt is the measures of innovation activities: R&D, number of patents, truncation-

bias adjusted citations; Successi is a dummy variable equal to one for firms that com-

pleted an IPO after withdrawal of the initial filing and zero for firms that did not

complete an IPO after withdrawal of the initial filing; Af terit is a dummy variable that

takes a value of one for post-withdrawn years of withdrawn firms and post-IPO years of

successful IPO firms; EF Dik is an industry external finance index; and Xikt−1 is a set

of characteristic variables that affect a firm’s innovation activities.

   Table 6 reports the results of DD (Panel A) and DDD (Panel B) estimations. Panel

A shows that the coefficients on Success × Af ter are insignificant, suggesting that, on

average, there is no significant difference in the innovation of successful and withdrawn

firms in all industries. In Panel B, we condition our analysis on firms’ dependence on

external capital. The coefficient (δ) represents the differential post-IPO impact between

the treatment and control groups in IFD industries. The negative coefficients in all

specifications suggest no improvement in the innovation profile of firms in IFD after they

complete an IPO. The coefficients on the three-way interactive term (ρ) are significant

and positive in the specifications of patent and originality. The positive coefficients



                                             25
indicate that external finance dependent firms that eventually went public produce more

patents after IPO. The patents of these successful IPO firms are of higher originality

than the patents produced before IPO. The coefficients are positive but not significant

in the specifications of citations and generality. Overall, the DDD results are consistent

with the view that the access to stock markets helps the innovation of firms in a greater

need of external capital.



5.3       Parallel Test

The key identifying assumption of DDD approach is the parallel trend assumption under

which, in absence of treatment, the average outcomes for the treatment and control

groups would have the same variation. We perform two diagnostic tests to ensure the

parallel trend assumption is satisfied. The first test is a graphic diagnosis. We plot the

patent dynamics of the treatment group over the pre-withdrawn, pre-IPO, and post-

IPO periods and that of the control group over the pre-withdrawn and post-withdrawn

periods.14 Figure 1 shows that the treatment and control groups follow similar trends

in patents during the pre-withdrawn and pre-IPO eras.

       As a second test to investigate whether or not there is pre-trend in innovation prior

to the transition from private to public, we adopt an approach similar to Bertrand

and Mullainathan (2003) and Acharya and Subramanian (2009). We use four dummy

variables to capture any effects during four separate time periods: before withdrawal

of the initial registration statement (P re-W ithdrawn); during the period between the
  14
    In order to examine changes in patents around the transitions, we require that firms in the treatment
group have at least one observation in each of the three periods.


                                                   26
withdrawn year and the IPO year (P re-IP O); the IPO year and one year after the IPO

(Af ter0,1 ); and two years after the IPO and beyond (Af ter2+ ). The following model is

estimated:

 Yikt = α+βP re-W ithdrawnit +δP re-IP Oit +θAf terit0,1 +δAf teri2+ +γXikt−1 +εikt . (5)

We find that the coefficients on the dummy variables P re-W ithdrawn and P re-IP O

are all statistically insignificant (Table 7). There is no evidence of a pre-trend. The

coefficients on Af ter2+ are positive and significant in the specifications of patent and

generality, which suggests that innovation begins to increase two years after the com-

pletion of an IPO.



5.4     Regression Discontinuity

As the third strategy to examine the causal effect of an IPO on innovation, we apply a

quasi-experimental fuzzy regression discontinuity (RD) design discussed in Angrist and

Lavy (1999) and Hahn et al. (2001). Identification in a fuzzy RD relies on the assumption

that observations sufficiently close to the discontinuity threshold (x0 ) are similar. Fuzzy

RD exploits discontinuity in the probability of treatment as a function of the forcing

variable (xi ) and uses the discontinuity as an instrumental variable for treatment.15 In

our context, we use the log normalized NASDAQ listing requirement for net tangible

assets as the forcing variable xi and exploit discontinuity in the probability of an IPO
  15
     Sharp regression discontinuity is not suitable for studying public listings because an IPO is not
solely determined by the observable listing criteria. The probability of treatment (IPO) is affected by
factors other than the forcing variable. Thus, the probability of treatment does not jump from 0 to 1
when the forcing variable crosses the threshold.




                                                  27
(treatment) at the minimum listing requirement x0 so that:
                          
                          
                           f1 (xi ) if xi ≥ x0
                          
      P (IP Oi = 1|xi ) =                                                                               (6)
                          
                           f0 (xi ) if xi ≤ x0 ,
                          

where f1 (x0 ) 6= f0 (x0 ). The fuzzy RD allows for a jump in the probability of treatment

to be less than one at the threshold. The probability of treatment is a function of xi :

       E[IP Oi |xi ] = P (IP Oi = 1|xi ) = f0 (xi ) + [f1 (xi ) − f0 (xi )]zi ,                         (7)

where the dummy variable, zi = 1(xi ≥ x0 ), indicates the point where the probability

of treatment discontinues. Assuming f1 (xi ) and f0 (xi ) are described by pth-order of

polynomials, we have:

       E[IP Oi |xi ] = γ0 + γ1 xi + γ2 x2i ... + γp xpi + λzi + δ1 xi zi + δ2 x2i zi + ...δp xpi zi .   (8)

Fuzzy RD can be estimated using a two-stage least square approach with zi and the

interaction terms [xi zi , x2i zi , ...xpi zi ] as instruments for IP Oi . We specify four functional

forms for the forcing variable including the first order and the second order polynomials

and the interaction terms. Under the simple linear specification using only zi as an

instrument, the fuzzy RD reduced form model is16 :

       Yi = α + β1 zi + β2 xi + εi ,                                                                    (9)

where Yi is the outcome variable including the average number of patents, citations,

and novelty, respectively;17 β1 estimates the treatment effect, i.e., the difference in the
  16
     The reduced form models for the other three cases are Yi = α + β1 zi + β2 xi + β3 xi × zi + εi ;
Yi = α + β1 zi + β2 xi + β3 x2i + εi ; Yi = α + β1 zi + β2 xi + β3 x2i + β4 x2i × zi + εi .
  17
     The mean number of patents, citations, novelty of IPO firms are averaged over the post-IPO years,
while the means of private firms are averaged over the sample period. The sample is restricted between
1994 to 2001.




                                                     28
outcome of listing and not listing on the NADSAQ; and xi is the forcing variable centered

at the threshold.

       The forcing variable xi is defined as the log normalized level of net tangible assets

and the probability is discontinuous at the normalized minimum listing requirement, x0 .

NASDAQ required a minimum listing requirement of $4 million in net tangible assets

from February 7, 1989 to August 21, 1997 and a minimum of $6 million in net tangible

assets from August 21, 1997 to June 21, 2001.18 Following Chemmanur and Krishnan

(2012), we normalize the net tangible assets of NASDAQ IPO firms in the last fiscal

year before going public and the net tangible assets of private firms in the first sample

year as,

                          Net tangible assets
         xi = log(                                     ).
                     NASDAQ asset listing requirements

Firms with assets larger than the listing standard (xi ≥ 0) are more likely to list on the

NASDAQ.

       The average treatment effect is estimated by:
                  lim E[Yi |xi ] − lim− E[Yi |xi ]
                 x→x+
                    0              x→x0
         β=                                               .                                      (10)
              lim+ E[IP Oi |xi ] − lim− E[IP Oi |xi ]
              x→x0                 x→x0

The numerator of equation (10) is the difference in expected outcomes for firms with net

tangible assets just above and below the minimum assets requirement of the NASDAQ

and the denominator is the difference in the faction of listed firms just above and below

the threshold.
  18
    See Semenenko (2012) for changes initial listing requirements on NASDAQ. The net tangible assets
requirement was replaced by the total shareholder equity requirement after June 21, 2001. Net tangible
assets are defined as total assets exclude total liabilities and intangible assets. We use the lowest
quantitative standards as the cut-off points for listing at NASDAQ.



                                                     29
   As the first step in any RD analysis, we plot the relationship between the outcome

and the forcing variable for firms with net tangible asset larger than the NASDAQ listing

requirement over the post-IPO period and for firms with net tangible assets less than

the NASDAQ listing requirement over the sample period. Figure 2 shows a jump in

the average number of patents and the average truncation bias adjusted citations at the

cutoff, supporting our identification strategy.

   One may be concerned that the jump in innovation observed in Figure 2 could be

driven by the size difference of firms rather than by the IPO. To ease this concern, we

conduct a placebo graphic analysis using normalized net tangible assets in a random

year as the forcing variable. If the effect is caused by an IPO, we should not observe

a discontinuity in innovation at the cutoff in the placebo test. Figure 3 presents the

analysis using a firm’s first available normalized net tangible asset as the forcing variable.

We observe no jump in the average number of patents and the average truncation bias

adjusted citations at the cutoff.

   Table 8 presents the results of the fuzzy RD estimations. We report the estimates

of the average treatment effect for four functional form specifications: linear model,

linear model with a treatment interaction, quadratic model, and quadratic model with

treatment interactions. The coefficients on the indicator variable zi are positive and

statistically significant in most specifications. Firms listed on the NASDAQ on average

tend to have more patents after the listing than private firms. The quality and novelty

of patents for listed firms also appear to be higher than those for private firms.




                                             30
6     Potential Explanations

The results suggest that public firms in EFD industries are more innovative than private

firms, but not public firms in IFD industries. The differences in the patent portfolios of

private and public firms are not likely due to our sampling or estimation method choices.

In this section, we investigate the potential explanations for the observed differences.



6.1    Innovation Intensity and Innovation

One potential reason for the observed larger patent portfolios of public firms in EFD

industries could be that public listing relaxes the financial constraints of firms needing

external capital. Funding is especially important for innovation since design, develop-

ment, manufacturing, and patenting are costly. If stock markets facilitate technological

innovation through enabling cheaper capital, we would expect that firms with a higher

propensity to innovate will be more likely to go public and benefit more from being

publicly listed. To test this conjecture, we investigate innovation and public listing in

relation to innovation intensity.

    Following Acharya and Subramanian (2009), we first construct the time-series industry-

level innovation intensity as the median number of patents for all patent-producing firms

in the two-digit SIC code industries in each year. We then measure each industry’s in-

novation intensity as its time series median during 1994-2004 and use percentile ranking

of innovation intensity as the innovation intensity index. We include the innovation

intensity index in the first step of the treatment effect model. We estimate the model



                                           31
for all firms and separately for firms in external finance dependent and internal finance

dependent industries. Panel A of Table 9 reports the estimation results. The coeffi-

cients on the innovation intensity index are positive and significant in the specifications

of using all firms, suggesting that firms in innovation-intensive industries on average are

more likely to go public. However, the separate estimations show that only the more

innovative firms in EFD industries have a higher propensity to go public, while more

innovative firms in IFD industries do not.

   We next examine whether or not firms in industries with differential innovation in-

tensity benefit differently from being publicly listed. We include an interactive term

between innovation intensity and the public dummy, as well as the interaction between

EFD index and public dummy, innovation intensity, and their interaction in the second

stage of the treatment effect model. Panel B of Table 9 shows that the coefficients

on P ublic × Intensity are positive, suggesting that public firms in more innovative in-

dustries have a better innovation profile than their private counterparts. The positive

coefficients on EF D × P ublic × Intensity in specifications related to patent portfolios

indicate that the benefits associated with public listing for innovative firms are stronger

in external finance dependent industries. In sum, the results are consistent with our

conjecture and suggest that the access to stock markets is beneficial for innovative firms

in a greater need of capital.




                                             32
6.2    Innovation Efficiency

R&D investment is an input to innovation and innovative output is usually revealed

by patents (Griliches (1990)). Firms differ in their abilities to convert their spending

on R&D to fruitful output. To investigate the possibility that the difference in patent

portfolios between public and private firms may be related to the variation in their

innovation efficiency, we measure innovation efficiency as the natural logarithm of one

plus patents per dollar R&D investment.

   In Table 10, we test whether public and private firms differ in their production of

patents from R&D. We estimate the treatment effect model separately for firms in ex-

ternal and internal finance dependent industries and then examine the differential effect.

The coefficient on the public dummy is positive and significant in the specification of

EFD industries, but insignificant in the specification of IFD industries. The coefficient

on the interaction between EF D and P ublic dummy is positive and significant. The

results indicate that public firms in EFD industries outperform private firms in inno-

vation efficiency. However, public firms in IFD industries are not necessarily able to

generate more patents from their investments in R&D than their private counterparts.

Overall, our results suggest that higher efficiency augmented with more capital associ-

ated with public listing improves the innovation profile of public firms in external finance

dependent industries.




                                            33
6.3    Short-Termism

Stock markets have been criticized for providing incentives to managers to pursue short-

term performance at the expenses of long-term value (Stein (1989), Bolton et al. (2006)).

Facing the pressure of meeting short-term earnings, managers of public firms may behave

in a myopic manner. Acharya et al. (2013) suggest that managers have incentives to

conduct real income smoothing by manipulating production in an attempt to manage

market expectations. These models, however, do not feature financial dependence.

   There is substantial evidence that the managers of public firms engage in earnings

management in order to meet earnings targets (see Healy and Wahlen (1999) for a re-

view). Accruals management and real earnings management (REM) are the two types

of typical earnings management. Accruals management involves manipulation of accru-

als through the choice of accounting methods with no direct cash flow consequences.

Real earnings management is accomplished by changing the firm’s underlying opera-

tions that affect cash flows. Examples of real earnings management activities include

decreasing discretionary selling, general & administrative expenses (SGA), and cutting

R&D expenses (Roychowdhury (2006)). Graham et al. (2005) suggest that managers

prefer real earnings management to accruals management since it is harder for auditors

and regulators to detect real activities manipulation.

   In our context, the model of short-termism predicts that public firms would have

incentives to engage in real earnings management. Nevertheless, we expect the extent

of REM depends both on whether the firm is in an external finance dependent industry

and the firm’s innovation capacity. To investigate these relationships, we estimate the


                                           34
normal discretionary expenses from the cross-sectional regression for every two-digit SIC

industry and year, following Roychowdhury (2006):

     DISXi,t /T Ai,t−1 = α + β1 (1/T Ai,t−1 ) + β2 (Salesi,t−1 /T Ai,t−1 ) + εi,t     (11)

where DISXi,t is the discretionary expenditures of firm i in time t, including advertising

expenses and SGA expenses; T Ai,t−1 is total assets of firm i in time t − 1; and Salesi,t−1

is total revenue. The model is estimated using the Fama and MacBeth (1973) method.

This approach partially controls for industry-wide shocks while allowing the coefficients

to vary across time.

   We estimate the normal discretionary expenses by the fitted values from the Equa-

tion (11). The abnormal discretionary expenses are computed as the difference between

the normal level of discretionary expenses and the actual discretionary expenses. A

higher value of abnormal discretionary expenses indicates that a firm engages more in

real earnings management.

   In Table 11, we first examine whether public firms in IFD industries engage more real

earnings management than those in EFD industries. We conduct the test using both

the full sample and the matched sample. Panel A shows that abnormal discretionary

expenses (REM ) are on average positive for public firms in IFD industries and negative

for public firms in EFD industries. The result suggests that public firms in industries

dependent on internal capital are more likely to cut their discretionary spending, but

public firms in industries dependent on external capital are less likely to do so.

   We then further investigate real earnings management activities in EFD industries

based on the degree of innovation. Specifically, we examine whether more innovative

                                              35
public firms in EFD industries do more or less real earnings management. To answer

this question, we classify firms into four groups according to their R&D ratios. Group 1

includes firms with no spending on R&D (non-innovative firms) and Group 4 consists of

firms with the highest R&D ratio. Panel B of Table 11 presents a monotonic relationship

between real earnings management and the degree of innovation. More innovative firms

(Group 4) tend to engage less in real earnings management than less innovative firms

(Group 1). Overall, our results suggest that more innovative public firms in a great need

for external capital have lower incentives to behave myopically. The results also help to

explain our finding that public firms in EFD industries have a better innovation profile.



6.4    Acquisitions

Innovation can be achieved both internally and externally. Seru (2013) shows that inno-

vation acquisition can be a more efficient way to innovate for mature firms with internal

capital markets. Firms may engage in mergers & acquisitions (M&A) for the purpose

of purchasing innovative technologies and enhancing innovation productivity (Bena and

Li (2013), Sevilir and Tian (2013)). M&A transactions require a substantial amount of

capital. Public listing enables firms to raise the capital that they need for M&A. Indeed,

Bernstein (2012) documents that capital infusion from an IPO allows firms to purchase

better quality external patents through M&A. Hence, the better innovation profile of

public firms compared to private firms in EFD industries may also be because public list-

ing facilitates innovation-acquisition-driven M&A. Nevertheless, this acquisition-based

explanation is consistent with the financing-based explanation since the access to stock


                                           36
markets provides the financing needed for patent acquisitions.




7      Conclusions

This paper examines how innovation depends on whether a firm is listed on a stock

market and the need for external capital by studying the innovation activities of a large

sample of private and public firms. We estimate the treatment effect model that directly

controls for selection bias caused by the endogenous choice of going public. Our results

show that public firms in external finance dependent industries on average have more

patents, their patents receive more citations, and are more novel than private firms. To

establish causality, we exploit three quasi-experiments to estimate the treatment effect.

We find that public listing appears to be beneficial to the innovation of firms in industries

dependent more on external finance. The benefits on innovation likely come from the

access to public equity which may help to alleviate the financial constraints faced by

those firms.




References
Acharya, Viral, Ramin Baghai, and Krishnamurthy Subramanian, 2013, Wrongful dis-
  charge laws and innovation, Review of Financial Studies forthcoming.

Acharya, Viral, and Krishnamurthy Subramanian, 2009, Bankruptcy codes and innova-
    tion, Review of Financial Studies 22, 4949–4988.

Acs, Zoltan J., and David B. Audrestsch, 1988, Innovation in large and small firms: An
    empirical analysis, American Economic Review 78, 678–690.



                                             37
Aghion, Philippe, Nick Bloom, Richard Blundell, Rachel Griffith, and Peter Howitt,
  2005, Competition and innovation: An inverted-U relationship, Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 120, 701–728.

Aghion, Philippe, John Van Reenen, and Luigi Zingales, 2013, Innovation and institu-
  tional ownership, American Economic Review 103, 227–304.

Allen, Franklin, and Douglas Gale, 1999, Diversity of opinion and financing of new
  technologies, Journal of Financial Intermediation 8, 68–89.

Amore, Mario Daniele, Cedric Schneider, and Alminas Zaldokas, 2013, Credit supply
  and corporate innovations, Journal of Financial Economics forthcoming.

Angrist, Joshua D., and Victor Lavy, 1999, Using maimonides rule to estimate the effect
  of class size on scholastic achievement, Quarterly Journal of Economics 114, 533–575.

Asker, John, Joan Farre-Mensa, and Alexander Ljungqvist, 2011, Does the stock market
  distort investment incentives, Working paper.

Aspen Institute, 2009, Overcoming short-termism: A call for a more responsible ap-
  proach to investment and business management.

Atanassov, Julian, 2013, Do hostile takeovers stifle innovation? evidence from anti-
  takeover legislation and corporate patenting, Journal of Finance 68, 1097–1131.

Bebchuk, Lucian Arye, and Lars A. Stole, 1993, Do short-term objectives lead to under-
  or over-investment in long-term projects, Journal of Finance 48, 719–729.

Bena, Jan, and Kai Li, 2013, Corporate innovations and mergers and acquisitions, Jour-
  nal of Finance forthcoming.

Benninga, Luigi, Fabio Schiantarelli, and Alessandro Sembenelli, 2005, The timing of
  initial public offerings, Journal of Financial Economics 75, 115–132.

Bernstein, Shai, 2012, Does going public affect innovation?, Working Paper, Available
  at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2061441 .

Bertrand, Marianne, and Sendhil Mullainathan, 2003, Pyramids, Journal of the Euro-
  pean Economic Association 1, 478–483.


                                          38
Blundell, Richard, and Monica Costa Dias, 2000, Evaluation methods for non-
  experimental data, Fiscal Studies 21, 427–468.

Bolton, Patrick, Jose Scheinkman, and Wei Xiong, 2006, Executive compensation and
  short-termist behaviour in speculative markets, Review of Economic Studies 73, 577–
  610.

Brav, Omer, 2009, Access to capital, capital structure, and the funding of the firm,
  Journal of Finance 64, 263–308.

Brown, James R., Steven M. Fazzari, and Bruce C. Petersen, 2009, Financing innovation
  and growth: Cash flow, external equity, and the 1990s R&D boom, Journal of Finance
  64, 151–185.

Brown, James R., Gustav Martinsson, and Bruce C. Petersen, 2013, Law, stock markets,
  and innovation, Journal of Finance forthcoming.

Chava, Sudheer, Alexander Oettl, Ajay Subramanian, and Krishnamurthy Subrama-
 nian, 2013, Banking deregulation and innovation, Journal of Financial Economics
  forthcoming.

Chemmanur, Thomas J., and Karthik Krishnan, 2012, Heterogeneous beliefs, IPO val-
  uation, and the economic role of the underwriter in IPOs, Financial Management
  forthcoming.

Dunbar, Craig, and Stephen R. Foerster, 2008, Second time lucky? Withdrawn IPOs
  that return to the market, Journal Of Financial Economics 87, 610–635.

Fama, Eugene F., and James D. MacBeth, 1973, Risk, return, and equilibrium: Empir-
  ical tests, Journal of Political Economy 81, 607–636.

Ferreira, Daniel, Gustavo Manso, and Andre Silva, 2012, Incentives to innovate and the
  decision to go public or private, Review of Financial Studies forthcoming.

Gao, Huasheng, Jarrad Harford, and Kai Li, 2013, Determinants of corporate cash
  policy: Insights from private firms, Journal of Financial Economics 109, 623–639.

Graham, John R., Campbell R. Harvey, and Shiva Rajgopal, 2005, The economic im-
  plications of corporate financial reporting, Journal of Accounting and Economics 40,
  3–73.

                                          39
Griliches, Zvi, 1990, Patent statistics as economic indicators: A survey, Journal of Eco-
  nomic Literature 28, 1661–1707.

Hahn, Jinyong, Petra Todd, and Wilbert van der Klaauw, 2001, Estimation of treatment
  effects with a quasi-experimental regression-discontinuity design, Econometrica 69,
  201–209.

Hall, Bronwyn H., Adam B. Jaffe, and Manuel Trajtenberg, 2001, The NBER patent
  and citation data file: Lessons, insights and methodological tools, NBER Working
  paper.

Hall, Bronwyn H., Adam B. Jaffe, and Manuel Trajtenberg, 2005, Market value and
  patent citations, RAND Journal of Economics 36, 16–38.

Hall, Bronwyn H., and Josh Lerner, 2010, Handbook of the Economics of Innovation,
  chapter The Financing of R&D and Innovation (Elsevier-North-Holland).

Healy, Paul, and James Wahlen, 1999, A review of the earnings management literature
  and its implications for standard setting, Accounting Horizons 17, 365–383.

Holmstrom, Bengt, 1989, Agency costs and innovation, Journal of Economic Behavior
  and Organization 12, 305–327.

Hsu, Po-Hsuan, Xuan Tian, and Yan Xu, 2013, Financial development and innovation:
  Cross-country evidence, Journal of Financial Economics forthcoming.

Lerner, Josh, Morten Sorensen, and Per Stromberg, 2011, Private equity and long-run
  investment: The case of innovation, Journal of Finance 66, 445–477.

Maksimovic, Vojislav, Gordon Philips, and Liu Yang, 2012, Private and public merger
  waves, Journal of Finance forthcoming.

Michaely, Roni, and Michael R. Roberts, 2012, Corporate dividend policies: Lessons
  from private firms, Review of Financial Studies 25, 711–746.

Mortal, Sandra, and Natalia Reisel, 2012, Capital allocation by public and private firms,
  Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis forthcoming.

Pagano, Marco, Fabio Panetta, and Luigi Zingales, 1998, Why do companies go public?
  An empirical analysis, Journal of Finance 53, 27–64.

                                           40
Rajan, Raghuram G., 2012, Presidential address: The corporation in finance, Journal
  of Finance 67, 1173–1217.

Rajan, Raghuram G., and Luigi Zingales, 1998, Financial development and growth,
  American Economic Review 88, 393–410.

Roychowdhury, Sugata, 2006, Earnings management through real activities manipula-
  tion, Journal of Accounting and Economics 42, 335–370.

Saunders, Anthony, and Sascha Steffen, 2011, The costs of being private: Evidence from
  the loan market, Review of Financial Studies 24, 4091–4122.

Scharfstein, David S., and Jeremy C. Stein, 1990, Herd behavior and investment, Amer-
  ican Economic Review 80, 465–479.

Schenone, Carola, 2010, Lending relationships and information rents: Do banks exploit
  their information advantages, Review of Financial Studies 23, 1149–1199.

Semenenko, Igor, 2012, Listing standards and IPO performance: Is more regulation
  better?, Journal of Applied Finance and Banking 2, 209–248.

Seru, Amit, 2013, Firm boundaries matter: Evidence from conglomerates and R&D
  activity, Journal of Financial Economics forthcoming.

Sevilir, Merih, and Xuan Tian, 2013, Acquiring innovation, Working Paper.

Stein, Jeremy C., 1989, Efficient capital markets, inefficient firms: A model of myopic
  corporate behavior, Quarterly Journal of Economics 104, 655–669.

Stigliz, Joseph, 1985, Credit markets and capital control, Journal of Money, Credit and
  Banking 17, 133–152.

Tian, Xuan, and Tracy Yue Wang, 2012, Tolerance for failure and corporate innovation,
  Review of Financial Studies forthcoming.

Trajtenberg, Manuel, 1990, A penny for your quotes: Patent citations and the value of
  information, Rand Journal of Economics 21, 325–342.

Trajtenberg, Manuel, Rebecca Henderson, and Adam Jaffe, 1997, University versus cor-
  porate patents: A window on the basicness of invention, Economics of Innovation and
  New Technology 5, 19–50.

                                          41
Figure 1: Patent Dynamics of Successful and Withdrawn Firms

This figure shows the patent dynamics of successful and withdrawn firms. We plot the
average number of patents over the pre-withdrawn, the pre-IPO, and the post-IPO periods
for firms that went public after the initial withdrawal of filings and the average number of
patents over the pre-withdrawn and the post-withdrawn periods for firms that did not go
public after the initial withdrawal of filings.

                                     W−6   W−5   W−4   W−3   W−2    W−1    W     W+1    W+2    W+3   W+4   W+5
                      10
                      9
         Average Number of Patents
         2 3 4 5 6 7 81
                      0




                                     W−3   W−2   W−1   W     IPO−2 IPO−1   IPO   IPO+1 IPO+2 IPO+3 IPO+4 IPO+5

                                                                Success            Withdrawn




                                                                    42
Figure 2: Discontinuous Effect of NASDAQ Listing and Innovation

This figure shows the discontinuous effect of NASDAQ listing on innovation. We plot the
average number of patents (top figure) and the average truncation-bias adjusted relative
citation (bottom figure) over the post-IPO period for NASDAQ IPO firms and the average
number of patents (top figure) and the average truncation-bias adjusted citations (bottom
figure) over the sample period for private firms on bin width of 0.4. We use net tangible
assets as the forcing variable and the minimum net tangible assets requirement of the
NASDAQ listing as the threshold. Net tangible assets are normalized to have a value of
zero at the threshold. The sample period is from 1994 to 2001.
                                      8      7
                   Average Number of Patents
                      2   3   4   5   1
                                      06




                                                               −4   −2              0              2               4
                                                                    Normalized Net Tangible Assets
                                                                       Patent
                                                                       Net Tangible Assets < Listing Requirement
                                                                       Net Tangible Assets > Listing Requirement
                                                      1
                   Truncation−Bias Adjusted Citations
                       .2     .4      .6
                                      0       .8




                                                          −5                      0                                    5
                                                                    Normalized Net Tangible Assets
                                                                       Truncation−Bias Adjusted Citations
                                                                       Net Tangible Assets < Listing Requirement
                                                                       Net Tangible Assets > Listing Requirement




                                                                                43
Figure 3: Placebo Test

This figure shows the placebo discontinuous effect of a NASDAQ listing on innovation. We
plot the average number of patents over the sample period for private firms on bin width
of 0.4. We use net tangible assets in the first year of each firm as the forcing variable and
the minimum net tangible assets requirement of the NASDAQ listing as the threshold. Net
tangible assets are normalized to have a value of zero at the threshold. The sample period
is from 1994 to 2001.
                                       8      7
                    Average Number of Patents
                       2   3   4   5   1
                                       06




                                                           −5                 0                                5
                                                                Normalized Net Tangible Assets
                                                                   Patent
                                                                   Net Tangible Assets < Listing Requirement
                                                                   Net Tangible Assets > Listing Requirement
                                                       1
                    Truncation−Bias Adjusted Citations
                        .2      .4     .6
                                       0       .8




                                                           −5                 0                                5
                                                                Normalized Net Tangible Assets
                                                                   Truncation−Bias Adjusted Citations
                                                                   Net Tangible Assets < Listing Requirement
                                                                   Net Tangible Assets > Listing Requirement




                                                                            44
Table 1:
Firm Characteristics and Innovation Activities of Private and Public Firms

This table compares the means of characteristic variables for the full sample of private and public
firms and for an industry-and-size matched sample. The full sample (Panel A) consists of 11,255
U.S. firms (2,392 private firms and 8,863 public firms) from Capital IQ from 1994 to 2004. The
matched sample (Panel B) includes 1,717 matched pairs of private and public firms. ln(Sales) is the
log of total revenue. S.Growth is the first difference of natural logarithm of total revenue. T angible
is tangible (fixed) assets scaled by total assets. Cash is total cash scaled by total assets. ROA
is EBITDA divided by total assets. Age is the difference between current year and founding year.
Capex is capital expenditures scaled by total assets. R&D is a ratio of research and development
expenditures to total assets. P atent is the number of patents applied by a firm in a given year.
Citations is citations per patent adjusted for truncation bias by dividing the number of citations
by the average amount of citations in in the same year and technology class. Originality of patent
is Herfindahl index of cited patents and Generality is Herfindahl index of citing patent. T angible,
Leverage, Cash, ROA, Capex, R&D are reported in percentage in this table. Dif f is the difference
in means of private and public firms from the t-test. t-stat is test statistics of the t-test.


                                            Panel A: Full Sample
             ln(Sales)     S. Growth       Tangible     Cash      ROA                      Age
 Private         4.55          0.21          29.74      14.66      2.67                   26.21
 Public          4.78          0.14          26.20      18.89      3.79                   33.50
 Diff           0.23          -0.07          -3.54       4.23      1.11                    7.30
 t-stat          9.86        -10.78         -15.27      18.18      4.41                   20.57
              Capex           R&D           Patent    Citations Originality             Generality
 Private         7.20          5.48           0.99       0.18      0.04                    0.06
 Public          6.31          4.93           7.03       0.32      0.07                    0.12
 Diff           -0.89         -0.54           6.04       0.14      0.03                    0.06
 t-stat        -12.21         -5.01           9.66      13.89     20.29                   28.20

                                    Panel B: Matched Sample
             ln(Sales)     S. Growth Tangible    Cash       ROA                            Age
 Private        4.78           0.17    30.91     11.94       5.20                         28.79
 Public         4.81           0.13    27.83     17.62       4.15                         34.86
 Diff          0.03           -0.04    -3.08      5.68      -1.05                          6.07
 t-stat         0.89          -3.48    -8.07     16.89      -2.84                         10.93
              Capex           R&D     Patent   Citations Originality                    Generality
 Private        6.74           3.63     0.58      0.11       0.02                          0.04
 Public         6.40           4.15     1.94      0.28       0.06                          0.10
 Diff          -0.34           0.52     1.36      0.17       0.04                          0.06
 t-stat        -2.92           3.30     7.53     10.73      17.24                         20.00



                                                  45
Table 2:
Regression Estimations for Innovation Activities of Private and Public Firms

The table reports the effect of being public on innovation using the fixed effect model (Panel A)
and the treatment effect model (Panel B). The results are based on the matched sample In Panel
A, the following fixed effect model is estimated: Yikt = α + βP ublici + γXikt−1 + ηk + ζt + εikt ,
where Yikt is the measures of innovation activities: R&D ratio, number of patents, truncation
bias adjusted citations, originality, and generality; P ublici is a dummy variable equal to one for
public firms and zero for private firms; Xikt is a set of characteristic variables that affect a firm’s
innovation activities, including ln(Sales) (log of total revenue), T angible (tangible assets scaled by
total assets), Cash (total cash scaled by total assets), Age (the difference between current year and
founding year), Capex (capital expenditures scaled by total assets), S.Growth (the first difference of
natural logarithm of total revenue), ROA (EBITDA divided by total assets); ηk control for industry
effects based on two-digit SIC codes; and ζt control for year fixed effects. The robust standard errors
adjusted for heteroskedasticity are reported in the brackets. In Panel B, we estimate the treatment
effect model to address the concern that a firm’s decision to go public may not be random (selection
bias). The treatment effect model is estimated with a two-step approach. The first step estimates the
probability of being public based on a firm’s logarithm of total assets, capital expenditure, growth
in sales, ROA, leverage, and industry external finance index from a probit model. The inverse Mills
ratio (M ills) is included in the second-step to adjust for self-selection. Industry effects based on
two-digit SIC codes and year fixed effects are controlled in the treatment model. ** indicates the 1%
significant level of the t-test; ** denotes the 5% significant level; and * denotes the 10% significant
level.
                                         Panel A: Fixed Effects      Model
                      R&D             Patent      Citations          Originality       Generality
  Public           0.0048***        1.4331***     0.1241***          0.0230***          0.0512***
                    [0.0012]         [0.1809]      [0.0163]           [0.0023]           [0.0037]
  ln(Sales)          0.0001         1.3572***     0.0528***          0.0077***          0.0200***
                    [0.0005]         [0.1613]      [0.0059]           [0.0008]           [0.0012]
  Tangible         0.0112***        2.1185***      0.0738*             0.0073             0.0065
                    [0.0033]         [0.6194]      [0.0442]           [0.0068]           [0.0100]
  Cash             0.1247***        3.5910***     0.7453***          0.0918***          0.1608***
                    [0.0068]         [0.7282]      [0.1304]           [0.0101]           [0.0138]
  Age             -0.0001***         -0.0023        0.0000           0.0001***          0.0002***
                    [0.0000]         [0.0041]      [0.0002]           [0.0000]           [0.0001]
  Capex              0.0005           2.9620        0.0213             0.0353            0.0665**
                    [0.0118]         [2.1412]      [0.1285]           [0.0227]           [0.0318]
  S.Growth         -0.0056**         -0.1837        0.0060            0.0044*             0.0052
                    [0.0025]         [0.1464]      [0.0256]           [0.0025]           [0.0040]
  ROA             -0.1367***       -1.2809***      -0.1212             0.0016            -0.0254*
                    [0.0089]         [0.4331]      [0.0964]           [0.0088]           [0.0132]
  Constant           0.0018        -7.0876*** -0.3006***               0.0014          -0.1183***
                    [0.0045]         [1.5386]      [0.0732]           [0.0146]           [0.0241]
  N                   9,620            9,620         9,620              9,620              9,620
  R2                 0.4177           0.0711        0.0560             0.1581             0.2041


                                                  46
                           Panel B: Treatment Effect Model
                R&D        Patent     Citations Originality   Generality
Public       0.0124***   2.7973*** 0.2107*** 0.0778***        0.0360***
              [0.0046]    [0.8565]     [0.0791]    [0.0128]    [0.0088]
ln(Sales)      0.0002    1.3740*** 0.0538*** 0.0203***        0.0079***
              [0.0005]    [0.0837]     [0.0077]    [0.0013]    [0.0009]
Tangible     0.0116***   2.1959***      0.0787      0.0080      0.0080
              [0.0045]    [0.8283]     [0.0765]    [0.0124]    [0.0085]
Cash         0.1231***   3.3087*** 0.7274*** 0.1553***        0.0891***
              [0.0043]    [0.8062]     [0.0745]    [0.0120]    [0.0083]
Age         -0.0001***     -0.0031      0.0000    0.0002***    0.0001**
              [0.0000]    [0.0043]     [0.0004]    [0.0001]    [0.0000]
Capex          -0.0023      2.4526     -0.0110      0.0566       0.0305
              [0.0125]    [2.3298]     [0.2152]    [0.0348]    [0.0239]
S.Growth    -0.0056***     -0.1760      0.0065      0.0053     0.0045*
              [0.0013]    [0.2405]     [0.0222]    [0.0036]    [0.0025]
ROA         -0.1360***     -1.1525     -0.1131    -0.0229**      0.0028
              [0.0042]    [0.7706]     [0.0712]    [0.0115]    [0.0079]
Mills         -0.0049*    -0.8864*     -0.0563    -0.0173**     -0.0085
              [0.0028]    [0.5203]     [0.0481]    [0.0078]    [0.0053]
Constant       -0.0046   -8.2398**     -0.3738    -0.1407**     -0.0097
              [0.0198]    [3.6744]     [0.3396]    [0.0549]    [0.0376]
N               9,620       9,620        9,620       9,620        9,620




                                   47
Table 3:
Firm Characteristics of Private and Public Firms in EFD and IFD Industries

This table compares the means of characteristic variables for industry-and-size matched private and
public firms in external finance dependent (EFD) and internal finance dependent (IFD) industries.
We regard industries with a positive value of the external finance dependence measure as external
finance dependent, while those with a negative value as internal finance dependent. A firm’s need for
external finance in a year is measured as the fraction of capital expenditures not financed through
internal cash flow. Internal cash flow defined as net income plus depreciation and amortization plus
interest expense. The time-series industry-level external finance dependence is constructed as the
median value of external finance needs of all firms in the two-digit SIC code industry in each year.
We then measure each industry’s external finance as its time series median during 1994-2004 period.
ln(Sales) is defined as log of total revenue. S.Growth is the first difference of natural logarithm of
total revenue, T angible is tangible (fixed) assets scaled by total assets. Cash is total cash scaled by
total assets. ROA is EBITDA divided by total assets. Age is the difference between current year
and founding year. Capex is capital expenditures scaled by total assets. R&D is a ratio of research
and development expenditures to total assets. P atent is the number of patents applied by a firm in
a given year. Citations is citations per patent adjusted for truncation bias by dividing the number
of citations by the average amount of citations in in the same year and technology class. Originality
of patent is the Herfindahl index of cited patents and Generality is the Herfindahl index of citing
patent. T angible, Leverage, Cash, ROA, and Capex are reported in percentage in this table. Dif f
is the difference in means of private and public firms from the t-test. t − stat is the t-statistics of
t-test.

                        Panel A: External Finance Dependent Industries
              ln(Sales) S.Growth Tangible       Cash        ROA         Age
  Private        4.64      0.18      31.91      12.94        4.08      27.50
  Public         4.69      0.14      28.93      19.12        3.25      32.91
  Diff          0.05      -0.05       -2.99      6.17       -0.83      5.41
  t-stat         1.19     -3.80       -7.07     16.16       -1.97      9.41
               Capex      R&D        Patent   Citations Originality Generality
  Private        7.21      4.26       0.66       0.12        0.02       0.05
  Public         6.76      4.76       2.21       0.32        0.07       0.11
  Diff          -0.44      0.50       1.54       0.19        0.04       0.07
  t-stat        -3.36     2.72         7.28     10.45       17.19      19.59

                            Panel B: Internal Finance Dependent Industries
              ln(Sales)     S.Growth Tangible        Cash       ROA         Age
  Private       5.50          0.11        25.55      6.60       11.15      35.52
  Public        5.53          0.12        21.40      8.86        9.42      46.41
  Diff          0.03          0.01        -4.15      2.25       -1.73      10.89
  t-stat        0.39          0.36        -5.06      4.45       -2.92      6.44
               Capex          R&D        Patent    Citations Originality Generality
  Private       4.25          0.25         0.13      0.04        0.01       0.02
  Public        4.25          0.55         0.37      0.07        0.02       0.03
  Diff          0.01          0.31         0.23      0.03        0.01       0.02
  t-stat        0.05          2.68         2.87      2.01        1.95       3.69
                                              48
Table 4:
External Finance Dependence and Innovation

This table reports the estimation results for private and public firms in external finance dependent
(Panel A) and internal finance dependent industries (Panel B) and the estimation results for the
differential effects (Panel C). We estimate the treatment effect model to address the concern that
a firm’s decision to go public may not be random (selection bias). The treatment effect model
is estimated with a two-step approach. The first step estimates the probability of being public
based on a firm’s logarithm of total assets, capital expenditure, growth in sales, ROA, and leverage
from a probit model. The inverse Mills ratio (M ills) is included in the second-step to adjust
for selection bias. The dependent variable is the measures of innovation activities: R&D ratio,
number of patents, truncation bias adjusted citations, originality, and generality. P ublici is a dummy
variable equal to one for public firms and zero for private firms. The control variables are a set
of characteristic variables that affect a firm’s innovation activities, including ln(Sales), T angible,
Cash, Age, capital expenditure, growth in sales, and ROA. Year and industry fixed effects are
controlled. In Panel C, we estimate the treatment effect model with the second-step model as
Yikt = α + βP ublici + δEF Dik + θP ublici × EF Dik + γXikt−1 + λXikt−1 × EF Dik + φM illsi + εikt ,
where EF Dik is an industry external finance index. Xikt−1 includes ln(Sales), T angible, Cash,
Age, capital expenditure, growth in sales, and ROA. The coefficients on the interactive term, θ, are
reported. Two-step consistent standard errors are reported in the brackets. *** indicates the 1%
significant level of the t-test; ** denotes the 5% significant level; and * denotes the 10% significant
level.


                             Panel A: External      Finance Dependent Industries
                       R&D           Patent         Citations   Originality Generality
   Public           0.0179***     3.6867***         0.2817***    0.1018***    0.0495***
                     [0.0055]       [1.0251]         [0.0943]     [0.0148]     [0.0102]
   ln(Sales)          0.0003      1.5496***         0.0607***    0.0229***    0.0091***
                     [0.0005]       [0.0973]         [0.0089]     [0.0014]     [0.0010]
   Tangible          0.0118**     2.8021***           0.1021        0.0168       0.012
                     [0.0052]       [0.9771]         [0.0899]     [0.0141]     [0.0097]
   Cash             0.1280***     3.5547***         0.7580***    0.1606***    0.0939***
                     [0.0049]       [0.9163]         [0.0843]     [0.0132]     [0.0091]
   Age             -0.0001***       -0.0034          -0.0002      0.0002**     0.0001*
                     [0.0000]       [0.0053]         [0.0005]     [0.0001]     [0.0001]
   Capex              -0.0054        1.7553          -0.0744        0.0325       0.014
                     [0.0140]       [2.6300]         [0.2419]     [0.0380]     [0.0261]
   S.Growth        -0.0061***       -0.1724           0.0085       0.0063      0.0053**
                     [0.0014]       [0.2694]         [0.0248]     [0.0039]     [0.0027]
   ROA             -0.1394***       -1.2591          -0.1011       -0.0191       0.006
                     [0.0047]       [0.8802]         [0.0809]     [0.0127]     [0.0087]
   Mills           -0.0086***      -1.2782**         -0.0855    -0.0265***    -0.0133**
                     [0.0033]       [0.6190]         [0.0569]     [0.0089]     [0.0061]
   Constant           -0.0078      -9.8142**         -0.4547    -0.1693***      -0.017
                     [0.0213]       [4.0092]         [0.3691]     [0.0578]     [0.0398]
   N                   8,109          8,109            8,109        8,109        8,109

                                                  49
                       Panel B: Internal Finance Dependent Industries
                 R&D          Patent      Citations  Originality Generality
Public         -0.0013       -0.3748        -0.0207     -0.0062       -0.0131
               [0.0044]      [0.3784]      [0.0586]    [0.0196]      [0.0128]
ln(Sales)    -0.0016***     0.2142***        0.0071      0.0036       -0.0002
               [0.0005]      [0.0454]      [0.0070]    [0.0024]      [0.0015]
Tangible        0.0034       -0.1570        -0.0526    -0.0389*       -0.0132
               [0.0048]      [0.4140]      [0.0645]    [0.0216]      [0.0141]
Cash         0.0277***      1.6146***     0.2504***   0.0818***      0.0324*
               [0.0066]      [0.5705]      [0.0888]    [0.0298]      [0.0194]
Age             0.0000       0.0034*       0.0006**   0.0003***     0.0002***
               [0.0000]      [0.0017]      [0.0003]    [0.0001]      [0.0001]
Capex           0.0304        1.6156        0.4859*   0.2300***      0.1115*
               [0.0199]      [1.7122]      [0.2653]    [0.0889]      [0.0580]
S.Growth       -0.0028       -0.2170        -0.0319     -0.0062       -0.0084
               [0.0022]      [0.1887]      [0.0292]    [0.0098]      [0.0064]
ROA          -0.0611*** -1.4910***         -0.1424*   -0.0635**      -0.0337*
               [0.0060]      [0.5152]      [0.0797]    [0.0267]      [0.0174]
Mills           0.0035       0.4055*         0.0181     0.0098         0.0072
               [0.0028]      [0.2376]      [0.0368]    [0.0123]      [0.0080]
Constant       0.0133*       -0.6258        -0.0431     -0.0312        0.0116
               [0.0073]      [0.6231]      [0.0969]    [0.0325]      [0.0211]
N                1,511         1,511          1,511      1,511          1,511

              Panel C: External vs. Internal Finance Dependent Industries
               R&D         Patent      Citations    Originality Generality
EFD×Public   0.0144**     2.1082*        0.1113     0.0906***    0.0406***
             [0.0062]     [1.1348]      [0.1043]     [0.0178]     [0.0121]




                                   50
Table 5:
The Influence of IPO: Difference-in-Differences

This table reports the effect of IPO on innovation for firms in external finance dependent industries
(Panel A) and internal finance dependent industries (Panel B) using difference-in-differences method.
We identify a group of firms transition from private to public during the sample period. For each
IPO firms, we find a similar private firms based on firm characteristics and industries. IPO firms
are matched to the private firms based on the the first year characteristics. In order to examine
the transition, firms are required to have minimum four years of consecutive data and to have at
least two year pre-IPO and one year post-IPO data. Firms in the two groups are matched by
the propensity scores of being public from the logit regression based on their total assets, capital
expenditure, ROA, and leverage. The sample used for the logit regression includes 695 private firms
and 961 IPO firms. The matched sample consists of 370 pairs of private and IPO firms and among
them 318 pairs in external finance dependent industries and 52 pairs in internal finance dependent
industries. We use the year that an IPO firm go public as the fictitious IPO year for its matched
private firm. ∆ represents the difference between innovation activities of IPO firms after and before
IPO and those of matched private firms after and before the fictitious IPO. R&D is a ratio of
research and development expenditures to total assets. P atent is the number of patents applied by
a firm in a given year. Citations is citations per patent scaled by the average citation counts of all
patents applied in the same year and technology class. Originality is the Herfindahl index of cited
patents. Generality is the Herfindahl index of citing patents. Dif f − in − Dif f is the difference of
differences in the average innovation activities of the treatment and control groups from the t-test.
t-stat is the t-statistics of t-test estimated by linear regression. *** indicates the 1% significant level
of the t-test; ** denotes the 5% significant level; and * denotes the 10% significant level.

                                      Panel A: External Finance Dependent Industries
                                ∆R&D ∆Patent ∆Citations ∆Originality ∆Generality
Matched Private Firms            -0.001    -0.692     -0.010       -0.005       -0.016
Matched Public Firms             -0.011    1.047       0.085        0.039       -0.011
Diff-in-Diff                    -0.010* 1.739***      0.095*      0.044***       0.005
t-stat                           -1.960     2.680      1.880        3.700        0.600

                            Panel B: Internal Finance Dependent Industries
                       ∆R&D ∆Patent ∆Citations ∆Originality ∆Generality
Matched Private Firms 0.001     -0.186       -0.042      -0.022        -0.020
Matched Public Firms   -0.003    0.374       0.006       0.006         -0.009
Diff-in-Diff          -0.004**   0.560        0.047      0.028*         0.012
t-stat                 -2.050    0.790        0.800      1.960          1.060




                                                    51
Table 6:
Success versus Withdrawal
This table reports the regression results on innovation of firms that withdrew their initial IPO filings. We identify a
sample of firms that withdrew their IPO filings and eventually did not go public (withdrawn sample) and a sample of
firms that successfully went public after initial withdrawal (success sample). We estimate the treatment effect model
with a two-step approach. The first step estimates the probability of being public based on a firm’s logarithm of
total assets, capital expenditure, growth in sales, ROA, leverage, and external finance dependent index from a probit
model. The inverse Mills ratio (M ills) is included in the second-step to adjust for selection bias. The second-step
model in Panel A is estimated as Yikt = α + βSuccessi + θAf terit + δSuccessi × Af terit + γXikt−1 + λXikt−1 ×
EF Dik + φM illsi + εikt . The second step model in Panel B is estimated as Yikt = α + βSuccessi + δSuccessi ×
Af terit +θAf terit +δEF Dik +θSuccessi ×EF Dik +κSuccessi ×Af terit +ρSuccessi ×Af terit ×EF Dik +γXikt−1 +
λXikt−1 ×EF Dik +φM illsi +εikt , where Yikt is the measures of innovation activities: R&D ratio, number of patents,
truncation bias adjusted citations, originality, generality; Successi is a dummy variable equal to one for firms that
went public after the withdrawal of IPO filing and zero for firms that did not go public after the withdrawal of IPO
filings; Af ter is a dummy variable that take a value of one for post-withdrawn years of withdrawn firms and post-IPO
years of successful IPO firms. EF D is an industry external finance index. Xikt−1 includes ln(Sales), T angible ,
Cash, Age; capital expenditure, sales growth, and ROA. The control variables are not reported. Two-step consistent
standard errors are reported in the brackets. *** indicates the 1% significant level of the t-test; ** denotes the 5%
significant level; and * denotes the 10% significant level.

                                                       Panel A: Transition Effect
                                     R&D             Patent   Citations Originality Generality
  Success                           0.0247           2.3260     0.4691      0.0846     0.0157
                                   [0.0344]         [1.4483]   [0.3202]    [0.0739]   [0.0401]
  After                            -0.0032           0.1474   -0.2557**    -0.0095  -0.0409***
                                   [0.0127]         [0.5289]   [0.1152]    [0.0270]   [0.0147]
  Success×After                    -0.0174          -0.0190     0.2103      0.0286     0.0245
                                   [0.0188]         [0.7849]   [0.1711]    [0.0401]   [0.0219]
  Mills                            -0.0141          -1.0954   -0.3588**    -0.0518    -0.0204
                                   [0.0192]         [0.8072]   [0.1787]    [0.0412]   [0.0223]

                              Panel B: Transition Effect and EFD
                       R&D      Patent    Citations Originality Generality
  Success            0.1129**    2.5575    0.7984*      0.1900*   0.0208
                     [0.0504]  [2.1021]    [0.4714]     [0.1074] [0.0587]
  After               -0.0041    1.1549      0.0477       0.1169  0.0062
                     [0.0334]  [1.4122]    [0.3156]     [0.0722] [0.0396]
  Success×After       -0.0261  -3.1825*     -0.3802    -0.2059** -0.0494
                     [0.0447]  [1.8897]    [0.4221]     [0.0966] [0.0531]
  EFD               0.3221*** 16.9033*** 1.5633* 0.7519*** 0.3702***
                     [0.0958]  [4.0365]    [0.9024]     [0.2062] [0.1132]
  EFD×After           0.0056    -2.3057     -0.5673     -0.2169* -0.0893
                     [0.0549]  [2.3221]    [0.5187]     [0.1187] [0.0652]
  Success×EFD         -0.0550   -0.2631     -0.5493      -0.1424 -0.0788
                     [0.0645]  [2.7268]    [0.6090]     [0.1393] [0.0766]
  Success×After×EFD 0.0174      5.8943*      0.9592     0.3969**  0.1239
                     [0.0725]  [3.0631]    [0.6844]     [0.1565] [0.0860]
  Mills             -0.0487**   -1.0666    -0.3203*      -0.0528  0.0078
                     [0.0208]  [0.8527]    [0.1922]     [0.0435] [0.0237]
  N                     649        649         649         649      649
                                    52
Table 7:
Parallel Test

This table examines the parallel trend of innovation activities in the pre-withdrawn and pre-IPO
periods for firms that experience IPO filings withdrawal. We identify a sample of firms that withdrew
their IPO filings and eventually did not go public (withdrawn sample) and a sample of firms that
successfully went public after initial withdrawal (success sample). The model is estimated as Yikt =
                                                   0,1
α + βP re-W ithdrawnit + δP re-IP Oit + θAf terit      + δAf teri2+ + γXikt−1 + εikt , where Yikt is the
measures of innovation activities: R&D ratio, number of patents, truncation bias adjusted citations
(Citations and R.Citations), originality, generality; P re-W ithdrawnit is a dummy variable equal
to one if it is the pre-withdrawn period for firms that went public after withdrawal of IPO filing;
P re-IP Oit is a dummy variable that take a value of one for pre-IPO years of successful firms;
       0,1                                                                                         2+
Af terit   is equal to one if it is IPO year or one year after IPO for successful firms; Af terit      is
equal to one if it is two or more years after IPO for successful firms. Xikt−1 includes ln(Sales),
T angible , Cash, Age; capital expenditure, sales growth, and ROA. The coefficients on Xikt−1 are
not reported. Heteroskedastity robust standard errors are reported in the brackets. *** indicates
the 1% significant level of the t-test; ** denotes the 5% significant level; and * denotes the 10%
significant level.

                             R&D          Patent        Citations     Originality      Generality
    Pre-Withdrawn           -0.0061       0.8649          0.2246        0.0043           0.0256
                           [0.0171]      [0.7703]       [0.2687]       [0.0310]         [0.0510]
    Pre-IPO                  0.007        0.2708         -0.0214        0.0108          -0.0022
                           [0.0175]      [0.5853]       [0.1274]       [0.0214]         [0.0338]
    After0,1               -0.0218*       0.4412          -0.008       -0.0018           0.0157
                           [0.0126]      [0.3966]       [0.1033]       [0.0135]         [0.0253]
    After2+                 -0.0109      0.8106*          0.0718       -0.0074          0.0401*
                           [0.0110]      [0.4762]       [0.1174]       [0.0120]         [0.0239]
    N                         649          649              649          649              649
    R2                        0.42         0.11            0.08          0.05             0.17




                                                   53
Table 8:
Fuzzy Regression Discontinuity Estimation

This table reports the results of fuzzy regression discontinuity estimation. We specify four functional
forms for the forcing variable xi and the reduced form models are: Yi = α + β1 zi + β2 xi + εi (Model
1); Yi = α + β1 zi + β2 xi + β3 xi × zi + εi (Model 2); Yi = α + β1 zi + β2 xi + β3 x2i + εi (Model
3); Yi = α + β1 zi + β2 xi + β3 xi × zi + β4 x2i + β5 x2i × zi + εi (Model 4). The dependent variables
are: the average R&D ratio, the average number of patents, the average number of citations, the
average number of relative citations, the average originality, and the average generality. The outcome
variables are averaged over the post-IPO period for NASDAQ listed firms and the variables are
averaged over the period of 1994 to 2001 for private firms. The independent variable, zi , is an
indicator variable that equals 1 if the forcing variable, xi , is larger or equal to the threshold. We
use normalized net tangible assets as the forcing variable and the normalized minimum quantitative
listing standard as the threshold for listing on the NASDAQ. Net tangible assets are normalized to
have a value of zero at the threshold. For IPO firms, net tangible assets in the last fiscal year before
going public are used. For private firms, net tangible assets in the first sample year are used. The
models are estimated using the two-stage least square approach. The coefficient, β1 for treatment
assignment are reported and robust standard errors are reported in the brackets. *** indicates
the 1% significant level of the t-test; ** denotes the 5% significant level; and * denotes the 10%
significant level.

                                           R&D     Patent Citations Originality Generality
Model 1: Linear                         0.0956*** 2.6623 0.6985*** 0.2037*** 0.0794***
                                         [0.0348] [1.8166] [0.2300] [0.0512] [0.0302]

Model 2: Linear Interaction               0.0442 3.5616* 0.6453** 0.1708**                  0.0646
                                         [0.0492] [2.0226] [0.2973] [0.0701]               [0.0406]

Model 3: Quadratic                        0.0724 4.2284** 0.8345** 0.2022*** 0.0857*
                                         [0.0554] [1.7278] [0.3659] [0.0777] [0.0459]

Model 4: Quadratic Interaction 0.0779 4.3687* 0.8385*                          0.1572       0.0810
                               [0.0697] [2.2409] [0.4638]                     [0.0999]     [0.0573]




                                                  54
Table 9:
External Finance Dependence, Innovation Intensity, and Innovation

This table tests innovation of industry-and-size matched private and public firms in relation to
the propensity to innovate and external finance dependence. Panel A reports the first step es-
timation results about the tendency to go public from the treatment effect model and Panel B
reports the results of relative comparison between innovation of private and public firms with dif-
ferent degrees of innovation intensity in external and internal finance dependent industries. We
estimate the treatment effect model to address the concern that a firm’s decision to go public may
not be random (selection bias). The first step of the treatment effect model estimates the prob-
ability of being public based on a firm’s logarithm of total assets, capital expenditure, growth in
sales, ROA, leverage, external finance dependence index (all firms only), and innovation intensity
index from a probit model. EF D is an industry-level external finance dependence index. Intensity
is innovation intensity index of an industry. The time-series industry-level innovation intensity
is constructed as the median number of patents for all patent-producing firms in the two-digit
SIC code industry in each year. We then measure each industry’s innovation intensity as its time
series median during the period of 1994-2004 and use the percentile ranking of innovation inten-
sity as innovation intensity index. The second step of the treatment effect model is estimated as
Yikt = α+βP ublici +θIntensityik +δP ublici ×Intensityik +δEF Dik +θP ublici ×EF Dik +κEF Dik ×
Intensityik + ρP ublici × Intensityik × EF Dik + γXikt−1 + λXikt−1 × EF Dik + φM illsi + εikt . The
dependent variable is the measures of innovation activities: R&D ratio, number of patents, trun-
cation bias adjusted citations, originality, generality. P ublici is a dummy variable equal to one for
public firms and zero for private firms. The control variables are a set of characteristic variables
that affect a firm’s innovation activities, including ln(Sales), T angible, Cash, Age, capital expen-
diture, growth in sales, and ROA. The inverse Mills ratio (M ills) adjusts for selection bias. Control
variables are not reported. Two-step consistent standard errors are reported in the brackets. ***
indicates the 1% significant level of the t-test; ** denotes the 5% significant level; and * denotes the
10% significant level.

                                   Panel A: Treatment Effect Model First Step
                                All            EFD Industries        IFD Industries
     Capex                  0.9185***             0.9822***               0.6894
                             [0.2233]              [0.2332]              [0.8810]
     S.Growth                -0.0484               -0.0619*               0.1476
                             [0.0308]              [0.0321]              [0.1104]
     ROA                   -0.6134***            -0.7771***                0.327
                             [0.0947]              [0.0999]              [0.2898]
     ln(A)                 -0.0336***            -0.0304***              -0.0396
                             [0.0083]              [0.0088]              [0.0247]
     Leverage              -1.5576***            -1.5493***            -1.6974***
                             [0.0471]              [0.0508]              [0.1276]
     Intensity              0.1173**             0.1986***               -0.1163
                             [0.0528]              [0.0595]              [0.1209]
     EFD                    0.2295***
                             [0.0574]
     Constant              1.3152***             1.3908***              1.3663***
                             [0.0565]              [0.0582]              [0.1425]
     N                        9,523                  8,063                1,460
                                              55
                             Panel B: Treatment Effect Model Second   Step
                         R&D         Patent   Citations Originality   Generality
Public                0.0160*** 2.3909**       0.1938* 0.0463***       0.0299**
                       [0.0062]     [1.1296]  [0.1039]    [0.0172]      [0.0119]
Intensity               0.0078      -0.4299     0.1911   0.0509**      0.0322**
                       [0.0080]     [1.4753]  [0.1359]    [0.0224]      [0.0156]
Public×Intensity      0.0235**      3.1894*    0.1392    0.0571**      0.0448**
                       [0.0095]     [1.7520]  [0.1614]    [0.0267]      [0.0185]
EFD                  0.0431*** -6.9643*** -0.0866        -0.0857**     -0.0423*
                       [0.0127]     [2.3303]  [0.2146]    [0.0354]      [0.0246]
EFD×Public              0.0108      -1.3284     -0.227    -0.0231       -0.0035
                       [0.0106]     [1.9575]  [0.1803]    [0.0298]      [0.0207]
EFD×Intensity           0.0090       3.5994    -0.1086     0.0512        0.0009
                       [0.0190]     [3.4887]  [0.3215]    [0.0531]      [0.0368]
EFD×Public×Intensity -0.0050         5.5454    0.6106* 0.1974***         0.0649
                       [0.0217]     [3.9873]  [0.3673]    [0.0607]      [0.0421]
Mills                -0.0133*** -1.4467*** -0.0719 -0.0221***         -0.0166***
                       [0.0029]     [0.5218]  [0.0480]    [0.0079]      [0.0055]
N                        9,523       9,523       9,523      9,523         9,523




                                     56
Table 10:
Innovation Efficiency

This table reports the estimation results for innovation efficiency of matched private and public firms
in external finance dependent and internal finance dependent industries. We estimate the treatment
effect model to address the concern that a firm’s decision to go public may not be random (selection
bias). The treatment effect model is estimated with a two-step approach. The first step estimates
the probability of being public based on a firm’s logarithm of total assets, capital expenditure,
growth in sales, ROA, and leverage from a probit model. The inverse Mills ratio (M ills) is included
in the second-step to adjust for selection bias. The dependent variable is the innovation efficiency
measured as natural logarithm of one plus the ratio of number of patents to R&D expenditures.
The control variables are a set of characteristic variables that affect a firm’s innovation activities,
including ln(Sales), T angible, Cash, Age, capital expenditure, growth in sales, and ROA. Year and
industry fixed effects are controlled. In the last column, we estimate the treatment effect model with
the second step model as Yikt = α + βP ublici + δEF Dik + θP ublici × EF Dik + γXikt−1 + λXikt−1 ×
EF Dik + φM illsi + εikt , where Yikt is innovation efficiency measured as the natural logarithm of
one plus patents per dollar R&D investment; EF Dik is an industry external finance index. Xikt−1
includes ln(Sales), T angible, Cash, Age, capital expenditure, growth in sales, and ROA. Industry
and time effects are included. The coefficients on the control variables are not reported. Two-step
consistent standard errors are reported in the brackets. *** indicates the 1% significant level of the
t-test; ** denotes the 5% significant level; and * denotes the 10% significant level.


                              EFD Industries              IFD Industries                  All
     Public                     0.0490***                     0.0114                   0.0221*
                                 [0.0123]                    [0.0100]                 [0.0115]
     EFD                                                                                0.0109
                                                                                      [0.2201]
     EFD×Public                                                                      0.0416***
                                                                                      [0.0136]
     Mills                        -0.0141*                    -0.0037                 -0.0107*
                                  [0.0074]                    [0.0063]                [0.0063]
     N                              8,109                       1,511                   9,620




                                                  57
 Table 11:
 Real Earnings Management and Innovation

 This table reports the estimation results for the relationship between innovation activities and real
 earnings management for public firms with different degrees of dependence on external finance and
 with different degrees of innovation. In Panel A, we compare real earnings management of public
 firms in internal and externa finance dependent industries using both matched sample and the full
 sample. In Panel B, we classify public firms in external finance dependent industries into four
 groups based on their R&D ratio. Group 1 include firms with no R&D spending and Group 4
 consists of firms with the highest R&D ratio. Real earnings management (REM ) is measured as the
 difference between the normal level of discretionary expenses and the actual discretionary expenses.
 We estimate the normal discretionary expenses from the following cross-sectional regression for every
 industry and year: DISXi,t /T Ai,t−1 = α + β1 (1/T Ai,t−1 ) + β2 (Salesi,t−1 /T Ai,t−1 ) + εi,t . where
 DISXi,t is the discretionary expenditures of firm i in time t, including advertising expenses and
 selling, general & administrative expenses; T Ai,t−1 is total assets of firm i in time t − 1; Salesi,t−1
 is total revenue. The normal discretionary expenses are estimated by the fitted values from the
 model. A higher value of REM indicates a higher degree of real earnings management. Dif f is the
 difference in the average real earnings management between public firms in internal and external
 finance dependent industries. t-stat is the t-statistics of t-test.


                                   Panel A: REM in EFD vs. IFD Industries
                      Matched Sample                   Full Sample
IFD Industries              1.36                            2.55
EFD Industries             -6.11                           -1.45
Diff                       -7.47                           -4.01
t-stat                     -7.30                           -6.93

                     Panel B: REM of Innovative vs. Non-Innovative Firms in EFD Industries
                     Matched Sample                      Full Sample
1:   Non-Innovative        -2.74                             2.41
2                          -9.40                             -0.54
3                         -11.81                             -7.66
4:   Most Innovative      -15.94                            -12.75




                                                   58
Table A.1:
Instrumental Variable Estimation

This table reports estimation results using the instrumental variable method. We use the percentage
of public firms in each industry based on two-digit SIC codes in a given year as an instrument for
the endogenous variable P ublic. The model is estimated using two-stage least square approach. The
dependent variables are the measures of the nature of innovation activities: R&D ratio (research
and development expenditures divided by total assets), number of patents, truncation-bias adjusted
citations (Citations, citations per patent scaled by the average citation counts of all patents applied
in the same year and technology class.); P ublici is a dummy variable equal to one for public firms
and zero for private firms. The other control variables are a set of characteristic variables that affect
a firm’s innovation activities, including ln(Sales) (natural logarithm of total revenue), T angibile
(tangible (fixed) assets scaled by total assets), Cash (total cash scaled by total assets), Age (the
difference between current year and founding year). We control for year fixed effects. The robust
standard errors adjusted for heteroskedasticity are reported in the brackets. *** indicates the 1%
significant level of the t-test; ** denotes the 5% significant level; and * denotes the 10% significant
level.
                      R&D              Patent            Citations     Originality       Generality
  Public           0.1096***        11.5496***           0.6339***      0.2647***         0.1093***
                    [0.0105]          [1.8713]            [0.1218]       [0.0293]          [0.0175]
  ln(Sales)         -0.0005          1.1225***           0.0410***      0.0163***        0.0059***
                    [0.0005]          [0.1404]            [0.0056]       [0.0013]          [0.0008]
  Tangible           0.0051         1.8084***              0.0139         0.0116           -0.0063
                    [0.0044]          [0.5834]            [0.0402]       [0.0118]          [0.0067]
  Cash             0.1065***          1.4795**           0.6433***      0.1319***        0.0804***
                    [0.0082]          [0.7397]            [0.1332]       [0.0184]          [0.0121]
  Age             -0.0002***        -0.0147***            -0.0002         0.0000            0.0000
                    [0.0000]          [0.0056]            [0.0003]       [0.0001]          [0.0000]
  Capex           -0.0672***           -3.6208          -0.3938***     -0.1380***          -0.0342
                    [0.0157]          [2.4165]            [0.1459]       [0.0414]          [0.0265]
  S.Growth         -0.0054**           -0.2248            -0.0012         0.0038            0.0038
                    [0.0026]          [0.1701]            [0.0266]       [0.0044]          [0.0026]
  ROA             -0.1313***           -0.2561            -0.0813        -0.0235            0.0055
                    [0.0093]          [0.4801]            [0.1006]       [0.0143]          [0.0090]
  Constant        -0.0394***       -13.3987***          -0.5912***     -0.2358***        -0.1190***
                    [0.0082]          [1.8660]            [0.1137]       [0.0217]          [0.0127]
  N                   9620              9620               9,620          9,620              9,620




                                                   59
Table A.2:
First Stage Estimation of the Treatment Effect Model

This table reports estimation results of the first stage estimation of the treatment effect model for
the matched sample, the sample of firms in external finance industries, and the sample of firms in
internal finance industries. The first step estimates the probability of being public based on a firm’s
logarithm of total assets, capital expenditure, growth in sales, ROA, leverage, and external finance
dependence index (all firms only) from a probit model. The dependent variables P ublici is a dummy
variable equal to one for public firms and zero for private firms. *** indicates the 1% significant
level of the t-test; ** denotes the 5% significant level; and * denotes the 10% significant level.
                                 All             EFD Industries             IFD Industries
        Capex                0.9198***              0.9342***                     0.925
                              [0.2226]               [0.2323]                   [0.8579]
        S.Growth              -0.0493                -0.0605*                    0.1367
                              [0.0307]               [0.0320]                   [0.1075]
        ROA                 -0.6064***             -0.7963***                    0.4184
                              [0.0941]               [0.0993]                   [0.2866]
        ln(A)               -0.0318***             -0.0287***                  -0.0485**
                              [0.0082]               [0.0088]                   [0.0231]
        Leverage            -1.5585***             -1.5464***                 -1.7421***
                              [0.0468]               [0.0505]                   [0.1256]
        EFD                 0.2712***
                              [0.0560]
        Constant            1.3287***                  1.4654***               1.3655***
                              [0.0548]                  [0.0531]                [0.1400]
        N                      9,620                     8,109                   1,511




                                                  60
Table A.3:
External Finance Dependence and Innovation: Top Quartile

This table reports the estimation results for private and public firms in external finance dependent
industries (Panel A) and for comparison between external and internal finance dependent industries
(Panel B). An industry with a positive value of external finance dependence index and belongs to
the top tertile of the index is classified as external finance dependence. We estimate the treatment
effect model with a two-step approach. The first step estimates the probability of being public
based on a firm’s logarithm of total assets, capital expenditure, growth in sales, ROA, and leverage
from a probit model. The inverse Mills ratio (M ills) is included in the second-step to adjust for
selection bias. The dependent variable is the measures of innovation activities: R&D ratio, number of
patents, truncation bias adjusted citations, originality, generality. P ublici is a dummy variable equal
to one for public firms and zero for private firms. The control variables are a set of characteristic
variables that affect a firm’s innovation activities, including ln(Sales), T angible, Cash, Age, capital
expenditure, growth in sales, and ROA. Year and industry fixed effects are controlled. We report the
coefficients on P ublic and inverse Mills ratio only in Panel A. In Panel B, we estimate the treatment
effect model with the second step model as Yikt = α + βP ublici + δEF Dik + θP ublici × EF Dik +
γXikt−1 + λXikt−1 × EF Dik + φM illsi + εikt , where EF Dik is an industry external finance index.
Xikt−1 includes ln(Sales), T angible, Cash, Age, capital expenditure, growth in sales, and ROA.
The coefficients on the interactive term, θ, are reported. Two-step consistent standard errors are
reported in the brackets. *** indicates the 1% significant level of the t-test; ** denotes the 5%
significant level; and * denotes the 10% significant level.

                               Panel A: External       Finance Dependent Industries
                        R&D          Patent            Citations  Originality    Generality
 Public                0.0284      7.0336***             0.2515     0.2010***     0.0576**
                      [0.0209]      [1.5324]            [0.2492]     [0.0408]     [0.0273]
 Mills                -0.0109     -3.8815***            -0.1005    -0.0791***      -0.0234
                      [0.0120]      [0.8770]            [0.1435]     [0.0234]     [0.0157]
 N                     2,064          2,064              2,064         2,064        2,064

                        Panel B: External vs. Internal Finance Dependent Industries
                        R&D         Patent       Citations   Originality   Generality
 EFD×Public           0.0144**     2.1082*        0.1113      0.0906***    0.0406***
                      [0.0062]     [1.1348]      [0.1043]      [0.0178]     [0.0121]
 N                      9,620        9,620         9,620         9,620        9,620




                                                  61
