                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               OPTIMAL TIME-CONSISTENT MACROPRUDENTIAL POLICY

                                           Javier Bianchi
                                        Enrique G. Mendoza

                                        Working Paper 19704
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19704


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2013




We are grateful for the support of the National Science Foundation under awards 1325122 (Mendoza)
and 1324395 (Bianchi), Mendoza also acknowledges the support of the Bank for International Settlements
under a 2014 Research Fellowship and the Jacobs Levy Center for Quantitative Financial Research
of the Wharton School under a 2014-15 research grant. We thank Fernando Alvarez, Gianluca Benigno,
John Cochrane, Alessandro Dovis, Charles Engel, Lars Hansen, Zheng Liu, Guido Lorenzoni, and
Tom Sargent for helpful comments and discussions. We also acknowledge comments by audiences
at several seminar and conference presentations since 2010. Some material included here circulated
earlier under the title “Overborrowing, Financial Crises and Macroprudential Policy”, NBER WP 16091,
June 2010. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Javier Bianchi and Enrique G. Mendoza. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Optimal Time-Consistent Macroprudential Policy
Javier Bianchi and Enrique G. Mendoza
NBER Working Paper No. 19704
December 20135HYLVHG6HSWHPEHU
JEL No. E0,F0,G0

                                             ABSTRACT

Collateral constraints widely used in models of financial crises feature a pecuniary externality: Agents
do not internalize how borrowing decisions taken in “good times” affect collateral prices during a
crisis. We show that agents in a competitive equilibrium borrow more than a financial regulator who
internalizes this externality. We also find, however, that under commitment the regulator's plans are
time-inconsistent, and hence focus on studying optimal, time-consistent policy without commitment.
This policy features a state-contingent macroprudential debt tax that is strictly positive at date t if a
crisis has positive probability at t + 1. Quantitatively, this policy reduces sharply the frequency and
magnitude of crises, removes fat tails from the distribution of returns, and increases social welfare.
In contrast, constant debt taxes are ineffective and can be welfare-reducing, while an optimized
“macroprudential Taylor rule” is effective but less so than the optimal policy.


Javier Bianchi
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706-139
and NBER
javieribianchi@gmail.com

Enrique G. Mendoza
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
egme@sas.upenn.edu
1      Introduction
Following the 2008 Global Financial Crisis, the realization that credit booms are infrequent but
perilous events that often end in similar crises (see, for example, Mendoza and Terrones (2008) and
Reinhart and Rogoff (2009)) has resulted in a strong push for a new “macroprudential” form of
financial regulation. The objective of this new regulation is to adopt a macroeconomic perspective
of credit dynamics, with a view to defusing credit booms in their early stages as a prudential
measure to prevent them from turning into crises (see for example Borio, 2003 and Bernanke,
2010). Efforts to move financial regulation in this direction, however, have moved faster and
further than our understanding of how financial policies influence the transmission mechanism
driving financial crises, particularly in the context of quantitative models that can be used to
design and evaluate these policies.
    This paper aims to fill this gap by answering three key questions: First, can credit frictions
affecting individual borrowers produce strong financial amplification effects that result in macroe-
conomic crises? Second, if the answer to the first question is yes, what is the optimal design of
macroprudential policy, particularly when commitment and credibility are issues at stake? Third,
how effective is this policy at affecting private borrowing incentives in a prudential manner, re-
ducing the magnitude and frequency of crises, and improving social welfare?
    This paper provides answers to these questions derived from the theoretical and quantitative
analysis of a dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model with a collateral constraint linking
borrowing capacity to the market value of collateral assets. We start by developing a normative
theory of the optimal macroprudential policy with and without commitment. Then we calibrate
the model to data from industrial countries, and solve it numerically to show that, in the absence
of macroprudential policy, the model embodies a strong financial amplification mechanism that
produces financial crises. Then we solve for the optimal, time-consistent macroprudential policy
of a regulator who cannot commit to future policies, and compute a state-contingent schedule of
debt taxes that supports the optimal allocations as a competitive equilibrium. We evaluate the
effectiveness of this policy for reducing the probability and magnitude of crises and increasing
social welfare, and compare it with the effectivenss of simpler policy rules.
    The collateral constraint is occasionally-binding and limits total debt (one-period debt plus
within-period working capital) to a fraction of the market value of physical assets that can be
posted as collateral, which are in fixed supply. This constraint is the engine of the model’s financial
amplification mechanism. When the constraint binds, Irving Fisher’s classic debt-deflation effect
is set in motion: Agents fire-sale assets to meet their obligations forcing price declines that tighten
further the constraint and trigger further asset fire-sales. The result is a financial crisis driven by
a nonlinear feedback loop between asset fire sales and borrowing capacity.
    Focusing on financial frictions models with collateral constraints is important because of the
prevalence of secured lending worldwide. The relevance of collateral in residential mortgage mar-


                                                  1
kets is self evident, but in addition, evidence cited by Gan (2007) shows that roughly 70 percent
of all commercial and industrial loans are secured with collateral in the United States, the United
Kingdom and Germany, and that real estate is a dominant form of collateral for firm financing
in these three countries and in 58 emerging economies. In line with this evidence, Chaney et al.
(2012) found that movements in U.S. local real estate prices are statistically significant for ex-
plaining cross-sectional variations in U.S. corporate investment. Moreover, there is also evidence
showing that a sizable share of working capital financing requires collateral, and that it plays an
important role in the drop in economic activity during financial crises. The Federal Reserve’s 2013
Survey of Terms of Business Lending shows that 40 percent of commercial and industrial loans
with less than a year of maturity used collateral. Amiti and Weinstein (2011) provide empirical
evidence showing that trade credit is a key determinant of firm-level exports during financial crises.
    The normative theory we study highlights a pecuniary externality similar to those used in the
related literature on credit booms and macroprudential policy (e.g. Lorenzoni, 2008; Korinek,
2009; Bianchi, 2011; Stein, 2012): Individual agents facing a collateral constraint taking prices
as given do not internalize how their borrowing decisions in “good times” affect collateral prices,
and hence aggregate borrowing capacity, in “bad times” in which the collateral constraint binds.
This creates a market failure that results in equilibria that can be improved upon by a financial
regulator who faces the same credit constraint but internalizes the externality.
    In our setup, this pecuniary externality implies that private agents fail to internalize the
Fisherian debt-deflation effect that crashes asset prices and causes a crisis when the constraint
binds. Moreover, when this happens production plans are also affected, because working capital
loans pay for a fraction of the cost of inputs, and these loans are also subject to the collateral
constraint. This results in a sudden increase in effective factor costs and a fall in output when the
constraint binds. In turn, this affects expected dividend streams and therefore asset prices, and
introduces an additional vehicle for the pecuniary externality to operate.
    We study the optimal policy problem of a financial regulator who chooses the level of credit
to maximize private utility subject to resource, collateral and implementability constraints. This
regulator internalizes the pecuniary externality and cannot commit to future policies. The inability
to commit is modeled explicitly by solving for optimal time-consistent macroprudential policy as
a Markov perfect equilibrium, in which the effects of the regulator’s optimal plans on future
regulator’s plans are taken into account. We followed this approach because we show that, under
commitment, the regulator promises lower future consumption to prop up asset prices when the
collateral constraint binds, but reneging is optimal ex post. Hence, in the absence of effective
commitment devices, the optimal macroprudential policy under commitment is not credible.
    We provide theoretical results showing that the regulator can decentralize its equilibrium al-
locations as a competitive equilibrium with optimal state-contingent debt taxes. A key element
of these taxes is what we label a macroprudential debt tax, which is levied in good times when
collateral constraints do not bind at date t but can bind with positive probability at t + 1, and we

                                                  2
show that this tax is always positive. When the constraint binds at t, the optimal taxes include
two other components, which combined can be positive or negative: One captures the regulator’s
“ex post” incentives to influence asset prices to prop up credit when collateral constraints are
already binding, and the other captures its incentives to influence the optimal plans of future
regulators due to the lack of commitment.
    The quantitative results show that the optimal policy reduces sharply the frequency and sever-
ity of financial crises. The probability of crises is 4 percent in the unregulated decentralized
equilibrium v. close to zero in the equilibrium attained by the regulator. When a crisis occurs,
asset prices drop 43.7 percent and the equity premium rises to 4.8 percent in the former, v. 5.4
and 0.7 percent respectively in the latter. Without regulation, the output drop is about 28 percent
larger and the distribution of asset returns features an endogenous “fat tail”. In terms of welfare,
the optimal policy yields a sizable average gain of 1/3rd of a percent computed as the standard
Lucas-style compensating variation in consumption that equates expected lifetime utility with and
without policy. The optimal macroprudential debt tax is about 3.6 percent on average, fluctuates
roughly half as much as GDP and has a correlation of 0.7 with leverage.
    We also evaluate the effectiveness of policy rules simpler than the optimal policy. Fixed debt
taxes are ineffective at best, and at worst they can be welfare-reducing. In contrast, a “macro-
prudential Taylor rule” that makes the tax an isoleastic function of the debt position relative to a
target performs better. Optimizing the elasticity of this rule to maximize the average welfare gain,
we construct a welfare-increasing rule that is effective at reducing the probability and magnitude
of crises, albeit less so than the optimal policy.
    This paper contributes to the growing quantitative macro-finance literature by developing a
non-linear quantitative framework suitable for the normative analysis of macroprudential policy.
Most of this literature, including this article, follows in the steps of the work on financial accelera-
tors initiated by Bernanke and Gertler (1989) and Kiyotaki and Moore (1997).1 In particular, we
follow Mendoza (2010) in analyzing the non-linear dynamics of an occasionally binding collateral
constraint. He showed that a constraint of this kind produces financial crises that match the key
features of observed crises, but his work abstracted from normative issues, which are the main
focus of this study.
    There are also quantitative studies of pecuniary externalities due to collateral constraints. In
particular, Bianchi (2011) studies the effects of a debt tax in a setting in which the borrowing
capacity is linked to the relative price of nontradable goods to tradable goods. Benigno et al.
(2013) show in a similar setup that there can be a role for ex-post policies to reallocate labor
from the non-tradables sector to the tradables sector, and show how this reduces precautionary
savings. This paper differs from these studies in that it focuses on assets as collateral, and on
asset prices as a key factor driving debt dynamics and the pecuniary externality, instead of the
  1
    See, for example, Jermann and Quadrini (2012), Perri and Quadrini (2011), Khan and Thomas (2013), Bigio
(2015), Boissay, Collard, and Smets (2015), Arellano and Kehoe (2012).


                                                    3
relative price of nontradable goods. This is important because private debt contracts commonly
use assets as collateral, and also because the forward-looking nature of asset prices introduces
effects that are absent otherwise. In particular, expectations of future crises affect the discount
rates applied to future dividends and distort asset prices even in periods of financial tranquility.
This also drives the time consistency issues that we tackle in this study and that were absent from
previous work. Our model also differs in that we introduce working capital financing subject to
the collateral constraint, which implies that the asset fire-sales also affect adversely production,
factor allocations and dividend rates.
    This paper is also related to the work of Jeanne and Korinek (2010), who studied a model
in which assets serve as collateral. In their model, however, aggregate, not individual, assets
are collateral for private borrowing, output follows an exogenous Markov-switching process, and
debt is limited to the sum of a fraction of the value of collateral plus an exogenous constant.
In addition, in their setup the planner faces asset prices that are predetermined in states in
which the collateral constraint binds, while we study a time-consistent Markov perfect equilibrium
in which the planner internalizes how borrowing choices made when the constraint binds affect
prices contemporaneously via changes in current consumption and in the optimal plans of future
regulators. Moreover, we can also prove that the optimal macroprudential tax is positive, while
Jeanne and Korinek obtain a tax that depends on equilibrium objects with a potentially ambiguous
sign.2 The two studies also differ sharply in their quantitative implications. In their calibration,
the constant term in the credit limit is much larger than the fraction of the value of assets that
serve as collateral, and the probability of crises equals the exogenous probability of a low-output
regime. As a result, debt taxes cannot affect the frequency of crises and have small effects on
their magnitude. In contrast, in our model both the probability of crises and output dynamics are
endogenous, and the optimal policy reduces sharply the incidence and magnitude of crises.
    Our analysis is also related to other studies on inefficient borrowing and its policy implications.
In particular, Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2014) and Farhi and Werning (2012) examine the use of
prudential capital controls as a tool for smoothing aggregate demand in the presence of nominal
rigidities and a fixed exchange rate regime. In earlier work, Uribe (2006) examined an economy
with an aggregate borrowing limit and compared the borrowing decisions with those of an economy
where the borrowing limit applies to individual agents.The literature on participation constraints
in credit markets initiated by Kehoe and Levine (1993) has also studied inefficiencies that result
from endogenous borrowing limits (e.g. Jeske, 2006 and Wright, 2006).
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents the theoretical analysis. Section
3 conducts the quantitative analysis. Section 4 provides conclusions. In addition, an extended
Appendix provides further details on various aspects of the theoretical and quantitative analyses.
   2
    Compare in particular condition (14) in this paper v. (19) in Jeanne and Korinek (2010), and the optimal tax
results in Prop. 1 and eq. (17) here v. eq. (21) in their paper. Korinek and Mendoza (2014) explain why their
treatment of the planner’s problem imposes time-consistency by construction (see p. 325).


                                                       4
2       A Model of Financial Crises & Macroprudential Policy
In this Section we study a small-open-economy model of financial crises driven by an occasionally
binding collateral constraint. We characterize first a decentralized competitive equilibrium (DE)
without regulation, following an approach similar to Mendoza (2010), in which a representative
firm-household (the “agent”) makes both production and consumption-savings plans for simplic-
ity.3 Then we analyze the optimal policy problem of a constrained-efficient social planner (SP)
who is unable to commit to future policies, and demonstrate that the SP’s allocations can be
supported as a competitive equilibrium with state-contingent debt taxes. Finally, we compare the
results with those obtained under commitment.


2.1     Firm-Household Optimization Problem
The representative agent has an infinite life horizon and preferences given by:
                                                 ∞
                                                 X
                                            E0         β t u(ct − G(ht ))                                (1)
                                                 t=0


In this expression, E(·) is the expectations operator, β is the subjective discount factor, ct is
consumption, and ht is labor supply (we follow the standard convention of using lowercase letters
for individual variables and uppercase letters for aggregate variables). The utility function u(·) is
a standard concave, twice-continuously differentiable function that satisfies the Inada condition.
The argument of u(·) is the composite commodity ct − G(ht ) defined by Greenwood et al. (1988).
G(h) is a convex, strictly increasing and continuously differentiable function that measures the
disutility of labor. This formulation of preferences removes the wealth effect on labor supply,
which prevents a counterfactual increase in labor supply during crises.
    The agent combines physical assets, intermediate goods (vt ), and labor (ht ) to produce final
goods using a production technology such that y = zt F (kt , ht , vt ), where F is a twice-continuously
differentiable, concave production function andzt is a productivity shock. This shock has compact
support and follows a finite-state, stationary Markov process. Intermediate goods are traded in
competitive world markets at a constant exogenous price pv in terms of domestic final goods (i.e.
pv can be interpreted as the terms of trade taken as given by the small open economy, and is also
the marginal rate of transformation between final goods and intermediate goods). The profits of
the agent are given by zt F (kt , ht , vt ) − pv vt .
    The agent’s budget constraint is:

                                          bt+1
                         qt kt+1 + ct +        = qt kt + bt + [zt F (kt , ht , vt ) − pv vt ]            (2)
                                           Rt
    3
   We show in Section B of the Appendix that the competitive equilibrium is the same if we separate the opti-
mization problems of households and firms (assuming a frictionless equity market).


                                                           5
where bt and kt are holdings of one-period non-state-contingent foreign bonds and domestic phys-
ical assets respectively, qt is the market price of assets, and Rt is the world-determined gross real
interest rate also taken as given by the small open economy.4 Since assets are in fixed unit supply,
the market-clearing condition in the asset market is simply kt = 1. Rt is stochastic and, like the
productivity shocks, it follows a finite-state, stationary Markov process with compact support.
    The assumption that the economy is small and open relative to world financial market fits
well the advanced economies we targeted to calibrate the model in Section 3. Even in the United
States, interest rates have become increasingly dependent on external factors as a result of financial
globalization. Mendoza and Quadrini (2010) use data from the Flow of Funds of the Federal
Reserve to show that about 1/2 of the surge in net credit in the U.S. economy since the mid 1980s
was financed by foreign capital inflows, and by 2010 more than half of the stock of treasury bills
was owned by foreign agents. Still, Section H of the Appendix reports results showing how our
quantitative findings vary if we replace the exogenous Rt process with an inverse supply-of-funds
curve, which allows the real interest rate to increase as debt rises. Assuming that Rt follows
a standard stationary process turns out to be conservative, because in the pre-2008-crisis boom
years real interest rates displayed a protracted decline, and introducing this drop strengthens our
results by enhancing the overborrowing effect of the pecuniary externality.
    The firm-household also faces a working capital constraint that requires a fraction θ ≤ 1 of
the cost of inputs pv vt to be paid in advance of production using foreign credit. This credit is a
within-period loan which effectively carries a zero interest rate. In contrast, in the conventional
working capital setup the marginal cost of inputs carries a financing cost determined by Rt and
thus responds to interest rate shocks (e.g. Uribe and Yue, 2006). Our formulation isolates the
effect of working capital due to the need to provide collateral for these funds, as explained below,
which is present even without the effect of Rt on marginal factor costs.
    The agent faces a collateral constraint that limits total debt, including both intertemporal debt
and working capital loans, not to exceed a fraction κt of the market value of beginning-of-period
asset holdings (i.e. κt imposes a ceiling on the leverage ratio):

                                                bt+1
                                            −        + θpv vt ≤ κt qt kt                                         (3)
                                                 Rt

We show in Section A.5 of the Appendix that this collateral constraint can be derived as an
implication of incentive-compatibility constraints on borrowers if limited enforcement prevents
lenders from collecting more than a fraction κt of the value of the assets owned by a defaulting
debtor. Note also that, while bonds and working capital are explicitly modeled as credit from
abroad, this credit could also be provided by a domestic financial system that has unrestricted
access to world capital markets and faces the same enforcement friction.
   4
   An equivalent formulation is to assume deep-pockets, risk-neutral lenders that discount utility at rate β ∗ = 1/R.
They are unaffected by domestic financial policies because their return on savings remains the same.


                                                         6
    The model allows for shocks to κt , which can be viewed as financial shocks that lead creditors
to adjust collateral requirements on borrowers (e.g. Jermann and Quadrini, 2012 and Boz and
Mendoza, 2014). It is important to note, however, that neither the nature of the financial ampli-
fication mechanism nor the normative arguments we develop later rely on κt being stochastic. In
fact, models with constant κ have been shown to be able to produce crises dynamics with realistic
features in response to productivity shocks of standard magnitudes (see Mendoza (2010)).
    The agent maximizes (1) subject to (2) and (3) taking prices as given. This maximization
problem yields the following optimality conditions for each date t = 0, ..., ∞:

           zt Fh (kt , ht , vt ) = G′ (ht )                                                                  (4)

           zt Fv (kt , ht , vt ) = pv (1 + θµt /u′ (t))                                                      (5)

                        u′ (t) = βRt Et [u′ (t + 1)] + µt                                                    (6)
                                                                                                        
                     qt u′ (t) = βEt u′ (t + 1) (zt+1 Fk (kt+1 , ht+1 , vt+1 ) + qt+1 ) + κt+1 µt+1 qt+1     (7)

 where µt ≥ 0 is the Lagrange multiplier on the collateral constraint and u′ (t) denotes u′ (ct −G(ht )).
    Condition (4) is the labor-market optimality condition equating the marginal disutility of labor
supply with the marginal productivity of labor demand, which is also the wage rate. Condition
(5) is a similar condition setting the demand for intermediate goods by equating their marginal
productivity with their marginal cost. The latter includes the financing cost θµt /u′ (t), which is
incurred only when the collateral constraint binds.
    The last two optimality conditions are the Euler equations for bonds and assets respectively.
When the collateral constraint binds, condition (6) implies that the marginal benefit of borrowing
to increase ct exceeds the expected marginal cost by an amount equal to the shadow price of
relaxing the credit constraint (i.e. the agent faces an effective real interest rate higher than Rt ).
Condition (7) equates the marginal cost of an extra unit of assets with its marginal benefit. When
the collateral constraint binds, the fact that assets serve as collateral increases the marginal benefit
of buying assets by βEt κt+1 µt+1 qt+1 .
    Following Mendoza and Smith (2006), the interaction between the collateral constraint and
asset prices can be illustrated by studying how the constraint alters the standard conditions for
                                                                                   q
asset pricing and excess returns. First, using the definition of asset returns (Rt+1  ≡ zt+1 Fk (t+1)+q
                                                                                                  qt
                                                                                                        t+1
                                                                                                            )
and iterating forward on (7) we can express the pricing condition as the expected present value of
                                                                    q
dividends (the marginal product of capital) discounted with Rt+1        :

                                       ∞ j
                                                                  !−1
                                       X Y                q
                            qt = E t                Et+i Rt+1+i         zt+j+1 Fk (t + j + 1),               (8)
                                       j=0    i=0




                                                             7
                                                         q
Second, combining (6) and (7) and the definition of Rt+1   , the expected excess return on assets
                                                  ep       q
relative to bonds (i.e. the equity premium, Rt ≡ Et (Rt+1      − Rt )) can be decomposed into a
liquidity premium, a collateral effect, and a risk premium as follows:
                                                    #                           q
                                        µt        Et φt+1 mt+1     covt (mt+1 , Rt+1 )
                          Rtep   = ′            −                −                                                   (9)
                                   u (t)Et mt+1      Et mt+1           Et [mt+1 ]
                                   |    {z    } |       {z     } |         {z        }
                                   Liquidity Premium   Collateral Effect      Risk Premium

                    j ′                                                                                        µ
where mt,t+1 ≡ β uu′ (c t+1 )
                     (ct )
                              is the one-period ahead stochastic discount factor, and φt+1 ≡ κt+1 u′t+1  qt+1
                                                                                                    (ct ) qt
                                                                                                              .
                                              ep
     The liquidity premium increases Rt when the constraint binds, with an effect proportional
to µt . The collateral effect pushes Rtep in the opposite direction, because buying more assets
at date t improves borrowing capacity at t + 1 if the constraint can bind then.5 The effect of
the risk premium depends on how the covariance between the stochastic discount factor and the
return on assets changes. The expectation of a binding collateral constraint rises the premium,
because it makes the covariance “more negative” as it makes it harder to smooth consumption,
but if the constraint is already binding the covariance rises as the constraint tigthens, reducing
the risk premium. If the liquidity premium dominates, conditions (8)and (9) imply that a binding
collateral constraint exerts pressure to fire-sell assets, raises excess returns and lowers asset prices.
    The above mechanism is at the core of the model’s pecuniary externality: higher individual
debt leads to more frequent fire sales, driving excess returns up and asset prices down, which
in turn reduces the aggregate borrowing capacity of the economy. In addition, because of the
efficiency loss induced by the diminished access to working capital financing when the collateral
constraint binds, the stream of dividends is also distorted. Moreover, because expected returns rise
whenever the collateral constraint is expected to bind at any future date, condition (8) also implies
that asset prices at t are affected by collateral constraints not just when the constraints binds at
t, but whenever it is expected to bind at any future date. Hence, expectations about future excess
returns (i.e. future liquidity and risk premia, and future collateral effects) and dividends feed back
into current asset prices. This interaction will play an important role in the normative analysis.
    The assumption that assets are not traded internationally is not innocuous. If assets are traded
by foreign investors in frictionless markets, asset prices are not affected by a domestic collateral
constraint, because they are priced discounting at the world’s risk-free rate (see Mendoza and
Smith, 2006). But if investors face trading costs or other frictions, prices respond and our findings
about the optimal policy to tackle the pecuniary externality still hold.6
   5
     A similar effect is present when kt+1 serves as collateral instead of kt , but its timing changes. In this case, the
marginal benefit of holding more assets as collateral shows up as the term −µt κt in Rtep (see Mendoza and Smith,
2006 and Bianchi and Mendoza, 2010)
   6
     The optimal policy would be more complex, because the planner would have incentives to alter prices to extract
monopolistic rents from foreigners.




                                                           8
2.2     Unregulated Decentralized Competitive Equilibrium
We define and solve for the DE in recursive form. We denote as s the triplet of date-t realizations of
shocks s = {zt , κt , Rt } and separate individual bond holdings under the agent’s control, b, from the
economy’s aggregate bond position, B, on which prices depend. Hence, the state variables for the
agent’s problem are the individual states (b, k) and the aggregate states (B, s). Aggregate capital
is not a state variable because it is in fixed supply. In addition, in order to form expectations of
future prices, the agent needs a “perceived” law of motion B ′ = Γ(B, s) governing the evolution
of the economy’s bond position, and a conjectured asset pricing function q(B, s).
    The agent’s recursive optimization problem is:

                               V (b, k, B, s) = ′ max
                                                   ′
                                                      u(c − G(h)) + βEs′ |s V (b′ , k ′ , B ′ , s′ )                  (10)
                                                   b ,k ,c,h,v
                                           b′
                 s.t.   q(B, s)k ′ + c +      = q(B, s)k + b + [zF (k, h, v) − pv v]
                                           R
                                  b′
                                −    + θpv v ≤ κq(B, s)k
                                  R
                              B ′ = Γ(B, s)

The solution to this problem is characterized by the decision rules b̂(b, k, B, s), k̂(b, k, B, s), ĉ(b, k, B, s),
v̂(b, k, B, s) and ĥ(b, k, B, s). The decision rule for bond holdings induces an “actual” law of mo-
tion for aggregate bonds, which is given by b̂(B, 1, B, s), and the recursive form of (8) induces an
“actual” pricing function q̂(B, s).

Definition (Recursive Competitive Equilibrium). A recursive competitive equilibrium is defined
by an asset pricing function q(B, s), a perceived law of motion for aggregate bond holdings Γ(B, s),
and decision rules b̂′ (b, k, B, s), k̂ ′ (b, k, B, s), ĉ(b, k, B, s), ĥ(b, k, B, s), v̂(b, k, B, s) with associated
value function V (b, k, B, s) such that:
      n                                                                                              o
   1. b̂(b, k, B, s), k̂(b, k, B, s), ĉ(b, k, B, s), ĥ(b, k, B, s), v̂(b, k, B, s), µ̂(b, k, B, s) and V (b, k, B, s)
      solve the agents’ recursive optimization problem, taking as given q(B, s) and Γ(B, s).

   2. The market for assets clear k̂(B, 1, B, s) = 1
                                            b̂′ (B,1,B,s)
   3. The resource constraint holds:               R
                                                            + ĉ(B, 1, B, s) = zF (1, ĥ(B, 1, B, s), v̂(B ′ , 1, B, s′ )) +
      B − pv v̂(b, 1, B, s)

   4. The perceived law of motion for aggregate bonds and perceived asset pricing function are
      consistent with the actual law of motion and actual pricing function respectively: Γ(B, s) =
      b̂(B, 1, B, s) and q(B, s) = q̂(B, s).




                                                               9
2.3    Time-Consistent Planner’s Problem
Comparing competitive equilibria with and without credit constraints, private agents borrow less
in the former, because the constraints limit the amount they can borrow, and also because they
build precautionary savings to self-insure against the risk of the sharp consumption adjustments
caused by the constraints. In contrast, in the normative analysis that follows we study constrained-
efficient allocations chosen by a planner or regulator who also faces the collateral constraint. We
show that the DE with collateral constraints displays overborrowing relative to the SP’s borrowing
decisions when the collateral constraint does not bind. Hence, the DE with collateral constraints
features underborrowing relative to the DE without collateral constraints but overborrowing rela-
tive to the SP equilibrium with the constraints.
    We formulate the SP’s problem in a manner similar to the “primal approach” to optimal
policy analysis, with the planner choosing allocations subject to resource, implementability and
collateral constraints. In particular, the SP chooses bt+1 on behalf of the representative firm-
household subject to those constraints, but lacking the ability to commit to future policies. Since
asset prices remain market-determined, the private agent’s Euler equation for assets enters in the
SP’s problem as an implementability constraint. The planner thus does not set asset prices, but
it does internalize how its borrowing decisions affect them.
    The optimization problem of the private agent changes because bt+1 is no longer a choice
variable, and this in turn has two implications (see Section A.1 of the Appendix for the complete
formulation of the agent’s optimization problem in the constrained-efficient equilibrium). First,
the agent now takes as given a transfer Tt , which matches the resources added or subtracted by
the SP’s bond choices (the SP’s budget constraint is Tt = bt − bR      t+1
                                                                         t
                                                                           ). Second, the private agent’s
problem no longer has an Euler equation for bonds, but the agent still faces the working capital
constraint, and hence the optimality conditions for vt and kt+1 are still (5) and (7).
    Following Klein et al. (2008) and Klein et al. (2007), we focus on Markov-stationary policy
rules that are expressed as functions of the payoff-relevant state variables (b, s). Since the SP
cannot commit to future policy rules, it chooses its policy rules at any given period taking as
given the policy rules that represent future SP’s decisions, and a Markov-perfect equilibrium is
characterized by a fixed point in these policy rules. At this fixed point, the policy rules of future
planners that the current planner takes as given to solve its optimization problem match those
that the current planner finds optimal to choose. Hence, the planner does not have the incentive
to deviate from other planner’s policy rules, thereby making these rules time-consistent.
    Let B(b, s) be the policy rule for bond holdings of future planners that the SP takes as given, and
{C(b, s), H(b, s), V(b, s), µ(b, s), Q(b, s)} the associated recursive functions that return the values
of the corresponding variables under that policy rule. Given these functions, the optimization
problem of the private agents yields a standard Euler equation for assets (see equation (A.3) of
the Appendix), which becomes the SP’s asset pricing implementability constraint that can be


                                                   10
rewritten recursively as follows:

        β Es′ |s {u′ (C(b′ , s′ ) − G′ (H(b′ , s′ )))(Q(b′ , s′ ) + z ′ Fk (1, H(b′ , s′ ), v(b′ , s′ )) +κ′ µ(b′ , s′ )Q(b′ , s′ )}
  q=                                                                                                                                   (11)
                                                             u′ (c − G(h))

This expression shows that the b′ choice of the planner affects asset prices directly, since it affects
date-t marginal utility (the denominator of the stochastic discount factor). In addition, the choice
of b′ affects asset prices indirectly by affecting the bond holdings chosen by future planner’s, along
with their associated future allocations and prices.
    As noted earlier, the SP maximizes the utility of the representative firm-household subject
to the resource, collateral and implementability constraints. In addition, the planner faces as
constraints the optimality conditions for labor and intermediate goods, and the Khun-Tucker
conditions associated with the collateral constraint in the DE. We show in Section A.3 of the
Appendix, however, that these additional constraints are not binding and can thus be ignored.
Hence, taking again as given {B(b, s), C(b, s), H(b, s), V(b, s), µ(b, s), Q(b, s)} the SP’s optimization
problem can be represented in recursive form as follows:

                V(b, s) =          max u(c − G(h)) + βEs′ |s V(b′ , s′ )                                                               (12)
                                 c,b′ ,q,h,v
                      b′
                c+       = b + zF (1, h, v) − pv v
                      R
            b′
               − θpv v ≥ −κq
            R
       qu′ (c − G(h)) = βEs′ |s [u′ (C(b′ , s′ ) − G(H(b′ , s′ )))(Q(b′ , s′ ) + z ′ Fk (1, H(b′ , s′ ), v(b′ , s′ )))
                                 +κ′ µ(b′ , s′ )Q(b′ , s′ )]

The economy’s resource constraint has the multiplier λ ≥ 0. The collateral constraint has the
multiplier µ∗ ≥ 0), which differs from µ because the private and social values from relaxing the
collateral constraint differ. The asset pricing implementability constraint has the multiplier ξ ≥ 0.
As mentioned earlier, this constraint requires the planner to choose allocations such that q satisfies
the pricing condition from the private asset market.
    Given the definition of the recursive planner’s problem, it is straightforward to define the
constrained-efficient equilibrium:

Definition. The recursive constrained-efficient equilibrium is defined by the policy function b′ (b, s)
with associated decision rules c(b, s), h(b, s), v(b, s), µ(b, s), pricing function q(b, s) and value
function V(b, s), and the conjectured function characterizing the decision rule of future planners
B(b, s) and the associated decision rules C(b, s), H(b, s), v(b, s), µ(b, s) and asset prices Q(b, s),
such that these conditions hold:7
   7
    Note that there is a decision rule µ(b, s) even tough µ does not appear in the SP’s problem, because as we show
in Section A.1 of the Appendix, constraint (5) does not bind and this yields µt = (µ∗t /λt )u′ (t).


                                                                    11
    1. Planner’s optimization: V(b, s) and the functions b′ (b, s),c(b, s), h(b, s), v(b, s), µ(b, s), and
       q(b, s) solve the Bellman equation defined in Problem (12) given B(b, s), C(b, s), H(b, s),
       v(b, s), µ(b, s) and Q(b, s).

    2. Time consistency (Markov stationarity): The conjectured policy rules that represent optimal
       choices of future planners match the corresponding recursive functions that represent optimal
       plans of the current regulator: b′ (b, s) = B(b, s), c(b, s) = C(b, s), h(b, s) = H(b, s), v(b, s) =
       v(b, s), µ(b, s) = µ(b, s), q(b, s) = Q(b, s).


2.4        Comparison of Equilibria and Optimal Policy
The SP and DE solutions differ in two key respects: First, private agent’s fail to internalize how
borrowing choices made at date t affect asset prices at date t + 1 in states in which the collateral
constraint binds. Second, they also do not take into account that when the collateral constraint
binds already at t, date-t asset prices can be pushed up to enhance borrowing capacity by changing
current borrowing choices or by affecting the decisions of future regulators. We characterize these
differences by comparing the optimality conditions for consumption, bonds, and asset prices across
the two environments.
    The SP’s optimality conditions re-written in sequential form are the following:8

            ct ::             λt = u′ (t) − ξ t u′′ (t)qt                                                                                            (13)
                                         
        bt+1 ::           u′ (t) = βRt Et u′ (t + 1) − ξ t+1 u′′ (t + 1)Qt+1 + ξ t Ωt+1 + ξ t u′′ (t)qt + µ∗t                                        (14)

                                       κt µ∗t
            qt ::             ξt =                                                                                                                   (15)
                                       u′ (t)

 where Ωt+1 collects all the terms with derivatives that capture the effects of the planner’s choice of
bt+1 on qt via effects on the actions of future planners in the right-hand-side of the implementability
constraint.9 Ωt+1 is composed of three terms. The first, captures how an extra unit of bt+1 affects
future consumption and labor disutility, and thus affects the discounting of future asset returns
(i.e. future marginal utility) that applies when determining qt . In our quantitative work, this term
is always negative, since ct+1 − g(ht+1 ) rises with bt+1 and u′′ < 0. The second term includes the
effects by which higher bt+1 alters qt by affecting asset prices and dividends at t + 1. Numerically,
asset prices tend to be increasing in bond holdings, and so this second term is usually positive.
The third term captures how changes in bt+1 affect the tightness of the collateral constraint at t+1,
    8
     These expressions are obtained by assuming that the policy and value functions are differentiable, and then
applying the standard Envelope             theorem to the first-order conditions of the planner’s problem.
   9
     In recursive form, Ω′ = R1 u′′ (C(b′ , s′ ) − G(H(b′ , s′ ))){Q(b′ , s′ ) + z ′ Fk (1, H(b′ , s′ ), v(b, s)(b′ , s′ ))}.
{Cb (b′ , s′ ) − G′ (H(b′ , s′ ))Hb (b′ , s′ )} + u′ (C(b′ , s′ ) − G′ (H(b′ , s′ ))){Qb (b′ , s′ ) + z ′ [Fkh (1, H(b′ , s′ ), v(b′ , s′ ))Hb (b′ , s′ ) +
Fkv (1, H(b′ , s′ ), v(b′ , s′ ))vb (b′ , s′ )]} + κ′ [µb (b′ , s′ )Q(b′ , s′ ) + µ(b′ , s′ )Qb (b′ , s′ )]


                                                                            12
thereby affecting the value of collateral and asset prices at t. This third effect is negative. These
three effects imply that the sign of Ωt+1 is ambiguous, but numerically we find that Ωt+1 < 0,
implying that the planner has higher incentives to borrow at the margin when the constraint binds.
     Next we compare the optimality conditions of the SP and DE. Compare first the condition for
ct . The planner’s condition is eq. (13), while the corresponding condition in the DE takes the
standard form λt = u′ (t). Thus, the shadow value of wealth for the private agent is simply the
marginal utility of current consumption, while the social shadow value of wealth adds the amount
by which an increase in ct reduces marginal utility and relaxes the implementability constraint.10
Moreover, condition (15) shows that the social benefit from relaxing the implementability con-
straint is positive at date t if and only if the collateral constraint binds for the social planner at
t, i.e., µ∗ > 0 ↔ ξ t > 0. These two conditions together show that, when the collateral constraint
binds, the marginal social benefit of wealth of an extra unit of ct considers how the extra consump-
tion raises equilibrium asset prices, which in turn relaxes the collateral constraint (i.e. combining
                                          κ µ∗
(15) and (13) we obtain −u′′ (t)qt ut′ (t)t ). If the collateral constraint does not bind, µ∗t = ξ t = 0 and
the shadow values of wealth in the DE and SP coincide.
     Compare next the SP’s Generalized Euler equation for bonds (14) with the corresponding Euler
equation in the DE. This comparison highlights the two main properties that distinguish the DE
and SP outcomes:
     (1) Effects via qt+1 : Condition (14) indicates that the differences identified above in the private
and social marginal utilities of wealth, which are differences in marginal benefits of bond holdings
“ex post” when the collateral constraint binds, induce differences “ex ante,” when the constraint
is not binding. In particular, if µt = 0, the marginal cost of increasing debt at date t in the DE
is the standard term βRt Et u′ (t + 1). In contrast, the second term in the right-hand-side of (14)
shows that the marginal social cost of borrowing is higher, because the SP internalizes the effect
by which the larger debt at t reduces borrowing ability at t + 1 if the credit constraint binds then.
We can use again (15) to make this evident, by rewriting the second term in the right-hand-side
                              κ     µ∗t+1
of (14) as −u′′ (t + 1)qt+1 ut+1                                   ∗
                                ′ (t+1) , which is positive for µt+1 > 0. Intuitively, since the planner

values more consumption when the constraint binds ex-post, it borrows less ex-ante (i.e. there is
overborrowing in the DE relative to the SP).
     (2) Effects via qt : The two Euler equations for bonds also differ in that condition (14) includes
effects that reflect the SP’s ability to induce changes in current asset prices when the constraint
binds at t (i.e. µt > 0). There are two effects of this kind: First, the term ξ t u′′ (t)qt shows that,
when µt > 0, the SP internalizes that increasing ct raises qt and provides more borrowing capacity.
This effect, when present, reduces the social marginal benefit of savings. Second, since the planner
cannot commit to future policies, it takes into account how future planners respond to changes
in its debt choice (which is a state variable of the next-period’s planner). As explained above,
  10
       Note that −ξ t u′′ (t)qt > 0 because u′′ (·) < 0 and ξ t > 0, as condition (15) implies. Hence, λt > u′ (t).



                                                              13
the derivatives of the future decision rule and pricing function with respect to bt+1 are included
in Ωt+1 and are only relevant when µt > 0, otherwise they vanish. Since Ωt+1 has an ambiguous
sign, this effect can either increase or reduce the social marginal benefit of savings.
    Notice a key difference between the qt and qt+1 effects: The latter is only relevant when the
constraint has a positive probability of becoming binding at t+1, while the former are only relevant
when the constraint is binding at t. Existing studies of macroprudential policy focus mainly on
the effects via qt+1 , but the above discussion suggests that the effects operating via qt should also
be part of the analysis.
    We show now that the SP’s equilibrium can be decentralized with a state-contingent tax on
debt τ t .11 The price of bonds becomes 1/[Rt (1 + τ t )] in the budget constraint of the private agent
in the regulated competitive equilibrium, and there is also a lump-sum transfer Tt rebating tax
revenue.12 The agents’ Euler equation for bonds becomes:

                                     u′ (t) = βRt (1 + τ t )Et u′ (t + 1) + µt                                       (16)

Analyzing the SP’s optimality conditions together with those of the regulated and unregulated
DE leads to the following proposition:

Proposition 1 (Decentralization with Debt Taxes). The constrained-efficient equilibrium can be
decentralized with a state-contingent tax on debt with tax revenue rebated as a lump-sum transfer
and the tax rate set to satisfy:

                    1           ′                   ′′
                                                                                           1
   1 + τt =       ′
                           E t  u  (t + 1) − ξ t+1 u    (t + 1)Q t+1 + ξ t Ω t+1   +         ′
                                                                                                      [ξ t u′′ (t)qt ]
              Et u (t + 1)                                                           βRt Et u (t + 1)

where the arguments of the functions have been shorthanded as dates to keep the expression simple.
Proof: See Appendix A.2 .

    The optimal tax schedule has two components that match the qt and qt+1 effects on the social
marginal benefit of savings identified in the SP’s Euler equation. First, matching the pecuniary
externality via qt+1 , we have a component denoted the macroprudential debt tax, τ M P , which is
a tax levied only when the collateral constraint is not binding at t but may bind with positive
probability at t + 1. Thus, this tax hampers credit growth in good times to lower the risk of future
financial instability. Using (15), the macroprudential debt tax reduces to:
                                                                                   
                                                  −Et [ξ t+1 u′′ (t + 1)Q(t + 1)]
                                   τM
                                    t
                                      P
                                          =                                                                          (17)
                                                           Et [u′ (t + 1)]
  11
     Following Bianchi (2011), it is also possible to decentralize the planner’s problem using measures targeted
directly to financial intermediaries, such as capital requirements, reserve requirements or loan-to-value ratios.
  12
     The tax can also be expressed as a tax on the income generated by borrowing, so that the post-tax price would
be (1 − τ R                                                         R
          t )(1/Rt ). The two treatments are equivalent if we set τ t = τ t /(1 + τ t ).




                                                           14
We can also demonstrate that this tax is non-negative. It is zero whenever the constraint is not
expected to bind at t + 1, but otherwise it is strictly positive, since u′ > 0, u′′ < 0 and ξ ≥ 0. Thus,
the tax is strictly positive whenever there is a positive probability that the collateral constraint (or
equivalently the implementability constraint, given condition (15)) can become binding at t + 1.
    The second component of the optimal debt tax is formed by the two terms that match the
effects operating through qt , and hence are only present if the collateral constraint binds at t. Since
the term ξ t u′′ (t)qt is negative, it pushes for a debt subsidy, but since the term with Ωt+1 has an
ambiguous sign, the combined effect also has an ambiguous sign and thus the second component
of the tax can be positive or negative.
    The above optimal policy analysis modeled the SP as choosing allocations and bonds directly
subject to an implementability constraint, and showing that those allocations can be decentralized
using debt taxes. In Section A.3 of the Appendix, we demonstrate that the same outcome can be
obtained if we model instead the planner as choosing directly optimal debt taxes under discretion
facing allocations and prices that are competitive equilibria. In particular, we show that this
approach yields the same allocations and the same taxes. In addition, we also study in the
Appendix a case in which debt taxes are restricted to be positive. This is interesting because
the optimal τ t we derived could be negative, which would require introducing other forms of
taxation to finance subsidies, particularly lump-sum taxes. Our results show that the optimal
macroprudential debt tax τ M    t
                                  P
                                     has the same form as the one we derived here.
    While it was possible to characterize theoretically the differences in the optimality conditions
of the DE and SP, the optimal debt tax and the sign of the macroprudential debt tax, comparing
the levels of debt and asset prices in the two equilibria is only possible via numerical simulation.
Still, we can develop some intuition using elements of this analysis.
    Borrowing decisions and asset prices are related, both when the collateral constraint binds and
when it does not. When it binds, it is obvious that higher asset prices support higher debt. When
it does not bind, expectations of higher asset prices reduce the need to build precautionary savings
and lead to higher borrowing, since collateral constraints are expected to be more relaxed. Hence,
understanding differences in asset prices is key for understanding differences in debt choices across
the DE and SP. In turn, given the asset pricing condition, differences in expected asset returns are
key for understanding how prices differ, and these differences can be characterized analytically.
    Expected returns in the DE are characterized by the condition we derived for the equity
premium (eq. (9)). The planner’s excess returns are given by the following expression, which
follows from applying the same treatment to the SP’s optimality conditions as we did in the DE:
                                                    #                           q
                                                                                             #                      
           µt + ξ t u′′ (t)qt + βRt Et ξ t Ωt+1   Et φt+1 mt+1     covt (mt+1 , Rt+1 ) βRt Et ξ t+1 u′′ (t + 1)Qt+1
  Rtep   =                                      −                −                    −                                 (18)
                      u′ (t)Et mt+1                  Et mt+1             Et mt+1              u′ (t)Et mt+1
           |                 {z               } |       {z     } |          {z       } |            {z              }
                   Liquidity Premium          Collateral Premium     Risk Premium            Externality Premium


Excess returns for the SP differ from the DE in two respects. First, they carry an “externality


                                                             15
premium,” because the SP internalizes the qt+1 effects of borrowing decisions. In fact, simplifying
further this premium yields Rt τ M  t
                                      P
                                        , which is intuitive because the macroprudential tax rateis
equal to the magnitude of the wedge the qt+1 effect drives into the SP’s Euler equation for bonds
relative to the DE. Second, the SP’s liquidity premium includes two terms absent from the liquidity
premium in the DE, which are related to the SP’s effects on qt when the constraint binds at t.
As noted before, the first of these terms is negative, which lowers the return on assets, and the
second term has an ambiguous sign. In addition to these first-order effects via the externality and
liquidity premia, there are also second-order effects operating via endogenous changes in all four
premia in the SP’s excess returns, since the SP has a stronger precautionary-savings motive and
supports allocations and prices that produce less risk.
    The net effect of the four premia in the SP’s returns can increase or decrease asset prices in the
economy with regulation v. the DE. First, the externality premium pushes asset returns higher and
asset prices lower, which tilts the portfolio towards bonds and away from risky assets. Second, the
additional terms in the liquidity premium can push returns higher or lower, since their combined
value has an ambiguous sign. Third, the second-order effects via changes in precautionary savings
and risk can have ambiguous effects too, since higher demand for bonds weakens demand for
assets, lowering their price, but lower risk premia reduce expected returns, increasing asset prices.
    Quantitatively, under our baseline calibration, expected returns are generally higher, asset
prices lower and debt smaller for the SP than the DE, and particularly so in the good-times
regions of the state space in which the macroprudential tax is used. In contrast, during financial
crises (which become very infrequent under the optimal policy) returns are significantly lower,
prices higher and debt higher for the SP than the DE (see Section I of the Appendix for a detailed
comparison of the quantitative asset pricing features of both economies). The lack of commitment
is important for these results too. Under commitment, as we describe below, the planner considers
how borrowing at any date t affects asset prices in previous periods, which creates a force to sustain
higher asset prices even when the constraint does not bind.


2.5     Time Inconsistency under Commitment
We focused on studying optimal policy without commitment because we found that the problem
under commitment yields time-inconsistent optimal plans.13 A comprehensive analysis of this
issue is beyond the scope of this paper, but we provide here the argument that shows why optimal
policy under commitment is time-inconsistent.
    The planner chooses at date 0 policy rules in a once-and-for-all fashion (see Section D of the
Appendix for a detailed description of the planner’s optimization problem under commitment and
  13
     This time-inconsistency problem does not arise in Lorenzoni (2008)’s classic model of fire sales because in
his model the asset price is determined by a static condition linking relative productivity of households and en-
trepreneurs, rather than expectations about future marginal utility. Similarly, in Bianchi (2011), borrowing capacity
is determined by a static price of non-tradable goods.


                                                         16
a numerical example). In contrast with the problem without commitment, we found that in this
case we do need to carry as constraints the optimality conditions of factor allocations and the
Khun-Tucker conditions associated with the collateral constraint in the DE, because it cannot be
guaranteed that they are always nonbinding.
    The first-order conditions for consumption, bond holdings and asset prices under commitment
in sequential form are the following:14

                  ct ::              λt =u′ (t) − ξ t u′′ (t)qt + ξ t−1 u′′ (t)(qt + zt Fk (t) + κt µt qt )       (19)

               bt+1 ::               λt =βRt Et λt+1 + µ∗t + µt ν t                                               (20)

                                                                  κt (µt ν t + µ∗t )
                 qt ::                ξ t =ξ t−1 (1 + κt µt ) +                                                   (21)
                                                                       u′ (t)

 The time-inconsistency problem is evident from the presence of the lagged multipliers in the first
and third conditions.15 According to (19), the planner internalizes how an increase in consumption
at time t helps relax the borrowing constraint at time t and makes it tighter at t − 1. As (21)
shows, this implies that the Lagrange multiplier on the implementability constraint ξ t follows a
positive, non-decreasing sequence, which increases every time the constraint binds. Intuitively,
when the constraint binds at t, the planner promises lower future consumption so as to prop up
asset prices and borrowing capacity at t, but ex post when t + 1 arrives it is sub-optimal to keep
this promise. In line with this intuition, we found in the numerical example of the Appendix that
the planner with commitment supports higher asset prices and higher debt than in the DE (which
is the opposite of what we found vis-a-vis the SP without commitment).
    Section D of the Appendix also shows that state-contingent debt taxes can still be be used to
decentralize the solutions of the problem under commitment as a competitive equilibrium, except
that again this is a non-credible policy because of the time-inconsistency of the planner’s optimal
plans. The macroprudential component of this tax has the same form as in the problem without
commitment only if the collateral constraint has never been binding up to date t and is expected
to bind with some probability at t + 1. Otherwise, even if it does not bind at t, the optimal
macroprudential taxes differ with and without commitment.
  14
     The problem has seven Lagrange multipliers, but in these first-order conditions only four appear. λt , µ∗t , ξ t ,
which are assigned to the same constraints as in the problem without commitment, and ν t which is the multiplier
assigned to the constraint that requires the complementary slackness condition of the DE to hold.
  15
     It should be understood that time t − 1 variables include the history up to time t − 1 and time t variables
represent the history up to time t − 1 in addition to a time t exogenous disturbance.




                                                          17
3      Quantitative Analysis
This Section studies the model’s quantitative implications by conducting numerical simulations
for a baseline calibration. The first part describes the calibration and the rest discusses the results.


3.1     Calibration
We calibrate the model to annual frequency using OECD data between 1984 and 2012.16 For
some variables (e.g. housing wealth and working capital), we used only U.S. data because of data
availability limitations.
   The functional forms for preferences and technology are the following:
                                              1+ω
                                                     1−σ
                                        c − χ h1+ω          −1
                  u(c − G(h)) =                                  ω > 0, σ > 1
                                           1−σ
                                    z α k α v αh
                     F (k, h, v) = e k v h ,                αk , αv , αh ≥ 0 αk + αv + αv ≤ 1

TFP and R follow independent AR(1) processes.17 TFP shocks follow an AR(1) process: zt =
z̄ + ρz zt−1 + εt with εt ∼ N (0, σ ε ) and z̄ normalized so that mean output equals one. The
AR(1) process for the logged gross real interest rate is: ln(Rt ) = (1 − ρR )R̄ + ρR ln(Rt−1 ) + ς t
with ς t ∼ N (0, σ ς ). These shocks are discretized using Tauchen’s quadrature method with 3
realizations for each shock. κ follows a standard two-state, regime-switching Markov process with
 L
  κ < κH , where κH represents a normal credit regime and κL is a regime with unusually tight
credit conditions, in the sense that switches from κH to κL are infrequent and the mean duration
of the κL regime is low. For simplicity, this process is assumed to be independent from the Markov
processes of z and R. The continuation transition probabilities are denoted PL,L and PH,H for κL
and κH respectively, and the long-run probabilities are given by P L = PH,L /(PL,H + PH,L ) and
P H = PL,H /(PL,H + PH,L ). The mean durations are 1/PL,H and 1/PH,L for κL and κH respectively.
    The calibration proceeds in two steps. First, a subset of parameter values are set using direct
empirical evidence or standard values from the literature. Second, given these parameter values,
the remaining six parameters are simultaneously determined by solving the model to target jointly
six moments from the data.
    In the first step, we set the parameters of the R process, the values of the two κ regimes, and
the values of {σ, ω, αh , θ, αν , χ}. To calibrate the interest-rate process, we follow the standard
approach in the international macro literature of measuring the world real interest rate using
  16
     We include all 34 OECD countries for simplicity. The cross-country averages of national accounts ratios and
time-series moments used to calibrate the model change only slightly excluding the 9 OECD emerging economies.
The data were gathered from OECD National Accounts Statistics and the United Nations UNdata.
  17
     This assumption is in line with the observation that the Basu-Fernald U.S. Solow residual estimates are uncor-
related with the U.S. real interest rate on 90-day Tbills.



                                                            18
                                       Table 1: Calibration

  Parameters set independently      Value                     Source/Target
  Risk aversion                     σ = 1.                    Standard value
  Share of inputs in gross output   αv = 0.45                 Cross country average OECD
  Share of labor in gross output    αh = 0.352                OECD GDP Labor share = 0.64
  Labor disutility coefficient      χ = 0.352                 Normalization to yield average h = 1
  Frisch elasticity                 1/ω = 2                   Keane and Rogerson (2012)
  Working capital coefficient       θ = 0.16                  U.S. Working capital/GDP ratio=0.133
  Tight credit regime               κL = 0.75                 U.S. post-crisis LTV ratios
  Normal credit regime              κH = 0.90                 U.S. pre-crisis LTV ratios
  Interest rate                     R̄ = 1.1%, ρR = 0.68      U.S. 90-day T-Bills
                                    σ R = 1.86%
  Parameters set by simulation      Value                     Target

  TFP shock                         ρz = 0.78, σ z = 0.01     OECD average for std. and autoc. of GDP
  Share of assets in gross output   αk = 0.008                Value of collateral matches total credit
  Discount factor                   β = 0.95                  N F A = −25 percent
  Transition prob. κH to κL         PH,L = 0.1                4 crises every 100 years (See Appendix E.2 )
  Transition prob. κL to κL         PL,L = 0.                 1 year duration of crises (See Appendix E.2)




the annualized ex-post real return on 90-day U.S. T-bills. This yields R̄ = 1.01, ρR = 0.68 and
σ ς = 1.38 percent.
    The values of the credit regimes are set to κL = 0.75 and κH = 0.9. These values are consistent
with evidence on loan-to-value (LTV) ratios for both households and firms in the United States
and abroad during the financial crisis and prior to the crisis. Demyanyk and Hemert (2011) and
Duca and Murphy (2011) show that U.S. mortgage LTV ratios peaked at about 0.9 in the run-up
to the crisis, hence we set κH = 0.9. Favilukis et al. (2010) note that there was a significant drop
in LTV ratios during the crisis, down to maximum values in the 0.75-0.8 range. These LTV ratios
are also in the range of cross-country estimates reported by Nguyen and Qian (2012). They report
LTVs for both firms and households ranging between 0.72 and 0.9 based on firm-level survey data
from the World Bank Enterprise Survey.
    The CRRA coefficients is set to σ = 1, which is commonly used in open-economy DSGE
models. The Frisch elasticity of labor supply (1/ω) is set equal to 2, in the range of estimates
typically used in Macro models (see Keane and Rogerson, 2012). The parameter χ is set so that
mean hours are equal to 1, which requires χ = αh (with αh calibrated as described below).
    Using national accounts data for all OECD members, we obtained a GDP-weighted average
of the ratio of total intermediate goods to gross output of about 0.45 in the 1980-2012 period.
Hence we set αv = 0.45. The share of labor in gross output is then set so that it yields the

                                                 19
standard OECD labor share in GDP of 0.64 (see Stockman and Tesar, 1995). This implies αh =
0.64∗ (1 − αv ) = 0.352.
    The value of θ is set to be consistent with an empirical estimate of working capital financing
based on cross-sectional U.S. data for 2013. In particular, we measure working capital as the sum
of trade credit liabilities of nonfinancial businesses from the Flow of Funds dataset, plus the total
of commercial and industrial loans extended by commercial banks with maturity of less than one
year, from the Survey of Terms of Business Lending. This yields an estimate of 13.3 percent of
GDP for total working capital financing in 2013. Hence, since total working capital as a share of
GDP in the model is given by θpv v/(F (k, h, v) − pv v), and the ratio of total intermediate goods
to GDP in U.S. data for 2013 was 0.8, it follows that θ=0.133/.8=0.16.
    The second stage of the calibration sets the values of {ρz , σ z , αk , β, PL,L PH,L , }. The values of
these six parameters are set jointly so that the DE solution matches the corresponding six target
moments from the data listed in Table 1.
    The values of ρz and σ z are targeted to match the average autocorrelation and standard
deviation of the linearly-detrended cyclical component of output across all OECD countries in the
1984-2010 period. The average standard deviation is 0.05 and the average autocorrelation is 0.76.
Matching these moments requires setting ρz = 0.78 and σ z = 0.01.
    The target for setting the value of β is an estimate of the net foreign asset position (NFA)
as a share of GDP that excludes the government sector (since government is not included in the
model).18 This estimate was constructed using U.S. data from the Flow of Funds dataset for 2013.
We did not target the time-series average because the U.S. NFA-GDP ratio has displayed a marked
downward trend since the early 1980s due to the Global Imbalances phenomenon. Since the Flow
of Funds provide a breakdown of domestic v. foreign financing only in terms of the overall funding
for the total domestic nonfinancial sectors, which includes the government, we compute first the
fraction of the net credit liabilities of the domestic nonfinancial sectors financed by the rest of the
world (0.2), and then apply this fraction to the total net credit liabilities of the private domestic
nonfinancial sectors (−1.21), which yields a private NFA position of 0.2 × (−1.21) = −0.249 as a
share of GDP. The model’s decentralized equilibrium yields an unconditional mean of b as share
of GDP that matches this ratio with β = 0.95.
    In setting the share of capital in value added, we cannot follow the standard approach of setting
it to the observed share of about 1/3rd, because this estimate includes capital income accrued to
the entire capital stock, while the model considers only capital that is in fixed supply. Instead, we
set the capital share so that the value of assets usable as collateral can support levels of leverage
comparable with those observed in the data (i.e. the values in the interval defined by κL and κH ).
In particular, we set αk so that the collateral constraint in the κL regime holds with equality when
  18
    We also control for the absence of government purchases by deducting a time- and state-invariant amount of
autonomous expenditures in the resource and budget constraints, calibrated to match the 16 percent average share
of government expenditures in GDP in U.S. data over the 1984-2012 period.


                                                      20
evaluated at the unconditional averages of asset prices, debt and working capital. That is, we
adjust αk until this condition holds: E[qt ] = −E[bt+1κL+θpv vt ] . Given the NFA target of −24.9 percent
of GDP, the working capital estimate of 13.3 percent of GDP, and the value of κL , the condition
holds when αk = 0.008.19
    Finally, we calibrate the transition probabilities of the credit regime switching process so as to
match the frequency and duration of financial crises in the data. To construct estimates of these
two statistics, we applied the methodology proposed by Forbes and Warnock (2012) to identify
the timing and duration of sharp changes in financial conditions. A financial crisis is defined as an
event in which linearly-detrended current account is above two-standard deviations from its mean.
Since the current account is the overall measure of financing of the economy vis-a-vis the rest of the
world, this unusually large current accounts represent unusually large drops in foreign financing.
The starting (ending) dates of the events are set in the year within the previous (following) two
years in which the current account first rose (fell) above (below) one standard deviation. Using
the data for all OECD countries over the 1984-2012 period, we obtained financial crises with a
frequency of 4 percent and a mean duration of 1 year. The model calibrated with PL,L = 0 and
PHH = 0.9, and applying the same criteria to define financial crises and their duration, yields
financial crises with a frequency of 3.8 percent and a mean duration of 1 year.
    The model is solved using a global, nonlinear solution algorithm taking into account the occa-
sionally binding, stochastic credit constraint. The DE solution is obtained using a time iteration
algorithm. In the SP’s problem, we use a nested fixed-point algorithm: In the inner loop, we solve
for policy functions and value functions using value function iteration, given future policies. In the
outer loop, we update future policies given the solution to the Bellman equation, which ensures
Markov stationarity. Further details are provided in Section J of the Appendix.


3.2     Financial Crises Dynamics
In order to analyze the model’s ability to generate financial crises, and the effectiveness of the
optimal policy at reducing the frequency and severity of crises, we conduct an event analysis of
model-simulated data for the DE and SP economies. We examine averages across financial crises
events in a long time-series simulation, defining crises in the same way as in the data.20
    The first important result of this event analysis is that the time-consistent macroprudential
policy reduces significantly the frequency of crises. The model was calibrated so that the DE
matches the 4-percent crises frequency observed in the data. Under the same calibration, the
  19
     This value is similar to what would be obtained if we impose the same average price of the baseline calibration
in a deterministic steady state in which the constraint is not binding. In this case, the steady-state pricing condition
implies q = αk (1 − β), and using the same average price and the same value of β as in the baseline calibration
would imply αk = 0.012. Risk and binding borrowing constraints alters the implied value of αk .
  20
     In Section F of the Appendix we follow a different approach and examine instead the DE’s predicted time-series
dynamics for the global financial crisis using a window spanning the 2000-2009 period, and compare these dynamics
with U.S. and European data and with what the event would have looked like under the optimal policy.


                                                          21
frequency of crises in the SP is only 0.02 percent. Thus, financial crises become extremely rare
under the optimal policy .21
    The ability of the DE to generate financial crises and the effect of the optimal policy on their
severity are illustrated by constructing event windows with the simulated data comparing the DE
and SP. The results are presented in Figure 1, which shows nine-year event windows for total
credit (bonds plus working capital) as a share of GDP, asset prices, output, and consumption, as
well as windows that show the evolution of the exogenous shocks.
    We construct comparable event windows for the two economies following this procedure: First,
we simulate the DE for 100,000 periods and identify financial crises using the event-study method-
ology we borrowed from the empirical literature described earlier. Second, we construct nine-year
event windows centered at the crisis year, denoted date t, by computing averages for each variable
across the cross section of crisis events at each date. This produces the DE dynamics plotted as
the red, continuous lines in Figure 1. Third, we take the initial bond position at t − 5 of the DE
and the sequences of shocks the DE went through in the nine-year window, and pass them through
the policy functions of the SP. Finally, we average in each date the cross-sectional sample of the
SP to generate the averages shown as the blue, dashed line in Figure 1.
    Panel (a) of Figure 1 shows that the pecuniary externality results in significant overborrowing
in the DE in the periods before the crisis. At t−5 both DE and SP start from the same credit-GDP
ratio by construction. But starting at t − 4, and for the rest of the pre-crisis years, credit under
the SP is roughly 3 percentage points of GDP below the DE average. In contrast, credit in the
DE rises in the years before the crises, peaking at about 38 percent of GDP. As a result of this
overborrowing, the DE builds up more leverage and experiences a larger collapse in credit when
a financial crisis hits. Credit falls amost 18 percentage points of GDP in the DE between t − 1
and t, v. 1.5 percentage points in the SP, and although it rises at a fast pace after the crisis, four
years later it remains below its long-run average. Note, however, that by then the DE is again
generating more credit than the SP.22
    Asset prices (panel (b)), output (panel (c)) and consumption (panel (d)) also fall more sharply
in the DE than the SP. The declines in consumption and asset prices are particularly larger (−26
v. −8 percent for consumption and −43.7 v. −5.4 percent for asset prices). The asset price
collapse plays an important role in explaining the more pronounced decline in credit in the DE,
because it reflects the full impact of the Fisherian deflation. Output falls almost 2 percentage
points more in the DE than in the SP, because of the higher shadow price of inputs produced by
the tighter binding constraint on access to working capital.
    Panel (e) shows that financial crises are preceded largely by regimes with κH and coincide with
  21
     We identify financial crises for the SP using the credit thresholds of the DE in levels. Re-computing the
thresholds using the standard deviation of credit in the SP, which is smaller, the frequency of crises rises slightly
but remains much lower than in the DE. Our results are also largely robust to alternative crises definitions.
  22
     The model produces large credit drops partly because all intertemporal credit is in the form of one-period
bonds, whereas loans in the data have on average a longer maturity.


                                                         22
                       (a) Credit                                                            (b) Asset Price
40                                                                       10

                                                                           0
35
                                                                        -10

30                                                                      -20

                                                                        -30
25
                                                                        -40

20                                                                      -50
           t-3                  t                  t+3                                 t-2          t          t+2
                       (c) Output                                                      (d) Consumption
 0                                                                         5

                                                                           0
 -2
                                                                          -5

 -4
                                                                        -10

                                                                        -15
 -6

                                                                        -20
 -8
                                                                        -25

-10                                                                     -30
             t-2            t              t+2                                         t-2          t          t+2


         (e) Mean Financial Shock                                               (f) TFP and Interest Rate Shocks
0.95                                                                     1.5
                                                                                                               Interest Rate
                                                                           1                                   TFP
 0.9
                                                                         0.5

                                                                           0
0.85
                                                                        -0.5
 0.8                                                                      -1

                                                                        -1.5
0.75
                                                                          -2

 0.7                                                                    -2.5
                 t-2        t               t+2                                        t-2          t          t+2
                                     Decentralized Equilibrium        Social Planner



                                    Figure 1: Comparison of Crises Dynamics

Note: Panel (a) shows the credit-GDP ratio in percent. Panels (b),(c),(d),(f) are plotted as percent
differences relative to unconditional averages.




                                                                 23
                                         Table 2: Summary Statistics


                                                               Decentralized       Social
                                                               Equilibrium        Planner
                           Crisis statistics
                       Probability of crisis                        4.0             0.02
                       Asset Price Drop                           −43.7            −5.4
                       Equity Premium                              4.8               0.7
                           Mean tax and welfare gains
                       Macroprudential Debt Tax                                         3.6
                       Welfare Gains                                                   0.30

                   Note: The price drop and equity premium are averages conditional on financial
                   crises events. The debt tax and welfare gains are unconditional averages over
                   the model’s limiting distribution of bonds and shocks. The welfare gains are
                   measured as compensating variations in consumption that equate expected
                   lifetime utility for the DE and SP at each point in the state space.


regime switches to κL . Panel (f) shows that TFP is declining on average before financial crises,
and reaches a through of about 2 percent below the mean when a crisis hits, and after that it
recovers. The real interest rate falls slightly on average before financial crises, then rises about 50
basis points when crises occur and remains stable in the years after. Thus, financial crises in the
DE are associated on average with adverse TFP, interest rate and financial shocks. Note, however,
that the model also generates crises with positive TFP shocks when leverage is sufficiently high
and an adverse financial shock hits.
    Summing up, this event analysis delivers two main results: First, financial amplification driven
by the Fisherian mechanism is strong in the model, producing financial crises with deep reces-
sions.23 Second, the pecuniary externality is quantitatively large, resulting in an optimal policy
that is very effective at reducing the magnitude and frequency of crises.
    Table 2 shows additional statistics that summarize the effectiveness of the optimal policy. In
addition to the reductions in the probability of crises and the asset price collapse during a crisis
documented above, this Table shows that the excess return on assets averages 4.8 percent during
financial crises in the DE v. 0.8 percent in the SP. About half of the large excess return in the
DE is due to the collateral effect identified in equation (9), and the rest is due to the liquidity
and risk premia. The average debt tax over the entire state space is 3.6 percent, and the welfare
gain of the optimal policy is 30 basis points in terms of the standard compensating variation in
consumption (see subsection 3.4 for an explanation of how the welfare gains are meaured).
 23
      Mendoza (2010) shows that this holds also in models with capital accumulation.




                                                        24
                                                                                               Positive Crisis
                                                                                               Probability Region




                 Next-Period Bond Holdings (B′)   -0.15                                  B SP (B, s)



                                                          Constrained Credit Region
                                                                                                                            SP
                                                                                                                        B        (B, s)
                                                   -0.2


                                                                                            B DE (B, s)
                                                                                                      DE            Stable Credit Region
                                                                                                  B        (B, s)
                                                  -0.25

                                                          -0.25                         -0.2                  -0.15                  -0.1
                                                                                      Current Bond Holdings (B)

                                                          Figure 2: Bond Decision Rules and Borrowing Limits.


3.3       Borrowing Decisions and Amplification
The manner in which the optimal policy reduces amplification and tackles the pecuniary externality
can be illustrated by comparing borrowing decisions across the DE and SP. Figure 2 shows the
decision rules for bonds B DE (B, s) and B SP (B, s) as the red-continuous and blue-dashed curves
respectively. Bond choices for t+1 (B ′ ) are shown in the vertical axis as functions of bond holdings
at t in the horizontal axis (B), for values of the shocks set to κL , high R and average TFP. The
                                                        DE               SP
Figure also shows the debt limits of each economy (B (B, s) and B (B, s)).24
    The bond decision rules are divided into three regions: The leftmost region is the constrained
credit region, which is defined by the values of B that represent sufficiently high initial debt (low
B) such that the collateral constraint already binds for the SP. The center region is the positive
crisis probability region. This region is characterized by financial instability, in the sense that
the constraint is not binding at t, but values of B ′ chosen by private agents in the DE are low
enough so that for some values of the shocks at t + 1 the collateral constraint binds. As shown
in Section 2, this is the region in which the regulator uses the macroprudential debt tax. At
equilibrium, the long-run probability of observing states in this region region is almost 94 percent
in the SP solution. Hence, while crises are near-zero probability events under the optimal policy,
macroprudential debt taxes are used nearly all the time. Finally, the rightmost region is the stable
credit region, where B is high enough so that both the constraint is not binding at t and the
probability of hitting it next period is zero for both DE and SP.
    The V-shaped bond decision rules are a feature of financial frictions models that incorporate a
strong Fisherian deflation mechanism. This is in contrast with standard Bewley-style incomplete-
 24
      These limits are defined as −κq DE (B, s) + pv v̂ DE (B, 1, B, s) and −κq SP (B, s) + pv v̂ SP (B, s)


                                                                                                       25
markets models of heterogeneous agents and RBC models of the small open economy, both of
which produce monotonically-increasing decision rules. The point at which the decision rules
switch slope corresponds to the value of B at which the collateral constraint is marginally binding
in each economy (i.e. it holds with equality but the choice of debt is exactly the same debt allowed
by the credit constraint). To the right of this point, the collateral constraint does not bind and
the decision rules are upward sloping. To the left of this point, the decision rules are sharply
decreasing in B, because a reduction in B results in a sharp fall in asset prices caused by the
Fisherian deflation mechanism, which tightens the borrowing constraint, thus increasing B ′ .25 In
line with these results, the decision rules lie above their corresponding borrowing limits to the
right of the values of B at which the constraint becomes binding, and to the left the decision rules
must be equal to their corresponding borrowing limits.
    A second, and more important, feature of the bond decision rules from the perspective of the
normative analysis we are conducting, is that the SP’s decision rule is uniformly higher than in
the DE for all values of B (i.e. there is “overborrowing” in the DE relative to the SP in all three
regions). Recall, however, that as we explained in Section 2, prices and bond choices can be higher
or lower in the SP than in the DE. Indeed we found that with other parameterizations the two
decision rules can be closer, and there can even be instances in which the DE chooses higher B ′ .
    The differences in bond choices across DE and SP may seem small, but they lead to large
differences in prices and allocations when a crisis occurs. The non-linear financial amplification
dynamics that make this possible, and the SP’s ability to weaken them, are illustrated in Figure
3. This Figure shows the decision rules for bonds over the interval −0.25 ≤ B ≤ −0.17 for two
different triples of s. The ones labeled positive shock are for κH , and the ones labeled negative
shock are for κL , using for both average TFP and a high value of R. The ray from the origin is
the stationary choice (45-degree) line, where B ′ = B.
    Figure 3 can be used to visualize the dynamics of financial amplification in the DE, and compare
them with the SP via the following experiment: Assume both DE and SP start in a hypothetical
first period with bonds at point O, which is the intersection of DE’s bond decision rule under
positive shocks with the 45-degree line. Starting at this point, agents in the DE choose bond
holdings D such that D = O, since B ′ = B. Hence, DE ends the period with the same amount of
bonds it started with. Assume then that the second period arrives and the realization of κ is κL .
The DE starts at point D but now the collateral constraint becomes binding, and the Fisherian
deflation of asset prices forces a sharp, nonlinear upward adjustment of the bond position such
that B ′ increases to point D′ , reducing debt from about −0.245 to about −0.185. Compare this
with what happens in the SP case. Starting at O, the planner’s decision rule increases bond
holdings (lowers debt) to about −0.22, to end the first period at point P . Hence, SP ends with
debt slightly below what agents in the DE chose (i.e. −0.22 v. −0.245 respectively). The second
  25
    In Bianchi (2011), this non-monotonicity arises from how consumption affects the marginal rate of substitution
between tradables and non-tradables and thus the relative price of nontradables.


                                                       26
                                         -0.17
                                                                   SP             DE     45 degree



                                                                        Negative Shock
                                                      D′
             Next-Period Bond Holdings



                                                              P′
                                         -0.21
                                                               P

                                             Positive Shock



                                                       O,D
                                         -0.25
                                             -0.25                        -0.21                      -0.17
                                                              Current Bond Holdings

        Figure 3: Amplification Dynamics in Response to Adverse Shocks


period arrives, but now the correction in debt triggered by the binding collateral constraint is
small, as the choice of B ′ rises from P to P ′ . Hence, the slightly smaller initial debt of the SP v.
the DE in the second period results in a sharply smaller upward adjustment in B ′ for the planner
(about 50 basis points in percent of GDP v. roughly 700). This is the mechanism that produces
the SP’s significantly smaller financial crises shown in the event analysis.
    The differences in borrowing decisions and asset prices of the DE and SP are also reflected
in two important differences in the cumulative long-run distributions of realized asset returns
(see Figure 4). First, the SP shows more mass at higher returns, which partly reflects that the
externality premium identified in equation (18) is large, or, since this premium can be expressed
as Rt τ M
        t
          P
            , it can also be viewed as an implication of the macroprudential debt tax. Second, the
distribution for the DE displays a fat left tail, which corresponds to states in which negative shocks
hit when agents have a relatively high level of debt. Intuitively, the standard effect of negative
shocks reducing expected dividends and putting downward pressure on asset returns is amplified
by the effect of asset fire-sales that occur if the collateral constraint binds.
    The fat tail of the distribution of asset returns in the DE, and its substantial effects on the risk
premium due to the associated time-varying risk of financial crises, are important results because
they are an endogenous equilibrium outcome resulting from the non-linear asset pricing dynamics
when the debt-deflation mechanism is at work. Fat tails in asset returns are also highlighted in
the recent literature on asset pricing and “rare disasters” but this literature generally treats
financial disasters as resulting from exogenous stochastic processes. More details on the asset
pricing implications and the implications of macroprudential policy are reported in Appendix I.




                                                                                   27
                             1


                            0.8

              Probability
                            0.6                          Social Planner



                            0.4


                            0.2   Decentralized Equilibrium



                             0
                              -45         -35       -25     -15      -5    5    15
                                                Asset Returns (in percentage)

                             Figure 4: Ergodic distribution of Asset returns


3.4    Macroprudential Debt Tax & Welfare Effects
We now study the quantitative features of the macroprudential debt tax (τ M P ) and its welfare
implications. Panel (a) of Figure 5 shows the tax schedule as a function of B for average TFP,
high R and κH . Panel (b) shows the event-analysis evolution of the tax around financial crises.
     Panel (a) shows that the tax is zero when the value of B at date t is such that the economy
is in the stable credit region, because the probability of hitting the collateral constraint at t + 1
is also zero. When B is low enough to be in the positive-crisis-probability region the constraint is
still not binding at t but it can bind at t + 1, and so the tax is positive. In this region, the tax is
higher at lower B (i.e, it is increasing in current debt), because this makes it more likely that the
constraint will become binding at t + 1, and that if it does it will be more binding than at higher
values of B. The tax can be as high as 13 percent when debt is about 30 percent.
     Panel (b) shows that the tax is positive and rising in the four years prior to the financial
crisis. Recall from Figure 1 that these are also the years in which credit and leverage rise in the
unregulated DE. Hence, the policy is taxing debt to reduce the overborrowing that occurs in the
good times, so as to mitigate the magnitude of a financial crisis when it occurs. The tax peaks at
about 12 percent in the year just before the crisis. When the crisis hits the tax is zero, because at
this point µt > 0 and the probability of µt+1 > 0 is zero, and hence the prudential aspect of the
policy vanishes. The tax increases slightly the year after the crisis and then rises rapidly to reach
about 7 percent at t + 4.
     As noted earlier, the long-run average of the macroprudential debt tax is 3.6 percent. In
addition, it has a standard deviation that is roughly half the standard deviation of GDP, and a
correlation of 0.7 with the leverage ratio. This is consistent with the prudential rationale behind


                                                                          28
                (a) Tax Schedule in Good States                                   (b) Dynamics around Crises Events

           12
                                                                             12


            9
                                                                              9
       %




                                                                         %
            6
                                                                              6

            3
                                                                              3

            0
                 -0.3    -0.2          -0.1      0       0.1                  0
                         Current Bond Holdings                                             t-2      t         t+2


                                            Figure 5: Optimal Macroprudential Tax


the tax: The tax is high when leverage is building up and low when the economy is deleveraging.
Note, however, that since leverage itself is negatively correlated with GDP, the tax also has a
negative GDP correlation. Finally, the tax also has a positive correlation with “credit conditions”
as reflected in κt , again in line with arguments often used to favor macroprudential policy.
    Jeanne and Korinek (2010) also computed macroprudential debt taxes to correct a similar
pecuniary externality, but found that they have much weaker effects on financial crises than in
our setup: The asset price drop is reduced from 12.3 to 10.3 percent, compared with 43.6 to 5.4
percent in our analysis. In their model, the credit constraint is determined by the aggregate level
of assets K̄ and a constant term ψ (i.e. their constraint is bt+1
                                                                R
                                                                   ≥ −κqt K̄ − ψ), with parameters
calibrated to κ = 0.046, ψ = 3.07 and qt K̄ = 4.8. This implies that the effects of the credit
constraint are driven mainly by ψ, and only 7 percent of the borrowing ability depends on the
value of assets (0.07=0.046*4.8/(0.046*4.8+3.07)). As a result, the Fisherian deflation effect
and the pecuniary externality are both weak, and thus macroprudential policy cannot be very
effective. Moreover, since they model output as an exogenous, regime-switching Markov process,
such that the probability of a crisis equals the exogenous probability of the low-output regime,
macroprudential policy cannot affect the probability of crises either.
    We study the welfare implications of the optimal policy by calculating welfare effects as com-
pensating consumption variations for each initial state (B, s) that equalize expected utility across
the DE and SP. Formally, for a given initial state (B, s) at date 0, the welfare effect of the optimal
policy is computed as the value of γ(B, s) that satisfies this condition:
                             ∞
                             X                                                    ∞
                                                                                  X
                                       t
                        E0         β       u(cDE
                                              t (1   + γ) −    G(hDE
                                                                  t ))   = E0           β t u(cSP
                                                                                               t  − G(hSP
                                                                                                       t ))           (22)
                             t=0                                                  t=0


The mean welfare gain reported earlier is the average γ(B, s) computed with the DE’s ergodic
distribution. In addition, we analyze below the variation of the welfare gains across (B, s) pairs
and in the dynamics around crises.

                                                                   29
                          (a) Schedule in Good States
                                                                                       (b) Simulation of Welfare Gains
                                                                                0.37
Percentage Points




                    0.3                                                         0.36


                                                                                0.35
                    0.2




                                                                            %
                                                                                0.34
                    0.1

                                                                                0.33


                          -0.2   -0.15   -0.1   -0.05   0   0.05   0.1          0.32
                                   Current Bond Holdings                                     t-2      t      t+2


                                                        Figure 6: Welfare Gains of the Optimal Policy


    The welfare gains of the optimal policy arise from two sources. First, the reduced variability
of consumption in the SP v. the DE, due to the fact that the credit constraint binds more often in
the DE, and when it binds it induces a larger adjustment in asset prices and consumption. Second,
the efficiency loss in production that occurs in the DE due to the effect of the credit friction on
working capital and factor allocations. Again, since the collateral constraint binds more often in
the DE than in the SP, there is a larger efficiency loss in the former.
    The welfare gains of the optimal policy are illustrated in Figure 6. Panel (a) shows the state-
contingent schedule of welfare gains as a function of B for the same “good” state with average TFP,
high R and κH as in Figure 5. Panel (b) shows the event-analysis dynamics of the welfare gains
around financial crises events. In looking at these results, keep in mind that the values of γ are
generally small because the model is in the class of stationary-consumption, representative-agent
models with CRRA preferences that produce small welfare effects due to consumption variability
(see Lucas, 1987). Moreover, although the efficiency loss in production at work when the collateral
constraint binds can be relatively large and add to the welfare effects, this is a low-probability
event because of the low probability of hitting the constraint.
    The schedule of welfare gains as a function of B in panel (a) is bell-shaped in the region with
a positive probability of crisis at t + 1. It rises sharply as B rises from −0.25, peaking at about
a 0.35 welfare gain when B = −0.18, and then falls gradually. The welfare gains continue to fall
gradually, and almost linearly, as B moves into the stable credit region, and reaches 0.26 percent
when B = 0.15. This pattern is due to the differences in the optimal plans of the regulator vis-a-
vis private agents in the DE. In the region where a crisis is possible at t + 1, the SP’s allocations
projected as of date t for the future differ sharply from those of the DE, because of the latter’s
higher magnitude and frequency of crises, and this generally enlarges the welfare gains of the
optimal policy. Notice that, since the regulator’s allocations involve more savings and less current
consumption, there are welfare losses in terms of current utility for the regulator, but these are
far outweighed by less vulnerability to sharp decreases in future consumption during financial


                                                                             30
crises. As the level of debt falls and the economy enters the stable credit region, financial crises
are unlikely at t + 1, or are likely much further into the future, and thus the welfare gains of the
policy (or the costs of the externality) decrease.
    Panel (b) shows that the welfare gains of the optimal policy rise in the years before the crisis
to a peak around 0.36 percent at t − 1. When the crisis hits the welfare gain drops to near 0.32
percent, because by then the crisis has arrived and the prudential aspect of the optimal policy
is less valuable, but right after the crisis the welfare gain increases sharply. As noted before,
the unconditional average welfare gain computed using the DE’s ergodic distribution is about 0.3
percent. These welfare gains may seem small, but they are much higher than the welfare gains of
eliminating business cycles obtained with the same CRRA coefficient of σ = 1 in calibrations to
U.S. data (e.g. Lucas (1987) estimated a gain of only 0.0005).


3.5                Simple Macroprudential Rules
The state-contingent nature of the optimal policy has the usual drawback that complex state-
contingent rules are difficult to implement in practice, and therefore rarely used. In particular,
there is concern for the ability of regulators to track accurately financial conditions and adjust
macroprudential tools optimally and in a timely fashion (e.g. Cochrane, 2013). On the other
hand, if macroprudential policy is limited to the relatively simple rules that regulators typically
use, the question that is often raised is whether these simpler rules are effective. In light of these
concerns, we examine the effectiveness of two simple rules: First, a time- and state-invariant debt
tax (a “fixed tax”). Second, in the spirit of Taylor’s rule for monetary policy, a “Macroprudential
Taylor Rule” that makes the tax a function of credit. The key insight of this analysis is that
simple rules can still be welfare improving if they are designed carefully, otherwise they can yield
outcomes that are worse than the unregulated decentralized equilibrium.

                                                                                       (b) Welfare Gains
                        (a) Crisis Probability                               0.3
              4
                                                                                                           max
                                                                             0.2                           average
                                                         Percentage Points




             3.5
                                                                                                           min
                                                                             0.1
Percentage




              3

             2.5                                                               0

              2                                                              -0.1

             1.5                                                             -0.2

              1                                                              -0.3
               0       0.5        1         1.5    2                             0   0.5      1        1.5       2
                               Tax (%)                                                      Tax (%)

                     Figure 7: Effects of Fixed Debt Taxes on Probability of Crises and Welfare


                                                        31
    Consider first the fixed tax. Figure 7 shows the effects of fixed taxes ranging from 0 to 2
percent on the long-run probability of financial crises (panel(a)) and on welfare (panel (b)). Fixed
taxes reduce the likelihood of crises monotonically from 4 to 2.6 percent as the tax rises from 0
to 2 percent. This occurs because as debt is taxed more, agents build less leverage and are less
vulnerable to crises, but this does not mean that they are necessarily better off. Recall in particular
that the optimal τ M P fluctuates roughly half as much as GDP and is positively correlated with
leverage, while this rule keeps the tax constant. As a result, fixed taxes yield welfare gains when
computed conditional on initial states in which the constraint is not binding, but can produce
welfare losses otherwise. This is due to the negative short-run effects of debt taxes on asset prices
and the tightness of the collateral constraint, which occur in turn because the increased cost of
borrowing shifts demand from assets to bonds. There is also a positive, second-order effect of debt
taxes on asset prices, because of a reduction in the riskiness of assets, but this effect is dominated
by the first-order effect of taxes on the relative demand for bonds.
    Panel (b) shows the average, maximum and minimum welfare gain for constant taxes in the 0
to 2 percent range (recall that the average welfare gain under the optimal policy is 0.3 percent).
This plot illustrates two results. First, fixed taxes are always inferior to the optimal policy: The
maximum (average) welfare gain of fixed taxes peaks at about 0.07 (0.03) percent with a tax of
0.6 percent, significantly smaller than the SP’s average welfare gain (see Table 3). Second, some
fixed taxes are welfare-reducing. Fixed taxes reduce welfare in a subset of the state space, which is
reflected in the fact that the minimum welfare gain is always negative for all values of fixed taxes
in panel (b), and this subset grows as the fixed tax rate rises (the largest welfare cost reaches -1.5
percent as the tax approaches 2 percent). When the subset of the state space in which fixed taxes
cause welfare losses is large enough, the average welfare gain also turns negative. This occurs for
fixed debt taxes above 1.2 percent.
    Fixed taxes can reduce welfare because they reduce asset prices when the collateral constraint
binds, making financial crises worse. This suggests that a regulator considering only fixed taxes
should trade off the prudential benefit of the taxes in restraining credit growth in good times
against their adverse effects in making financial crises worse. This tradeoff is reflected in the
welfare-maximizing fixed tax of about 0.6 percent (see panel (b)). This tax is significantly smaller
than the 3.6 percent average optimal macroprudential tax, and it achieves an average welfare gain
about 1/10th of that obtained with the optimal tax (see Table 3).
    Fixed taxes are also much less effective at reducing the magnitude of financial crises. As Figure
8 shows, under the welfare-maximizing fixed tax of 0.6 percent, crisis dynamics are about the same
as in the unregulated DE. Adding to this result the above findings showing a small reduction in the
probability of crises (from 4 to 3.6 percent) and a negligible average welfare gain (0.03 percent),
we conclude that fixed debt taxes are an ineffective macroprudential policy tool. Moreover, since
fixed taxes higher than 1.2 percent reduce welfare, in fact they are at best ineffective.
    The macroprudential Taylor rule allows the tax to vary with the borrowing choice, according

                                                  32
                       Table 3: Performance of Optimal and Simple Policy Rules


                                                  Decentralized        Optimal         Best        Best
                                                  Equilibrium           Policy        Taylor       Fixed
               Welfare Gains (%)                         –               0.30         0.09          0.03
               Crisis Probability (%)                   4.0              0.02         2.2           3.6
               Drop in Asset Prices (%)               −43.7             −5.4         −36.3         −41.3
               Equity Premium (%)                      4.8               0.77          3.9          4.3
                 Tax Statistics
               Mean                                      –                3.6           1.0          0.6
               Std relative to GDP                       –                0.5           0.2           –
               Correlation with Leverage                 –                0.7           0.3           –

             Note: Moments for optimal policy are for the macroprudential debt tax. “Mean” under
             Best Fixed corresponds to the welfare-maximizing fixed tax.

                                                                                               η
to the following piecewise, isoelastic function:26 τ t = max[0, (1 + τ 0 )(bt+1 /b̄) − 1], where τ 0 is a
constant term, and η is the elasticity of the tax with respect to the excess of the borrowing choice
bt+1 relative to a target b̄. Note that, since under the baseline calibration bt+1 is always negative,
the ratio bt+1 /b̄ is positive, and hence η > 0 implies that the tax rises as debt rises above its target.
The cutoff at zero rules out subsidies on debt, in line with the result that the macroprudential tax
is non-negative, and allows us to avoid having to model other taxes to pay for these subsidies.
    We set τ 0 to the value of the welfare-maximizing fixed tax (0.6 percent) and search numerically
for an “optimal” pair (η, b̄) that maximizes the average welfare gain, computing the average as
before, using the ergodic distribution of the DE without regulation.27 This procedure yields η = 2
and b̄ = −0.23, which is 200 basis points lower than the DE average, in line with the notion that
the macroprudential tax aims to reign on overborrowing.
    The macroprudential Taylor rule yields an average debt tax of 1 percent, higher than the best
fixed tax of 0.6 percent, but lower than the mean optimal tax of 3.6 percent (see Table 3). This
rule also yields taxes that fluctuate less and are less correlated with leverage than the optimal
taxes. In terms of the effectiveness of this policy at affecting crises probability, magnitude of crises
and welfare gains, the rule is much better than the fixed taxes, but still clearly inferior to the
optimal policy. The rule yields a welfare gain of about 1/10th of a percent, a third of the gain
under the optimal policy, and lowers the probability of crisis to about half of the 4 percent in the
DE. Figure 8 shows that crises dynamics are less severe than in the DE and under fixed taxes,
  26
     We also evaluated rules including other variables like asset prices, the interest rate, TFP, output or the leverage
ratio, or conditioning on whether the collateral constraint binds, but their performance did not yield noticeable
gains compared with this simpler rule.
  27
     Optimizing the various formulations of the rule that we studied is computationally intensive, because for each
one the model has to be solved for all combinations of values of the relevant elasticity coefficients specified in
pre-determined grids.


                                                          33
                           (a) Credit/GDP                                         (b) Asset Price
             40


                                                                  0
             35
                                                             -10

             30                                              -20

                                                             -30
             25
                                                             -40

             20                                              -50
                     t-3               t             t+3                    t-2          t          t+2

                           (c) Output                                             (d) Consumption
         0                                                        5

                                                                  0
        -2
                                                                -5

        -4
                                                             -10

                                                             -15
        -6

                                                             -20
        -8
                                                             -25

       -10                                                   -30
                   t-2           t            t+2                             t-2           t             t+2
                     Decentralized Equilibrium      Optimal Tax       Simple Rule       Fixed Tax

       Figure 8: Event Analysis: Decentralized Equilibrium, Optimal Policy and Simple Policies


but still more severe than under the optimal policy. Recall also that these are results that hold
for optimized values of the parameters of the tax rule. As with the fixed tax, one can produce
outcomes that are significantly inferior for other parameter values.
    An issue often discussed together with the effectiveness of simple macroprudential policy rules
is whether it is feasible to construct a parsimonious statistical framework that can yield accurate
“early warnings” of financial crises. We examined this issue by conducting an experiment similar
to the one Boissay et al. (2015) proposed, treating the model as a true data-generating process and
testing whether parsimonious logit regressions could yield warnings as accurate as the model’s in
terms of the fractions of Type-1 and Type-2 errors in crises prediction.28 In the results reported
in Section G of the Appendix, we show that a regression using the ratio of total credit to GDP
produces fractions of both errors similar to those produced by the model, which is consistent with
the findings of Boissay et al. (2015).
  28
   Type-1 errors occur when a warning is not issued at t but a crisis occurs at t + 1, and Type-2 errors occur
when a warning is issued at t but a crisis does not occur at t + 1.



                                                           34
   In summary, the results for the two simple rules we examined highlight both the benefits and
dangers of simple macroprudential policies: If institutional limitations prevent regulators from
using optimal, state-contingent macroprudential policy instruments, it is possible to end up with
environments in which the policy is welfare-reducing. This contrasts sharply with the results in
Bianchi (2011), because in his setup fixed taxes do not have negative effects on borrowing capacity
across states, whereas here they do because of the forward-looking nature of asset prices.


4     Conclusions
This paper performed a normative analysis of a dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model of
financial crises in which a collateral constraint limits access to intertemporal debt and working
capital to a fraction of the market value of assets. This constraint introduces financial amplification
via the classic Fisherian debt-deflation mechanism, affecting both aggregate demand and supply,
and produces a pecuniary externality, because agents do not internalize the effects of individual
borrowing decisions on asset prices that determine aggregate borrowing capacity.
    We compared theoretically the unregulated competitive equilibrium with the one attained by
a constrained-efficient financial regulator unable to commit to future policies. This regulator faces
the collateral constraint but internalizes the pecuniary externality, taking into account how its
current borrowing choices affect current and future asset prices and the borrowing decisions of
future regulators, so that the optimal macroprudential policy is endogenously time-consistent. In
contrast, we showed that the forward-looking nature of asset prices causes the optimal policy
under commitment to be time-inconsistent. We also showed that the optimal, time-consistent
allocations can be decentralized as a competitive equilibrium using a state-contingent schedule of
debt taxes. We labeled the component of these taxes associated with the future value of collateral
a macroprudential debt tax, and proved that it is strictly positive. Capital requirements or loan
to value ratios can be used with similar results (see Bianchi, 2011).
    We conducted a quantitative analysis in a version of the model calibrated to OECD data. The
competitive equilibrium features strong financial amplification and large pecuniary externalities,
resulting in financial crises that are markedly more severe and more frequent than with the optimal
policy. As a result, the optimal policy yields a welfare gain of roughly 0.3 of a percent, with a
debt tax that is about 3.6 percent on average, half as volatile as output and with a correlation
with leverage of 0.7.
    We recognize that despite these findings, macroprudential policy also faces serious hurdles.
One is the state-contingent complexity of the optimal policy. We showed that simpler rules can
be effective too, but they can be counterproductive if they are not designed carefully. Fixed debt
taxes are at best ineffective, because when targeted to maximize their welfare gain they have
negligible effects on welfare and on the magnitude and frequency of crises, and if set higher than


                                                  35
that target (including at the average of the optimal tax) they produce outcomes worse than the
unregulated equilibrium. A macroprudential Taylor rule that makes the tax a function of the ratio
of debt to a target, with an elasticity optimized to maximize the welfare gain, is more effective,
albeit still less than the optimal policy.
    There are several other hurdles that we did not study in this paper. One has to do with the
complex heterogeneity of actual financial markets, which include a large set of financial constraints
affecting various types of borrowers (e.g. households, nonfinancial firms, financial intermediaries).
Hence, effective macroprudential policy faces severe informational requirements in terms of both
coverage and timeliness of leverage and debt positions. A second hurdle relates to incomplete
information and innovation in capital markets. In Bianchi et al. (2012) we showed that the
effectivenes of macroprudential regulation weakens in an environment in which financial innovation
occurs but agents, including the regulator, are imperfectly informed about it. Finally, there are
also hurdles related to possible conflicts with the overall stance of fiscal policy. In particular,
cutting macroprudential taxes when a crisis hits can be hard, because often these are times when
governments run large deficits, which make it hard to lower taxes, especially of a financial nature.




                                                 36
References
Amiti, M. and Weinstein, D. (2011). ‘Exports and Financial Shocks’. The Quarterly Journal of
 Economics, vol. 126, no. 4, 1841–1877.
Arellano, B. Y., Cristina and Kehoe, P. (2012). ‘Financial markets and Fluctuations in Volatility’.
  Federal Res. Bank of Minneapolis, Research Dept. Staff Report 466.
Benigno, G., Chen, H., Otrok, C., Rebucci, A., and Young, E. R. (2013). ‘Financial crises and
  macro-prudential policies’. Journal of International Economics, vol. 89, no. 2, 453–470.
Bernanke, B. (2010). ‘Financial reform to address systemic risk’. Speech at the Council on Foreign
  Relations, Washington, D.C. (March 2010).
Bernanke, B. and Gertler, M. (1989). ‘Agency costs, net worth, and business fluctuations’. Amer-
  ican Economic Review , vol. 79, no. 1, 14–31.
Bianchi, J. (2011). ‘Overborrowing and Systemic Externalities in the Business Cycle’. American
  Economic Review , vol. 101, no. 7, 3400–3426.
Bianchi, J., Boz, E., and Mendoza, E. G. (2012). ‘Macroprudential Policy in a Fisherian Model
  of Financial Innovation’. IMF Economic Review , vol. 60, no. 2, 223–269.
Bianchi, J. and Mendoza, E. G. (2010). ‘Overborrowing, Financial Crises and ’Macroprudential’
  Policy’. NBER Working Paper No. 16091.
Bianchi, J. and Mendoza, E. G. (2015). ‘Optimal time-consistent macroprudential policy’. Mimeo,
  Minneapolis Fed.
Bigio, S. (2015). ‘Endogenous Liquidity and the Business Cycle’. American Economic Review ,
  vol. 105, no. 6, 1883–1927.
Boissay, F., Collard, F., and Smets, F. (2015). ‘Booms and systemic banking crises’. Forthcoming
  Journal of Political Economy.
Borio, C. (2003). ‘Towards a macroprudential framework for financial supervision and regulation?’
  CESifo Economic Studies, vol. 49, no. 2, 181–215.
Boz, E. and Mendoza, E. G. (2014). ‘Financial Innovation, the Discovery of Risk, and the U.S.
  Credit Crisis’. Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 62, no. March, 1–22.
Chaney, T., Sraer, D., and Thesmar, D. (2012). ‘The Collateral Channel: How Real Estate Shocks
 Affect Corporate Investment’. The American Economic Review , vol. 102, no. 6, 2381.
Cochrane, J. H. (2013). ‘The Danger of an All-Powerful Federal Reserve’. The Wall Street Journal,
  Aug. 26, 2013 . Available: Link.
Demyanyk, Y. and Hemert, O. V. (2011). ‘Understanding the Subprime Mortgage Crisis’. Review
  of Financial Studies, vol. 24, no. 6, 1848–1880.



                                                37
Duca, J. M., J. V. and Murphy, A. (2011). ‘House Prices and Credit Constraints:Making Sense of
 the US Experience’. Economic Journal , vol. 121, no. 552, 533–551.
Farhi, E. and Werning, I. (2012). ‘Dealing with the Trilemma: Optimal Capital Controls with
  Fixed Exchange Rates’. NBER Working Paper No. w18199.
Favilukis, J., Ludvigson, S. C., and Van Nieuwerburgh, S. (2010). ‘The Macroeconomic Effects of
  Housing Wealth, Housing Finance, and Limited Risk-sharing in General Equilibrium’. National
  Bureau of Economic Research, WP Np. 15988.
Forbes, K. J. and Warnock, F. E. (2012). ‘Capital flow waves: Surges, stops, flight, and retrench-
  ment’. Journal of International Economics, vol. 88, no. 2, 235–251.
Gan, J. (2007). ‘Collateral, debt capacity, and corporate investment: Evidence from a natural
 experiment’. Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 85, no. 3, 709–734.
Greenwood, J., Hercowitz, Z., and Huffman, G. W. (1988). ‘Investment, capacity utilization, and
  the real business cycle’. The American Economic Review , pages 402–417.
Jeanne, O. and Korinek, A. (2010). ‘Managing Credit Booms and Busts: A Pigouvian Taxation
  Approach’. NBER Working Paper No 16377.
Jermann, U. and Quadrini, V. (2012). ‘Macroeconomic effects of financial shocks’. American
  Economic Review , vol. 102, no. 1, 238–271.
Jeske, K. (2006). ‘Private International Debt with Risk of Repudiation’. Journal of Political
  Economy, vol. 114, 576–593.
Keane, M. and Rogerson, R. (2012). ‘Micro and macro labor supply elasticities: A reassessment
  of conventional wisdom’. Journal of Economic Literature, pages 464–476.
Kehoe, T. and Levine, D. (1993). ‘Debt-constrained asset markets’. The Review of Economic
  Studies, vol. 60, no. 4, 865–888.
Khan, A. and Thomas, J. K. (2013). ‘Credit Shocks and Aggregate Fluctuations in an Economy
 with Production Heterogeneity’. Journal of Political Economy, vol. 121, 1055–1095.
Kiyotaki, N. and Moore, J. (1997). ‘Credit Cycles’. Journal of Political Economy, vol. 105,
  211–248.
Klein, P., Krusell, P., and Rios-Rull, V. (2008). ‘Time-consistent public policy’. The Review of
  Economic Studies, vol. 75, no. 3, 789–808.
Klein, P., Quadrini, V., and Rios-Rull, V. (2007). ‘Optimal Time–consistent Taxation with Inter-
  national Mobility of Capital’. The B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics, vol. 5, no. 1.
Korinek, A. (2009). ‘Systemic Risk-Taking: Accelerator Effects, Externalities, and Regulatory’.
 Mimeo, University of Maryland.




                                               38
Korinek, A. and Mendoza, E. G. (2014). ‘From Sudden Stops to Fisherian Deflation: Quantitative
 Theory and Policy’. Annu. Rev. Econ., vol. 6, no. 1, 299–332.
Lorenzoni, G. (2008). ‘Inefficient Credit Booms’. Review of Economic Studies, vol. 75, 809–833.
Lucas, R. (1987). Models of business cycles. Basil Blackwell New York.
Mendoza, E. G. (2010). ‘Sudden Stops, Financial Crises, and Leverage’. The American Economic
 Review , vol. 100, no. 5, 1941–1966.
Mendoza, E. G. and Quadrini, V. (2010). ‘Financial Globalization, Financial Crises and Conta-
 gion’. Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 57, no. 1, 24–39.
Mendoza, E. G. and Smith, K. A. (2006). ‘Quantitative implications of a debt-deflation theory of
 Sudden Stops and asset prices’. Journal of International Economics, vol. 70, no. 1, 82–114.
Mendoza, E. G. and Terrones, M. E. (2008). ‘An Anatomy Of Credit Booms: Evidence From
 Macro Aggregates And Micro Data’. NBER Working Paper 14049.
Nguyen, H. and Qian, R. (2012). ‘The Cross-Country Magnitude and Determinants of Collateral
  Borrowing’. The World Bank, Polciy Researh Working Paper No. 6001.
Perri, F. and Quadrini, V. (2011). ‘International recessions’. NBER Working Paper No 17201.
Reinhart, C. and Rogoff, K. (2009). This time is different: Eight centuries of financial folly.
  Princeton Univ Pr.
Schmitt-Grohé, S. and Uribe, M. (2014). ‘Downward Nominal Wage Rigidity, Currency Pegs, and
  Involuntary Unemployment’. Mimeo, Columbia University.
Stein, J. C. (2012). ‘Monetary policy as financial stability regulation’. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, vol. 127, no. 1, 57–95.
Stockman, A. and Tesar, L. (1995). ‘Tastes and Technology in a Two-country Model of the
  Business Cycle’. American Economic Review , vol. 85, no. 1, 168–185.
Uribe, M. (2006). ‘On Overborrowing’. American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings,
  vol. 96, no. 2, 417–421.
Uribe, M. and Yue, V. Z. (2006). ‘Country spreads and emerging countries: Who drives whom?’
  Journal of international Economics, vol. 69, no. 1, 6–36.
Wright, M. (2006). ‘Private capital flows, capital controls, and default risk’. Journal of Interna-
 tional Economics, vol. 69, no. 1, 120–149.




                                                39
            Online Apppendix to
Optimal Time-Consistent Macroprudential Policy
                   Javier Bianchi
      Minneapolis Fed, University Wisconsin & NBER

                Enrique G. Mendoza
        University of Pennsylvania, NBER & PIER

                      August, 2015
Contents
A Theoretical Analysis and Proofs                                                                                                    1
  A.1 Optimal Time Consistent Planner’s Problem . . . .         .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    1
  A.2 Proof of Proposition 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    3
  A.3 Optimal Tax on Debt Problem: Equivalence Result           .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    4
  A.4 Non-Negative Tax on Debt . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    5
  A.5 Derivation of Collateral Constraint . . . . . . . . .     .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    6

B Reinterpretation: Model with Households and Firms                                                                                  8
  B.1 Household Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    8
  B.2 Firms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    8
  B.3 Market Clearing and Competitive Equilibrium . . . . .             .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    9
  B.4 Household-Firm problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    9
  B.5 Equivalence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   10

C Investment                                                                                                                        11
  C.1 Optimal Time Consistent Planner’s Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                           11

D Commitment                                                                                                                        13
  D.1 Theoretical Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                     13
  D.2 Numerical Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                     14

E Data Appendix                                                                                                                     17
  E.1 Data Sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                      17
  E.2 Frequency and Duration of Financial Crises . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                          17

F Great Recession Experiment                                                                                                        22

G Early Warnings                                                                                                                    25

H Sensitivity                                                                                                                       27

I   Asset Pricing                                                                                                                   29

J Computational Algorithm                                                                                                           32
  J.1 Numerical Solution Method for Decentralized Equilibrium . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                             32
  J.2 Numerical Solution Method for Constrained-Efficient Equilibrium . . . . . . . . .                                             34
A      Theoretical Analysis and Proofs

This section provides theoretical proofs of our analysis in Bianchi and Mendoza (2015).


A.1     Optimal Time Consistent Planner’s Problem
We explain here the analytical formulation of the markov perfect equilibrium and show that the
recursive social planner’s problem under discretion is given by (12). To do this, we first provide a
complete formulation of the planner’s problem and then establish that solving a relaxed planner
problem that include only a subset of the constraints of the time consistent planner problem as in
(12) is equivalent to solving the full optimal time consistent planner problem.
     Construction of the Planner’s Problem—- As described in Section 2.3, we consider a social
planner that chooses bt+1 on behalf of the representative firm-household while the households
retain the choices of consumption, labor supply, intermediate inputs, land holdings taking as
given asset prices, wages, and future government policies. Hence, the planner’s problem can be
seen as choosing all allocations and prices subject to implementability constraints, as we’ll describe
below. To derive the implementability constraints, we analyze the problem of the households,
which consist of choosing {ct , ht , kt+1 } taking as given prices {qt , wt } and the planner’s transfers
Tt :
                                                                           ∞
                                                                           X
                                                      max             E0         β t u(ct − G(ht )
                                                 {ct ,ht ,kt+1 }t≥0
                                                                           t=0


                            s.t. ct + qt kt+1 = kt qt + zt F (kt , ht , vt ) − pv vt + Tt

                                 bt+1
                                      − θpv vt ≥ −κt qt kt
                                  R

    First-order conditions are

           zt Fh (kt , ht , vt ) = G′ (ht )                                                            (A.1)

           zt Fv (kt , ht , vt ) = pv (1 + θµt /u′ (t))                                                (A.2)
                                    
                     qt u′ (t) = βEt u′ (t + 1) (zt+1 Fk (kt+1 , ht+1 , vt+1 ) + qt+1 ) + κqt+1 µt+1   (A.3)

which correspond to conditions (4),(5),(7).
                                 # b′        These
                                                  three conditions together with complementary
                                          v
slackness conditions µ ≥ 0 and µ R − θp v + κq = 0 constitute the implementability constraints
in the optimal planner’s problem, as described below. Notice that combining the household budget
constraint with the government budget constraint Tt = bt − bR
                                                            t+1
                                                              t
                                                                we arrive to the resource constraint

                                               b′
                                          c+      = b + zF (1, h, v) − pv v.                           (A.4)
                                               R



                                                              1
The planner’s problem consists of maximizing expected lifetime utility (1) subject to (4),(5),(7),
(A.4), and complementary slackness conditions, taking as given future planner’s policies policies
{B(b, s), C(b, s), H(b, s), V(b, s), µ(b, s), Q(b, s)}

Problem 1. The recursive optimal time consistent planner’s problem is given by the following
problem:

                      V(b, s) =         max u(c − G(h)) + βEs′ |s V(b′ , s′ )                                            (SP)
                                     c,b′ ,q,µ,h,v


                           b′
                      c+      = b + zF (1, h, v) − pv v                                                                (SP1)
                           R
                  b′
                     − θpv v ≥ −κq                                                                                     (SP2)
                  R

             qu′ (c − G(h)) = βEs′ |s u′ (C(b′ , s′ ) − G(H(b′ , s′ )))(Q(b′ , s′ ) + z ′ Fk (1, H(b′ , s′ ), v(b′ , s′ )))

                                 + κ′ µ(b′ , s′ )Q(b′ , s′ )                                                           (SP3)

                zFh (1, h, v) = G′ (h)                                                                                 (SP4)
                                                              
                                      v              θµ
                zFv (1, h, v) = p             1+ ′                                                                     (SP5)
                                                u (c − G(h))

                             µ≥0                                                                                       (SP6)
                            
           b′
   µ          − θpv v + κq       =0                                                                                    (SP7)
           R

Proposition 2 (Relaxed Planner Problem). Consider the planning problem A.1. Constraints
(SP4)-(SP7) do not bind.
   Proof:
    The proof proceeds by analyzing a relaxed planner problem where the planner is not subject
to (SP4)-(SP7) and then showing that those conditions are satisfied.
    Consider the following relaxed problem (i.e., Problem 12 in the text):

                V(b, s) =           max u(c − G(h)) + βEs′ |s V(b′ , s′ )
                                  c,b′ ,q,µ,h,v
                      b′
                c+       = b + zF (1, h, v) − pv v
                      R
             b′
                − θpv v ≥ −κq
             R
       qu′ (c − G(h)) = βEs′ |s u′ (C(b′ , s′ ) − G(H(b′ , s′ )))(Q(b′ , s′ ) + z ′ Fk (1, H(b′ , s′ ), v(b′ , s′ )))(A.5)

                                  +κ′ µ(b′ , s′ )Q(b′ , s′ )

                                                               2
Let λ ≥ 0 be the multiplier on the resource constraint, µ∗ ≥ 0 be the multiplier on the collateral
constraint, ξ ≥ 0 be the multiplier on the asset pricing implementability constraint.
   First order conditions and envelope condition in Problem 12 yields:

                      c ::        λ = u′ (c − G(h)) − ξu′′ (c − G(h))q                                                  (A.6)

                     b′ ::        λ = βREs′ |s [Vb (b′ , s′ ) + ξ Ω̂] + µ∗                                              (A.7)

                      q ::        µ∗ κ = ξu′ (c − G(h))                                                                 (A.8)

                      h ::        λzFh (1, h, v) = u′ (c − G(h))G′ (h) − ξqu′′ (c − G(h))G′ (h)                         (A.9)
                                                                   
                                                      vµ∗
                      v ::        zFv (1, h, v) = p 1 + θ                                                             (A.10)
                                                       λ
                                       ′            
                                    ∗  b        v
                  KT ::           µ       − θp v + κq = 0                                                             (A.11)
                                       R

                  EC ::           Vb (b′ , s′ ) = λ                                                                   (A.12)
                   
 where Ω̂ ≡ R1 u′′ (C(b′ , s′ ) − G(H(b′ , s′ ))){Q(b′ , s′ ) + z ′ Fk (1, H(b′ , s′ ), v(b′ , s′ ))}.
{Cb (b′ , s′ )−G′ (H(b′ , s′ ))Hb (b′ , s′ )}+u′ (C(b′ , s′ )−G′ (H(b′ , s′ ))){Qb (b′ , s′ )+z ′ [F            ′ ′       ′ ′         ′ ′
                                                                                                    kh (1, H(b , s ), v(b , s ))Hb (b , s )+
               ′ ′       ′ ′       ′ ′            ′      ′ ′      ′ ′           ′ ′          ′ ′
Fkv (1, H(b , s ), v(b , s ))vb (b , s )]} + κ [µb (b , s )Q(b , s ) + µ(b , s )Qb (b , s )]
                                                                                                                      
                 u′ (c−G(h)) zFv (1,h,v)         29                                            ∗      λ zFv (1,h,v)
    Set µ =            θ          pv
                                            − 1 . Rearranging (A.10), we have µ = θ                          pv
                                                                                                                     − 1 and
                                                                         µ∗
combining this with the expression for µ, we have µt = λtt u′ (ct − G(ht )). Since u′ (.) > 0, the KT
conditions of the relaxed problem µ∗ ≥ 0 and (A.11) imply (SP6) and (SP7), the KT conditions
of the original problem. By definition of µ, we have that (SP5) is satisfied. Finally, substituting
(A.6) into (A.9) yields the original optimality condition with respect to employment (SP4).
    This completes the proof that (SP4)-(SP7) do not bind. This proves Proposition 2.


A.2       Proof of Proposition 1
Define the tax as:
                     
               βREt u′ (C(bt+1 , zt+1 )) − ξ t+1 u′′ (C(bt+1 , zt+1 ))Q(bt+1 , zt+1 ) + ξ t Ωt+1 + ξ t u′′ (ct )qt
   1 + τt =
                                                βREt u′ (C(bt+1 , zt+1 ))
                                                                                                             (A.13)
The constrained efficient equilibrium can be characterized by sequences {ct , kt+1 , bt+1 , qt , λt , µt }∞        t=0
that satisfy (3), (13), (14), (15), kt = 1 together with complementary slackness conditions.
   The regulated decentralized equilibrium is characterized by a sequence {ct , kt+1 , bt+1 , qt , λt , µt }∞       t=0
   29
      Notice the distinction between µ, which is the shadow value of relaxing the collateral constraint for individual
agents, and is choice variable for the planner, and µ∗ , which is the shadow value of relaxing the collateral constraint
from the planner’s perspective (i.e. the shadow value in the planner’s KT problem).




                                                              3
that satisfy (2), (3), (A.6), (16),

                                         u′ (ct ) = βR (1 + τ t ) Et u′ (ct+1 ) + µt ,                             (A.14)

together with complementary slackness conditions. Using the expression for the tax (A.13) and
(A.14), yields condition (14) and identical conditions characterizing the two equilibria.
                                 h                                                    i
               u (t) = βREt u (t + 1) − ξ t+1 u (t + 1)Qt+1 + ξ t Ω̂t+1 + ξ t u′′ (t)qt + µ∗t
                ′                    ′                      ′′



When the collateral constraint is not binding, we obtain the following macro-prudential debt tax:

                                                       −ξ t+1 u′′ (t + 1)Qt+1
                                           τ t = Et                           ≥0                                   (A.15)
                                                            Et u′ (t + 1)

A.3     Optimal Tax on Debt Problem: Equivalence Result
Consider the following planner’s problem that seeks an optimal tax on debt, given that future
taxes T (B, s) are chosen by future planners, which are associated with policies
{B(b, s), C(b, s), H(b, s),
V(b, s), µ(b, s), Q(b, s)}. The planner chooses the tax on debt to maximize utility considering the
optimal response of households. That is, the planner chooses sequentially a tax on debt subject
to all competitive equilibrium conditions including u′ (c) = βR(1 + τ )E [u′ (C(b′ , z ′ ))] + µ

                    V(b, s) =        max          u(c − G(h)) + βEs′ |s V(b′ , s′ )                                (A.16)
                                c,b′ ,q,µ,h,v,τ


                         b′
                    c+      = b + zF (1, h, v) − pv v
                         R
               b′
                  − θpv v ≥ −κq
               R
          qu′ (c − G(h)) = βEs′ |s u′ (C(b′ , s′ ) − G(H(b′ , s′ )))(Q(b′ , s′ ) + z ′ Fk (1, H(b′ , s′ ), v(b′ , s′ )))

                            + κ′ µ(b′ , s′ )Q(b′ , s′ )

            zFh (1, h, v) = G′ (h)
                                                                
                             v                    θµ
            zFv (1, h, v) = p 1 +             ′
                                             u (c − G(h))

                    µ≥0
      ′            
      b      v
   µ     − θp v + κq = 0
      R

           u′ (c − G(h)) = βR(1 + τ )E [u′ (C(b′ , z ′ ) − G(H(b′ , z ′ )))] + µ                                   (A.17)



                                                                 4
Relative to problem (SP), problem (A.16) contains one additional restriction A.17 and one addi-
tional policy instrument τ . Let τ ∗ the optimal tax that solves (A.16), the MPE condition implies
that τ (B, s) = T (B, s)

Proposition 3. A sequence of allocations and prices constitute a constrained efficient equilibrium
if and only if they are the outcome of a markov perfect equilibrium where the government chooses
sequentially a tax on debt.

Proof
    Consider solving the relaxed problem of maximizing the objective function dropping constraint
(A.17). Notice that the resulting problem is the same as (12), after applying Proposition 2. Hence,
allocations and prices satisfy (12) if and only if they satisfy the optimal tax problem. In addition,
                                                                       u′ (c)
notice that τ only appears in (A.17). Hence, setting 1 + τ = βRE[u′ (C(b    ′ ,z ′ ))]+µ imply that condition

(A.17) is satisfied.


A.4      Non-Negative Tax on Debt
We solve for the optimal tax on debt, as in problem (A.16) but consider taxes on debt that cannot
be negative. This is natural because subsidies on debt require lump sum taxes. So we rule out
lump sum taxes but not lump sum transfers. As we showed in Section 2.4, the tax is non-negative
when the constraint is not binding, but is possibly negative when the constraint binds. Hence, it
is possible that the non-negativity constraint on τ would be binding.
    The problem of this planner is the same as in (A.16) but with an additional implementability
constraint given by:
                                           u′ (ct − G(ht )) − µt
                             1 + τt =                               ≥1
                                       βRt E [u′ (ct+1 − G(ht+1 ))]
Following the same steps as in (A.1) and (A.3), the regulator’s problem can be written as:

                               V(b, s) =       max u(c − G(h)) + βEs′ |s V(b′ , s′ )                              (A.18)
                                           c,b′ ,q,µ,h,v


                                    b′
                               c+      = b + zF (1, h, v) − pv v
                                    R
                           b′
                              − θpv v ≥ −κq
                           R
                      qu′ (c − G(h)) = βEs′ |s u′ (C(b′ , s′ ) − G(H(b′ , s′ )))(Q(b′ , s′ ) + z ′ Fk (1, H(b′ , s′ ), v(b′ , s′ )))

                                        + κ′ µ(b′ , s′ )Q(b′ , s′ )

            u′ (c − G(h))
                                          ≥1
βRt E [u′ (C(b′ , s′ ) − G(H(b′ , s′ )))]

Let γ pt ≥ 0 denote the lagrange multipliers on the last constraint. Following the same steps as




                                                            5
above yields that the optimal tax is given by:
                                                                                       
                                                      1
  1+   τ ttax≥0   =                                                    βREt u′ (C(bt+1 , zt+1 ) − G(H(bt+1 , zt+1 )))
                       βREt u′ (C(bt+1 , zt+1 ) − G(H(b′ , s′ )))
                                                                                                                         
                    p                       ′′                      p       u′′ (C(bt+1 , zt+1 ) − G(H(bt+1 , zt+1 )))
                  ξ t+1 Q(bt+1 , zt+1 )u (C(bt+1 , zt+1 )) + γ t+1
                                                                          βREt [u′ (C(bt+1 , zt+1 ) − G(H(bt+1 , zt+1 ))]
                                               
                   + ξ pt Ωpt+1 + γ pt φpt+1 − µt (ϕpt + 1) + µpt
                                                                                                
                        p     ′′          p                    u′′ (ct − G(ht )
                   + ξ t qt u (ct ) − γ t                                                                              (A.19)
                                                βREt [u′ (C(bt+1 , zt+1 ) − G(H(bt+1 , zt+1 ))]

Now suppose that both the non-negative tax constraint and the collateral constraint are slack
today but might bind tomorrow with positive probability, i.e. γ pt = 0 and µ∗t = 0. In this case,
A.19 becomes:
                                               
                          1
       tax≥0
  1 + τt     =                             βREt u′ (C(bt+1 , zt+1 )) − ξ pt+1 Q(bt+1 , zt+1 )u′′ (C(bt+1 , zt+1 ))
               βREt u′ (C(bt+1 , zt+1 ))
                                                        
                   p          u′′ (C(bt+1 , zt+1 ))
               + γ t+1                                                                                       (A.20)
                         βREt [u′ (C(C(bt+1 , zt+1 )))]
                                        h                                          i
                      µt −u′ (ct )          u′′ (C(bt+1 ,zt+1 ))Cb (bt+1 ,zt+1 )
where   φpt+1
            ≡            β 2 Rt
                                   Et              (u′ (C(bt+1 ,zt+1 )))2
   Notice that the tax has the same form as above but now it has an additional term given by
the possible non-negativity constraint on future tax rates.


A.5       Derivation of Collateral Constraint
We provide a derivation of the collateral constraint (3) as an incentive compatibility constraint
resulting from a limited enforcement problem. Debt contracts are signed with creditors in a
competitive environment. Financial contracts are not exclusive, i.e., agents can always switch
to another creditor at any point in time. Households borrow at the beginning of the period,
before the asset market open. Within period, households can divert future revenues and avoid
any costs from defaulting next period when debt becomes due. At the end of the period, there
are no more opportunities for households to divert revenues and repayment of previous bonds is
enforced. Financial intermediaries can costlessly monitor diversion activities at time t. If creditors
detect the diversion scheme, they can seize a fraction κt of the household assets. After defaulting,
a household regains access to credit markets instantaneously and a repurchases the assets that
investors sell in open markets. Given this environment, a household that borrows d˜t+1 and engage
in diversion activities gains d˜t+1 and loses a κt qt kt .
    Formally, let V R and V d be the value of repayment and default respectively, and V be the
continuation value. If a household raises d˜ resources by borrowing R   b′
                                                                           at the beginning of the




                                                                                   6
period, and defaults, it gets

                               ˜ b, k, X) = max u(c − G(h)) + βEs′ |s V (b′ , k ′ , B ′ , s′ )
                          V d (d,                                                                     (A.21)
                                            ′ ′b ,k ,c,v
                                         b′
              s.t.    q(B, s)k ′ + c +      = d˜ + q(B, s)k(1 − κ) + b + zF (k, h, ν) − pν ν
                                         R
                                b′
                            −      + θpν ν ≤ κq(B, s)k
                                R

where the budget constraint reflects the fact that the household regain access to credit markets
and can borrow b′ and the collateral constraint reflects that agents buy back the assets from
investors. If the household does not default, it gets the utility from current consumption plus the
continuation value of starting next period with debt b′ as stated in 10.

                                V r (b, k, X) = ′max
                                                  ′
                                                     u(c − G(n)) + βEs′ |s V (b′ , k ′ , B ′ , s′ )   (A.22)
                                                 b ,k ,c,h
                                          b′
               s.t.    q(B, s)k ′ + c +      = q(B, s)k + b + zF (k, h, ν) − pν ν
                                          R
                                 b′
                             −      + θpν ν ≤ κq(B, s)k
                                 R

A simple inspection at the budget constraints implies that households repay if and only if d˜t+1
≤ κ t qt k t
    Notice that for the constrained-efficient equilibrium, the derivation of the feasible credit posi-
tions is analogous to the case in the decentralized equilibrium. If the planner engages in diversion,
creditors can seize a fraction κt of assets in the economy. Moreover, households can buy back
the assets at the market price qt . This implies that the same collateral constraint applies in the
constrained-efficient equilibrium in this environment.




                                                             7
B      Reinterpretation: Model with Households and Firms
We describe here a setup where households and firms are modeled independently and is isomorphic
to the baseline model. This rationalizes the approach of consolidating households and firms within
a single problem as well as the calibration approach.


B.1     Household Problem
Households choose consumption, holdings of stocks, bond holdings and labor supply to maximize
                                                              ∞
                                                              X
                                         max              E         β t u(ct − G(ht ) + φt k H )
                                  {ct ,ht ,bH
                                            t+1 ,st+1 }       t=0


subject to

                                                     bH
                                                      t+1
                               st+1 pt + ct +             ≤ st (dt + pt ) + bH
                                                                             t + w t ht              (B.1)
                                                      Rt
                                                     bH
                                                      t+1 ≥ −κt qt k
                                                                     H
                                                                                                     (B.2)

where φ captures preference for housing, st represents the holdings of firm shares and pt represents
the price of firm shares. We assume that the stock of housing owned by households is constant.

    First order conditions:

                                        pt u′ (t)              =      βEt u′ (t + 1)(dt+1 + pt+1 )   (B.3)
                                        G′ (ht )               =      wt                             (B.4)
                                           u′ (t)              =      βRt Et u′ (t + 1) + RµHt ,     (B.5)
                            µH   H            H
                             t (bt+1 + κt qt k )               =      0                              (B.6)
                                              µH
                                               t               ≥      0                              (B.7)

    where µH is the non-negative Lagrange multiplier on the household borrowing constraint.


B.2     Firms
Et problem of the firm is to choose capital, labor, intermediate inputs, dividends and bond holdings
to maximize equity value, which can be expressed as:
                                                     ∞
                                                     X
                            max                               u′ (ct − G(ht ))dt
                    {dt ,bF     F
                          t+1 ,kt+1 ,nt ,vt }         t=0

                          F           bFt+1
                 dt + qt kt+1 +          ≤ ktF qt + F (zt , ktF , nt , vt ) − wt nt − pvt vt + bFt   (B.8)
                                  Rt
                         bFt+1 − θpvt vt ≥ −κt qt ktF                                                (B.9)



                                                                      8
    First order conditions are:

                                     u′ (t)qt = Et u′ (t + 1)(Fk (t + 1) + qt+1 ) + βEt µFt+1 qt+1                   (B.10)
                                       Fn (t) = wt                                                                   (B.11)
                                                                 
                                                    v        µFt
                                       Fv (t) = p 1 + θ ′                                                            (B.12)
                                                            u (t)
                                          ′               ′
                                        u (t) = βRt Et u (t + 1)) + RµFt ,                                           (B.13)
             µFt (bFt+1 + θpvt vt + κt qt ktF ) = 0                                                                  (B.14)
                                           µFt ≥ 0                                                                   (B.15)

    where µF is the non-negative Lagrange multiplier on the firm collateral constraint.


B.3      Market Clearing and Competitive Equilibrium
Market clearing requires:

                                                                      h t = nt                                       (B.16)
                                                                      st = 1                                         (B.17)
                                                        F
                                                       kt+1 + k H = K̄                                               (B.18)

Notice that (B.13) and (B.5) imply that µH      F
                                          t = µt .
   A competitive equilibrium in this economy is {ct , ht , bH             H        F      F                H
                                                            t+1 , st+1 , k , dt , bt+1 , kt+1 , nt , vt , µt } such
that conditions (B.1)-(B.15) equations hold.


B.4      Household-Firm problem
                                                               ∞
                                                               X
                                       max                 E         β t u(ct − G(nt ) + φt k H )
                               {ct ,bt+1 ,kt+1 ,nt ,vt }
                                                               t=0



                                            bt+1
                             ct + kt+1 qt +       ≤ kt qt + F (zt , kt , nt , vt ) + bt                              (B.19)
                                             Rt
                                     bt+1 − θpv v ≥ −κqt (k H + kt )                                                 (B.20)

First-order conditions:

                                       u′ (t)qt        =        βEt u′ (t + 1)(Fk (t + 1) + qt+1 ) + βEt µt+1 qt+1   (B.21)
                                        Fn (t)         =        G′ (nt )                                             (B.22)
                                         u′ (t)        =        βRt Et u′ (t + 1) + Rt µt ,                          (B.23)
         µt (bt+1 − θpv v + κt qt (k H + kt ))         =        0                                                    (B.24)
                                             µt        ≥        0                                                    (B.25)

where µt denotes the Lagrange multiplier on the consolidated collateral constraint.

                                                                     9
                                                                   F
   A competitive equilibrium in this economy is {ct , nt , bt+1 , kt+1 , µt } such that conditions (B.19)-
(B.25) hold.


B.5      Equivalence
Proposition 4. If ct , ht , bH           H        F      F
                             t+1 , st , k , dt , bt+1 , kt+1 , nt , vt , wt , pt } is a competitive equilibrium allo-
                                                                                   F
cation in the economy with separated households and firms, then {ct , nt , bt+1 , kt+1 } is a com-
petitive equilibrium allocation in an economy with a representative household-firm with bt+1 =
bH      F             F
 t+1 + bt+1 , kt+1 = kt+1 .
                                      F
    Conversely, if {ct , nt , bt+1 , kt+1 } is a competitive equilibrium allocation in an economy with a
representative household-firm, then there exists prices wt , qt , pt such that ct , ht , bH           H        F
                                                                                          t+1 , st , k , dt , bt+1 ,
 F
kt+1 , nt , vt is a competitive equilibrium allocation in the economy with separated households and
firms, with bt+1 = bH      F             F
                    t+1 + bt+1 , kt+1 = kt+1 .

Proof: ” →” Suppose {ct , ht , bH             H        F      F
                                t+1 , st+1 , k , dt , bt+1 , kt+1 , nt , vt }is a competitive equilibrium alloca-
tion in an economy with a separated households and firms. Then we have to show that conditions
(B.1)-(B.15) imply that (B.19)-(B.25) also hold. This follows from simple inspection: Budget con-
straint of the household firm (B.19) follows by combining (B.1),(B.17) and (B.8). The household-
firm collateral constraint (B.20) follows from combining (B.2),(B.9) and bt+1 = bH                     F
                                                                                                t+1 + bt+1 . Labor
market condition (B.22) follows from (B.4) and (B.11). Euler equations and complementary slack-
ness conditions (B.23)-(B.25) follow from (B.5)-(B.7).

                                        F
Proof: ” ←” Suppose {ct , nt , bt+1 , kt+1 } is a competitive equilibrium allocation in an economy
with a representative household-firm. Then, we have to show that (B.19)-(B.25) imply that
equations (B.1)-(B.15) also hold. This follows from simple inspection after constructing prices as
follows w = G′ (h), qt so that pt u′ (t) = βEt u′ (t + 1)(dt+1 + pt+1 ), u′ (t)qt = βEt u′ (t + 1)(Fk (t +
1) + qt+1 ) + βEt µt+1 qt+1 Construct bH        F              H             H F         v
                                         t+1 , bt+1 such that bt+1 ≤ κqt k , bt+1 − θpt vt ≥ −κt qt kt
                                                                                                         F

                                                                                                                bF
and bFt+1 = bt+1 − bH                                          F                       v       F
                    t+1 . Construct st+1 = 1 and dt = F (zt , k , nt , vt ) − wt nt − pt vt + bt − Rt .
                                                                                                   t+1


Market clearing in labor market (B.16) and optimality of labor demand (B.11) follows by taking
w = G′ (h). and (B.22). Euler equation and complementary slackness condition (B.5)-(B.7) follow
from (B.23)-(B.25).




                                                         10
C     Investment
This section shows that the qualitative insights of the model that features capital in exogenous
supply extend to a model with capital adjustment cost.
      In order to have kt+1 units of capital ready for production in period t + 1, an agent with kto
units of used capital needs to employ φ(kt+1 , kto ) units of the consumption good at date t.
There is a competitive market for used capital, where agents can buy and sell capital at the price
qto , after production has taken place. To simplify the exposition, we assume no intermediate inputs
and a borrowing constraint bR   t+1
                                  t
                                    ≥ −κt qt K̄ where K̄ is the aggregate capital stock at steady state
and q is the price of newly installed capital readily available to produce in the following period.
      The budget constraint is as follows
                     bt+1
              ct +        + qto kto + φ(kt+1 , kto ) + q k̃t+1 ≤ bt + zt F (kt , ht ) + qto kt + qkt+1
                      Rt
   According to this, households sell old capital kt and newly installed capital kt+1 , and use bonds
and production to buy newly installed capital k̃t+1 , old capital kto , consume and issue new bonds.
This allows for the possibility of kto 6= kt and kt+1 6= k̃t+1 . However, market clearing in the used
capital market requires kto = kt , kt+1 = k̃t+1 .
   Recursive representation— Let X = (B, K, s) denote the aggregate state of the economy. The
recursive optimization problem of agents is given by:

    V (b, k, X) =           max               u(c − G(h)) + βEs′ |s V (b′ , k ′ , X ′ )                      (C.1)
                      c,ko ,k̃′ ,b′ ,h,kt+1
                                 ′
                             b
                      c+        + φ(k ′ , k o ) + q o (X)k o + q(X)k̃ ′ = b + zF (k, h) + q o (X)k + q(X)k(C.2)
                                                                                                          ′
                             Rt
            b′
               ≥ −κq(X)K̄                                                                                    (C.3)
            Rt

Optimality conditions are:

                u′ (ct − G(ht ))         =       βREt [u′ (ct+1 − G(ht+1 ))] + µ                             (C.4)
                          G′ (h)         =       Fh (k, h)                                                   (C.5)
                         q o (X)         =       φ2 (k̃ ′o )                                                 (C.6)
                               qt        =       φ1 (kt+1 , kto )                                            (C.7)
               ′
              u (ct − G(ht ))qt          =       βEt [u′ (ct+1 − G(ht+1 )){qt+1
                                                                            o
                                                                                + zt+1 Fk (kt+1 , ht+1 )}]   (C.8)

Market clearing implies that the resource constraint is

                                                   b′
                                              c+      + φ(k ′ , k o ) = b + zF (k, h)                        (C.9)
                                                   R

C.1     Optimal Time Consistent Planner’s Problem
As described in Section 3 and Section of the Appendix, the planner chooses directly borrowing
on behalf of the households, and let all markets clear competitively. That is, the planner chooses
allocations and prices subject to a set of implementability constraints given by (C.5)-(C.9).

                                                                 11
   Under discretion, planner takes future policies for capital K, consumpion C, bonds B as given
and solves the following problem:

                        V(b, k, s) =          max u(c − G(h)) + βEs′ |s V(b′ , k ′ , s′ )
                                             c,k′ ,b′ ,h
                b′
            c+     + φ(k ′ , k o )     = b + zF (k, h)
                R
                              b′
                                       ≥ −κφ1 (k ′ , k)kt
                              R
                       G′ (h)          = Fh (k, h)
       u′ (c − G(h))φ1 (k ′ , k)       = βEs′ |s [u′ (C(b′ , k ′ , X ′ ) − G(H(b′ , k ′ , X ′ ))){φ2 (K(b′ , k ′ , X ′ ), k ′ ))
                                         +z ′ Fk (k ′ , H(b′ , k ′ , X ′ ))}]

    Using first-order conditions and envelope condition, the Euler equation for bonds is:
                          
u′ (ct − G(ht )) = βREt u′ (C(bt+1 , kt+1 ) − G(H(bt+1 , kt+1 ))
                                                                                                                  
                   −ξ t+1 φ1 (K(bt+1 , kt+1 , X), kt+1 )u′′ (C(bt+1 , kt+1 , X) − G(H(bt+1 , kt+1 , X))) + ξ t Ωt
                   +ξ t φ1 (kt+1 , kt )u′′ (ct − G(ht )) + µ∗t

where Ω ≡ Es′ |s [u′′ (C(b′ , k ′ , X ′ )−G(H(b′ , k ′ , X ′ ))){φ2 (K(b′ , k ′ , X ′ ), k ′ ))+z ′ Fk (K̄, H(b′ , k ′ , s′ ))}(Cb (b′ , k ′ , s′ )
−G′ (H(b′ , k ′ , s′ ))Hb (b′ , k ′ , s′ )) + u′ (C(b′ , k ′ , s′ ) − G(H(b′ , k ′ , s′ )))(φ21 (K(b′ , k ′ , s′ ), k ′ )Kb (b′ , k ′ , s′ )
+z ′ {Fkk (K̄, H(b′ , k ′ , s′ ))Kb (b′ , k ′ , s′ )) + Fkh (K̄, H(b′ , k ′ , s′ ))Hb (b′ , k ′ , s′ ))}].

     Suppose that the implementability constraint is slack today but binds tomorrow, i.e ξ t = 0 but
ξ t+1 ≥ 0. This yields

                    u′ (ct − G(ht )) = βREt [u′ (C(bt+1 , kt+1 , X) − G(H(bt+1 , kt+1 , X)))                                    (C.10)
                                       −ξ t+1 φ1 (K(bt+1 , kt+1 , X), kt+1 )u′′ (C(bt+1 , kt+1 , X)]                            (C.11)

Just like in the condition (14) of the baseline model, there is a positive wedge between the marginal
cost of borrowing from the planner and households when the constraint is not binding at t but is
expected to bind at t + 1.




                                                                   12
D      Commitment
This section provides more details about the analysis under commitment. There are two sections.
Section D.1 derives some theoretical results and D.2 provides a numerical analysis.


D.1     Theoretical Results
                                                                
Under commitment, the planner chooses at time 0 once and for all ct , bt+1 , qt , ht , vt , µt+1                     t≥0
                                                                                                                           to
maximize expected lifetime utility:
                                                                                          ∞
                                                                                          X
                                                               max                   Et         β t u(ct − G(ht ))
                                                    {ct ,bt+1 ,qt ,ht ,vt ,µt }t≥0
                                                                                          t=0
                                        bt+1
                                   ct +         ≤ bt + zt F (1, ht , vt ) − pvt vt                                    (D.1)
                                          R
                            zt Fh (1, ht , vt ) = G′ (ht )                                                            (D.2)
                                                                                
                                                   v                θµt
                            zt Fv (1, ht , vt ) = pt 1 + ′                                                            (D.3)
                                                            u (ct − G(ht ))
                             bt+1
                                   − θpvt vt ≥ −κt qt                                                                 (D.4)
                               R                      
                        u′ (ct − G(ht ))qt = βEt u′ (ct+1 − G(ht+1 ))(qt+1 + zt+1 Fk (1, ht+1 , vt+1 ))
                                                             
                                             +κt+1 µt+1 qt+1                                                          (D.5)
                                        
                 bt+1         v
        µt              − θpt vt + κt qt   = 0                                                                        (D.6)
                  R
                                          µt ≥ 0                                                                      (D.7)

   Let λt , ζ ht , ζ vt , µ∗t , ξ t , ν t and χt denote the lagrange multipliers on constraints (D.1)-(D.7)
respectively. First-order conditions with respect to ct , bt+1 , qt , ht , vt , and µt are:

                        ct ::        λt = u′ (t) − ξ t u′′ (t)qt + ξ t−1 u′′ (t)(qt + zt Fk (t) + κt µt qt )          (D.8)

                        bt+1 ::      λt = βRt Et λt+1 + µ∗t + µt ν t                                                  (D.9)

                                                                     κt (µt ν t + µ∗t )
                           qt ::     ξ t = ξ t−1 (1 + κt µt ) +                                                      (D.10)
                                                                          u′ (t)




                                                                   13
                                                               1 h                                                                     
                    ht ::          zt Fh (t) = G′ (ht ) +         ζ t [zt Fhh (t) − G′′ (h)] + ζ vt zt Fvh (t) − ξ t−1 u′ (t)zt Fkh (t)
                                                               λt
                                                                                                                        (D.11)
                                                1 v                                                                                       
                     vt ::         zt Fv (t) =      pt [λt + θµ∗t + θµt ν t ] + ζ ht zt Fhv (t) + ζ vt zt Fvv (t) − ξ t−1 u′ (t)zt Fkv (t)
                                                λt
                                                                                                                       (D.12)
                                                                               
                                                        bt+1
µt ::     ξ t−1 κt qt u′ (t) + χt + ζ vt pv θ = −ν t         − θpvt ν t + κt qt                                        (D.13)
                                                         R

Notice that conditions (D.8)-(D.10) correspond to conditions (19)-(21 in Section 2.5.
   Complementary slackness conditions is:
                                                                           
                                                      bt+1
                                            µ∗t                v
                                                           − θpt vt + κt qt   = 0                                       (D.14)
                                                       R
                                                                       χ t µt = 0                                       (D.15)

   The Euler equation for bonds is:

 u′ (t) = βREt [u′ (t + 1) − ξ t+1 u′′ (t + 1)qt+1 + ξ t u′′ (t + 1)(qt+1 (1 + κt+1 µt+1 ) + zt+1 Fk (t + 1)) ]
                                                                       ζ ν pv θµ u′′ (t)
          +ξ t u′′ (t)qt − ξ t−1 u′′ (t)(qt (1 + κt µt ) + zt Fk (t)) − t t ′ t 2        + µ∗t + ν t µt  (D.16)
                                                                            u (t)

Following the same steps as in A.2 and assuming that the implementability constraints (D.11),
(D.12 ), and (D.13) are not binding, the macro-prudential tax on debt under commitment τ M
                                                                                         t
                                                                                           P,C

is given by:
                                       κµ
                                 −Et u′ (ct+1
                                          t+1 )
                                                u′′ (ct+1 )qt+1 + ξ t−1 (Et u′′ (ct+1 )zt+1 − zt u′′ (ct ))
                   τM
                    t
                      P,C
                             =
                                                                Et u′ (ct+1 )
Compared to the tax in the markov perfect equilibrium (17), the tax under commitment features
another term that relates to previous commitments as given by the second term on the right hand
side of (D.1).


D.2     Numerical Results
A numerical solution requires of the model under commitment requires to find appropriate state
values to keep track of previous promises. Notice that ξ follows an increasing sequence over time
and hence is not an appropriate state variable for a numerical solution.
    Building on Kydland and Prescott (1980), one can transform the planner’s problem to express
it recursively expanding the states to include consumption and asset prices. For simplicity, we
consider here a production function of the form F (k) = zk, a collateral constraint that depends
on the market value of aggregate assets and only productivity shocks. The recursive problem for




                                                                14
t > 0 can be expressed as follows

                     V (b, q, c, s) =       max             u(c) + βEs′ V (b′ , q(s′ ), c(s′ ), z ′ )   (D.17)
                                        b′ ,q(s′ ),m(s′ )

                       c + b′ /R ≤ b + z
                               b′ ≥ −κq
                          qu′ (c) ≥ βEc(s′ )(z ′ + q(s′ ))

with states (b, q, c, s) ∈ A where A is the largest set of points (b, q, c, s) such that we can find a
sequence bt+1 , ct , qt satisfying all the constraints.
   Att = 0, the planner is not bound by past promises of consumption and asset prices. The time
0 problem consists of choosing q(b, s), c(b, s) that maximize V (b, q, c, s).

                                           max V (b, q, c, s)                                           (D.18)
                                             c,q


To solve the model, we construct a grid for the three endogenous state variables b, q, c of dimension
N B, N Q and N C respectively and a grid of dimension N S for the exogenous state variables.
Notice that since the planner is choosing asset prices and consumption for each possible value of
the shock tomorrow, the dimension of the control space for each combination of state variables is
N S × N B × N Q × N C + 1. To keep the numerical solution manageable, we use relatively coarse
grids of N S = 2, N B = 20, N Q = 10, N C = 20. Finally, the set A is determined through an
iterative procedure.
     Figure 9 shows the value function, and policy functions for asset prices, consumption, and
bonds at t = 0 and comparing them to the decentralized equilibrium. That is, we first solve
(D.17) and obtain the policy function b′ (b, q, c, s) and value function V ′ (b, q, c, s), and then find
c∗ , q ∗ that solve (D.18). Figure 9 plots the solution for c∗ , q ∗ together with the associate value
function, and the bond policy that solves (D.17) for c∗ , q ∗ that solve (D.18) .




                                                            15
            Value Function                                        Consumption
 -66                                                    1.5

-66.5                                                     1

 -67                                                    0.5
             -0.4            -0.2              0                  -0.4            -0.2         0
                    b                                               b
               Asset Prices                               Bond Policy Function
     2                                                    0
                                                                                      Ramsey
                                                        -0.2                          DE
     1
                                                        -0.4
     0
             -0.4            -0.2              0                  -0.4            -0.2         0
                           b                                                      b
         Figure 9: Policy Functions under Commitment vs Decentralized Equilibrium

  Note: Dashed lines represent optimal macroprudential policy under commitment.




                                                   16
E     Data Appendix

E.1     Data Sources
    • Net Foreign Asset Position (NFA): Flow of Funds

    • Total Credit: Survey of Terms of Business Lending and Flow of Funds

    • Intermediate Inputs: United Nations UNdata

    • GDP: OECD National Accounts Statistics


E.2     Frequency and Duration of Financial Crises
To construct estimates of the duration and frequency of financial crises, we applied the methodol-
ogy proposed by Forbes and Warnock (2012) to identify the timing and duration of sharp changes
in financial conditions. A financial crisis is defined as an event in which the cyclical component of
the linearly-detrended current account is above two-standard deviations from its mean. Since the
current account is the overall measure of financing of the economy vis-a-vis the rest of the world,
this unusually large current accounts represent unusually large drops in foreign financing. The
starting (ending) dates of the events are set in the year within the previous (following) two years
in which the current account first rose (fell) above (below) one standard deviation. Using the data
for all OECD countries over the 1984-2012 period, we obtained financial crises with a frequency
of 4 percent and a mean duration of 1 year.
    Table 4 indicates the list of all crises events identified with this methodology and Figures
E.2-E.3 show the data for current account for all countries.




                                                 17
                      Table 4: Financial Crises Episodes.



Australia             [2001Q2   -   2002Q3]
Austria               [2002Q3   -   2003Q2], [2008Q1 - 2009Q1]
Belgium               [2010Q2   -   2011Q2]
Canada                [1996Q1   -   1997Q1]
Chile
Czech Republic        [2005Q3   -   2006Q3]
Denmark               [2005Q4   -   2006Q3], [2010Q3 - 2011Q2]
Estonia               [2009Q3   -   2010Q4]
Finland               [1995Q1   -   1996Q2]
France                [1999Q1   -   2000Q1]
Germany               [1989Q1   -   1990Q4]
Greece
Hungary               [2001Q4 - 2002Q3], [2009Q4 - 2011Q1]
Iceland
Ireland               [2003Q2 - 2004Q4]
Israel                [2006Q2 - 2007Q3], [2010Q1 - 2010Q4]
Italy
Japan                 [2007Q2   -   2008Q2]
Korea, Republic of    [2004Q1   -   2005Q1]
Luxembourg            [2005Q1   -   2005Q3]
Mexico                [1983Q2   -   1984Q3], [1995Q4 - 1997Q2]
Netherlands           [2006Q1   -   2007Q1]
New Zealand           [2009Q3   -   2010Q4]
Norway                [2000Q3   -   2002Q1]
Poland
Portugal              [2003Q1 - 2004Q3]
Slovak Republic       [1995Q4 - 2000Q4]
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden                [2006Q4 - 2008Q4]
Switzerland           [2010Q1 - 2011Q1]
Turkey                [1994Q4 - 1995Q2], [2001Q4 - 2002Q3], [2009Q2 - 2010Q2]
United Kingdom
United States         [1991Q1 - 1992Q2], [2009Q2 - 2010Q2]

   Note: Financial Crises episodes.




                                         18
                                                                                                                     Figure E.1: Financial Crises

                                                                           (a) Australia                                                                                                                             (b) Austria                                                                                                                           (c) Belgium
                                                                                              AUS                                                                                                                                  AUT                                                                                                                                   BEL
                         Current account (% of GDP)




                                                                                                                                Current account (% of GDP)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Current account (% of GDP)
                                                                                                                                                                                                    2                                                                                                                 3

                                                                 2                                                                                                             1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                 1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                                                               0.5

                                                                 0                                                                                                                                  0                                                                                                                 0

                                                                                                                                                                       -0.5
                                                            -1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -1
                                                                                                                                                                                            -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -2
                                                            -2                                                                                                         -1.5

                                                                                                                                                                                            -2                                                                                                                -3

                                                                 1980Q4   1986Q4     1992Q4    1998Q4     2004Q4     2010Q4                                                                   1996Q4                      2002Q4             2008Q4                                                            1995Q4                                          2001Q4              2007Q4          2013Q4




                                                                             (d) Canada                                                                                                                                (e) Chile                                                                                                                             (f ) Czech
                                                                                               CAN                                                                                                                                 CHL                                                                                                                                  CZE
                                    Current account (% of GDP)




                                                                                                                                          Current account (% of GDP)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Current account (% of GDP)
                                                                                                                                                                                         6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           4
                                                                  2
                                                                                                                                                                                         4                                                                                                                 3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2
                                                                  1
                                                                                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1

                                                                  0                                                                                                                      0                                                                                                                 0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -1
                                                                                                                                                                                 -2
                                                                 -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -2

                                                                                                                                                                                 -4                                                                                                               -3
                                                                 -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -4
                                                                                                                                                                                 -6

                                                                 1981Q4    1987Q4     1993Q4    1999Q4      2005Q4     2011Q4                                                     2003Q4                                                2009Q4                                                         1995Q4                                                 2001Q4               2007Q4         2013Q4




                                                                            (g) Denmark                                                                                                                               (h) Estonia                                                                                                                            (i) Finland
                                                                                              DNK                                                                                                                                      EST                                                                                                                                   FIN
                            Current account (% of GDP)




                                                                                                                                                                       Current account (% of GDP)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Current account (% of GDP)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                          10
                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2

                                                                                                                                                                                                           5
                                                                 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1


                                                                 0                                                                                                                                         0                                                                                                                                     0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -1
                                                                 -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                           -5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -2
                                                                 -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                          -10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -3
                                                                 1995Q4             2001Q4              2007Q4           2013Q4                                                                            2000Q4                  2006Q4                 2012Q4                                                                           1980Q4         1986Q4    1992Q4   1998Q4     2004Q4   2010Q4




                                                                               (j) France                                                                                                                            (k) Germany                                                                                                                                   (l) Greece
                                                                                               FRA                                                                                                                                     DEU                                                                                                                                   GRC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 5
              Current account (% of GDP)




                                                                                                                                                                             Current account (% of GDP)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Current account (% of GDP)




                                                                  1                                                                                                                                         2

                                                                                                                                                                                                           1.5

                                                          0.5                                                                                                                                               1

                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.5

                                                                  0                                                                                                                                         0                                                                                                                                    0

                                                                                                                                                                                                          -0.5

                                                 -0.5                                                                                                                                                       -1

                                                                                                                                                                                                          -1.5

                                                                 -1                                                                                                                                         -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -5
                                                                 1995Q4             2001Q4              2007Q4            2013Q4                                                                            1980Q4   1986Q4   1992Q4    1998Q4   2004Q4   2010Q4                                                                                 1995Q4            2001Q4             2007Q4          2013Q4




Ratio of cumulated net capital inflows over the last four quarters to cumulated GDP
over the last four quarters. Shaded areas describe periods of Financial Crises




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               19
                                                                                                                                          Figure E.2: Financial Crises

                                                                                                        (a) Hungary                                                                                                                            (b) Iceland                                                                                                                  (c) Ireland
                                                                                                                     HUN                                                                                                                                         ISL                                                                                                                           IRL
                                          Current account (% of GDP)




                                                                                                                                                                                  Current account (% of GDP)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Current account (% of GDP)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3

                                                                                      3                                                                                                                                       10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2
                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1
                                                                                      1

                                                                                      0                                                                                                                                             0                                                                                                                       0

                                                                              -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -5
                                                                              -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -2
                                                                              -3                                                                                                                                     -10

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -3

                                                                               1995Q4                      2001Q4               2007Q4       2013Q4                                                                                 1997Q4              2003Q4              2009Q4                                                                          1990Q4           1996Q4            2002Q4         2008Q4




                                                                                                         (d) Israel                                                                                                                             (e) Italy                                                                                                                      (f ) Japan
                                                                                                                    ISR                                                                                                                                      ITA                                                                                                                                JPN
             Current account (% of GDP)




                                                                                                                                                    Current account (% of GDP)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Current account (% of GDP)
                                                       3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                1.5
                                                       2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1

                                                       1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                0.5

                                                       0                                                                                                                                                            0                                                                                                                                            0

                                                                                                                                                                                       -0.5
                                              -1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -0.5

                                                                                                                                                                                                               -1
                                              -2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -1
                                                                                                                                                                                       -1.5
                                              -3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -1.5

                                                1995Q4                                                   2001Q4               2007Q4       2013Q4                                                              1995Q4                            2001Q4                2007Q4           2013Q4                                                                   1994Q4             2000Q4              2006Q4           2012Q4




                                                                                                          (g) Korea                                                                                                                      (h) Luxembourg                                                                                                                    (i) Mexico
                                                                                                                      KOR                                                                                                                                   LUX                                                                                                                             MEX
                                                                  Current account (% of GDP)




                                                                                                                                                                         Current account (% of GDP)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Current account (% of GDP)




                                                                                               3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3
                                                                                               2                                                                                                                    4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                               1                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1

                                                                                               0                                                                                                                    0                                                                                                                     0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -1
                                                                                               -1                                                                                                              -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -2
                                                                                               -2                                                                                                              -4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -3
                                                                                                                                                                                                               -6
                                                                                               -3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -4

                                                                                               2000Q4                2006Q4                2012Q4                                                              2000Q4                                     2006Q4                     2012Q4                                        1980Q4                             1986Q4       1992Q4      1998Q4     2004Q4   2010Q4




                                                                                                        (j) Netherlands                                                                                                                      (k) New Zealand                                                                                                                 (l) Norway
                                                                                                                       NLD                                                                                                                                       NZL                                                                                                                           NOR
                                                                 Current account (% of GDP)




                                                                                                                                                                                                       Current account (% of GDP)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Current account (% of GDP)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             8

                                                                                               3                                                                                                                                     3                                                                                                                       6

                                                                                               2                                                                                                                                     2                                                                                                                       4

                                                                                               1                                                                                                                                     1                                                                                                                       2

                                                                                               0                                                                                                                                     0                                                                                                                       0

                                                                                               -1                                                                                                                                   -1                                                                                                                      -2


                                                                                               -2                                                                                                                                   -2                                                                                                                      -4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -3                                                                                                                      -6
                                                                                               -3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -8
                                                                                               1995Q4       2001Q4               2007Q4       2013Q4                                                                                1988Q1     1994Q1       2000Q1        2006Q1       2012Q1                                                               1981Q4        1987Q4      1993Q4     1999Q4      2005Q4    2011Q4




Ratio of cumulated net capital inflows over the last four quarters to cumulated GDP
over the last four quarters. Shaded areas describe periods of Financial Crises




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                                                                                                                Figure E.3: Financial Crises

                                                                                                                                   (a) Poland                                                                                                            (b) Portugal                                                                                                                       (c) Slovak Republic
                                                                                                                                                                   POL                                                                                                                     PRT                                                                                                                        SVK
                                                                                        Current account (% of GDP)




                                                                                                                                                                                                          Current account (% of GDP)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Current account (% of GDP)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           4
                                                                                                                     3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3
                                                                                                                     2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2

                                                                                                                     1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1

                                                                                                                     0                                                                                                                     0                                                                                                                       0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -1                                                                                                                -2
                                                                                                                     -1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -2
                                                                                                                     -2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -6
                                                                                                                     -3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -4

                                                                                                                     2002Q4                                               2008Q4                                                           1996Q4           2002Q4                                          2008Q4                                           1995Q4                                       2001Q4                                       2007Q4             2013Q4




                                                                                                                               (d) Slovenia                                                                                                                (e) Spain                                                                                                                                      (f ) Sweden
                                                                                                                                            SVN                                                                                                                                                  ESP                                                                                                                   SWE
                                                           Current account (% of GDP)




                                                                                                                                                                                                              Current account (% of GDP)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Current account (% of GDP)
                                                                                                         4                                                                                                                                  3                                                                                                                                               2

                                                                                                         3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2
                                                                                                         2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                         1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.5

                                                                                                         0                                                                                                                                  0                                                                                                                                               0

                                                                                                -1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -1
                                                                                                -2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -2
                                                                                                -3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -1.5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -3                                                                                                                                              -2
                                                                                                -4

                                                                                                 1995Q4                            2001Q4                                     2007Q4             2013Q4                                    1995Q4          2001Q4                                        2007Q4           2013Q4                                                            1993Q4           1999Q4                                     2005Q4            2011Q4




                                         (g) Switzerland                                                                                                                                (h) Turkey                                                                                                      (i) United Kingdom                                                                                                                                  (j) United States
                                                           CHE                                                                                                                                      TUR                                                                                                                        GBR                                                                                                                                                   USA
   Current account (% of GDP)




                                                                                                                                            Current account (% of GDP)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Current account (% of GDP)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Current account (% of GDP)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2
                                6                                                                                                                                        4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.5                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                                                                         3
                                4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.5
                                2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.5
                                                                                                                                                                         1

                                0                                                                                                                                        0                                                                                                                         0                                                                                                                                                   0

                                                                                                                                                                         -1                                                                                                                      -0.5
                                -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -0.5
                                                                                                                                                                         -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -1
                                -4
                                                                                                                                                                         -3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -1.5                                                                                                                                                 -1
                                -6                                                                                                                                       -4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -2

                                1980Q4   1986Q4   1992Q4          1998Q4                                                  2004Q4   2010Q4                                1987Q4        1993Q4     1999Q4                                        2005Q4    2011Q4                                   1980Q4    1986Q4   1992Q4       1998Q4                                                        2004Q4   2010Q4                                       1980Q4    1986Q4     1992Q4    1998Q4   2004Q4   2010Q4




Ratio of cumulated net capital inflows over the last four quarters to cumulated GDP
over the last four quarters. Shaded areas describe periods of Financial Crises




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    21
F           Great Recession Experiment
In section 3.2, we conduct ed an event analysis designed to show how average financial crises look
in DE and conduct counterfactual experiments to show the effectiveness of macroprudential policy.
In this section, we examine instead the DE model’s predicted time-series dynamics leading up to
and including the global financial crisis event using a window spanning the 2000-2009 period. We
compare these dynamics with the observed dynamics in the United States and Europe, and with
a counterfactual of what the event would have looked like under the SP’s optimal policy.30 The
results for three of the model’s key variables (asset prices, output and the current account) are
shown in Figure 1.

                Land Prices (Model)                             Land Prices (US)                Housing Prices (Euro)
       20                                       20                                         6


       10                                       10
                                                                                           4
                                                 0
        0
                                                                                           2
                                               -10
      -10
                                               -20                                         0
      -20
                                               -30
                                                                                           -2
      -30                                      -40

      -40                                      -50                                         -4
                02       04     06      08                02         04       06      08        02      04      06      08


                     Output (Model)                              Output (US )                        Output (Euro)
       8                                        8                                          8

       6                                        6                                          6

       4                                        4
                                                                                           4
       2                                        2
                                                                                           2
       0                                        0
                                                                                           0
      -2                                       -2

      -4                                       -4                                          -2

      -6                                       -6                                          -4
               02        04     06      08                02        04       06       08        02      04      06      08


              Current Account (Model)                     Current Account (US)                  Current Account(Eur )
      15                                                                                   3
                                                2.5

                                                    2                                      2
      10                                        1.5                                        1
                                                    1
                                                                                           0
       5                                        0.5
                                                                                           -1
                                                    0
                                                                                           -2
       0                                       -0.5

                                                 -1                                        -3

      -5                                       -1.5                                        -4
               02        04     06      08                 02        04       06      08        02      04      06      08


                                        Decentralized Equilibrium         Social Planner



                                      Figure F.1: Comparison of Crises Dynamics

      Note: In the model, Land Prices and output expressed as a percentage deviation of mean values for
      decentralized equilibrium. Data values are expressed as deviation from a linear trend over the period
      1984-2010.

 30
      Data for Europe represents simple average of European Union—the source is Eurostat.


                                                                     22
                                                                         Macroprudential Tax
                         Welfare Gains                               8
             0.38
                                                                     7
             0.36                                                    6




                                                        Percentage
                                                                     5
Percentage




             0.34
                                                                     4

             0.32                                                    3

                                                                     2
              0.3
                                                                     1

                                                                     0
                    02      04     06      08                            02    04        06        08



                            Figure F.2: Macroprudential Tax and Welfare Gains


    To generate the simulated data for the DE and SP we need to set an initial condition for
b, and values for the realizations of TFP, R and κ for the ten years in the event window. The
initial condition for b is set equal to the private NFA-GDP ratio of the United States observed in
2000, which was −11.6 percent. The values of the interest-rate shocks are set to their observed
realizations during 2000-2009 and the values of the TFP shocks are set so as to match the observed
deviation from linear trend of the U.S. real GDP in the same period—we use interpolation over
the realizations included in the Markov approximation of the AR(1) process of TFP). The values
of κ are set to κH for 2000-2008 and κL for 2009. The DE and SP decision rules for bonds, together
with the recursive functions that map the values of bonds and the shocks into equilibrium prices
and allocations, are then used to generate the plots shown in the first column of Figure 1.
    Comparing the DE model’s crisis dynamics with the U.S. and European data, Panels (a)-(c)
of the Figure 1 show that the model does quite well at tracking the dynamics of asset prices,
particularly for the United States, which is the country used to set the initial conditions and
shock realizations for the model simulations. The timing of the crash in the asset price is off
by one year, because we set the change to κL and the lowest realization of TFP in 2009, to be
consistent with the fact that the lowest deviation from trend in GDP was observed in 2009. We
could calibrate to 2008 instead and then the crash in the asset price would be in the same year as
in the data. The current account in the DE and the U.S. data share the feature that the financial
crisis is associated with a sharp current account reversal. The reversal, however, is much large
in the model than in the data, which is partly due to the fact that debt in the model is only
one-period debt, while actual U.S. net foreign assets include significant positions in long-term
instruments.31 For the same reason, the large current account reversal implies a decline in private
consumption larger than what was observed in U.S. data.
    As figure F.1 shows, the policy not only prevents the asset price crash, but in addition it
produces lower and more stable asset prices for the entire ten-year period. The output dynamics
are identical across the two economies before the crisis, because they experience the same TFP
shocks calibrated to replicate the path of output, but when the crisis hits output falls less in the SP
because the collateral constraint is less binding, and hence implies a smaller cutback in working
             31
   The model also abstracts from government policies that were put in place to offset the credit crunch (see e.g.
Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010) and Bianchi (2012)).


                                                       23
capital financing. The DE shows slightly larger current account deficits than SP from 2002 to
2004, from then until the crisis hits the two are about the same, and then when the crisis hits the
SP avoids the current account reversal completely. The larger initial deficits of the DE reflect the
incentive to overborrow that private agents have because of the effect of the pecuniary externality.
The differences in current accounts are small, which means that debt positions pre-crisis are not
all that different, but as we show later, small differences in debt positions between the DE and
SP result in large differences in macro outcomes, because the calibrated model features a strong
financial amplification mechanism.
    Figure F.2 shows the time-series dynamics of the optimal tax and the welfare gains (i.e. these
are values conditional on each year instead of the averages shown in Table 2). The tax increases
first gradually and then sharply to about 7 percent just before the crisis. The welfare gain of the
optimal policy follows a very similar pattern, and reaches a maximum of 36 basis points the year
before the crisis.




                                                24
                           Table 5: Type-1 and Type-2 Errors in Crises Warnings

                                                         Model                                Logit
                                                       Probability           All Regressors        Credit-Output
  (i) 5 percent of Type-1 errors in the model
  Type 1                                                   5.0                     4.4                  3.4
  Type 2                                                  63.7                    69.1                 73.2
  (ii) 5 percent of Type-2 errors in the model
  Type 1                                                  82.8                    84.0                 81.7
  Type 2                                                   5.0                     7.9                  9.2
 Note: All values are expressed in percent. Warning probability cutoffs are 1.8 and 8.6 percent in scenarios (i) and
(ii) respectively. “All Regressors” includes credit, asset prices and all exogenous shocks as explanatory variables


G         Early Warnings
We examine whether it is feasible to construct a parsimonious statistical framework that yields
accurate “early warnings” of financial crises by conducting an experiment similar to the one Boissay
et al. (2015) proposed. We produce a 500,000-observations time-series simulation of the DE, which
includes roughly 20,000 crisis events (since the probability of crises is 4 percent). This yields a
time-series of the one-step-ahead probability of observing a crisis at t+1 conditional on date t.
Then we select a cutoff value such that the model issues a crisis warning when the probability
exceeds the cutoff. The criterion for setting the cutoff is that the warnings be statistically accurate,
in the sense that Type-1 or Type-2 errors are in the 95 percentile.32 Type-1 errors occur when
the model does not issue a warning at t but a crisis occurs at t + 1 in the simulated data (i.e.
the model failed to predict a crisis). Type-2 errors occur when the model issues a warning at t
but a crisis does not occur at t + 1 (i.e. it wrongly predicted a crisis). At the 95 percentile for
Type-1 (Type-2) errors, there should not be more than 5 percent of errors of that type. Table 4
shows that the model produces warnings with this accuracy if the probability cutoffs are set to
1.8 percent for Type-1 errors and 8.6 percent for Type-2 errors.
    The above represents the “best” early warning system attainable, in the sense that the warn-
ings are based on the true model’s crisis probabilities. Since in practice these probabilities are
unobservable, however, they cannot be used directly to build early-warning indicators, as Boissay
et al. (2015) noted. Hence, we examine whether logit regressions using the model’s fundamentals
as explanatory variables can do as well as the model in terms of the fractions of Type-1 and Type-2
errors generated when issuing crisis warnings. In these regressions, the dependent variable is a




  32
       Boissay et al. applied the cutoff only to Type-2 errors, but in principle it can be applied to both.


                                                           25
    binary variable set to 0 when a crisis does not occur and 1 when it occurs (which is observable),
and the independent variables enter in logs and with a one-period lag.
    Table 4 shows Type-1 and Types-2 errors in crisis warnings obtained from two logit regressions
using the 1.8 and 8.6 percent cutoffs produced by the model. One uses as regressors all of the
model’s state variables (TFP, interest rates, κ, and the bond position) together with GDP and
asset prices, and the other uses only the ratio of total credit (bonds plus working capital) to GDP.
Both of these regressions are good early-warning systems, because the fractions of Type-1 and
Type-2 errors they produce are similar to the ones produced by the model, although the logit
with all the regressors does slightly better. We also estimated alternative regressions with subsets
of the regressors used in the first logit model, but they all produced larger fractions of Type-1
and Type-2 errors. This is in line with the finding of Boissay et al. (2015), showing that a logit
regression using only the debt-GDP ratio approximates well model-based errors.




                                                 26
                                          Table 6: Sensitivity Analysis



                             Macroprudential    Welfare    Crisis Prob.    Asset Price Drop   Equity Premium
                               Debt Tax         Gains      DE      SP      DE        SP       DE       SP

   Baseline                         3.6           0.30     4.0    0.02    −43.9   −5.4         4.8       0.8
   Low WK (θ = 0.12)                3.6           0.21      5.4   0.02    −37.1   −5.6         4.1       1.0
   Endogenous R                     3.7           0.28     3.88   0.00    −43.1   −6.6         4.8       0.7
   Higher Patience                  3.1           0.20     2.65   0.02    −51.0   −10.4       4.62      0.54




H       Sensitivity
The supply side channel driven by working capital plays an important role for determining the
large gains from macroprudential policy. Reducing θ by 25% reduces the welfare gains by about
33 %, i.e. welfare gains fall from 0.3 to 0.2 percentage points of permanent consumption. Hence,
we conclude that large gains from macroprudential policy arise due to adverse effects of crises on
economic activity, besides the gains from higher consumption smoothing. This links our results
to Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2013) who show that capital controls achieve substantial gains by
reducing average unemployment via reductions in volatility, and hence departing from standard
Lucas welfare calculations.
    In the second sensitivity experiment we modify the model to relax the assumption of a per-
fectly elastic supply of funds at an exogenous interest rate Rt . We argued that this is a natural
assumption for many of the economies to which we calibrate our model, and is also a convenient as-
sumption theoretically to abstract from redistribution effects. To see the robustness of our results
to this assumption, we introduce a real interest rate which varies with aggregate bond holdings.
                                                                                          ′
In particular, we assume that the net interest rate is now given by r(B ′ ) = rt − ̺(e−(B −B̄) − 1),
where B̄ denotes the average value of bond holdings and set ̺ = 0.05.33 With ̺ > 0, the interest
rate increases with the debt of the economy. In principle, this could work to attenuate the Fishe-
rian deflation and the pecuniary externality, because of the endogenous self-correcting mechanism
increasing the cost of borrowing as debt increases, but we found that quantitatively this did not
result in large changes relative to the baseline.34 This is shown in the last row of Table 6 for a
value of ̺ = 0.05. With this value of ̺, the real interest rate reaches a minimum of −1.5 percent
in the simulations which is around the minimum value observed in the data between 1980 and
2012.
    Finally, we consider an increase in the discount factor from β = 0.95 to β = 0.96. This makes
agents less willing to borrow and the economy becomes relatively less exposed to crises. As a
result, there are lower gains from macroprudential policy. Notice that higher patience also makes
  33
      This specification is proposed by Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2003) to avoid the problem with the unit root in
net foreign assets that arises when using perturbation methods to solve small open economy models. In our model,
its purpose is only to approximate what would happen if the interest rate could respond to debt choices in a richer
general equilibrium model.
   34
      The average macroprudential debt tax is slightly higher because now the planner also internalizes how borrowing
affects the interest rate, which is taken as exogenous by individual agents. The welfare gains of moving from
the constrained efficient equilibrium with an exogenous interest rate to the decentralized equilibrium with the
endogenous interest rate are about the same as in the baseline, which again suggests that the exogeneity of the
interest rate does not have significant effects on the quantitative results.


                                                          27
agents relatively more precautionary about future fluctuations, which in principle could make
macroprudential policy more desirable. Quantitatively, however, the first effect dominates, as can
be seen in Table 6.




                                               28
I        Asset Pricing
We report here more details on the asset pricing implications of the models and the implications
of macroprudential policy. Figure I.1 shows plots of six key asset pricing variables as functions
of B in the DE and SP economies when TFP and the interest rate take their average values and
κ = κH (this is in contrast with Figure 2, which plotted policy functions for a “bad” state with
low TFP and κL ). The variables plotted are the expected return on assets, the price of assets, the
Sharpe ratio, the volatility of returns, the risk premium, and the price of risk.
    In this Figure DE experiences higher risk premia, return volatilities, risk prices and Sharpe
ratios due to the fact that the DE is significantly more risky than the SP economy. Moreover,
differences with SP become larger for lower values of B since this implies that it is more likely
that the collateral constraint will bind at t + 1. On the other hand, expected return are higher for
SP. The higher risk premia in DE should in principle push asset prices down by reducing excess
returns. At equilibrium, however, this effect is more than offset by the first-order effect of the SP’s
debt tax, which by arbitrage of returns between assets and bonds this tax increases the expected
return on assets. In turn, higher excess returns contribute to explain the uniformly lower asset
prices of the SP relative to the DE for all the domain of B in panel (b), in line with eq. (8).
    It is also important to note in Figure I.1 the significant nonlinearities in the asset pricing
variables within the DE itself (and keeping in mind we are looking at these variables for realizations
of shocks in a “good” state as of date t). In particular, in the region with a positive probability
of a crisis at t + 1, the Sharpe ratio, return volatility, risk premium and price of risk are steep
decreasing functions of B, while they are virtually flat in the stable credit region. Similarly, asset
prices are a steeper function of B in the positive crisis probability region than in the stable credit
region.
    Table 7 reports statistics that characterize the main properties of asset pricing behavior in
                                                                      q
the DE and SP. The Table shows expected excess returns (Et [Rt+1        ]) in column (1) and its two
components, namely the after-tax risk free rate and the equity premium (Rtep ) in columns (2) and
(3) respectively. Using eq. (9), Rtep is decomposed into the two components that result from the
effect of collateral constraints that bind at t (column (4)) or are expected to bind at t + 1 (column
(5)), and the standard risk premium component given by the covariance between the stochastic
discount factor and asset returns (column (6)). The equity premium in column (3) is equal to the
sum of these three components. In addition, the Table reports the market price of risk (column
(7)), the log standard deviation of returns (column (8)) and the Sharpe ratio (column (9)). All of
these statistics are reported for the unconditional long-run distributions of each economy as well
as for distributions conditional on the collateral constraint being binding and not binding.
    The unconditional equity premium is significantly higher in the DE than in the SP by about
400 basis points (4.8 v. 0.8 percent).35 This difference is due to both higher risk premium (1.5 vs.
0.2 percent) and higher liquidity premium (4.7 vs. 1.8 percent). Moreover, the difference in equity
premium can be attributed to both higher volatility (14.6 vs 5.2) and higher price of risk (14.6
vs 5.2). Higher price of risk in DE reflects the fact that consumption, and therefore the pricing
kernel, fluctuate significantly more in the former than in the latter. Moreover, financial crises
episodes introduce higher volatility in asset prices and asset returns. Finally, the unconditional
Sharpe ratio of the DE is 0.5 v. 0.2 in the SP, implying that risk-taking is “overcompensated” in
the competitive equilibrium relative to the compensation it receives under the optimal policy. The
    35
    the sizable equity premium in the DE contrasts sharply with existing findings (e.g. Heaton and Lucas (1996))
showing that credit frictions without the Fisherian deflation mechanism do not produce large premia.



                                                      29
                  (a) Expected Return on Assets                                              Asset Price (b)
      30
                                                                            0.48
      27
                                                                            0.46
      24
      21                                                                    0.44

      18                                                                    0.42
      15                                                                      0.4
      12
                                                                            0.38
       9
                                                                            0.36
       6
       3                                                                    0.34

       0                                                                    0.32
       -0.3                     -0.25                       -0.2               -0.3                  -0.25           -0.2
                        Current Bond Holdings                                                Current Bond Holdings

                        (c) Sharpe Ratio                                               (d) Volatility Asset Return
       4                                                                    25

       2
                                                                            20
       0
                                                                            15
       -2

       -4                                                                   10

       -6
                                                                              5
       -8

      -10                                                                     0
        -0.3                    -0.25                       -0.2              -0.3                  -0.25            -0.2
                        Current Bond Holdings                                               Current Bond Holdings

                        (e) Risk Premium                                                    (f) Price of Risk
                                                                            50
       0.1


                                                                            40
      0.08


      0.06                                                                  30



      0.04                                                                  20


      0.02                                                                  10


           0                                                                  0
           -0.3                  -0.25                      -0.2              -0.3                  -0.25            -0.2
                         Current Bond Holdings                                              Current Bond Holdings
                                         Decentralized Equilibrium        Social Planner



                      Figure I.1: Asset Pricing Variables in “Good” States of Nature


differences in asset pricing statistics between DE and SP apply to constrained and unconstrained
region, as Table 7 shows.




                                                                     30
                                      Table 7: Asset Pricing Moments

                  (1)             (2)           (3)        (4)         (5)          (6)      (7)        (8)        (9)
                  Expected     Risk-free      Equity    Liquidity   Collateral     Risk     Price
                                                                                                           q
                  Return       Plus Tax      Premium    Premium      Effect      Premium   of Risk   σ t (Rt+1 )   SRt


                                  Decentralized Equilibrium
 Unconditional    6.0             1.2        4.8         4.7           1.4         1.5       14.6       9.1        0.5
 Constrained      85.6            1.2        84.4        84.1          0.0         0.2        4.1       6.2        13.7
 Unconstrained    1.3             1.2         0.1        0.0           1.5         1.6       15.3       9.3        0.0

                                           Social Planner
 Unconditional    4.1             3.3            0.8        1.8        1.2         0.2        5.2       3.8         0.2
 Constrained      6.9            -21.8          28.7        28.5       0.0         0.2        5.1       3.8         7.6
 Unconstrained    3.9             5.0           -1.2        0.0        1.3         0.2        5.2       3.8        -0.3

Note: The Sharpe ratio for each row is computed as the average of all corresponding equilibrium realizations of excess
returns divided by the standard deviation of excess returns. All figures except the Sharpe ratios are in percent.




                                                            31
J      Computational Algorithm

J.1       Numerical Solution Method for Decentralized Equilibrium
Following Bianchi (2011), we use Coleman (1990)’s time iteration algorithm, modified to address
the occasionally binding endogenous constraint, that operates directly on the first-order conditions.
Formally, the computation of the competitive equilibrium requires solving for functions
{B(b, s), Q(b, s), C(b, s), ν(b, s), H(b, s), µ(b, s)} such that:

                                       B(b, s)
                          C(b, s) +            = zF (1, H(b, s), ν(b, s)) + b − pv ν(b, s)                        (J.1)
                                         R

                                             B(b, s)
                                         −           + θpν ν(b, s) ≤ κQ(b, s)                                     (J.2)
                                               R
        u′ (C(b, s) − G′ (H(b, s))) = βREs′ |s [u′ (C(B(b, s), s′ ) − G′ (H(B(b, s), s))] + µ(b, s)               (J.3)


                           zFn (1, H(b, s), ν(b, s)) = G′ (H(b, s))                                               (J.4)
                           zFν (1, H(b, s), ν(b, s)) = pν (1 + θµ(b, s)/u′ (C(b, s)))                             (J.5)


      qu′ (c − G(h)) = βEs′ |s {u′ (C(b′ , s′ ) − G′ (H(b, s)))(Q(b′ , s′ ) + z ′ Fk (1, H(b′ , s′ ), ν(b′ , s′ )))(J.6)
                       +κ′ µ(b′ , s′ )Q(b′ , s′ )}

The algorithm follow these steps:

    1. Generate a discrete grid for the economy’s bond position Gb = {b1, b2 , ...bM } and the shock
       state space Gs = {s1, s2 , ...sN } and choose an interpolation scheme for evaluating the func-
       tions outside the grid of bonds. We use 300 points in the grid for bonds and interpolate the
       functions using a piecewise linear approximation.

    2. Conjecture Bk (b, s), Qk (b, s), Ck (b, s), Hk (b, s), ν k (b, s), µk (b, s) at time K, ∀b ∈ Gb and ∀s ∈
       Gs

    3. Set j = 1

    4. Solve for the values of Bk−j (b, s), Qk−j (b, s), Ck−j (b, s), (b, s), µk−j (b, s) at time k − j using
       (J.1)-(J.7) and Bk−j+1 (b, s), Qk−j+1 (b, s), Ck−j+1 (b, s)
       Hk−j+1 (b, s), µk−j+1 (b, s)∀ b ∈ Gb and ∀ s ∈ Gs :

        (a) Assume collateral constraint ( J.2) is not binding. Set µk−j (b, s) = 0 and solve for
            Hk−j (b, s) and ν using (J.4) and (J.5). Solve for Bk−j (b, s) and Ck−j (b, s) using (J.1)
            and(J.3) and a root finding algorithm.
                                   B     (b,s)
        (b) Check whether − k−jR       + θpν ν k−j (b, s) ≤ κQk−j+1 (b, s) holds. Notice that this step
            uses the asset price from the previous iteration to determine whether the collateral con-
            straint is binding. Of course, once policies and prices converge, this becomes innocuous.
            The advantage from this formulation is that it avoids solving through iterations for an

                                                          32
        additional market clearing price, which may or may not be unique. We conducted sev-
        eral robustness checks in this dimension like starting from a different initial guess for
        the equilibrium. Moreover, it would be straightforward to alter our method by solving
                                                 B   (b,s)
        for possibly multiple Q that satisfy − k−jR        + θpν ν k−j (b, s) = κQk−j+1 with a cer-
        tain equilibrium selection, e.g. the one that maximizes the utility of the representative
        agent.
    (c) If constraint is satisfied, move to next grid point.
   (d) Otherwise, solve for µ(b, s), ν k−j (b, s), Hk−j (b, s), Bk−j (b, s) using (J.2, (J.3) and(J.4)
       with equality.
    (e) Solve for Qk−j (b, s) using (J.7)

5. Evaluate convergence. If supB,s kxk−j (b, s) − xk−j+1 (b, s)k < ǫ for x = B, C, Q, µ, H we have
   found the competitive equilibrium. Otherwise, set xk−j (b, s) = xk−j+1 (b, s) and j       j+1
   and go to step 4.




                                               33
J.2      Numerical Solution Method for Constrained-Efficient Equilib-
       rium
From a methodological standpoint, the solution method we developed is related to the literature
using Markov perfect equilibria to solve for optimal time-consistent policy. In particular, we
extended the methods proposed in Klein et al. (2008) and Klein et al. (2007) to models with an
occasionally binding collateral constraint. The algorithm we propose uses a nested fixed point
algorithm. Given future policies, we solve for policy functions and value functions using value
function iteration as an inner loop. In the outer loop, we update future policies given the solution
to the Bellman equation. The algorithm follows these steps:
  1. Generate a discrete grid for the economy’s bond position Gb = {b1, b2 , ...bM } and the shock
     state space Gs = {s1, s2 , ...sN } and choose an interpolation scheme for evaluating the func-
     tions outside the grid of bonds. We use 300 points in the grid for bonds and interpolate the
     functions using a piecewise linear approximation.
  2. Guess policy functions B, Q, C, ν, µ at time K ∀ b ∈ Gb and ∀ z ∈ Gz . We use as initial
     policies the policies of the decentralized equilibrium, and we check that we obtain the same
     equilibrium when starting from alternative policies.
  3. For given C, Q, H, ν, µ solve for the value function and policy functions :

                   V (b′ , s′ ) =     max u(c − G(h)) + βEs′ |s V (b′ , s′ )                                       (J.7)
                                    c,b′ ,µ,h,ν
                         b′
                      c+    = b + zF (k, h, ν) − pν ν                                                              (J.8)
                         R
              zFh (k, h, ν) = G′ (h)                                                                               (J.9)
                                                     
                                             θµ
              zFν (k, h, ν) = pν 1 + ′                                                                           (J.10)
                                       u (c − G(h))
         ′              
         b
      µ     − θpν ν + κq    = 0                                                                                  (J.11)
         R
                b′
                   − θpν ν ≥ −κq                                                                                 (J.12)
                R

             qu′ (c − G(h)) = βEs′ |s {u′ (C(b′ , s′ ) − G′ (H(b, s)))(Q(b′ , s′ ) + z ′ Fk (1, H(b′ , s′ ), ν(b′ , s′ ))
                              +κ′ µ(b′ , s′ )Q(b′ , s′ )}                                                       (J.13)

      This recursive problem is solved using value function iteration. The value functions and
      policy functions are approximated using linear interpolation whenever the bond position is
      not in the grid. To solve the optimal choices in each state, we first assume the collateral
      constraint is not binding and use a Newton type algorithm to solve the optimization problem.
      If the collateral constraint is binding, we solve for every b′ , the combinations of c, h, ν, q, µ
      that satisfy these 6 conditions (J.8)-(J.13), with (J.13) holding with equality.
  4. Denote by σ i , i = c, q, h, ν, µ the policy functions that solve the recursive problem in step (3)
     Compute the sup distance between B, Q, C, ν, µ and σ i , i = c, q, h, ν, µ. If the sup distance is
     higher than 1.0e-6, update B, Q, C, ν, µ and solve again the recursive problem.


                                                        34
References
Bianchi, J. (2011). ‘Overborrowing and Systemic Externalities in the Business Cycle’. American
  Economic Review , vol. 101, no. 7, 3400–3426.

Bianchi, J. (2012). ‘Efficient bailouts?’ NBER Working Paper No. 18587.

Bianchi, J. and Mendoza, E. G. (2015). ‘Optimal time-consistent macroprudential policy’. Mimeo,
  Minneapolis Fed.

Coleman, W. (1990). ‘Solving the stochastic growth model by policy-function iteration’. Journal
  of Business & Economic Statistics, vol. 8, no. 1, 27–29.

Gertler, M. and Kiyotaki, N. (2010). ‘Financial intermediation and credit policy in business cycle
 analysis’. Handbook of Monetary Economics, forthcoming.

Heaton, J. and Lucas, D. (1996). ‘Evaluating the effects of incomplete markets on risk sharing
  and asset pricing’. Journal of Political Economy, vol. 104, no. 3, 443–487.

Klein, P., Krusell, P., and Rios-Rull, V. (2008). ‘Time-consistent public policy’. The Review of
  Economic Studies, vol. 75, no. 3, 789–808.

Klein, P., Quadrini, V., and Rios-Rull, V. (2007). ‘Optimal Time–consistent Taxation with Inter-
  national Mobility of Capital’. The B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics, vol. 5, no. 1.

Kydland, F. E. and Prescott, E. C. (1980). ‘Dynamic optimal taxation, rational expectations and
 optimal control’. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control , vol. 2, 79–91.

Schmitt-Grohe, S. and Uribe, M. (2003). ‘Closing small open economies’. Journal of International
  Economics, vol. 61, 163–185.
