                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               AN EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH TO MERGER EVALUATION

                                         Christopher T. Conlon
                                        Julie Holland Mortimer

                                         Working Paper 19703
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19703


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2013




We thank Dennis Carlton, Joe Farrell, Dan O'Brien, and participants at the FTC Microeconomics Conference
and 'I.O. Fest' at UC Berkeley for comments. Tom Gole, Adam Kapor, Joonwoo Park, and Sharon
Traiberman provided exceptional research assistance. Financial support for this research was generously
provided through NSF grant SES-0617896. Any remaining errors are our own. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Christopher T. Conlon and Julie Holland Mortimer. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
An Experimental Approach to Merger Evaluation
Christopher T. Conlon and Julie Holland Mortimer
NBER Working Paper No. 19703
December 2013
JEL No. L0,L4,L44

                                              ABSTRACT

The 2010 Department of Justice and Federal Trade Commission Horizontal Merger Guidelines lay
out a new standard for assessing proposed mergers in markets with differentiated products. This new
standard is based on a measure of ``upward pricing pressure,'' (UPP) and the calculation of a ``gross
upward pricing pressure index'' (GUPPI) in turn relies on a ``diversion ratio,'' which measures the
fraction of consumers of one product that switch to another product when the price of the first product
increases. One way to calculate a diversion ratio is to estimate own- and cross-price elasticities. An
alternative (and more direct) way to gain insight into diversion is to exogenously remove a product
from the market and observe the set of products to which consumers actually switch. In the past, economists
have rarely had the ability to experiment in this way, but more recently, the growth of digital and online
markets, combined with enhanced IT, has improved our ability to conduct such experiments. In this
paper, we analyze the snack food market, in which mergers and acquisitions have been especially active
in recent years. We exogenously remove six top-selling products (either singly or in pairs) from vending
machines and analyze subsequent changes in consumers' purchasing patterns, firm profits, diversion
ratios, and upward pricing pressure. Using both nonparametric analyses and structural demand estimation,
we find significant diversion to remaining products. Both diversion and the implied upward pricing
pressure differ significantly across manufacturers, and we identify cases in which the GUPPI would
imply increased regulatory scrutiny of a proposed merger.


Christopher T. Conlon
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 W. 118th St.
New York City, NY 10027
cc3264@columbia.edu

Julie Holland Mortimer
Department of Economics
Boston College
140 Commonwealth Avenue
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
julie.mortimer.2@bc.edu
1       Introduction

Since 1982, one of the primary tools in evaluating the potential anticompetitive effects of
horizontal mergers has been the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI) which measures both the
level of concentration in a particular market, as well as how a proposed merger would change
the level of concentration. The HHI relates market shares to markups when firms are engaged
in a symmetric Cournot game, but because HHI requires market shares as inputs, a practical
challenge has been defining the relevant market in terms of both geography and competitors.
The 2007 merger between Whole Foods and Wild Oats highlighted the problems with the
black-and-white distinction of market definitions. In that case, the FTC argued that the
proposed merger was essentially a merger to monopoly in the market for “premium organic
groceries,” while Whole Foods argued they faced competition from traditional grocery stores,
and thus the merger represented little change in concentration.
    In 2010, the Department of Justice (DOJ) and the Federal Trade Commission (FTC)
released a major update to the Horizontal Merger Guidelines, which shifts the focus away
from traditional concentration measures like HHI, and towards methods that better account
for product differentiation and the closeness of competition, utilizing intuition from the dif-
ferentiated products Bertrand framework. Rather than use a full structural equilibrium
simulation of post-merger prices and quantities such as in Nevo (2001), as an initial screen,
the guidelines instead hold all post-merger quantities fixed, as well as the prices of all goods
outside the merger, and consider the unilateral effects of the merger on the prices of the
merged entity’s products. This exercise produces the two key measures: Upward Pricing
Pressure (UPP) and Generalized Upward Pricing Pressure Index (GUPPI). Both of these
depend on the prices and costs of merged products, and are monotonic functions of a “Di-
version Ratio” between the products of the two merged firms. In general, one expects prices
and profit margins to be directly observed, leaving only the diversion ratio to be estimated.1
In this sense, the diversion ratio serves as a sufficient statistic to determine whether or not a
proposed merger is likely to increase prices (and be contested by the antitrust authorities).
    This sentiment is captured in the Guidelines’ definition of the diversion ratio:

             In some cases, the Agencies may seek to quantify the extent of direct compe-
        tition between a product sold by one merging firm and a second product sold by
        the other merging firm by estimating the diversion ratio from the first product to
    1
    Prices and margins may be observed by antitrust authorities, even if academic researchers do not observe
them. Under the Hart-Scott-Rodino Antitrust Improvements Act of 1976, price and margin data are provided
in pre-merger filings.


                                                     1
     the second product. The diversion ratio is the fraction of unit sales lost by the
     first product due to an increase in its price that would be diverted to the second
     product. diversion ratios between products sold by one merging firm and products
     sold by the other merging firm can be very informative for assessing unilateral
     price effects, with higher diversion ratios indicating a greater likelihood of such
     effects. diversion ratios between products sold by merging firms and those sold by
     non-merging firms have at most secondary predictive value.

    There is a growing literature that examines the potential advantages and disadvantages
of the use of diversion ratios as the primary input into merger evaluation. Many of these
advantages are discussed in Farrell and Shapiro (2010), and similar to those found in the
literature on sufficient statistics (Chetty 2009). One benefit is that the diversion ratio does
not require data from all firms in an industry, but rather only those firms engaged in a
potential merger. Another benefit is that the diversion ratio need not be measured with
reference to a specific demand system, nor does it necessarily assume a particular type of
conduct within the industry. Some potential disadvantages include the fact that GUPPI and
UPP may not always correctly predict the sign of the price effect of a merger, and that these
measures may either overpredict and undepredict pricing effects; in general this will depend
on the nature of competition among non-merging firms, and whether prices are strategic
substitutes or strategic complements. Cheung (2011) provides empirical evidence comparing
UPP with econometric merger simulation and finds evidence of both type I and type II
errors. There is a growing literature that examines the theoretical conditions under which
the predictions of UPP and GUPPI accurately predict merger effects, including Carlton
(2010), Schmalensee (2009), Willig (2011).
    A limitation of the UPP/diversion approach is that it ignores how mergers change the
incentives of non-merging firms, as well as the equilibrium quantities. This has led some
to consider more complicated (and accurate) alternatives based on pass-through rates (i.e.,
Jaffe and Weyl (Forthcoming)), with recent empirical work by Miller, Remer, Ryan, and
Sheu (2012). This paper remains silent on whether or not Diversion, UPP, and GUPPI
accurately capture the price effects of mergers, but instead focuses on how the diversion ratio
might be measured by empirical researchers and antitrust practitioners. Farrell and Shapiro
(2010) suggest that firms themselves track diversion in their normal course of business,
Reynolds and Walters (2008) examine the use of consumer surveys in the UK. Alternatively,
diversion could be measured as a prediction of a parametric demand estimation exercise,
and Hausman (2010) argues this is the only acceptable method of measuring diversion. We

                                              2
explore an experimentally motivated identification argument for diversion, and then design
and conduct a series of field experiments.
    Diversion measures the fraction of consumers who switch from product 1 to product 2 as
product 1 becomes less attractive (often by raising its price). While it would be impossible
(or at least a very bad idea) to randomize whether or not mergers take place, we show that
an unintended benefit of the ceteris parabis approach embedded in the diversion ratio is
that it lends itself to experimental sources of identification. It is relatively straightforward
to consider an experiment that increases the price of a single good and measures sales to
substitute goods. Another option would be to eliminate product 1 from the choice set and
measure substitution directly. By narrowing the focus to the diversion ratio, rather than a
full merger simulation, it is now possible to employ a set of tools that have become common
in the economics literature on field experiments and treatment effects.
    In this paper we design an experiment to measure diversion. However, even though exper-
imental approaches to identification allow treating the diversion ratio as a “treatment effect”
of an experiment, we must be careful in considering which treatment effect our experiment
measures. We show that the measure of diversion required in UPP analysis represents a
marginal treatment effect (MTE), but many experimental designs (including ours) measure
an average treatment effect (ATE). We derive an expression for the variance of the diversion
ratio, and show that a tradeoff exists between bias and efficiency. For small price increases,
an assumption of constant diversion may be reasonable, but the small changes induced in
the sales of product 1 may result in quite noisy estimates of diversion. Large changes in
p1 imply a more efficient estimate of diversion, but introduce the possibility for bias if the
diversion ratio is not constant. We also derive expressions for diversion under several para-
metric models of demand, and show how diversion varies over a range of price increases.
For example, we show that both the linear demand model and a ‘plain vanilla’ logit model
exhibit constant diversion (treatment effects) for any price increase.
    While removing products from consumers’ choice sets (or changing prices) may be difficult
to do on a national scale, one might be able to measure diversion accurately using smaller,
more targeted experiments. In fact, many large retailers such as Target and Wal-Mart
frequently engage in experimentation, and online retailers such as Amazon.com and Ebay
have automated platforms in place for “A/B-testing.” As information technology continues
to improve in retail markets, and as firms become more comfortable with experimentation,
one could imagine antitrust authorities asking parties to a proposed merger to submit to an
experiment executed by an independent third party. One could even imagine both parties


                                               3
entering into an ex ante binding agreement that mapped experimental outcomes into a
decision on the proposed merger.
    An additional challenge in using experiments to measure diversion is that in many retail
settings, the overall level of sales is highly variable. In supermarket scanner data, for ex-
ample, it is not uncommon for category-level sales to vary 30% or more from week to week,
while shares of individual products may be quite small (< 5%). This requires either that
experiments consider extremely large treatment and control groups, or that adjustments are
made for overall heterogeneity. We develop some straightforward adjustments for overall
heterogeneity in the context of our experiment.
    Our paper considers several hypothetical mergers within the single-serving snack foods
industry, and demonstrates how to design and conduct experiments to measure the diver-
sion ratio. We measure diversion by exogenously removing one or two top-selling products
from each of three leading manufacturers of snack food products, and observing subsequent
substitution patterns. We use a set of sixty vending machine in secure office sites as our
experimental “laboratory” for the product removals. We then compare our estimated ex-
perimental diversion ratios to those found using structural econometric models, such as a
random-coefficients logit model, and a nested logit model. We document cases where these
different approaches agree, and where they disagree, and analyze what the likely sources
of disagreement are. In general we show that while all approaches generate qualitatively
similar predictions, the parametric models tend to under-predict substitution to the very
closest substitute, and over-predict substitution to non-substitute products compared to the
experimentally-measured treatment effects.
    The paper also contributes to a recent discussion about the role of different methods in
empirical work going back to Leamer (1983), and discussed recently by Heckman (2010),
Leamer (2010), Keane (2010), Sims (2010), Nevo and Whinston (2010), Stock (2010), and
Einav and Levin (2010). A central issue in this debate is what role experimental or quasi-
experimental methods should play in empirical economic analyses in contrast to structural
methods. Angrist and Pischke (2010) complain about the general lack of experimental or
quasi-experimental variation in many IO papers. Nevo and Whinston (2010)’s response high-
lights that most important IO questions, such as prospective merger analysis and counter-
factual welfare calculations, are not concerned with measuring treatment effects and do not
lend themselves to experimental or quasi-experimental identification strategies. Of course,
as screening of potential mergers shifts towards diversion-based measures, this may open the
door towards more experimentally-motivated identification strategies.


                                             4
    The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 lays out a theoretical framework, section 3
describes the snack foods industry, our data, and our experimental design. We describe our
calculation of the treatment effect under various models in section 4, and present the results
of the analyses in section 5. Section 6 concludes.


2    Theoretical Framework

The first part of this section is purely expositional and does not introduce new results beyond
those presented in Farrell and Shapiro (2010) and closely follows Cheung (2011).
   For simplicity, consider a single market composed of f = 1, . . . , F multi-product firms
and j = 1, . . . , J products, where firm f sets the prices of products in set Jf to maximize
profits:
                                        X
                               πf =          (pj − cj )sj (p) − Cj
                                      j∈Jf


Under the assumption of constant marginal costs cj the FOC for firm f becomes

                                        X                   ∂sk (p)
                             sj (p) +          (pk − ck )           =0
                                        j∈Jf
                                                             ∂pj

Let the superscripts (0) and (1) denote pre- and post-merger quantities respectively. Consider
the pre- and post-merger FOC of a single-product firm who owns product j and is acquiring
product k:

                                                                  (0)    ∂sj (p(0) )
                                                   sj (p(0) ) + (pj − cj )           = 0
                                                                            ∂pj
                           (1)                  ∂sj (p(1) )     (1)      ∂sk (p(1) )
            sj (p(1) ) + (pj − (1 − ej ) · cj )             + (pk − ck )             = 0
                                                   ∂pj                     ∂pj


                                                                 (1)     (0)
Then U P Pj represents the change in the price of j : pj − pj that comes about from the
difference in the two FOCs, where all other quantities are held fixed at the pre-merger values
                        (1)  (0)
(i.e.: p(1) = p(0) and pk = pk ) and the merger results in cost savings ej . That is:




                                                     5
                                                                 −1
                                                   ∂sj (p(0) )         ∂sk (p(0) )
                                               
                              (0)
                 U P Pj =   (pk     − ck ) ·                         ·             −ej · cj   (1)
                                                      ∂pj                ∂pj
                                               |                  {z             }
                                                               Djk (p(0) )


Here U P Pj measures how the merger affects the opportunity cost of selling an extra unit
of j traded off against the marginal cost efficiency. Notice that now the firm internalizes
the effect that some fraction of sales of j would have become sales of k. The key input
into merger analysis is the quantity Djk (p(0) ) or the diversion ratio at the pre-merger prices
(and quantities). In words, the diversion ratio measures the fraction of consumers who
switch from j to k under pre-merger prices p(0) when the price of j is increased just enough
for a single consumer to cease purchasing j. An alternative to UPP that does not require
taking a stance on the marginal cost efficiency e is the Gross Upward Pricing Pressure Index
(GUPPI). GUPPI takes the form:

                                                     (0)
                                                    p k − ck
                              GU P P Ij =               (0)
                                                                  · Djk (p(0) )               (2)
                                                       pj

    The other basic extension we want to consider is when the owner of firm j merges with
a firm that controls not only product k, but also product l. In the case where k and l have
the same margins pk − ck = pl − cl then the impact of the three product merger on U P Pj is
identical to that in (1) with the exception that it depends on the sum of the diversion ratios
Djk + Djl .

2.1    Empirically Measuring Diversion

The goal of our paper is to show how the diversion ratio might be estimated experimentally.
Part of the rationale given in Farrell and Shapiro (2010) is that the diversion ratio no longer
needs to be measured with respect to a particular parametric functional form of demand,
and one way to identify Djk might be through conducting an experiment. An obvious
experiment would be to exogenously manipulate the price of product j to some random
subset of consumers and to measure how the sales of j and k respond. If we let (p(0) , p(1) )
                                                                         (0)    (1)
represent the price vectors during the control and treatment, so that pl = pl , ∀l 6= j and




                                                           6
 (1)   (0)
pj = pj + ∆pj . The diversion ratio can be computed:

                                                        R p1j                   ∂qk (pj ,p−j )
                       ∆Q     Q  (p(1)
                                       ) − Q  (p(0)
                                                    )    p0j                         ∂pj
                                                                                                 ∂pj
                          k    k            k
                D
                d jk =      =                         =   p1j
                                                                                                       (3)
                       ∆Qj    Qj (p(1) ) − Qj (p(0) )   R                       ∂qj (pj ,p−j )
                                                                                                 ∂pj
                                                                          p0j        ∂pj


First we consider the possible bias introduced by considering a larger than infinitesimal
increase in price ∆pj  0. We derive an expression by considering a second order expansion
of demand at p(0) :

                                                    ∂qk       ∂ 2 qk
                     qk (p + ∆pj ) ≈ qk (p) +           ∆pj +        (∆pj )2 + O((∆pj )3 )
                                                    ∂pj       ∂p2j
             qk (p + ∆pj ) − qk (p)   ∂qk ∂ 2 qk
                                    ≈     +      ∆pj + O(∆pj )2                                        (4)
                     ∆pj              ∂pj   ∂p2j

This allows us to compute an expression for the bias in Djk :

                                                    ∂ 2 qj       ∂ 2 qk
                                              Djk   ∂p2j
                                                             +   ∂p2j
                            Bias(D jk ) ≈ −                               ∆pj                          (5)
                                 d
                                              ∂qj       ∂ 2 qj
                                              ∂pj
                                                    +   ∂p2j
                                                               ∆pj

Our expression in (5) shows that the bias of our diversion estimate depends on two things:
one is the magnitude of the price increase ∆pj , the second is the curvature of demand
∂ 2 qk
 ∂p2j
       . This suggests that bias is minimized by experimental designs that consider small price
changes. However, small changes in price may lead to noisy measures of ∆q. More formally
we assume constant diversion ∆qk ≈ Djk ∆qj and construct a measure for the variance of the
diversion ratio:
                                          
                                     ∆q k       1  2 2         2
                                                                                      
             V ar(D
                  djk )  ≈  V ar             ≈      D  σ
                                                     jk ∆qj + σ ∆qk − 2Djk ρσ    σ
                                                                              ∆qj ∆qk       (6)
                                    |∆qj |     ∆qj2

This implies a bias-variance tradeoff when estimating diversion. If our primary concern is
that the curvature of demand is steep, it suggests considering a small price increase. However,
if our primary concern is that sales are highly variable, we should consider a larger price
increase.
    Instead of viewing our experiment as a biased measure of the marginal treatment effect,
we can instead ask: “What quantity does our experimental diversion measure estimate?”




                                                7
We can derive an approximate relationship for our experimental diversion measure EDjk :
                                                       Z     p0j +∆p1
                                        1                               ∂qk ∂qj
                                ED
                                \ jk =                                          ∂pj                       (7)
                                       ∆qj                 p0j          ∂qj ∂pj
                                                                        |{z}
                                                                        Djk (p)


Thus an experiment varying the price pj measures the weighted average of diversion ratios
for different price increases, where the weights correspond to the lost sales of j at a particular
pj as a fraction of all lost sales of j.
    The experiment in our empirical example does not employ actual price changes, instead
the focal product is removed from the consumer’s choice set. This is equivalent to increasing
                                                    (0)
the price pj to the choke price where qj (pcj , p−j ) = 0. This has the advantage that it
minimizes the variance expression in (6). The other derivations in this section provide
insight into instances in which a product removal provides an accurate measure of diversion:
                                                 2
(a) when the curvature of demand is small ( ∂∂pq2k ≈ 0), (b) when the true diversion ratio is
                                                   j
constant (or nearly constant) Djk (p) = Djk , or (c) when demand for j is steepest near the
                        (0)                     (0)
               ∂qj (pj ,p−j )       ∂qj (pj +δ,p−j )
market price        ∂pj
                                         ∂pj
                                                       .
    In our example, it might seem reasonable that customers who substitute away from a
Snickers bar after a five cent price increase switch to Reese’s Peanut Butter Cup at the
same rate as after a 25 cent price increase, where the only difference is the number of overall
consumers leaving Snickers. However in a different industry, this may no longer seem as
reasonable. For example, we might expect buyers of a Toyota Prius to substitute primarily
to other cheap, fuel-efficient cars when faced with a small price increase (from the market
price of $25,000 to $25,500), but we might expect some substitution to luxury cars when
facing a larger price increase (to $50,000). If demand (in units) for the Prius falls rapidly
with a small price increase, so that residual demand (and the potential impact of further
price increases) is small, then an experiment that removes it from the choice set may provide
an accurate measure of diversion to remaining products, even though the diversion ratio
itself is not constant.
    In the Appendix we derive explicit relationships for the diversion ratio for several well
known parametric demand functions. There are two functional forms for demand that exhibit
                                                                                      2
constant diversion and are always unbiased: the first is linear demand, for which ∂∂pq2k = 0,
                                                                                                      j
                                                                                      2     ∂2q
∀j, k. The second is the IIA logit model, for which Djk =                         − ∂∂pq2k / ∂p2j .
                                                                     We derive these rela-
                                                                                        j      j
tionships, as well as expressions for diversion under other demand models in the Appendix,


                                                                 8
and show that random coefficients logit demand, and CES demands (including log-linear
demand) do not generally exhibit constant diversion.


3       Description of Data and Industry

Globally, the snack foods industry is a $300 billion a year business, composed of a number
of large, well-known firms and some of the most heavily advertised global brands. Mars
Incorporated reported over $50 billion in revenue in 2010, and represents the third largest
privately-held firm in the US. Other substantial players include Hershey, Nestle, Kraft, Kel-
logg, and the Frito-Lay division of PepsiCo. While the snack-food industry as a whole might
not appear highly concentrated, sales within product categories can be very concentrated.
For example, Frito-Lay comprises around 40% of all savory snack sales in the United States,
and reported over $13 billion in US revenues last year, but its sales outside the salty-snack
category are minimal, coming mostly through parent PepsiCo’s Quaker Oats brand and the
sales of Quaker Chewy Granola Bars.2 We report HHI’s at both the category level and for all
vending products in Table 1 from the region of the U.S. that includes our vending operator.
If the relevant market is defined at the category level, all categories are considered highly
concentrated, with HHIs in the range of roughly 4500-6300. At the overall vending machine
level, the HHI is below the critical threshold of 2500. Any evaluation of a merger in this
industry would hinge on the closeness of competition, and thus require measuring diversion.
    Over the last 25 years, the industry has been characterized by a large amount of merger
and acquisition activity, both on the level of individual brands and entire firms. For exam-
ple, the Famous Amos cookie brand has been owned by the Kellogg Company since 2001.
Between 1985 and 2001, Famous Amos cookies were owned by at least seven firms, including
the Keebler Cookie Company (acquired by Kellogg in 2001), Presidential Baking Company
(acquired by Keebler in 1998), as well as by other snack food makers and private equity firms.
Zoo Animal Crackers have a similarly complicated history owned by cracker manufacturer
Austin Quality Foods, before they too were acquired by the Keebler Cookie Co. (who in
turn was acquired by Kellogg).3
    2
      Most analysts believe Pepsi’s acquisition of Quaker Oats in 2001 was unrelated to its namesake business
but rather for Quaker Oats’ ownership of Gatorade, a close competitor in the soft drink business.
    3
      A landmark case in market definition was brought by Tastykake in attempt to block the acquisition
of Drake (the maker of Ring-Dings) by Ralston-Purina’s Hostess brand (the maker of Twinkies). That
case established the importance of geographically significant markets, as Drake’s had only 2% marketshare
nationwide but a much larger share in the Northeast (including 50% of the New York market). Tastykake
also successfully argued that the relevant market was single-serving snack cakes rather than a broad category
of snack foods involving cookies, candy bars. [Tasty Baking Co. v. Ralston Purina, Inc., 653 F. Supp. 1250


                                                     9
    Our study measures diversion through the lens of a single medium-sized retail vending
operator in the Chicago metropolitan area, MarkVend. Each of MarkVend’s machines inter-
nally records price and quantity information. The data track total vends and revenues since
the last service visit on an item-level basis (but do not include time-stamps for each sale).
Any given machine can carry roughly 35 products at one time, depending on configuration.
    We observe retail and wholesale prices for each product at each service visit during our
38-month panel. There is relatively little price variation within a site, and almost no price
variation within a category (e.g., chocolate candy) at a site. This is helpful from an ex-
perimental design perspective, but can pose a challenge to demand estimation. Very few
“natural” stock-outs occur at our set of machines.4 Most changes to the set of products
available to consumers are a result of product rotations, new product introductions, and
product retirements. Over all sites and months, we observe 185 unique products. We con-
solidate some products with very low levels of sales using similar products within a category
produced by the same manufacturer, until we are left with the 73 ‘products’ that form the
basis of the rest of our exercise.5
    In addition to the data from Mark Vend, we also collect data on the characteristics of
each product online and through industry trade sources.6 For each product, we note its
manufacturer, as well as the following set of product characteristics: package size, number
of servings, and nutritional information.7

3.1     Experimental Design

We ran four experimental treatments with the help of the Mark Vend Company. These
represent a subset of a larger group of experiments we have used in other projects, such as
Conlon and Mortimer (2010) and Conlon and Mortimer (2013a). Our experiment follows 60
snack machines located in professional office buildings and serviced by MarkVend. Most of
the customers at these sites are ‘white-collar’ employees of law firms and insurance companies.
Our goal in selecting the machines was to choose machines that could be analyzed together, in
- Dist. Court, ED Pennsylvania 1987]
   4
     Mark Vend commits to a low level of stock-out events in its service contracts.
   5
     For example, we combine Milky Way Midnight with Milky Way, and Ruffles Original with Ruffles Sour
Cream and Cheddar.
   6
     For consolidated products, we collect data on product characteristics at the disaggregated level. The
characteristics of the consolidated product are computed as the weighted average of the characteristics of
the component products, using vends to weight. In many cases, the observable characteristics are identical.
   7
     Nutritional information includes weight, calories, fat calories, sodium, fiber, sugars, protein, carbohy-
drates, and cholesterol.



                                                     10
order to be able to run each experiment over a shorter period of time across more machines.8
These machines were also located on routes that were staffed by experienced drivers, which
maximized the chance that the experiment would be successfully implemented. The 60
machines used for each experiment were distributed across five of Mark Vend’s clients, which
had between 3 and 21 machines each. The largest client had two sets of floors serviced on
different days, and we divided this client into two sites. Generally, each site is spread across
multiple floors in a single high-rise office building, with machines located on each floor.
    For each treatment, we removed a product from all machines at a client site for a period
of 2.5 to 3 weeks. We conducted eight treatments, four of which are analyzed here. In two
of the four treatments we simultaneously removed the two best-selling products from either
(a) chocolate maker Mars Incorporated (Snickers and Peanut M&Ms), or (b) salty-snack
producer PepsiCo (Doritos Nacho Cheese and Cheetos Crunchy). For the third and fourth
treatments we individually removed two products owned by Kellogg’s: Famous Amos Choco-
late Chip Cookies, and Zoo Animal Crackers. We chose to run these last two treatments
separately in part because Animal Crackers are difficult to categorize, and close substitutes
are less obvious.9
    Whenever a product was experimentally stocked-out, poster-card announcements were
placed at the front of the empty product column. The announcements read “This product is
temporarily unavailable. We apologize for any inconvenience.” The purpose of the card was
two-fold: first, we wanted to avoid dynamic effects on sales as much as possible, and second,
the firm wanted to minimize the number of phone calls received in response to the stock-out
events. The dates of the interventions range from June 2007 to September 2008, with all
removals run during the months of May - October. We collected data for all machines for
just over three years, from January of 2006 until February of 2009. During each 2-3 week
experimental period, most machines receive service visits about three times. However, the
length of service visits varies across machines, with some machines visited more frequently
than others.
    The cost of the experiment consisted primarily of driver costs. Drivers had to spend
extra time removing and reintroducing products to machines, and the driver dispatcher had
to spend time instructing the drivers, tracking the dates of each experiment, and reviewing
   8
     Many high-volume machines are located in public areas (e.g., museums or hospitals), and have demand
(and populations) that varies enormously from one day to the next, so we did not use machines of this
nature. In contrast, the work-force populations at our experimental sites are relatively homogenous.
   9
     The remaining four treatments involved the individual removal of each individual chocolate or salty-snack
product from our first two treatments. These are analyzed in Conlon and Mortimer (2010) and Conlon and
Mortimer (2013a), but are less relevant for this paper.


                                                     11
the data as they were collected. Drivers are generally paid a small commission on the
sales on their routes, so if sales levels fell dramatically as a result of the experiments, their
commissions could be affected. Tracking commissions and extra minutes on each route for
each driver would have been prohibitively expensive to do, and so drivers were provided with
$25 gift cards for gasoline during each week in which a product was removed on their route
to compensate them for the extra time and the potential for lower commissions.
    Our experiment differs somewhat from an ideal experiment. Ideally, we would be able to
randomize the choice set on an individual level, though technologically that is difficult in both
vending and traditional brick and mortar contexts. In contrast, online retailers are capable
of showing consumers different sets of products and prices simultaneously. This leaves our
design susceptible to contamination if for example, Kraft runs a large advertising campaign
for Planters Peanuts that corresponds to the timing of one of our experiments. Additionally,
because we remove all of the products at an entire client site for a period of 2.5 to 3 weeks,
we lack a contemporaneous group of untreated machines. We chose this design, rather than
randomly staggering the product removals, because we (and the participating firms) were
afraid consumers might travel from floor to floor searching for stocked out products. This
design consideration prevents us from using control machines in the same building, and makes
it more difficult to capture weekly variation in sales due to unrelated factors, such as a law
firm taking a big case to trial, or accountants during quarterly reporting season.10 Despite
the imperfections of field experiments in general, these are often the kinds of experiments
run by firms in their regular course of business, and may most closely approximate the type
of experimental information that a firm may already have available at the time when a
proposed merger is initially screened.


4      Analyses of the Experimental Outcomes

The goal of our experiment is to determine how sales are diverted away from best-selling
products. In principle, this calculation is straightforward. In practice, however, there are
two challenges in implementing the experiment and interpreting the data generated by it.
The first challenge is that there is a large amount of variation in overall sales at the weekly
level independent of our product removals. This weekly variation in overall sales is common
in retail environments. We often observe week-over-week sales that vary by over 20%, with
  10
    On balance, we thought that people traveling from floor to floor was a larger concern. It also has the
additional benefit that we can aggregate over all machines at a client site, and treat the entire site as if it
were a single machine.



                                                      12
no single product having more than 4.5% market share. This can be seen in Figure 1, which
plots the overall sales of all machines from one of the sites in our sample on a weekly basis.
For example, a law firm may have a large case going to trial in a given month, and vend
levels will increase at the firm during that period. In our particular setting, many of the
treatments were run during the summer of 2007, which was a high-point in demand at these
sites, most likely due to macroeconomic conditions. In this case, using a simple control like
previous weeks’ sales, or overall average sales, could result in unreasonable treatment effects,
such as sales increasing due to product removals, or sales decreasing by more than the sales
of the removed products. This requires either adjustments to control for aggregate volatility
in demand, or an alternative design that considers a substantially larger treatment group.11
    The second challenge is that the data are recorded at the level of a service visit to a
vending machine. It is sometimes more convenient to organize observations by week, rather
than by visit, because different visits occur on different days of the week. In order to do this,
we assign sales to a uniform measure of a week, assuming that sales are distributed uniformly
among the business days in a service interval. We allow our definition of when weeks start and
end to depend on the client site and experiment because different experimental treatments
start on different days of the week.12

4.1     Computing Treatment Effects

In order to compute treatment effects, we treat all machines on all floors of a particular
office building as a single machine. We do this for two reasons, the first is that sales at the
individual machine level are quite small and can vary quite a bit over time. This would
make it hard to measure any kind of effect. The second is that we don’t want to worry about
consumers going from machine to machine searching for missing products, or additional noise
in demand created by a long meeting on a particular floor, etc. We address the problem of
aggregate volatility by choosing the set of relevant control weeks St with two restrictions born
out of consumer theory: (1) removing products cannot increase total sales, and (2) removing
products cannot reduce total sales by more than the sales of the removed products. Let qjt
denote the sales of product j in site-week t, and superscript 1 denote sales when a treated
product(s) is removed, and superscript 0 denote sales when a treated product(s) is available.
                                                            0
If Qt denotes aggregate sales during client-week t, and qjs   denotes the sales of the removed
product during control week s then these two restrictions imply that the set of control weeks
  11
     However, it is worth pointing out that our dataset already consists of nearly 3 million individual pur-
chases, and likely mimics the nature and scale of experiments run by firms in their natural course of business.
  12
     At some site-experiment pairs, weeks run Tuesday to Monday, while others run Thursday to Wednesday.

                                                      13
is given by:

                                                                  0
                                    {s : s 6= t, Q0s − Q1t ∈ [0, qjs ]}                                     (8)

Notice that this is the same as placing a restriction on diversion from the removed product
j to all other products, which is:
                                         X
                                                 Djk ∈ [0, 100%]                                            (9)
                                          k6=j


The problem with a direct implementation of (8) is that weeks with high sales of the focal
           0
product qjs   are more likely to be included in the control. This selection bias would understate
the diversion ratio. We propose a slight modification of (8) which is unbiased. We replace
 0         0        0    0
qjs with qcjs = E[qjs |Qs ]. An easy way to obtain the expectation is to run an OLS regression
    0
of qjs on Q0s . We run one regression for each client-site and report the results for one of the
client-sites in Table 2. We use our definition of control weeks s to compute the expected
control sales that correspond to treatment week t as:

                            St = {s : s 6= t, Q0s − Q1t ∈ [0, bˆ0 + bˆ1 Q0s ]}                             (10)

    In 528 of 634 machine-treatment weeks, at least one corresponding control week is found
for each treatment observation. On average we find 24 control observations per treatment
observation.13
    For each treatment week t we can compute the treatment effect and diversion ratio as:

                                 [ dif f     ∆qkt
                                 Djk     = γ                                                               (11)
                                             ∆qjt
                                                            (1)
                                           1           AVk             1 X 0
                                   ∆qkt = qkt −                   ·           q                            (12)
                                                       AVk
                                                            (0)       #St s∈S ks
                                                                            t



where St is the set of control weeks that corresponds to a particular treatment week t.
                (1)
             AV
Ignoring the k(0) term, this is just the difference between sales during the treatment weeks
             AVk
and average sales during the corresponding control weeks.
                       (1)
                    AV
   The role of the k(0) term is to adjust for changes in the product availability between
                    AVk
the treatment and control period. It has the effect of transforming the product availability
  13
    If we were focused on a particular merger, we could also condition St on a specific set of relevant products
in which we were interested, for example, the products of a close competitor.


                                                       14
to match the product availability during the treatment period. Thus we can consider (11)
as measuring the average treatment on the treated (ATT). The units for AVk correspond to
the aggregate sales in the weeks where k was available.
    We report a subset of the availability adjustments in Table 4 for the Mars (M&M Peanut
and Snickers) product removals.14 While this adjustment addresses changes in availability of
substitute products, it no longer gets the aggregate diversion patterns correct. Even with our
restriction on control weeks in (10), we can generate diversion ratios that are less than zero
or greater than 100% in aggregate after the availability adjustments. Therefore, we rescale
the adjusted change in vends for products with positive diversion by a constant (treatment-
specific) factor, γ, for all products so that the aggregate diversion ratio is the same before
and after our availability adjustment. This is demonstrated in Table 3.
    Table 4 shows the availability adjustments for individual products for a single treatment
(i.e., the Snickers-Peanut M&M removal). We note that the adjustments are generally quite
small, as availability is roughly the same during the treatment and control weeks. However,
in a few cases the adjustment is crucial. For example, Reese’s Peanut Butter Cups is a
close competitor to the two Mars products Snickers and Peanut M&Ms, and sees the largest
change in unadjusted sales (174.2 vs 56.5, or 118.2 units). After the adjustment, the change
in sales is considerably smaller (33.4 units instead of 118.2 units) but still quite substantial.
Similarly, Salty Other shows a negative change in sales as a result of the Mars product
removals, implying that it is a complement rather than a substitute, but after adjusting for
declining availability, the sign changes.
    Once we have constructed our restricted set of treatment weeks and the set of control
weeks that corresponds to each, inference is fairly straightforward. We aggregate to the
manufacturer level, and use (11) to construct a set of pseudo-observations, and employ a
t-test for the difference.

4.2     Regression-based Approach

An obvious approach to measuring the effects of the experiment would be to consider a
regression that regresses sales of product j in week t and machine m on a treatment indicator,
and estimate a different coefficient for each product. This would not address the primary
challenge that aggregate sales vary dramatically at the weekly level. Week-specific (or week-
client-specific) fixed effects both explain little of the variation at the machine-week level and
  14
    The full set of adjustments for all product and all experiments are available from the authors upon
request.


                                                  15
have the problem that they are collinear with the treatment. To address this problem we
instead use manufacturer-specific marketshares rather than sales as our dependent variable:15

                                  qf mt
                        sf mt ≡         = αf m + βf × treatmentmt + εf mt                              (13)
                                  Mmt

This requires a choice of the market size Mmt . One option would be to use the sales of all
products Qmt , but that has the problem that it would not accurately capture substitution to
the outside good. Instead, we let Mmt = Mm be the maximum weekly sales for that particular
machine.16 This specification addresses the cross-machine variation in tastes for the products
of different manufacturers. Though we do not include them in our primary specification, we
could also include additional regressors for the availability of other competing products.
    Under this specification, we construct the expected change in sales of k, and the corre-
sponding diversion ratio implied by the experiment:

                                           E[∆qf ]    cf · Mf
                                                      β
                                     D
                                     djf =         =γ                                                  (14)
                                           E[∆qj ]    βbj · Mj

where Mj , and Mf denote the availability (in market size terms) of the removed product(s),
and the substitute manufacturer, respectively. Appropriate choices of Mj , and Mf allow
us to compute the average treatment on the treated (ATT), average treatment on control
(ATC), or the average treatment effect (ATE). If all products were always available, all three
of these quantities would always be the same. In practice these are easy to compute as they
involve predicting the change in quantity for each observation and then aggregating across
the appropriate set of weeks.
    As an example, consider the case of single product firms where the focal product is always
available (we consider the focal product to be “available” but treated during our treatment
period). If the product was available for 90% of treatment consumers, and 10% of control
consumers we would adjust the ratio of βb coefficients by 0.9 and 0.1 respectively to compute
the ATT and ATC. If the sample were evenly split between treatment and control, then the
ATE would imply rescaling diversion by 0.5.
    Just like in the differences case, this approach gets the relative diversion ratios correct,
  15
     As margins do not vary at the manufacturer-category level, and U P P depends only on manufacturer-level
                                                                                               P
diversion, we aggregate sales to the level of a manufacturer f rather than a product j, qf mt = j∈JF qjmt .
  16
     As a robustness test we’ve experimented with different specifications that also use common shocks
across weeks. Other than some obvious holiday weeks, the weekly variation tends to be uncorrelated across
machines. About 65% of the variation in weekly machine sales is explained by the machine, and only about
10% is explained by the week.


                                                    16
but once we aggregate across weeks with different availability, it does not get the aggregate
scale of diversion ratios correct. We address this by rescaling where γ is chosen to match
the aggregate diversion (for all manufacturers with positive diversion) from our unadjusted
differences.

4.3     Parametric Specifications

In addition to computing treatment effects, we also specify two parametric models of de-
mand: nested logit and random-coefficients logit, which are estimated from the full dataset
(including weeks of observational data that do not meet any of our control criteria).
    We consider a model of utility where consumer i receives utility from choosing product
j in market t of:

                                     uijt = δj + ξt + µijt + εijt                                     (15)

The parameter δj is a product-specific intercept that captures the mean utility of product
j, ξt captures market level heterogeneity in demand, and µijt captures individual-specific
correlation in tastes for products.
    In the case where (µijt + εijt ) is distributed generalized extreme value, the error terms
allow for correlation among products within a pre-specified group, but otherwise assume no
correlation. This produces the well-known nested-logit model of McFadden (1978). In this
model consumers first choose a product category l composed of products gl , and then choose
a specific product j within that group. The resulting choice probability for product j in
market t is given by the closed-form expression:

                                          e(dj +ξt )/λl ( k∈gl ∩at e(δk +ξt )/λl )λl −1
                                                         P
                        pjt (δ, λ, at ) =      P P                 (δk +ξt )/λl )λl
                                                                                                      (16)
                                                   ∀l (  k∈gl ∩at e


where the parameter λl governs within-group correlation, and at is the set of available prod-
ucts in market t.17
   The random-coefficients logit allows for correlation in tastes across observed product char-
acteristics. This correlation in tastes is captured by allowing the term µijt to be distributed
  17
    Note that this is not the IV regression/‘within-group share’ presentation of the nested-logit model in
Berry (1994), in which σ provides a measure of the correlation of choices within a nest. Roughly speaking,
in the notation used here, λ = 1 corresponds to the plain logit, and (1 − λ) provides a measure of the
‘correlation’ of choices within a nest (as in McFadden (1978)). The parameter λ is sometimes referred to as
the ‘dissimiliarity parameter.’



                                                      17
according to f (µijt |θ). A common specification is to allow consumers to have independent
                                                                            P
normally distributed tastes for product characteristics, so that µijt =        l σl νilt xjl where
νilt ∼ N (0, 1) and σl represents the standard deviation of the heterogeneous taste for prod-
uct characteristic xjl . The resulting choice probabilities are a mixture over the logit choice
probabilities for many different values of µijt , shown here:
                                                                P
                                                   edj +ξt + l σl νilt xjl
                                           Z
                       pjt (δ, θ, at ) =          P                 P           f (ν)d ν                (17)
                                               1 + k∈at edk +ξt + l σl νilt xkl


Estimation then proceeds by full information maximum likelihood (FIML) in the case of
nested logit or maximum simulated likelihood (MSL) in the case of the random coefficients.
The log-likelihood is:
                                                   X
                             θbM LE = arg max            qj,t log(pjt (δ, θ; at ))
                                               θ
                                                   j,t


In both the nested-logit and random-coefficient models we include an additional ξt for either
a machine-visit pair (15,256 fixed effects), or a choice set (2,710 fixed effects). For the
nested-logit model, we allow for heterogeneous tastes across five major product categories
or nests: chocolate candy, non-chocolate candy, cookie, salty snack, and other.18 For the
random-coefficients specification, we allow for three random coefficients, corresponding to
consumer tastes for salt, sugar, and nut content.19
    In Table 5, we report the parameter estimates for our preferred specification of the
random-coefficients and nested-logit models. We considered a large number of alternative
models, but presented the results selected by the Bayesian Information Crtieria (BIC). All of
our estimates included 73 product-specific intercepts. In the case of the nested logit model,
this included 5 nests (Chocolate, Non-Chocolate Candy, Cookie/Pastry, SaltySnack, and
Other). For the random coefficients model, this included only three normally distributed
  18
     The vending operator defines categories in the same way. “Other” includes products such as peanuts,
fruit snacks, crackers, and granola bars.
  19
     We do not allow for a random coefficient on price because of the relative lack of price variation in the
vending machines. We also do not include random coefficients on any discrete variables (such as whether
or not a product contains chocolate). As we discuss in Conlon and Mortimer (2013b), the lack of variation
in a continuous variable (e.g., price) implies that random coefficients on categorical variables may not be
identified when product dummies are included in estimation. We did estimate a number of alternative
specifications in which we include random coefficients on other continuous variables, such as carbohydrates,
fat, or calories. In general, the additional parameters were not significantly different from zero, and they
had no appreciable effect on the results of any prediction exercises.


                                                         18
random coefficients (Salt, Sugar, and Nut Content), though we considered additional specifi-
cations including coefficients on Fat, Calories, Chocolate, Protein, Cheese, and other product
characteristics. Additionally we estimated both sets of models with both choice set fixed
demand shifters ξt and machine-visit level demand shifters. While the extra demand shifters
improved the fit, BIC preferred the smaller set of choice-set fixed effects.
    Computing the diversion ratios is a straightforward prediction from the model:

                                            pk (at \ j, ξt , θ̂) − pk (at , ξt , θ̂)
                      D
                      d jk (at , ξt , θ̂) =
                                                       pj (at , ξt , θ̂)

The important decision is how to determine the choice set used in the counterfactual pre-
diction exercise. We use a single choice set based on the most commonly available products
during our treatment period (so as to approximate ATT). An alternative would be to consider
a representative choice set based on some other period, or to predict the change in vends
for each market observed in the data and then aggregate to obtain a choice-set weighted
diversion prediction (similar to how we construct the OLS prediction). We choose the sim-
pler representative choice set, because we believe it better approximates the approach likely
to be taken by empirical researchers. We also choose a value of ξt that corresponds to the
treatment period.

4.4    Identification and Parameter Estimates

The treatment effects approach and the parametric model rely on two different sources of
identification. Formal nonparametric identification results for random utility models such
as Berry and Haile (2010) or Fox and Gandhi (2010) often rely on variation across markets
in continuous characteristics such as price. This is unavailable in the vending setting, since
there is little to no price variation. Instead, the parametric models are identified through
discrete changes in the choice set, primarily through product rotations. The intuition is that
Snickers and Milky Way may look similar in terms of observable characteristics (a Snickers
is essentially a Milky Way with peanuts), but have different marketshares. In fact, Snickers
often outsells Milky Way 3:1 or better, which leads us to conclude that Snickers offers higher
mean utility to consumers. At the same time, sales may respond differently to the availability
of a third product. For example, if Planters Peanuts is introduced to the choice set, and
it reduces sales of Snickers relatively more than Milky Way, we might conclude there are
heterogeneous preferences for peanuts. One challenge of this approach, is that while we
might observe many differences in relative substitution patterns across products, we must

                                                      19
in essence project them onto a lower dimensional basis of random coefficients. Thus if our
model did not include a random parameter for peanuts, we would have to explain those
tastes with something else, like “salt.”
    In the absence of experimental variation, many of the best-selling products are essentially
always stocked by the retailer. Therefore we learn about the closeness of competition between
popular products by observing how market shares respond to the availability of a third
(often much less popular) product. The identifying variation comes through the fact that
we observe 2,710 different choice sets in 15,256 service visits. If, for example, all machines
stocked exactly the same set of products every week, we would only have a single choice set,
and would struggle to identify any nonlinear parameters.20
    While the product rotations are crucial to the identification of the parametric models,
they are somewhat of a nuisance to the identification of the treatment effects model. Product
rotations introduce additional heterogeneity for which we must control, or we risk introducing
bias into the estimated treatment effect. The ideal identification setting for the treatment
effect would be a case with no non-experimental variation in either prices or the set of
available products. Thus the treatment effect estimator should perform well precisely when
the parametric demand model may be poorly identified, and vice versa. This creates an
inherent problem in any setting where we want to evaluate the relative performance of the
two approaches. In contrast, both the treatment effects approach and the discrete choice
models benefit from experimental variation in the choice set.

5       Results

Our primary goal has been both to show how to measure diversion ratios experimentally, but
also to understand how those experimentally measured diversion ratios compare to diversion
ratios obtained from common parametric models of demand.
    Table 6 shows the diversion computed for the top 5 substitutes under the treatment effects
approach and the diversion computed under random coefficients, and nested logit models for
each experiment. There is a general pattern that emerges. The logit-type models and the
treatment effects approach predict a similar order for substitutes (i.e.: the best substitute,
the second best substitute, and so on). Also, they tend to predict similar diversion ratios for
the third, fourth and fifth best substitute. For example in the Snickers and Peanut M&M
removal, the treatment effects approach and the random coefficients logit approach predict
around 4% diversion to Reese’s Peanut Butter Cups and M&M Milk Chocolate. However,
 20
      Typically this problem could be alleviated by seeing variation in prices within a product over time.

                                                      20
there tends to be a large discrepancy for diversion to the best-substitute product in every
removal. The treatment effect predicts nearly 14.2% of consumers substituting to Twix,
while the random coefficients model predicts only 6.4%. This effect is large enough that it
could lead to incorrect conclusions about upward pricing pressure or a potential merger.
    It is important to point out that our results should not be interpreted as showing that
the treatment effects approach is always preferred to the parametric demand estimation
approach. In the Famous Amos Cookie removal, the treatment effect shows that 20.7%
of consumers switch from Famous Amos Chocolate Chip Cookies to Sun Chips, while the
random coefficient model predicts diversion < 1% (the products are quite dissimilar). While
this effect appears large in the raw data, it represents an effect that most industry experts
would not likely believe. Moreover, the effect is not precisely estimated as indicated by table
7. In part, this may be because we have imperfectly adjusted for the increased availability of
Sun Chips, or because we have failed to adjust for some close competitor of Sun Chips, or that
overall sales levels of Sun Chips are highly variable.21 While the parametric demand models
observe the reduced availability of Smartfood Popcorn and use that to improve its estimates
of parameters, the treatment effects model is now faced with confounding variation.
    Table 7 shows diversion ratios aggregated to the level of a manufacturer. The results
exhibit the same pattern as before, in which the treatment effects predict much more substi-
tution to the closest substitutes than the random coefficients and nested logit models do. For
merger analysis, correctly predicting diversion to one or two closest substitutes might be the
most important feature of a model or identification strategy, because those are the potential
mergers about which we should be most concerned. The other potential anomaly is that
after adjusting for product availability, the aggregate diversion measures from the paired
differences approach can be unrealistically high (> 240%). In the columns labeled “Adj.
Differences” and “Adj. OLS,” we re-scale all of the diversion estimates so that the aggregate
diversion (among manufacturers with positive diversion) matches the original aggregate di-
version in the paired (but unadjusted for availability) data. Much of the differences between
the parametric models and the treatment effects approach can be attributed to substitution
to the outside good. The parametric models predict that consumers will be diverted to some
other product at a rate of approximately 30-45%, while the paired and OLS approaches
predict that consumers will be diverted at a rate of 65-75%. All of the models broadly
  21
    Imagine that our treatment weeks at our largest location are correlated with reduced availability of
Smartfood Popcorn for reasons unrelated to our removal, such as supply problems at the warehouse. (It
actually is!) In that case we could think about the actual treatment as removing Famous Amos Cookies and
Smartfood Popcorn simultaneously.



                                                  21
predict the same relative magnitudes, but the parametric models predict smaller aggregate
magnitudes. A different parametrization of the outside share might lead to more similar
estimates.
    In table 8 we compute the gross upward pricing pressure index (GUPPI), which is
GU P P Ij = Djk pkp−c j
                        k
                          . We exploit the fact that we observe the wholesale contracts be-
tween the retailer and the manufacturer, and let the wholesale prices serve as pj , and pk
in the above expression. We assume that all products have a manufacturing cost of $0.15,
and exploit the fact that within manufacturer-category there is no wholesale price variation:
(Snickers and 3 Musketeers have the same wholesale price even though one is much more
popular than the other). Under a symmetry assumption (not true in our example) the criti-
cal value for GUPPI is generally 10%, because it corresponds to a ‘small but significant and
non-transitory price increase,’ or SSNIP, of 5% under the hypothetical monopolist test. If we
apply the same 10% threshold to our results we find that a Mars-Hershey merger would likely
attract further scrutiny, but not a Mars-Nestle merger (at least not for the wholesale prices
of Snickers and Peanut M&Ms). Meanwhile, the acquisition of the Mars or Pepsi product
portfolio might place upward pricing pressure on Zoo Animal Crackers, as they exhibit large
point estimates for GUPPI under the treatment effects approach, though diversion is not
statistically significant from zero, and the effects are imprecise. Similarly, the Famous Amos
cookies show a large but imprecise point estimate for the acquisition of the Pepsi portfolio
(driven by an inexplicable rise in the sales of Sun Chips).


6     Conclusion

Under the revised 2010 Horizontal Merger Guidelines, the focus on the diversion ratio and the
“single product merger simulation” approach in UPP and GUPPI where all other prices and
quantities are held fixed, imply that the diversion ratio serves as a single sufficient statistic
for at least the initial screening stage of merger evaluation. We show that the diversion ratio
has the attractive empirical property that it can be estimated via experimental or quasi-
experimental techniques in a relatively straightforward manner. Our hope is that this makes
a well-developed set of tools available both to researchers in Industrial Organization, and
also to antitrust practitioners.
    At the same time, we are quick to point out that while the diversion ratio can be ob-
tained experimentally, it is not trivial, and researchers should think carefully about which
treatment effect their experiment (or quasi-experiment) is actually identifying; as well as
what identifying assumptions required for estimating the diversion ratio implicitly assume

                                               22
about the structure of demand. An important characteristic of many retail settings is that
even category level sales are much more variable than most product level market shares.
We partially alleviate this problem by employing full removal of the product, rather than
marginal price increases, and derive conditions under which this may provide a reasonable
approximation to the marginal diversion ratio. Even under our design, the overall variability
in the sales levels can make diversion ratios difficult to measure. If firms submitted to sim-
ilar experiments as part of a merger review process, or made previous experimental results
available, they would likely focus on a narrower set of potential products than we considered
in our setting.




                                             23
References
Angrist, J., and J.-S. Pischke (2010): “The Credibility Revolution in Empirical Eco-
 nomics: How Better Research Design is Taking the Con out of Econometrics,” The Journal
 of Economic Perspectives, 24(2), 3–30.

Berry, S. (1994): “Estimating discrete-choice models of product differentiation,” RAND
 Journal of Economics, 25(2), 242–261.

Berry, S., and P. Haile (2010): “Nonparametric Identification of Multinomial Choice
 Demand Models with Heterogeneous Consumers,” Working Paper.

Carlton, D. W. (2010): “Revising the Horizontal Merger Guidelines,” Journal of Com-
 petition Law and Economics, 6(3), 619–652.

Chetty, R. (2009): “Sufficient Statistics for Welfare Analysis: A Bridge Between Structural
 and Reduced-Form Methods,” Annual Review of Economics, 1(1), 451–488.

Cheung, L. (2011): “The Upward Pricing Pressure Test for Merger Analysis: An Empirical
 Examination,” Working Paper.

Conlon, C., and J. H. Mortimer (2010): “Effects of Product Availability: Experimental
 Evidence,” NBER Working Paper 16506.

        (2013a): “All Units Discount: Experimental Evidence from the Vending Industry,”
  Working Paper.

       (2013b): “Demand Estimation Under Incomplete Product Availability,” American
  Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 5(4), 1–30.

Einav, L., and J. Levin (2010): “Empirical Industrial Organization: A Progress Report,”
  The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 24(2), 145–162.

Farrell, J., and C. Shapiro (2010): “Antitrust Evaluation of Horizontal Mergers: An
  Economic Alternative to Market Definition,” The B.E. Journal of Theoretical Economics,
  10(1), 1–41.

Fox, J., and A. Gandhi (2010): “Nonparametric Identification and Estimation of Random
  Coefficients in Nonlinear Economic Models,” Working Paper.

Hausman, J. A. (2010): “2010 Merger Guidelines: Empirical Analysis,” Working Paper.

Heckman, J. J. (2010): “Building Bridges Between Structural and Program Evaluation
 Approaches to Evaluating Policy,” Journal of Economic Literature, 48(2), 356–398.

Jaffe, S., and E. G. Weyl (Forthcoming): “The First Order Approach to Merger Anal-
  ysis,” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics.


                                            24
Keane, M. (2010): “A Structural Perspective on the Experimentalist School,” The Journal
 of Economic Perspectives, 24(2), 47–58.

Leamer, E. (1983): “Let’s Take the Con Out of Econometrics,” American Economic Re-
  view, 75(3), 308–313.

          (2010): “Tantalus on the Road to Asymptopia,” The Journal of Economic Per-
  spectives, 24(2), 31–46.

McFadden, D. (1978): “Modelling the Choice of Residential Location,” in Spatial Inter-
 action Theory and Planning Models, ed. by A. Karlqvist, L. Lundsqvist, F. Snickars, and
 J. Weibull. North-Holland.

Miller, N. H., M. Remer, C. Ryan, and G. Sheu (2012): “Approximating the Price
 Effects of Mergers:Numerical Evidence and an Empirical Application,” Working Paper.

Nevo, A. (2001): “Measuring Market Power in the Ready-to-Eat Cereal Industry,” Econo-
 metrica, 69, 307–342.

Nevo, A., and M. Whinston (2010): “Taking the Dogma out of Econometrics: Structural
 Modeling and Credible Inference,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 24(2), 69–82.

Reynolds, G., and C. Walters (2008): “The use of customer surveys for market defini-
 tion and the competitive assessment of horizontal mergers,” Journal of Competition Law
 and Economics, 4(2), 411–431.

Schmalensee, R. (2009): “Should New Merger Guidelines Give UPP Market Definition?,”
  Antitrust Chronicle, 12, 1.

Sims, C. (2010): “But Economics Is Not an Experimental Science,” The Journal of Eco-
  nomic Perspectives, 24(2), 59–68.

Stock, J. (2010): “The Other Transformation in Econometric Practice: Robust Tools for
  Inference,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 24(2), 83–94.

Willig, R. (2011): “Unilateral Competitive Effects of Mergers: Upward Pricing Pressure,
 Product Quality, and Other Extensions,” Review of Industrial Organization, 39(1-2), 19–
 38.




                                          25
           6000
           4000
   Vends
           2000
           0




                  0        50                 100                 150
                                       Week

                             Total Sales            Focal Sales



Figure 1: Total Overall Sales and Sales of Snickers and M&M Peanuts by Week




                                     26
             Table 1: Manufacturer Market Shares and HHI’s by Category and Total

              Manufacturer:                   Category:
                               Salty Snack Cookie Confection      Total
              PepsiCo                 78.82   9.00         0.00   37.81
              Mars                     0.00   0.00        58.79   25.07
              Hershey                  0.00   0.00        30.40   12.96
              Nestle                   0.00   0.00        10.81    4.61
              Kellogg’s                7.75  76.94         0.00   11.78
              Nabisco                  0.00  14.06         0.00    1.49
              General Mills            5.29   0.00         0.00    2.47
              Snyder’s                 1.47   0.00         0.00    0.69
              ConAgra                  1.42   0.00         0.00    0.67
              TGIFriday                5.25   0.00         0.00    2.46
              Total                 100.00 100.00        100.00 100.00
              HHI                  6332.02 6198.67      4497.54 2401.41

Source:     IRM Brandshare FY 2006 and Frito-Lay Direct Sales For
Vending   Machines    Data,    Heartland     Region,     50   best-selling products.
(http://www.vending.com/Vending Affiliates/Pepsico/Heartland Sales Data)




                    Focal Sales                        β0   βtotalsales      R2
                    Zoo Animal Cracker              6.424        0.039    0.503
                    Famous Amos Cookie              6.937        0.025    0.395
                    Doritos and Cheetos           -16.859        0.078    0.628
                    Snickers and Peanut M&Ms       -1.381        0.127    0.704


        Table 2: Selection of Control Weeks: Regression for Focal Sales at Site 93



           Experiment                 Unadjusted     Adjusted     Adjusted (> 0)      γ
           Zoo Animal Cracker              77.35        84.58             246.11   0.31
           Famous Amos Cookie              65.30      -178.83             181.98   0.36
           Cheetos and Doritos             66.22        -7.57             101.62   0.65
           Snickers and Peanut M&M         66.47        17.69              79.00   0.84


                      Table 3: Adjustment for Aggregate Diversion



                                             27
Manufacturer   Product                      V ends0   V ends1   (% Avail0 )   (% Avail1 )   Adj Control   Difference
Hershey        Payday                           1.2       6.6          1.3           2.5            2.3          4.3
Hershey        Reeses Peanut Butter Cups       56.5     174.7           29         72.5           141.3         33.4
Hershey        Twizzlers                       24.3      57.3        17.7             37           50.7          6.6
Hershey        Choc Herhsey (Con)              37.2      65.9        29.9          35.5            44.2         21.7
Kellogg        Brown Sug Pop-Tarts              5.9       5.9          4.6           3.7            4.7          1.2
Kellogg        Strwbry Pop-Tarts              127.6     139.6        77.7          78.7           129.2         10.4
Kellogg        Cheez-It Original SS             190     206.2        84.6          82.3           184.8         21.4
Kellogg        Choc Chip Famous Amos          189.7     209.5        99.9           100           189.9         19.6
Kellogg        Rice Krispies Treats            26.1      82.7        30.7          60.8            51.7           31
Kraft          Ritz Bits Chs Vend              21.9      27.1           37         45.3            26.8          0.3
Kraft          100 Cal Oreo Thin Crisps        32.4      46.9        25.3          33.5            42.8          4.1
Mars           M&M Milk Chocolate             113.2     144.6           61         57.6           106.7         37.9
Mars           Milky Way                         17      64.3        17.9          26.9            25.5         38.8
Mars           Twix Caramel                   182.7     301.4        78.6             80            186        115.4
Mars           Nonchoc Mars (Con)              33.3      44.5        26.1          25.2            32.2         12.3
Nestle         Butterfinger                    41.3      61.8        31.3          31.8            41.9         19.9
Nestle         Raisinets                      149.2     199.3        80.8          83.1           153.5         45.8
Pepsi          Frito LSS                      160.7     187.1        75.6          78.9           167.8         19.3
Pepsi          Grandmas Choc Chip              78.9      83.7        55.3             52           74.2          9.5
Pepsi          Lays Potato Chips 1oz SS       117.8     181.2        53.5          78.8           173.5          7.7
Pepsi          Baked Chips (Con)              208.1       228        91.7          97.5           221.3          6.7
Snyders        Snyders (Con)                  367.6     418.6        82.6          87.2           387.9         30.7
Sherwood       Ruger Wafer (Con)              116.6     151.9        63.7          80.9           148.1          3.8
Kar’s Nuts     Kar Sweet&Salty Mix 2oz        111.2     134.9        61.5          66.9           121.1         13.8
Misc           Rasbry Knotts                   63.7      72.4        82.5          77.9            60.1         12.3
Misc           Farleys Mixed Fruit Snacks      66.6      78.8        57.3          67.4            78.3          0.5
Misc           Other Pastry (Con)               0.5      10.5          1.6             5            1.5            9
Misc           Salty Other (Con)               35.7      29.1        20.4          15.4            27.1            2

           Table 4: Adjustments of Control Weeks: Mars (Snickers, Peanut M&M’s) Experiment
                  Table 5: Parametric Model Estimates

                       Random Coefficients          Nested Logit
                       Visit FE Choice FE        Visit FE Choice FE
σSalt                     0.506        0.458
                          [.006]       [.010]
σSugar                    0.673        0.645
                          [.005]       [.012]
σP eanut                  1.263        1.640
                          [.037]       [.028]
λChocolate                                          0.828      0.810
                                                    [.003]     [.005]
λCandyN on−Choc                                     0.908      0.909
                                                    [.007]     [.009]
λCookie/P astry                                     0.845      0.866
                                                    [.004]     [.006]
λOther                                              0.883      0.894
                                                    [.005]     [.006]
λSaltySnack                                         0.720      0.696
                                                    [.003]     [.004]
# Nonlinear Params             3             3           5          5
Product FE                    73            73          73         73
# Fixed Effects ξt        15,256         2,710     15,256      2,710
Total Parameters          15,332         2,786     15,334      2,788
LL                   -4,372,750    -4,411,184 -4,372,147 -4,410,649
Total Sales            2,960,315     2,960,315  2,960,315  2,960,315
BIC                    8,973,960     8,863,881  8,972,783  8,862,840
AIC                    8,776,165     8,827,939  8,774,962  8,826,873




                                   29
Manufacturer    Product                         Adj. Diversion Estimate(RC)    Estimate(NL)
                                Zoo Animal Cracker Experiment
Mars            M&M Peanut                                11.9           1.9            1.5
Mars            M&M Milk Chocolate                         4.2           1.0            0.8
Mars            Snickers                                   7.6           1.8            1.4
Pepsi           Sun Chip LSS                               4.2           0.9            0.9
Pepsi           Rold Gold (Con)                           10.0           2.2            1.4
                                   Famous Amos Experiment
Hershey         Choc Herhsey (Con)                         6.0           8.5            0.8
Pepsi           Sun Chip LSS                              20.7           0.7            1.2
Pepsi           Rold Gold (Con)                            9.1           1.3            1.8
Planters        Planters (Con)                            10.5           0.6            1.8
Misc            Rasbry Knotts                              3.9           0.3            1.3
                                Doritos and Cheetos Experiment
Pepsi           Frito LSS                                 15.4           1.2            5.0
Pepsi           Baked Chips (Con)                          6.3           1.1            4.8
Pepsi           FritoLay (Con)                            11.1           1.4            3.7
Pepsi           Ruffles (Con)                              7.3           1.3            6.0
General Mills   Nature Valley Swt&Salty Alm                3.9           0.6            0.5
                            Snickers and Peanut M&Ms Experiment
Hershey         Reeses Peanut Butter Cups                  4.1           4.1            3.1
Mars            M&M Milk Chocolate                         4.7           4.0            3.6
Mars            Milky Way                                  4.8           2.4            2.5
Mars            Twix Caramel                              14.2           6.4            4.3
Nestle          Raisinets                                  5.6           3.5            2.9


                      Table 6: Top 5 Substitutes by Experiment




                                            30
Manufacturer Differences   Adj. Differences Adj. OLS    Nested Logit RC Logit
Misc                23.6                8.3   11.3               6.7      5.8
Kar’s Nuts           7.0                2.4    1.7               2.2      2.3
Sherwood            28.7               10.0    4.5               6.2      1.3
Pepsi               82.6               28.9   23.3              14.4     20.5
Nestle               0.2                0.1    4.4               2.0      3.4
Mars                 6.1                2.2   12.7               9.6     15.6
Kraft               35.6               12.5    4.2              10.7      7.9
Kellogg              1.0                0.4    2.6              10.4      3.8
Hershey                                           .              2.6      4.2
Total              184.8               64.7   64.7              64.7     64.7
Misc                23.3                6.3   20.0              17.5     10.8
General Mills                                     .              2.0      1.3
Sherwood            19.2                5.2       .
Pepsi              150.0               40.3   35.3               17.8    13.5
Mars                                              .               1.9     7.4
Kraft               34.8                9.4    5.6                8.7     8.7
Kellogg                                           .              12.4     7.4
Hershey             14.7                4.0    4.1                4.7    16.0
Total              241.9               65.1   65.1               65.1    65.1
Misc                 8.2                4.1   13.0               10.4    11.7
General Mills        0.3                0.2    8.6                0.9     2.0
Sherwood             9.3                4.7       .
Snyders              7.0                3.6    2.8
Pepsi               94.4               47.7   37.8*              52.2    25.8
Mars                                              .               4.8    12.1
Kraft                8.2                4.1    1.9                2.2     6.0
Kellogg                                           .               1.1     3.1
Hershey             23.8               12.0   12.2                4.8    15.7
Total              151.2               76.4   76.4               76.4    76.4
Misc                 3.6                3.1    1.7                3.2     1.6
Kar’s Nuts           4.0                3.4    2.6                1.3     1.3
Sherwood             5.0                4.3       .               1.2     0.9
Snyders              0.6                0.6    2.3                3.5     2.1
Pepsi                1.4                1.2    8.9                6.6     6.0
Nestle               8.5                7.3    7.7**              8.7     8.5
Mars                25.2               21.7    9.7               19.1    18.7
Kraft                3.2                2.8    6.8*               2.5     4.7
Kellogg              1.9                1.7   10.5*               5.7     7.6
Hershey             20.6               17.8  13.8***             12.0    12.5
Total               74.1               63.9   63.9               63.9    63.9


                Table 7: Diversion: Manufacturer Level Results
                                     31
Manufacturer Adj. Differences Adj. OLS Nested Logit RC Logit
                   Animal Crackers Experiment
Pepsi                     18.6       18.3          9.2  13.1
Mars                       2.3       16.6         10.3  16.7
Sherwood                   6.3        2.2          3.9   0.8
Kraft                      5.9        2.3          5.1   3.7
Kellogg                    0.2        1.6          5.2   1.9
Hershey                                            3.1   5.0
Nestle                     0.1        4.0          1.7   2.9
                Famous Amos Cookie Experiment
Pepsi                     23.1       28.4         10.2   7.7
Hershey                    4.2        3.1          5.0  16.9
Mars                                               1.8   7.1
Kellogg                                            5.5   3.3
Kraft                      3.9        3.2          3.7   3.7
              Cheetos and Doritos Nacho Experiment
Pepsi                     23.8       24.9         26.1  12.9
Hershey                   11.1        7.7          4.4  14.5
Mars                                               4.0  10.1
General Mills              0.1        3.2          0.3   0.7
              Snickers and M&M Peanut Experiment
Mars                      13.6        7.0         12.0  11.7
Hershey                   12.3        5.8          8.3   8.6
Nestle                     3.7        3.8          4.4   4.2
Pepsi                      0.4        3.9          2.5   2.3
Kellogg                    0.5        3.5          1.7   2.2


        Table 8: Gross Upward Pricing Pressure Estimates




                              32
A       Appendix:
A.1      diversion ratio under Parametric Demands
This section derives explicit formulas for the diversion ratio under common parametric forms for demand.
The focus is whether or not a demand model implies that the diversion ratio is constant with respect to the
magnitude of the price increase. It turns out that the IIA Logit and the Linear demand model exhibit this
property, while the log-linear model, and mixed logit model do not necessarily exhibit this property.
    We go through several derivations below:


Linear Demand
The diversion ratio under linear demand has the property that it does not depend on the magnitude of the
price increase. To see this consider that the linear demand is given by:
                                                      X
                                           Qk = αk +     βkj pj
                                                         j

Which implies a diversion ratio corresponding to a change in price pj of ∆pj :

                                              ∆Qk   βkj ∆pj   βkj
                                      Djk =       =         =                                                (18)
                                              ∆Qj   βjj ∆pj   βjj

This means that for any change in pj from an infinitesimal price increase, up to the choke price of j; the
diversion ratio, Djk is constant. This also implies that under linear demands, divergence is a global property,
under any initial set of prices, quantities, or any magnitude of price increase will result in the same diversion.


Log-Linear Demand
The log-linear demand model does not exhibit constant diversion with respect to the magnitude of the price
increase. The log-linear model is specified as:
                                                     X
                                      ln(Qk ) = αk +   kj ln(pj )
                                                         j

If we consider a small price increase ∆pj the diversion ratio becomes:

                             ∆ log(Qk )   ∆Qk Qj (p)             εkj ∆ log(pj )   εkj
                                        ≈        ·           =                  =
                             ∆ log(Qj )   ∆Qj Qk (p)             εjj ∆ log(pj )   εjj
                                          | {z }
                                            Djk

                                                                 Qk (p) εkj
                                                     Djk     ≈         ·                                     (19)
                                                                 Qj (p) εjj

This holds for small changes in pj . However for larger changes in pj we can no longer use the simplification
                   ∆Q
that ∆ log(Qj ) ≈ Qj j . So for a large price increase (such as to the choke price pj → ∞, log-linear demand
can exhibit diversion that depends on the magnitude of the price increase.
IIA Logit Demand
The plain logit model exhibits IIA and proportional substitution. This implies that the diversion ratio does
not depend on the magnitude of the price increase. Here we consider two price increases, an infinitesimal
one and an increase to the choke price pj → ∞.
    Consider the derivation of the diversion ratio Djk under simple IIA logit demands. We have utilities
and choice probabilities given by the well known equations, where at denotes the set of products available



                                                       33
in market t:

                                    uijt      = xjt β − αpjt +εijt
                                                |     {z   }
                                                          ṽjt

                                                           exp[ṽjt ]           Vjt
                                    Sjt       =           P                 =
                                                     1+     k∈at exp[ṽkt ]   IV (at )

Under logit demands, an infinitesimal price change in p1 exhibits identical diversion to setting p1 → ∞ (the
choke price):
                                               ∂Sk
                                               ∂pj          αSk Sj           Sk
                              D
                              djk    =                =                 =
                                               ∂Sj        αSj (1 − Sj )   (1 − Sj )
                                               ∂pj
                                                   Vk
                                                Pe                      eVk
                                              1+ l∈a\j eVl
                                                                 −               0
                                                                     1+ l0 ∈a eVl           Sk
                                                                       P
                              Djk    =                              Vj               =
                                                      0−         Pe                      (1 − Sj )
                                                            1+       l∈a   eVl

              Sk
As an aside 1−S  k
                   = MQ−Qk , so we either need market shares or market size (back to market definition!). In
                        k


both cases diversion is merely the ratio of the marketshare of the substitute good divided by the share not
buying the focal good (under the initial set of prices and product availability). It does not depend on any
of the econometric parameters (α, β).
    Also we can also show that the bias expression for the diversion ratio is set to zero that is: Djk =
         2
∂ 2 qk ∂ qj
∂p2j
      / ∂p2 .
           j



                                           ∂ 2 qj
                                                     = α2 (1 − 2Sj )(Sj − Sj2 )
                                           ∂p2j
                                           ∂ 2 qk
                                                     = −α2 (1 − 2Sj )Sj Sk
                                           ∂p2j
                                           ∂ 2 qk
                                           ∂p2j              Sk
                                           ∂ 2 qj
                                                     =            = Djk
                                                           1 − Sj
                                           ∂p2j



Random Coefficients Logit Demand
Random Coefficients Logit demand relaxes the IIA property of the plain Logit model, which can be unde-
sirable empirically, but it also means that the diversion ratio varies with original prices and quantities, as
well as with the magnitude of the price increase. Intuitively a small price increase might see diversion from
the most price sensitive consumers, while a larger price increase might see substitution from a larger set of
consumers. If price sensitivity is correlated with other tastes, then the diversion ratio could differ with the
magnitude of the price increase.
    We can repeat the same exercise for the logit model with random coefficients, by discretizing a mixture
density over i = 1, . . . , I representative consumers, with population weight wi :

                                             uijt    = xjt βi − αi pjt +εijt
                                                       |      {z     }
                                                                     ṽijt




                                                                 34
                                                                  ∂Vik
Even when consumers have a common price parameter                 ∂pj       = α,

                                      ∂Sk
                                                       sij sik ∂V
                                                   R              ik
                                                                                      R
                                      ∂pj                      ∂pj                       sij sik
                          D
                          djk   =            =R                    ∂V
                                                                              →R
                                      ∂Sj
                                                   sij (1 −   sij ) ∂pijj            sij (1 − sij )
                                      ∂pj
                                              Vik                    Vik
                                           Pe                     Pe
                                     R
                                         1+ l∈a\j eVil
                                                         −   1+             eVil0     1
                                                                                           Z
                                                                                                sij sik
                                                                    l0 ∈a
                          Djk   =                       Vij                         =
                                                  − 1+Pe eVil                         sj       (1 − sij )
                                              R
                                                        l∈a


Now, each individual exhibits constant diversion, but weights on individuals vary with p, so that diversion
is only constant if sij = sj . Otherwise observations with larger sij are given more weight in correlation
of sij sik . The more correlated (sij , sik ) are (and especially as they are correlated with αi ) the greater the
discrepancy between marginal and average diversion.




                                                             35
