                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 THE VALUE OF CONNECTIONS IN TURBULENT TIMES:
                       EVIDENCE FROM THE UNITED STATES

                                          Daron Acemoglu
                                           Simon Johnson
                                           Amir Kermani
                                            James Kwak
                                            Todd Mitton

                                        Working Paper 19701
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19701


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2013




We thank Isil Erel, Taylor Nadauld, and René Stulz for sharing data. For helpful comments we thank
Josh Angrist, Caroline Hoxby, Suresh Naidu, Francesco Trebbi, and people who provided comments
during or after our talks at MIT, Northwestern, Harvard Business School, the International Monetary
Fund, the University of Alberta, BYU, Yale, the University of California at Berkeley, and the 2012
Econometric Society meetings. We are also grateful for constructive suggestions from some former
officials. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19701.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Daron Acemoglu, Simon Johnson, Amir Kermani, James Kwak, and Todd Mitton. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Value of Connections in Turbulent Times: Evidence from the United States
Daron Acemoglu, Simon Johnson, Amir Kermani, James Kwak, and Todd Mitton
NBER Working Paper No. 19701
December 2013
JEL No. G01,G14,G21,G28

                                              ABSTRACT

The announcement of Timothy Geithner as nominee for Treasury Secretary in November 2008 produced
a cumulative abnormal return for financial firms with which he had a connection. This return was about
6% after the first full day of trading and about 12% after ten trading days. There were subsequently
abnormal negative returns for connected firms when news broke that Geithner’s confirmation might
be derailed by tax issues. Excess returns for connected firms may reflect the perceived impact of relying
on the advice of a small network of financial sector executives during a time of acute crisis and heightened
policy discretion.


Daron Acemoglu                                       James Kwak
Department of Economics, E18-269D                    University of Connecticut
MIT                                                  School of Law
77 Massachusetts Avenue                              james.kwak@law.uconn.edu
Cambridge, MA 02139
and CIFAR                                            Todd Mitton
and also NBER                                        Marriott School
daron@mit.edu                                        Brigham Young University
                                                     684 TNRB
Simon Johnson                                        Provo, UT 84602
MIT Sloan School of Management                       todd.mitton@byu.edu
100 Main Street, E52-562
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
sjohnson@mit.edu

Amir Kermani
Haas School of Business and
 Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
2220 Piedmont Ave
Berkeley CA 94720
amir@haas.berkeley.edu
1    Introduction

On Friday, November 21, 2008, the news leaked that Timothy Geithner — then president
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York — would be nominated by President-elect Barack
Obama to become Secretary of the Treasury of the United States. Over the next ten trading
days, financial firms with a connection to Geithner experienced a cumulative abnormal return
of about 12% (relative to other financial sector firms). When Geithner’s nomination ran into
trouble in January 2009, due to unexpected tax issues, there was a fall in the value of Geithner-
connected firms — although this eﬀect is smaller and less precisely estimated than the increases
that were observed in November. How should we interpret these results?
    This pattern seems unlikely to be a fluke of the data or a result of mismeasurement. We use
three diﬀerent ways of identifying connections between financial institutions’ executives and
Geithner: (i) executives who had meetings with Geithner during 2007—08; (ii) executives who
belonged to the same nonprofit boards and groups as Geithner; and (iii) executives of firms
located in New York City, who would be close in proximity to the New York Fed. Our results
are essentially the same across all three measures of connections (although somewhat weaker
for the New York City measure), and they are robust across a wide range of checks, including
with various size controls and when we drop outliers.
    Our results are also unlikely to reflect higher than normal returns for firms most aﬀected
by the crisis and thus more likely to benefit from the appointment of a competent Treasury
Secretary. The results remain robust when we compare connected firms to non-connected firms
with similar size, profitability, leverage and prior stock price behavior, or when we control for:
how intensely firms were aﬀected in the most severe phase of the crisis during September—
October 2008; how their stock price rose when capital was injected into big banks in October
2008; or how much they were exposed to troubled assets (in particular, residential mortgage-
backed securities). Episodes of purely supportive policy — such as the Bear Stearns rescue,
the AIG bailout, or the passage of the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act — did not cause
the same robust pattern of abnormal returns for Geithner-connected firms. We also examine
evidence on the market-perceived probability of bankruptcy from credit default swap spreads,
although the available sample for these data is smaller than for equities. We find the same
pattern in CDS spread data as in equity data — i.e., there was a perceived benefit to creditors (in
the form of lower implied default risk) when the firms’ executives were connected to Geithner.
    There are at least three reasons why market participants may have expected benefits for


                                                1
Geithner-connected firms. First, they may have expected that some form of explicit corruption
could take place. In countries with weak institutions and much policy discretion in the hands
of politicians, such as Indonesia, Malaysia, or Pakistan, potential corruption is a reasonable
interpretation of stock price movements for politically connected firms.1 But corruption is
not plausible as an explanation for what happened in the United States. Econometric results
that show large eﬀects for political connections are typically based on data from countries
with weak institutions. In contrast, by most measures and at most times, the United States
has fairly strong institutions. Moreover, Geithner is widely regarded as an honest public
servant who is very unlikely to have acted on the basis of personal financial gain. Studies of
policymaking under the Obama administration by Suskind (2011) and Scheiber (2011) and first-
hand accounts by Bair (2012) and Barofsky (2012) — none of which are particularly sympathetic
to Geithner — contain absolutely no suggestion of corruption. Geithner has also never run for
public oﬃce and seems unlikely to ever do so, making political contributions irrelevant.2
    Second, market participants may have believed that Geithner’s policy preferences were
generally consistent with the interests of the financial institutions with which he was connected.
This might have represented a type of “cultural capture” of key oﬃcial decision-makers and
thinkers by Wall Street (Bhagwati (1998), Johnson and Kwak (2011)). According to this theory,
instead of favoring firms because he had connections with them, Geithner’s prior connections
had already shaped his perspectives on the financial sector and on the crisis that was still
unfolding. In particular, his close connections to large, complex, Wall Street banks might have
persuaded him that broader economic prosperity required rescuing those banks on relatively
generous terms (for shareholders, as well as executives and creditors). Our results, however,
are not based on a comparison of financial to non-financial firms or of large relative to small
financial firms.3 Rather, as already noted, they are driven by a comparison of connected to
non-connected firms of similar size. Even if Geithner took the worldview that Wall Street
    1
      For example, in a seminal study, Fisman (2001) found that being connected to President Suharto accounted
for 23 percent of firms’ value on average in Indonesia in the mid-1990s (where the events were rumors about the
president’s health). For Malaysia in the late 1990s, Johnson and Mitton (2003) found that connections to Prime
Minister Mahathir accounted for around 20 percent of firms’ total stock market value in a crisis, where the event
was the fall from power of Anwar Ibrahim, the Minister of Finance. Similar results are found in Pakistan by
Khwaja and Mian (2005), in a cross-country setting by Dinç (2005), and in Weimar Germany by Ferguson and
Voth (2008).
    2
      Duchin and Sosyura (2012) find that politically connected firms were more likely to receive TARP funds,
and also that such firms performed worse than non-connected firms. However, they measure connections to
Congress, not to Secretary Geithner.
    3
      Similarly, we show below that our results are not driven by Citigroup or other financial firms that are
considered by policymakers or markets as “too big to fail”. In all cases, we find that investors considered there
to be value in being personally connected to Geithner, quite aside from any “too big to fail” issues.



                                                       2
banks were “too big to fail”, this cannot directly account for our results.
       Third, the market may have subscribed to a “social connections meets the crisis” hypothesis:
that connections would matter during a time of crisis and increased policy discretion. It was
perhaps reasonable to suppose that immediate action with limited oversight would have to be
taken, and that oﬃcials would rely on a small network of established confidantes for advice
and assistance. Powerful government oﬃcials are no diﬀerent from the rest of us; they know
and trust a limited number of people. It is therefore natural to tap private sector friends,
associates, and acquaintances with relevant expertise when needed — including asking them for
advice and hiring them into government positions. Even with the best intentions, beliefs are
presumably shaped by self-interest, particularly when the people involved were, are, or will
be executives with fiduciary responsibility to shareholders. These tendencies can be checked
during ordinary times by institutional constraints and oversight, but during times of crisis and
urgency, social connections are likely to have more impact on policy.4
       Our findings show a stronger eﬀect for connections than is standard in most related research
on the United States.5 In part, previous studies have examined diﬀerent kinds of connections,
focusing on the legislature, where the impact of a single individual is likely to be limited. For
example, the so-called Jeﬀords Eﬀect — named after a Senator who switched parties unexpect-
edly, causing a change of control in the U.S. Senate — was found to be worth around 1% of firm
value (Jayachandran (2006)). Roberts (1990) found statistically significant but small eﬀects on
connected firms from the unexpected death of a U.S. Senator. Fisman et al. (2012) studied the
value of connections to former Vice President Dick Cheney, driven by events such as his heart
attacks, surprise news about his political career, the original Bush-Cheney “hanging chad”
   4
     Particularly important may have been Geithner’s connections through his long-term relationship with
Robert Rubin, who was Treasury Secretary in the Clinton administration, a former co-chair of Goldman Sachs,
and more recently a leading board member at Citigroup (he resigned from the latter position in January 2009).
From November 2003, Geithner was president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York — an institution that
has traditionally served as the eyes and ears of the Federal Reserve on Wall Street, but which is sometimes con-
sidered to have become too much influenced by the thinking at large financial institutions. Formal responsibility
for supervision rests with the Board of Governors in Washington D.C., but the New York Fed is very much
engaged in collecting information and interpreting what is going on. By tradition, the president of the New York
Fed plays a particularly important role in managing relationships between government oﬃcials and financial
services executives who are based in New York (“Wall Street”, broadly defined). He is also, by convention, vice
chair of the Federal Open Market Committee, which sets monetary policy. (All presidents of the New York Fed
to date have been men.)
   5
     Akey (2013) presents findings that are similar in magnitude to ours, but for congressional elections where
“the wedge between firms connected to a winning politician and firms connected to a losing politician is 1.7%
to 6.8% of firm equity value.” Goldman, Rocholl, and So (2009) find that when George W. Bush won the
presidency in 2000 (and Republicans controlled the Senate and the House of Representatives), Republican-
linked firms gained 3%-5% relative to Democrat-linked firms, but the links they measure are not exclusive to
the executive branch.



                                                       3
presidential election victory in 2000, and Iraq war developments, and found no evidence of sig-
nificant eﬀects. They concluded: “Contrary to conventional wisdom, we find that in all cases
the value of ties to Cheney is precisely estimated as zero. We interpret this as evidence that
U.S. institutions are eﬀective in controlling rent-seeking through personal ties with high-level
government oﬃcials”.6
       But Geithner ascended to the highest level of power at an unusual moment, with many
ideas in flux and great diﬀerences of opinion between otherwise well-informed and experienced
people.7 During the intense crisis of 2008 there was a wide range of opinions among policy
experts — and among potential Treasury Secretaries — regarding what should be done, with
significant potential implications for shareholders and creditors of financial institutions.
       During such an episode where immediate action is necessary, it is plausible that the usual
institutional checks may not work and social connections may become more important as
sources of both ideas and manpower.8 This interpretation is also consistent with recent work
by Querubín and Snyder (2013). Using a regression discontinuity approach, they find that
American politicians were not able to enrich themselves before or after the U.S. Civil War, but
during the war there were substantial opportunities for personal gain — either because there
was more government spending or because news media were distracted or both.
       Section 2 reviews the historical context and why market participants may have expected
connected firms to potentially perform better. Section 3 explains our coding of connections
and discusses the other variables we use. Section 4 presents our basic results and a range of
robustness checks. Section 5 analyzes the eﬀects of Geithner’s tax issues, which temporarily
jeopardized his nomination in January 2009. Section 6 discusses the design and implementation
of bailout policy and financial reform under the Geithner Treasury. Section 7 concludes. The
Online Appendix (Tables A1 through A10) contains additional results and details on the data.
   6
     Lower down the oﬃcial hierarchy, there is certainly more rent-seeking behavior. For example, Dube, Kaplan
and Naidu (2011) find that (leaked) credible private information on coup attempts backed by the United States
does move stock prices.
   7
     There has always been lobbying in the United States, but other evidence suggests this may have been more
intense during the recent boom and bust, as the stakes became very high. Igan, Mishra, and Tressel (2011)
find that lobbying of legislators by lenders was associated with more risk-taking before the crisis and worse
outcomes in 2008, while Igan and Mishra (2012) examine how the political influence of the financial sector
aﬀected deregulation. Mian, Sufi, and Trebbi (2010) establish that members of Congress were more likely to
support the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 when they received higher contributions from the
financial services industry. Tahoun (2013) finds that members of Congress own stock in firms that contribute
to their campaigns, and that such firms receive more in government contracts.
   8
     Faccio (2006) finds connections of various kinds exist everywhere. Faccio, Masulis, and McConnell (2006)
show connected firms are more likely to receive bailouts across a wide range of countries, but the probability of
bailout is much lower in richer countries. See also Chiu and Joh (2004) and Dinç (2005).




                                                       4
2        The Context and Event
2.1       Historical Context

The financial crisis first became clearly evident in mid-2007 when problems with subprime
mortgages began causing major losses at some hedge funds and structured investment vehicles.
The crisis grew in severity during the spring and summer of 2008 — culminating in the collapse
of Lehman Brothers and a full-blown financial panic in mid-September.
        These developments prompted Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson and Federal Reserve
Chairman Ben Bernanke to propose what eventually became the Emergency Economic Stabi-
lization Act (EESA), whose centerpiece was the $700 billion Troubled Assets Relief Program
(TARP).9 On October 14, 2008, using this legal authority, the Treasury Department, the Fed-
eral Reserve, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) announced two measures
that began to calm the markets. First, they revealed that $250 billion of TARP money was
available to recapitalize financial institutions and, of this amount, $125 billion had already
been accepted by nine major banks. Second, there would be a program under which the FDIC
guaranteed new debt issued by banks.10 By mid-November, however, when President-elect
Barack Obama was selecting his Treasury Secretary, the crisis was far from over.

2.2       Channels of Influence

Why might market participants have believed that the nomination of Timothy Geithner as
Treasury Secretary would be good for Geithner-connected firms relative to non-connected
firms? There are two potential channels of influence that do not appear to operate. The
first possibility is some form of expected material compensation. One possibility could be
outright corruption, in which firms or their lobbyists pay oﬃcials directly for favors. As we have
already emphasized, there is no plausible evidence to suggest that the Geithner appointment
could have implied corruption. Geithner is known to be honest and the United States has
tough anti-bribery rules that remained eﬀective even during the financial crisis.
    9
      On September 18, 2008, Paulson and Bernanke provided a dramatic briefing to congressional leaders. Ac-
cording to Chris Dodd, then chair of the Senate Banking Committee, they were told “that we’re literally maybe
days away from a complete meltdown of our financial system, with all the implications here at home and glob-
ally.” David Herszenhorn, “Congressional Leaders Stunned by Warnings,” The New York Times, September 19,
2008. The initial Treasury proposal, published on September 20, was only three pages long and did not specify
any independent oversight mechanisms. “Text of Draft Proposal for Bailout Plan,” The New York Times, Sep-
tember 20, 2008. The initial legislative proposal was rejected by the House of Representatives on September 29.
An amended version passed and was signed into law on October 3, 2008.
   10
      “Joint Statement by Treasury, Federal Reserve and FDIC,” Treasury Department Press Release, October
14, 2008, available at www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20081014a.htm.



                                                      5
   Another potential form of compensation is campaign financing, which sometimes matters
a great deal in the United States — particularly when elected oﬃcials have a sense of what
might encourage individual and corporate contributions to their campaigns. Geithner was
unelected and has never sought election, so such considerations are unlikely to be relevant in
his appointment or later decisions.
   Material compensation also motivates the so-called “revolving door” between the public
and private sectors, in which government oﬃcials are friendly with firms they oversee and
subsequently — or perhaps consequently — secure lucrative positions with those firms. Yet
before his nomination to Treasury, Geithner already had ample opportunity to land highly
lucrative jobs in the private sector. It seems implausible to suggest that he was motivated —
or that anyone would think he could be motivated — by potential employment opportunities.
   Second, there may well have been some “cultural capture” at the Treasury and in the
Obama administration, meaning the convergence of perspectives and interests that occurs
through immersion in a certain social or institutional context (e.g., working at the New York
Fed or being friends with high-profile financiers). Once in oﬃce, this shared mindset could
lead oﬃcials to decisions that favor the entire financial sector or perhaps some particular firms,
such as Wall Street banks. This is a plausible hypothesis in general, but the specific evidence
we present below cannot be explained by such cultural capture — our results indicate abnormal
returns for well-connected financial firms relative to other less well-connected firms with similar
characteristics, including size, profitability, leverage, and prior stock market performance.
   One channel of influence that market participants in November 2008 could reasonably have
expected to apply relates to the role of social connections. Access to government oﬃcials
can be hugely beneficial, as witnessed by the large U.S. lobbying industry. When powerful
politicians make decisions, they may be influenced by the people they talk to — and the people
with whom they talk will likely be the people they know (Bertrand, Bombardini, and Trebbi
(2011), and Blanes-i-Vidal, Draca, and Fons-Rosen (2012)). In addition to the simplest form
of direct access through social connections — i.e., the fact that any oﬃcial is more likely to take
a phone call from someone he knows than from a person he does not know — another form
of indirect access is provided by hiring. Any new administration must fill a large number of
important positions, and connections are an influential factor in hiring decisions.
   By November 2008, Geithner knew the leaders of the New York financial community very
well, and it could reasonably be expected that he would continue to take their calls and listen
to them seriously as Treasury Secretary. He would also be expected to place people he knew

                                                6
and trusted into important positions.11 Even if Geithner were not to favor connected firms
directly, they could still benefit through the influence of their alumni.
       The “social connections meets the crisis” hypothesis implies that market participants might
expect Secretary Geithner’s appointment to favor financial institutions based on pre-existing
professional and social connections. Such positions might become even more valuable when
policy discretion is higher and very consequential decisions need to be made — such as during
the financial crisis that was raging in November 2008.

2.3      Policy Discretion in November 2008

As of November 2008, Congress had already explicitly granted broad powers to Treasury to
intervene in the financial sector, and Secretary Paulson had pressured nine major banks into
accepting $125 billion of new government capital.12 Although Paulson’s Capital Purchase
Program (CPP) distributed capital on relatively generous terms, access was tightly controlled
by Treasury. In late October, for example, PNC acquired National City after National City
learned that its CPP application might not be approved.13 At the time, there was little
transparency about how applications were reviewed and what criteria were being used to
determine which banks received capital. The Treasury Department determined who received
the benefit of both cheap capital and a government seal of approval (Veronesi and Zingales
(2010)).14
       In addition, the Capital Purchase Program placed significant holdings of preferred stock in
the hands of the Treasury Department, as well as warrants on common stock. Although the
preferred stock was non-voting and Treasury committed not to vote its shares of common stock,
  11
     We should emphasize that drawing on pre-existing relationships on Wall Street is well-established practice
for a Treasury Secretary, and did not begin with Geithner. For example, Henry Paulson brought in more and
more Goldman Sachs alumni as the crisis deepened, including Neel Kashkari, who was charged with running
TARP. Because of his expertise, Kashkari was initially kept on by Geithner.
  12
     Damian Paletta, Jon Hilsenrath, and Deborah Solomon, “At Moment of Truth, U.S. Forced Big Bankers to
Blink,” The Wall Street Journal, October 15, 2008.
  13
     Dan Fitzpatrick, David Enrich, and Damian Paletta, “PNC Buys National City in Bank Shakeout,” The
Wall Street Journal, October 25, 2008.
  14
     The investment terms were considerably more favorable than those available from the private sector, such
as in Warren Buﬀett’s investment in Goldman Sachs. According to Bloomberg, the government received war-
rants worth $13.8 billion in connection with its 25 largest equity injections; under the terms Buﬀett got from
Goldman, those warrants would have been worth $130.8 billion. In addition, TARP received a lower interest
rate (5%) on its preferred stock investments than did Buﬀett (10%). Mark Pittman, “Paulson Bank Bailout in
‘Great Stress’ Misses Terms Buﬀett Won,” Bloomberg, January 10, 2009. The TARP Congressional Oversight
Panel had similar findings. TARP Congressional Oversight Panel, “February Oversight Report: Valuing Trea-
sury’s Acquisitions,” February 6, 2009, available at www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CPRT-111JPRT47178/pdf/CPRT-
111JPRT47178.pdf. Although there were justifications for this subsidy — in particular, Treasury wanted broad
participation in order to avoid stigmatizing particular banks — it still constituted potential expected value that
the government was willing and able to transfer to specific financial institutions.



                                                        7
this still left open the prospect of increased government influence; participating institutions
were also subject to executive compensation and corporate governance requirements.15 The
mechanics of implementing TARP were run within Treasury, giving significant discretion to
the Treasury Secretary’s appointees.16


3     Data and Descriptive Statistics

Our sample consists of all firms trading on the NYSE or NASDAQ that are categorized as
banks or financial services firms in the Datastream database. Of these 678 firms, we exclude
those that lack suﬃcient stock return data in the Datastream or TAQ databases to calculate
abnormal returns for our Geithner announcement event. The remaining sample of 603 firms
we refer to as the “full sample”.
    A potential complication is the Citigroup bailout which occurred between the news leak of
Geithner’s expected nomination on November 21 and the oﬃcial announcement of his nomi-
nation on November 24, 2008. On Sunday, November 23, the U.S. government entered into a
bailout agreement with Citigroup that provided Citigroup with a $20 billion capital infusion
through TARP, as well as guarantees on a pool of $306 billion of troubled assets.17
    Because the bailout occurred in the middle of the event window for the Geithner announce-
ment, and because the bailout (or at least the size and timing of the bailout) was not entirely
anticipated, it could complicate estimation of the eﬀect of the Geithner announcement — at
least to the extent that there is correlation between firms connected to Geithner and firms
impacted by the Citigroup bailout news.18 In our tests, we address this issue in two ways.
First, we report results for stock price reactions on November 21 only, which is prior to the
Citigroup bailout announcement. While this approach avoids the confounding eﬀects of the
   15
      “TARP Capital Purchase Program:            Senior Preferred Stock and Warrants,” available at on-
line.wsj.com/public/resources/documents/PublicTermSheet1014.pdf.
   16
      In addition to Neel Kashkari, Reuben Jeﬀrey, another Goldman alumnus, was named as interim chief
investment oﬃcer, and several other ex-Goldman executives played important roles in the Paulson Treasury.
Julie Creswell and Ben White, “The Guys from ‘Government Sachs’,” The New York Times, October 17, 2008;
Deborah Solomon, “The Financial Crisis: Amid Turmoil, Tireless Team Of Advisers Backed Paulson,” The Wall
Street Journal, September 17, 2008.
   17
      “Joint Statement by Treasury, Federal Reserve, and the FDIC on Citigroup,” November 23, 2008, available
at www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/bcreg/20081123a.htm
   18
      It is not certain that a bailout would be positive news for Geithner-connected firms. We have tested the
eﬀect of Geithner connections on returns surrounding another significant government bailout, the bailout of
Bank of America on January 16, 2009. The Bank of America bailout was similar in structure to the Citigroup
bailout, and confirmed the government’s willingness to take unprecedented measures to keep the largest banks
afloat. However, our tests show that cumulative abnormal returns for Geithner-connected firms surrounding
the Bank of America bailout are statistically insignificant, which suggests that Geithner-connected firms do not
generally have positive responses to the news of significant government bailouts of major banks.



                                                       8
Citigroup bailout, it is not entirely appealing because the post-leak return on November 21 is
only one hour in length, and because some uncertainty about the nomination remained until
the oﬃcial announcement on November 24.
       As a second approach, we exclude from our tests the firms that would be most likely to
be aﬀected by the bailout announcement.             We rank all firms in the sample based on their
return correlation with Citigroup during the period beginning the day of the Lehman collapse
and ending the day before the Geithner nomination announcement. We drop firms that rank
among the top 10% in correlation with Citigroup, and call this reduced sample our “base
sample”.19 To a large degree, the use of this base sample should eliminate the impact of the
bailout announcement on our estimates.
       Table 1 reports summary statistics of our variables for political connections and financial
data. We identify connections to Geithner in three diﬀerent ways. The first measure of
connections, which we refer to as “schedule connections”, identifies the number of times that
Geithner interacted with executives from each firm while he was president of the New York Fed.
We identify these interactions by searching Geithner’s daily schedule for each day from January
2007 through January 2009.20 For example, a search of Geithner’s schedule for Moody’s
Corporation reveals two interactions between Geithner and executives of Moody’s. On July 5,
2007, the schedule reads, “11:30 a.m. to 12:00 p.m. Meeting w/Raymond McDaniel, Chairman
& CEO, Moody’s Corporation”, and on September 15, 2008, the schedule reads “11:00 a.m.
to 12:00 p.m. Rating Agencies Meeting” and Raymond McDaniel is listed as one of the
participants. Based on this information, we code Moody’s schedule connections as two. Row
1 of Panel A of Table 1 reports descriptive statistics for this variable. By far the firm with
the greatest number of interactions listed on Geithner’s schedule is Citigroup, with a total of
34. Panel A of Appendix Table A1 lists all of the sample firms found on Geithner’s schedule
and the number of interactions. The average number of schedule connections, conditional on
a firm having at least one connection, is 4.96.
       The second measure of connections to Geithner, which we refer to as “personal connec-
tions”, identifies the number of links that Geithner has with each firm through personal rela-
tionships. We identify these links using the relationship maps published by muckety.com (run
  19
      We have also constructed the base sample by dropping firms that rank in the top 5% and in the top 20%
of those correlated with Citigroup. Our main results remain unchanged, although in the latter case only seven
firms remain in the treatment group.
   20
      “Geithner’s Calendar at the New York Fed,” The New York Times,                            available at
documents.nytimes.com/geithner-schedule-new-york-fed.




                                                     9
by independent journalists).21 The maps on muckety.com show the links for a given individual
to other people or to organizations.22 We count a link between Geithner and a firm if he has
a personal link with a person who is a director of the firm, or if he shares a board or similar
position (e.g., trustees of the Economic Club of New York) with someone who works for the
firm.23 We require that those links be active when Geithner’s nomination was announced.
       For example, we find a link between Geithner and American Express on muckety.com
through Kenneth Chenault, chairman and CEO of American Express, who is associated with
Geithner through the National Academy Foundation, where they are both directors, and
through the Partnership for New York City, where Chenault is a vice chairman and Geithner
is a board member. Based on this information we code personal connections for American Ex-
press as one. Descriptive statistics for this variable are reported in Row 2 of Table 1. Geithner
has the greatest number of personal connections (nine) to Citigroup; in contrast, he has only
one connection to Bank of America. The average number of personal connections to Geithner,
conditional on a firm having at least one connection, is 2.24. Appendix Table A2 lists all of
the identified personal connections between Geithner and sample firms.
       To independently verify the accuracy of the information provided by muckety.com, we
searched the annual reports of each company with an identified personal connection to Gei-
thner, as well as other publicly available information. We were able to verify 52 of the 58
connections reported by muckety.com, 45 of those using the annual report filed most im-
mediately subsequent to the Geithner nomination announcement (typically, for years ending
December 31, 2008), and another seven using other sources such as Forbes and Bloomberg. Of
the remaining six connections, two are confirmed to be errors and are excluded from our data.
The other four are identified as legal counsel for financial firms in the sample. These have also
been excluded from our data due to the diﬃculty of verifying the connection and because of
the diﬀerent nature of the connections. These exclusions leave us with a set of 52 personal
connections to Geithner from 21 diﬀerent financial firms (although five connected people each
have two board links to Geithner). Panel B of Appendix Table A1 lists these firms and their
connections.
  21
     These data are broadly similar to what is available for emerging markets, e.g., Gomez and Jomo (1997,
1998) on Malaysia. Many connections in emerging markets are formed early in careers. Most of the Geithner
connections are from his time at the New York Fed. We use muckety.com relationship maps from March 2009.
  22
     Measuring connections in ths way is standard in the network sociology literature. See, for example, Useem
(1984). Fisman et al. (2012) review the sociology literature on why board ties matter, including for the flow of
information.
  23
     Most of our data are board memberships, which are a matter of public record. However, the muckety.com
coding also contains some well-known mentor/adviser relationships, with Robert Rubin and a few others.



                                                      10
   The third measure of connections to Geithner is based on firm location, under the reasonable
assumption that Geithner would have greater contact with executives of firms headquartered
in New York City, where Geithner was located as president of the New York Fed. This measure
is a dummy variable set equal to one if the headquarters of the firm is identified as New York
City in the Datastream database. Descriptive statistics are reported in Row 3 of Table 1.
Forty-five of the sample firms have headquarters in New York City; these firms are listed in
Appendix Table A3.     All other sample firms not listed in Appendix Table A3 are listed in
Appendix Table A4.
   As is shown in Appendix Tables A1 and A3, there is some overlap in the three measures
of connections. Of the 63 firms that have some measure of connections, nine are connected
according to all three measures, ten are connected according to two of the three measures,
and 44 are connected according to only one of the measures. In subsequent analysis, when
regressions include our standard control variables, the number of connected firms becomes 22
(schedule), 20 (personal), and 41 (New York) due to missing data on control variables. In
addition, when we focus on our base sample the number of connected firms is 12 (schedule), 8
(personal), and 34 (New York).
   Rows 4 through 6 of Panel A of Table 1 report basic financial information for the sample
firms as obtained from the Worldscope database for the year 2008. Size (Row 4) is reported
as the logarithm of total assets, profitability (Row 5) is return on equity, and leverage (Row
6) is the ratio of total debt to total capital. Rows 7 through 9 report summary statistics for
our primary measure of firm performance, cumulative abnormal stock returns (CARs) — the
calculation of which is discussed in the next section. Rows 10 through 12 report statistics
for our secondary measure of performance, percentage changes in credit default swap (CDS)
spreads, which is also covered in the next section.
   Panel B of Table 1 reports diﬀerences in the means of these variables between firms con-
nected to Geithner and non-connected firms; here his schedule and personal connections are
converted to a dummy variable equal to one for firms that have any connection. Row 13 of Panel
B shows that connected firms are significantly larger than non-connected firms for all three
measures of connections. Row 14 shows that profitability is significantly lower for connected
firms, but only when we use the New York measure. Row 15 shows that leverage is higher for
connected firms, but the diﬀerence is only significant for the schedule measure of connections.
Panel C repeats the analysis of Panel B for the base sample. The diﬀerences reported in Panel
C are broadly similar to those in Panel B. Because of the performance diﬀerences shown in

                                              11
Panels B and C, we control for these variables below. Finally, Panel D of Table 1 reports
correlation coeﬃcients between the explanatory variables reported in Panel A.


4         Geithner Connections and Stock Returns

In this section we study whether connections to Geithner, as defined in the previous section,
are associated with diﬀerences in returns at the time of the announcement of Geithner’s nom-
ination. We begin by calculating returns for each firm in the sample on the relevant dates.
Geithner’s nomination was oﬃcially announced by President-elect Barack Obama early on
Monday, November 24, 2008. However, news of his impending nomination was leaked to the
press late in the trading day on Friday, November 21, 2008 at approximately 3:00 p.m. ET —
a time that coincides with the beginning of a stock market rally.
         For the purposes of studying stock price reactions, we define event day 0 as November 21 and
event day 1 as November 24, with subsequent event days corresponding to subsequent trading
days. We obtain daily stock returns for each sample firm from the Datastream database. In
order to more precisely delineate the response to the Geithner announcement on event day 0,
we calculate returns on that day as only the returns from 3:00 p.m. until the market close at
4:00 p.m. We obtain intraday returns from the TAQ database.

4.1         Univariate Tests

Panel A of Table 2 compares actual returns between connected and non-connected firms in the
base sample for event days 0 through 10. Panel A shows that on event day 0, using schedule
connections, connected firms outperformed non-connected firms by 4.3 percentage points, a
diﬀerence that is significant at the 5% level. Results are similar for the other measures of
connections, though not statistically significant for personal connections. On event day 1, when
the nomination was oﬃcially announced, return diﬀerences are even more pronounced. Using
the schedule measure, connected firms outperformed non-connected firms by 8.4 percentage
points on this day. The corresponding outperformance for firms with personal connections is
9.6 percentage points, and for firms with New York connections it is 3.1 percentage points.
The diﬀerence for the schedule and personal connections is significant at the 1% level, while
for New York it is significant at the 10% level.
         Panel A also shows that connected firms continued to outperform non-connected firms on
each day through event day 10, with the primary exception being event day 5.24 The final row
    24
         The underperformance of connected firms on event day 5 (a day when there was a sharp market down-


                                                      12
of Panel A reports cumulative performance for event days 0 through 10. Using the schedule
measure of connections, connected firms outperformed non-connected firms by 37.1 percentage
points over this period. For personal connections the diﬀerence was 46.3 percentage points,
and for New York connections the diﬀerence was 29.9 percentage points. By any measure of
connections, the outperformance of connected firms over this period was economically large
and highly statistically significant.
    Because there were large market movements during the event window, it is important to also
calculate abnormal returns for the event days. Our procedure for calculating abnormal returns
follows Campbell, Lo, and MacKinlay (1997). We calculate cumulative abnormal returns using
the market model as follows:
                                                           
                                                           X
                                         [0 ] =             
                                                           =0

where [0 ] is the cumulative abnormal return for firm  for event days 0 through .
 is calculated as
                                        =  − [̂ + ̂   ]

where  is the abnormal return for firm  on event day ,  is the actual return on firm 
for event day , and  is the return on the market for event day , with the market return
represented by the return on the S&P 500 index. The parameters ̂ and ̂  are estimated
from the following equation:
                                          =  +    +  

on a pre-event period of 250 trading days ending 30 days prior to event day 0. Although the
choice of estimation period length is subjective, a length of 250 days corresponds to roughly
one year of trading and has been used in other studies such as Jayachandran (2006) and Li
and Lie (2006). The cumulative abnormal returns show the actual returns of each firm less the
predicted returns of each firm based on that firm’s performance relative to the market over the
estimation period.25
    Panel B of Table 2 compares cumulative abnormal returns between connected firms and
non-connected firms in the base sample for event days 0 through 10. In contrast to the actual
returns reported in Panel A, no significant diﬀerence is reported between CARs of connected
firms and non-connected firms for the one hour of event day 0. Beginning on event day
turn) applies only to actual returns. In terms of abnormal returns (discussed below), there is no significant
underperformance of connected firms on event day 5.
  25
     We also calculated abnormal returns using a three-factor model, but the improvement in fit relative to the
market model was negligible.


                                                      13
1, the diﬀerences in CARs between connected firms and non-connected firms are relatively
large, but not statistically significant. Significant diﬀerences in CARs increase on subsequent
event days. The final row of Panel B shows that using the schedule measure, [0 10] for
connected firms is higher than [0 10] for non-connected firms by 15.7 percentage points.
The corresponding diﬀerences for the other measures are 15.8 percentage points and 11.0
percentage points, and in all cases the diﬀerence between the CARs is significant at the 1%
or 5% level. We repeat the analysis of Table 2 for the full sample and report those results in
Appendix Table A5. The results are fairly similar to those reported for the base sample.
   Table 2 shows strong performance of connected firms relative to non-connected firms in
response to Geithner’s nomination as Treasury Secretary. In the tests that follow, we assess
whether these results hold when controlling for other firm characteristics in a multivariate
setting.

4.2    OLS Regression Results

To control for additional characteristics of the sample firms, we first test the relationship
between connections to Geithner and cumulative abnormal returns in a regression framework.
We estimate the following equation:

                                     =  +  + z0 φ +                                     (1)

where  is either [0], [0 1], or [0 10] for firm ,  is a measure of connec-
tions for firm , and z is a set of firm-level covariates for firm  (such as firm size, profitability,
and leverage).
   The firm-level covariates are included to control for other basic firm characteristics that
could have some eﬀect on the observed relationship between connectedness and returns. A
common practice in regressions of this type in previous literature is to not control for firm-
level characteristics (see, e.g., Fisman (2001), Jayachandran (2006), Fisman et al. (2012)),
although Johnson and Mitton (2003) control for firm size and leverage and Jayachandran
(2006) controls for firm size in robustness checks.
   Results from such regressions could be confounded, however, by the diﬀerential eﬀects of
events following Geithner’s nomination on firms with diﬀerent characteristics. For this reason,
in the regressions that follow we control flexibly for a range of firm-level characteristics —
and, as a further step in this direction, we will also report results from various matching
estimators. In particular, firm size is included as a control because if Geithner had more


                                                  14
interaction with larger firms — and Panel B of Table 1 indicates that this is the case — then the
observed performance of Geithner-connected firms could be due to their size rather than to
their connections. Profitability is also an important control because it is an indicator of how
hard each firm had been impacted by the crisis, and it is possible that the firms that had been
hit the hardest also had the most to gain from Geithner’s appointment. Finally, leverage is
included as an additional indicator of the vulnerability of each firm during the crisis. For all of
these variables, we include cubics — i.e., the level, square, and cubed value — so as to account
for potential non-linear eﬀects.
   There might be other factors causing correlation of error terms (residual returns) across
firms. Unadjusted OLS standard errors would be biased in this case and could be too low.
To adjust for this possibility, we estimate adjusted standard errors that account for potential
cross-firm correlation of residual returns. We estimate the covariance matrix of returns using
pre-event return data on a window of 250 trading days ending 30 days prior to event day
0. This estimated covariance matrix is then used to calculate our standard errors, under the
assumption that the pre-event covariance matrix is an appropriate estimate of the covariance
matrix during the event. These adjusted standard errors should account for observed cross-
sectional correlation of returns between firms in our sample (see Greenwood (2005); Becker,
Bergstresser, and Subramanian (2013)). We use these adjusted standard errors below.
   Table 3 reports results of the estimation of equation (1). The adjusted standard errors
are reported below coeﬃcients in parentheses. The three measures of Geithner connections
(schedule, personal, and New York) are tested in turn. Although there is no established
standard in the literature for the appropriate length of the event window, we follow the practice
of first reporting results for shorter event windows ([0] and [0 1]) and then a longer
event window ([0 10]). The first three columns of the table report results for the full
sample with [0] as the dependent variable — the Citigroup bailout occurred after the
first trading day and thus correlation with Citigroup is not a concern when we use [0]. In
Column 1 the coeﬃcient on schedule connections is 0.0033, which indicates an abnormal return
of over 0.3% for each additional connection and is statistically significant at the 1% level. So,
for example, a firm with a number of connections equal to the sample average, conditional
on being connected (4.96 connections in the full sample), would have had an abnormal return
of roughly 1.6% on average, relative to non-connected firms during the last hour of trading
on November 21. The coeﬃcient on personal connections is significant at the 5% level and
indicates an abnormal return of over 0.7% for each additional personal connection, which also

                                                15
implies a similar average abnormal return of about 1.6% for the average connected firm (which
has 2.24 personal connections in the full sample). The coeﬃcient on New York connections is
significant at the 10% level and indicates that firms with New York connections had abnormal
returns of 1.3% relative to non-connected firms.26
       Columns 4 through 6 of Table 3 report results for [0 1] focusing on the base sample.
The coeﬃcients on schedule connections and personal connections are both positive and signif-
icant at the 1% level. The magnitude of the coeﬃcient on schedule connections indicates that
each additional interaction with Geithner during his tenure at the New York Fed is associated
with an abnormal return of 1.1% for event days 0 and 1 combined. This implies an abnormal
return of about 3.5% for the average connected firm (which has 3.16 schedule connections in
the base sample). The coeﬃcient on personal connections indicates an abnormal return of 5.0%
for each additional personal connection between Geithner and the firm, and thus an abnormal
return of about 8.8% for the average connected firm (which has 1.75 personal connections in
the base sample). The coeﬃcient on New York connections is not statistically significant.
       The last three columns of Table 3 report results for the estimation of equation (1) on the
base sample with [0 10] as the dependent variable. In these three columns the coeﬃcient
on Geithner connections is positive for all measures and significant at the 1% level for the
personal and New York measures. Compared to the quantitative magnitudes for [0 1],
the coeﬃcients on the personal and schedule measures are similar, but the coeﬃcient on the
New York measure is much larger, showing an abnormal return of 10.8% for connected firms.
       In summary, Table 3 reports economically meaningful and statistically significant cumula-
tive abnormal returns for Geithner-connected firms following the announcement of his nomi-
nation as Treasury Secretary, for both short and long event windows.27

4.2.1      Robustness Checks for OLS Results

We perform additional tests to assess the robustness of our baseline results reported in Table
3, and these are presented in Table 4. In this table and in others that follow, we suppress
reporting of the coeﬃcients of control variables for brevity, although we always include the
control variables (up to cubics in size, profitability, and leverage) in all specifications. To save
space we do not report results for New York connections in this table.
  26
     We do not report results for the base sample for [0], but the corresponding coeﬃcients in the base
sample are positive for all three measures and statistically significant for the New York measure.
  27
     We do not report results for the full sample for [0 1] and [0 10], but the corresponding coeﬃcients
in the full sample are generally larger and more precisely estimated than those reported for the base sample.



                                                      16
   We first address the question of whether Geithner-connected firms performed well after the
announcement of his nomination because of their personal connections to Geithner or because
Geithner’s appointment represented a signal that economic policy would be sensible. We get
at this question in four ways.
   Our first set of robustness checks controls for the vulnerability of firms to the macroeco-
nomic conditions prevailing at the time. These include the extent to which firms’ stock prices
declined in the immediate aftermath of the collapse of Lehman Brothers in September 2008 —
as a measure of how badly a firm might have suﬀered from the uncertainty or the fire sales
that a further collapse could have triggered (and that Geithner’s policies might have been
anticipated to mitigate). Specifically, we calculate the cumulative abnormal return starting on
the day of Lehman’s bankruptcy (Monday, September 15, 2008, is day 0 for this event) and
for the following four days, which comprises the entire trading week.
   As a second way to measure crisis vulnerability, we control for whether the firm is a deposit-
taking institution, as such institutions may have diﬀered in vulnerability to the crisis from other
financial firms. Using Worldscope data, we create a dummy variable for positive deposits.
Finally, we also control for whether firms had already received TARP funding prior to the
announcement of Geithner’s nomination, which can act as another proxy for the systemic
importance of a firm. TARP-approved firms were unlikely to collapse.
   Columns 1 and 2 of Table 4 report results controlling for all three of these proxies for crisis
vulnerability. The results are similar to our baseline results, with the exception that results for
[0 10] are somewhat weaker (Panel C). The coeﬃcients on the proxies for crisis vulnera-
bility (not reported in the table) are not always statistically significant in the regressions, but
the coeﬃcients on the Lehman bankruptcy CAR and the deposit-taking dummy are generally
negative, and the coeﬃcient on the TARP-funding dummy is generally positive.
   In Columns 3 and 4 we control for how firms responded to the announcement in early Oc-
tober that TARP funds would be used to recapitalize large banks. This decision was generally
regarded as the best of the available alternatives — so the response to this announcement oﬀers
another plausible way to control for how firms were aﬀected by sound policy decisions. This
decision was made public on Monday, October 13, with the announcement just after the stock
market closed — although it followed a meeting of top bankers at the Treasury Department
that was public knowledge. Similar European recapitalization plans had been unveiled over
the weekend, and this further contributed to the expectation that something similar would
happen in the United States. We calculate [0 1] for this event with October 13 as day

                                                17
0 and October 14 as day 1. Columns 3 and 4 show that controlling for this variable in our
regressions does not alter the main results. The eﬀect of being connected to Geithner remains
statistically significant.
       As a third approach we recalculate abnormal returns using an estimation window that is
focused on the turbulent period surrounding Lehman’s collapse — so our measure of expected
returns uses betas that reflect the response of each firm to market movements during this par-
ticular period. We calculate abnormal returns as described above, except that the estimation
period begins two weeks prior to the Lehman collapse (Monday, September 1, 2008) and ends
three weeks after the Lehman collapse (Friday, October 3, 2008), when Congress ultimately
approved EESA (which included TARP). Results using this measure of abnormal returns are
reported in Columns 5 and 6. The results show that the coeﬃcients on Geithner connections
are significant across all three panels in this specification and are all larger in magnitude than
the coeﬃcients in our baseline results.
       As a fourth approach, in Columns 7 and 8, we control more directly for the exposure of
financial firms to “toxic assets”. We measure exposure to toxic assets using data from Erel,
Nadauld, and Stulz (2013). We use their measure of holdings of mortgage-backed and asset-
backed securities (scaled by total assets) compiled from the Consolidated Financial Statements
for bank holding companies, as reported by the Federal Reserve Board of Governors. We use
data as of December 2008, and the variable is available for only 196 insured banks in our
sample. When controlling for this variable, the coeﬃcient on Geithner connections is highly
significant in all three panels. The coeﬃcient on “toxic assets” (not reported in the table) is
always positive and usually significant.28
       In our next robustness checks we test for the influence of the largest firms and extreme
observations on our results. Although we control flexibly for firm size throughout our analysis,
in Columns 9 and 10 we take another approach by limiting the sample to only the top size
decile of sample firms, thereby creating a subsample that is more homogenous in terms of size.
The coeﬃcient on Geithner connections is positive and statistically significant in four out of
six cases in this subsample.
       In Columns 11 and 12 we exclude firms that the administration deemed to be of systemic
importance, in that they were later included in the government-administered stress tests. The
  28
    We have also examined the eﬀect of including interactions between our various measures of exposure to a
further decline in asset prices (i.e., the control variables in Columns 1 through 4 and Columns 7 and 8) with the
Geithner connection variable. There are in general no robust and consistent interaction eﬀects between these
exposure variables and connections to Geithner.



                                                       18
firms that the government included in the stress tests (i.e., the Supervisory Capital Assessment
Program, SCAP) were those viewed in early 2009 as systemically important by the administra-
tion — and thus may have been more likely to benefit from bailouts similar to the one provided
to Citigroup or from other policies.29 These estimates are positive and significant in all but
one case. In Columns 13 and 14 we check for the influence of outliers by excluding firms
with extreme CARs, defined as those larger than the 99th percentile or smaller than the 1st
percentile. The Geithner coeﬃcient is significant in all but one case in this specification.
       As an additional robustness test, we consider whether results obtained for the schedule
measure of connections are robust when we calculate the number of connections using only
Geithner’s appointments from the year 2007. By 2008, the initial stages of the crisis were un-
derway, so Geithner may have had an increased number of meetings during this time with firms
aﬀected by the crisis. Using only 2007 appointments as the schedule measure of connections
puts the focus on pre-crisis relationships. The results using the 2007 measure are reported in
Column 15. As with our baseline results, the coeﬃcient on schedule connections is significant
at the 1% level for [0] and [0 1], but not for [0 10].
       To summarize, in the robustness checks in Table 4 the Geithner connection coeﬃcients gen-
erally retain statistical significance, although there are some exceptions. The magnitudes of the
coeﬃcients vary but are often larger than those reported in the corresponding baseline results
in Table 3. Table 4 indicates the positive relation between Geithner connections and abnormal
returns surrounding his nomination announcement is fairly robust in OLS specifications.30
       We also estimate similar results using various matching estimators. This includes propen-
sity score matching estimators in which firms were matched just on size; on primary control
variables (size, profitability and leverage); and on primary control variables plus other con-
trol variables (TARP participation dummy, deposit-taking dummy, and the CAR surrounding
the Lehman collapse). It also includes a nonparametric matching estimator, which estimates
the impact of connections on cumulative abnormal returns separately across 64 cells created
according to the covariates values and then combines them using the inverse standard errors
  29
      This excludes the following 17 firms from our sample: American Express, Bank of America, BB&T, Bank
of New York Mellon, Capital One, Citigroup, Fifth Third Bank, Goldman Sachs, JPMorgan Chase, Key Corp.,
Morgan Stanley, PNC Financial Services, Regions Financial, State Street, SunTrust, U.S. Bancorp, and Wells
Fargo. The other two SCAP participants, GMAC and MetLife, are not part of our sample.
   30
      To briefly summarize the results for the unreported New York measure of connections, it is statistically
significant (with the expected sign) in the following specifications: in Panels A and C when controlling for crisis
vulnerability, in Panels A and C when controlling for the TARP capital injections, in all three panels when
using the Lehman collapse beta, in Panel B when controlling for toxic assets, in Panel C when using the top
size decile only, in Panels A and C when excluding systemically important firms, and in Panels A and C when
excluding outliers.


                                                        19
of the estimates as weights. These results, which are reported in Appendix Table A6, show a
similar pattern to that found in our other robustness checks.

4.3      Synthetic Matching Methodology

The results presented so far — and most event studies of this type — implicitly assume that
the diﬀerences between the treatment group (Geithner-connected firms) and the control group
(non-connected firms) can be captured by a combination of the excess return calculation and
the covariates included in the regression model. But connected and non-connected firms may
be diﬀerent in other ways, which might be, at least partially, responsible for our results.
       As a complementary approach to address these concerns, we turn to the method of synthetic
matching developed in Abadie and Gardeazabal (2003) and Abadie, Diamond, and Hainmueller
(2009). The main idea of this method is to construct a synthetic match for each firm in the
treatment group (i.e., firms connected to Geithner) by using the firms in the control group in
such a way that the synthetic firm has similar behavior to the actual firm before the event of
interest. In contrast to the OLS results with flexible controls and the propensity score matching
and nonparametric estimates discussed above, which compare firms that are similar in terms
of the covariates, this approach compares firms that are similar in terms of the behavior of
their pre-event abnormal returns.
       The eﬀect of the event can be measured as a function of the diﬀerence between the behavior
of the firm and its synthetic match after the event. Abadie, Diamond, and Hainmueller (2009)
show that a primary reason to use this method is to control for the eﬀect of unobservable
factors that have an impact on the common time trend in the treatment and control groups.
       Most previous papers employ synthetic matching for the case of one entity in the treatment
group and one intervention. Since our sample includes many connected firms, we extend this
method for the case of many firms in the treatment group. As we explain below, inference is
based on confidence intervals we construct from the distribution of the “Geithner eﬀect” for
placebo treatment groups on Geithner’s nomination.31
       More formally, our synthetic matching procedure is as follows. First, we divide the firms
into treatment and control groups according to our measures of connections to Geithner. Then
we construct a synthetic match for each firm in the treatment group by solving the following
  31
    These intervals are constructed for testing the hypothesis of whether the eﬀect of Geithner connections is
zero or not — and are thus not standard confidence intervals.




                                                     20
optimization problem:
                                                                                             X       X
  ∀ ∈   {∗ }∈  =                     arg min                  [ −     ]2
                                                                { }∈                  ∈ 
                                                                                               ∈  

                   X
                    = 1      and ∀ ∈   ∀ ∈     ≥ 0
                  ∈ 

where  is the daily return on date  and  is the weight of control firm  employed in the
optimal weighting for firm . It is important that the estimation window not include the period
of intervention and it is typically selected as some period prior to the intervention. As before,
we use 250 trading days ending 30 days prior to the Geithner nomination announcement as our
                                        P
estimation window.32 The two criteria (  = 1 and  ≥ 0) imply the return for firms in
                                                  
the treatment group belong to convex combinations of returns for firms in the control group.
   After finding the optimal weights through iteration for each firm in the treatment group,
the return for the synthetic firm is constructed as:
                                                        X
                                            c =
                                                               
                                                      ∈ 

and the abnormal return is computed as the diﬀerence between the actual return and the
                       c ).
synthetic firm return (
   To estimate the eﬀect of intervention, we compute:
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                               
                                                        P                  −
                                                                     =0
                                                                           
                                 b  ) =      ∈  
                                 (                          P             1        
                                                                           
                                                    ∈  

where                                    v
                                         u         P                  c 2
                                         u
                                         t ∈  [ −  ]
                                 b =                                                   
                                                               
                         b  ) is the eﬀect of intervention at date  computed using cu-
   In the above formula, (
mulative abnormal returns of dates [   + ], 1b is a measure of goodness of the match in
the estimation window, and  is the length of the estimation window. This formula for the
average eﬀect of intervention on the treatment group is thus a weighted average formula, with
greater weight given to better matches. This is because the diﬀerence between actual returns
  32
     We find that the main results are robust to using other estimation windows. The results are somewhat
stronger when we use estimation windows closer to Geithner’s nomination starting from September 2008.



                                                         21
and synthetic firm returns should contain more information about the intervention when we
are better able to predict the return of the firms during the estimation window.
       To construct the confidence intervals, we randomly draw 5,000 placebo treatment groups
from the control group — with each group having the same size as the real treatment group.
We compute the Geithner-connection eﬀect for these placebo treatment groups on event days,
and construct the confidence intervals for hypothesis testing of whether the coeﬃcient is sig-
nificantly diﬀerent from zero. The eﬀect of Geithner connections is significant at 5% if it does
not belong to the interval that contains the [2.5, 97.5] percentiles of the eﬀect of the Geithner
connection for placebo treatment groups.
       Table 5 presents the results from the synthetic matching estimation. Because synthetic
matching requires a dichotomous definition of the treatment and control groups, we also con-
sider two additional definitions of connections: “highly connected” firms, which are defined as
those with more than two identified meetings with Geithner, and “mildly connected” firms,
which are those with one or two identified meetings.33
       Panel A of Table 5 presents results for the full sample in [0], and Columns 1 through 3
present results for all Geithner schedule connections (highly and mildly connected). Column 1
reports standard OLS results. In order to be comparable to the synthetic matching results, the
connections variable is a dummy (equal to one for firms with any number of connections). We
continue to adjust the OLS standard errors for pre-event correlations between firms, and the
OLS regressions include cubics in size, profitability, and leverage as before. Column 1 shows
that Geithner connections are associated with an abnormal return of 1.4% for the one-hour
return on day 0, and that this coeﬃcient is statistically insignificant. Below the coeﬃcient we
report the number of significant coeﬃcients obtained at each significance level when we test
the eﬀect of Geithner connections on 100 trading days between October 31, 2008, and April 7,
2009 (excluding key event dates), a period that does not overlap with our estimation period.
The number of significant coeﬃcients on non-event days indicates the drawback of using OLS
— i.e., the Geithner connections coeﬃcient is significant more often than would be expected.
       Column 2 presents the synthetic matching results as outlined above. The coeﬃcient on
  33
    Appendix Table A7 reports the weights on firms in our control group for each firm in our treatment group.
Our control group includes synthetic matches based on the characteristics of over 70 firms. For example, in
the synthetic match for Bank of America, Wells Fargo contributes a weight of 0.30. But Wells Fargo is not a
particularly good match for other firms in our treatment group — it contributes a weight of 0.19 for JPMorgan
Chase but not more than a 0.06 weight for any other firm. U.S. Bancorp contributes a weight of 0.41 for PNC,
but this is unusually high. The pattern for Citigroup is more common — one firm contributes a weight of 0.21
to the synthetic match, another eight firms contribute weights of between 0.08 and 0.13, and one other firm has
a weight of 0.01.


                                                      22
Geithner connections is smaller than in the OLS results and is not statistically significant.
The number of significant coeﬃcients shows that in the non-event-day tests, the Geithner
connections coeﬃcient is significant with a frequency that is much closer to what would be
expected in theory (e.g., at the 5% level, four times in a test window of 100 trading days).
This makes us more confident that in the synthetic matching method we are isolating the true
eﬀect of Geithner connections rather than the eﬀect of some other correlation among Geithner-
connected firms (which would have led to more frequent rejections on non-event days).
       Column 3 presents “corrected” synthetic matching results in which for our inference proce-
dure we eliminate firms for which we do not have a good synthetic match, defined as the firms
                                        √
in the control group with b more than 3 times the average  b for the real treatment group
firms.34 Although the formula used in the synthetic matching method already gives greater
weight to firms with better matches, we present the corrected results as a robustness check
to ensure that our confidence intervals are appropriate. The corrected results are similar to
the uncorrected results in Column 2. Columns 4 through 6 present a similar set of results
for the “highly connected” indicator, and Columns 7 through 9 for the “mildly connected”
indicator. As expected, the results are stronger for highly connected firms. Overall, Panel A
suggests that the eﬀect of Geithner connections on the one-hour day 0 returns is positive but
not statistically significant once the synthetic matching adjustments are made.
       Panel B of Table 5 repeats the tests of Panel A but for our base sample in [0 1]. These
tests show a much stronger eﬀect of Geithner connections, even in the synthetic matching
results. Column 2 shows that Geithner connections are associated with an abnormal return of
6.0%, which is economically sizable and statistically significant at the 1% level. As expected,
the results are even stronger for highly connected firms relative to mildly connected firms.
       Finally, Panel C repeats the results for [0 10]. The coeﬃcients in Columns 2 and
3 indicate a 12.4% abnormal return associated with Geithner connections. Once again the
matching estimate for highly connected firms is larger than for mildly connected firms.35 Taken
as a whole, Panels B and C show that the synthetic matching methodology confirms the
presence of a positive and significant eﬀect of Geithner connections at horizons longer than the
  34
     For both the schedule and personal measures, all connected firms have a relatively good synthetic match,
so the main eﬀect of changing the cutoﬀ is to change the estimated confidence intervals and not the estimated
coeﬃcient. We have tried various values for this parameter, including
                                                                    √ 1 (which eliminates all√the firms with
 larger than the average of 
                               for firms in the treatment group ), 3, and values larger than 3. The larger
the cutoﬀ, the closer the estimates are to uncorrected synthetic matching. Our results are not sensitive to this
range of cutoﬀ values.
  35
     In Panel C, the Geithner connections coeﬃcient tends to have more significant coeﬃcients in the non-event-
day tests, relative to the shorter-horizon CARs.


                                                      23
one-hour day 0 returns.

4.3.1      Robustness Checks for Synthetic Matching

Table 6 presents robustness checks for the synthetic matching results, focusing on [0 1].
In Panel A, we use the financial crisis estimation window (from September 1, 2008 to October
3, 2008) as reported above in the OLS robustness checks (see Columns 5 and 6 in Table 4). The
main results are similar to those presented in Panel B of Table 5. The primary diﬀerence is
that the eﬀect is stronger for highly connected firms while it is no longer significant for mildly
connected firms. Panel B uses the personal measure of connections. In these regressions the
coeﬃcient on Geithner connections is significant at the 5% level for highly connected firms. (In
Panels B and D, “highly connected” is defined as more than one connection because there are
fewer connections per firm using these definitions of connections.)
       In Panel C, we use the New York measure of connections to Geithner. Again the results
show the estimated Geithner connection coeﬃcient is statistically significant, although the size
of the coeﬃcient is smaller than with the other measures. This could be due to attenuation
bias since having headquarters in New York is a noisier measure of connections to Geithner.36
In Panel D we use just information from Geithner’s 2007 schedule to create the connections
variable and find that the synthetic matching results are robust to this change.
       In robustness checks not reported in the table, we have also examined whether our results
(OLS or synthetic matching) are dependent upon any single Geithner-connected firm. As the
number of Geithner-connected firms is relatively small, particularly in the base sample, it is
not surprising that in some specifications the significance of the results is altered when one
observation is excluded from the sample. We find that the connected firm that has the most
impact when dropped from the sample is Blackstone Group. Geithner’s connections to Black-
stone were strong, as evidenced by his personal and schedule connections (see Appendix Table
A1) and by the fact that Peter G. Peterson (co-founder and Senior Chairman of Blackstone
until December 31, 2008) was chairman of the board of directors of the New York Fed when
Geithner was picked to head that institution. Excluding Blackstone Group from the sample
negatively impacts the significance of the OLS results (but not the synthetic matching results)
for CAR[0,1] in the base sample, both because the point estimates change somewhat and
because confidence intervals also widen when a connected firm is excluded from the sample.
  36
     In an additional robustness check, we repeated our analysis just within the sample of New York firms. In
this case again, Geithner-connected firms had significantly higher abnormal returns.



                                                     24
Excluding Blackstone has less impact on the CAR[0,10] results, and no impact on whether
coeﬃcients are significant in the CAR[0] results or in the CDS results (reported in the next
section). Our robustness checks also show that there are occasions when excluding a particular
firm from the sample strengthens the results by making coeﬃcients that are otherwise insignif-
icant become significant. Across all specifications, the balance of the eﬀect from dropping
individual firms is roughly equal — i.e., a handful of results become insignificant and a handful
become significant. Our CDS results are not aﬀected by dropping any individual firm.37
       Table 7 provides our first falsification exercise. It investigates whether the positive re-
sponse of Geithner-connected firms is due to mean reversion of returns prior to the nomination
announcement, perhaps due to a Citigroup downturn preceding its November 2008 bailout.
We test whether Geithner connections were significant in the days before the announcement
using, in turn, [−1 0] in Panel A, [−5 0] in Panel B, and [−10 0] in Panel C.
In Columns 1 through 3 of Table 7 we present results for schedule connections. These columns
show that there is a negative trend for Geithner-connected firms prior to the announcement,
but none of the estimates is statistically significant. In Columns 4 and 5 we present results
comparable to Column 1, but for personal and New York connections. Again, the pre-trend is
negative, but not statistically significant except for [−10 0] for New York connections.
       In Figure 1 we show the pre-trend of the eﬀect of Geithner connections graphically. The
figure shows the coeﬃcient on Geithner connections for [  + 1] for each trading day 
in the month of November 2008. The coeﬃcients reported are synthetic matching results for
the base sample. Panel A shows results for all connected firms, and Panel B shows results
for highly connected firms. Each panel also reports confidence intervals for hypothesis testing
for [  + 1] at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels. Visually, the figures do not demonstrate any
consistent pattern of negative coeﬃcients prior to the nomination event, particularly in Panel B.
The figures also show that the nomination event stands out as the most statistically significant
event during the period, being the only day with significance at the 1% level.                  Panel B in
particular shows no pre-trend as the Geithner connection coeﬃcient lies inside the confidence
intervals for the entire period before the nomination. Together, Table 7 and Figure 1 suggest
that the positive reaction of Geithner-connected firms to the nomination announcement was
not just a reversal of previous trends.
  37
    As a robustness check, we also performed synthetic matching for CAR[0,1] for the sample of deposit-taking
firms and for the sample of non-deposit-taking firms separately. The resulting estimated coeﬃcients for the
Getihner connection are 6.7% and 6.0%; both are significant at the 5% level.




                                                     25
4.4    CDS Spreads

If the market perceived that benefits would accrue to Geithner-connected firms from his ap-
pointment as Treasury Secretary, then the news of his nomination should have impacted not
just stock returns of connected firms but also the probability of default for connected firms —
as reflected in their credit default swap spreads. If market participants expected that Geithner
or his associates could protect connected firms from bankruptcy or other trigger events, then
one would expect CDS spreads on the debt of connected firms to fall relative to non-connected
firms upon the Geithner nomination announcement.
    Because data on CDS spreads are available for relatively few firms, we view CDS spreads as
a secondary measure of firm performance. We obtain CDS data from the data provider Markit
for every firm in the full sample with available data, which gives us a sample of 27 firms
for our CDS tests. Each firm has multiple CDS listings for various maturities and contract
specifications. For our tests we use CDS contracts of five-year maturities (the most common
tenor) on senior unsecured debt (the most common priority level) with modified restructuring
provisions (the most common provision). Summary statistics for CDS spreads are reported in
row 10 of Table 1. At the time of the Geithner nomination announcement, the average spread
among sample firms was 465 basis points, with a median spread of 233 basis points.
    Table 8 reports estimations of equation (1) in which the dependent variable is the percentage
change in the CDS spread rather than the CAR in stock prices.38 (Summary statistics for
CDS spread changes are reported in rows 11 and 12 of Table 1). We report results only for
the full sample, with and without Citigroup, because there are not enough firms with CDS
data in the base sample to estimate the model. Panel A reports OLS results, first for the
percentage change in CDS spreads on day 1, and then for the percentage change in CDS
spreads from day 1 to day 10. Results are not reported for day 0 because of the unavailability
of intraday quotes on CDS spreads. Included but not reported in the regressions are the
same control variables from previous regressions. As in the CAR results, the standard errors
in these regressions are adjusted for pre-event correlations between firms. Panel A shows
that for all three measures of connections the coeﬃcient on Geithner connections is negative
whether Citigroup is included or not and for both return horizons. In the first five columns,
the coeﬃcient is statistically significant. The negative coeﬃcient is as predicted, in that the
Geithner nomination is associated with a reduction in the premium required for insurance on
  38
     Percentage changes in spreads are more appropriate as the dependent variable than are raw changes in
spreads because the magnitude of spreads varies widely among firms, particularly during the crisis period.


                                                   26
the debt of Geithner-connected firms. As an example of interpretation of the magnitude of these
eﬀects, the coeﬃcient of -0.014 in Column 1 indicates that each additional schedule connection
is associated with a 1.4% drop in a firm’s CDS spread on day 1. For an average-spread firm
with five schedule connections, this would imply a fall of 33 basis points.
       Panel B of Table 8 reports synthetic matching results. Again the coeﬃcient on Geithner
connections is negative in all cases, and it is statistically significant in all but two cases. In
some specifications the estimated eﬀects are particularly large. For example, in Column 9, the
coeﬃcient of -0.203 indicates that New York connections are associated with a 20.3% drop in
a firm’s CDS spread from day 1 to day 10 (about 99 basis points for an average-spread firm).
In short, the results in Table 8 are complementary to the results for stock returns and are
supportive of the hypothesis that the market expected benefits for Geithner-connected firms
when the Geithner nomination was announced.

4.5      Additional Falsification Checks

As additional falsification checks, we investigate the eﬀect of significant positive — and negative
— news about economic policy on Geithner-connected firms at moments when Geithner did
not have the same amount of influence as he could have been presumed to have as Treasury
Secretary. We also look at the implications of Henry Paulson’s earlier nomination as Treasury
Secretary, and the value of connections to other candidates at the time of Geithner’s nomination
event.
       First, we perform the same procedure as we do for the Geithner nomination event, but
for other event windows. Specifically, we examine the eﬀect of the Bear Stearns rescue and
purchase by JPMorgan Chase in March 2008. If Geithner-connected firms are diﬀerent from
others and tend to respond more to certain types of financial or macroeconomic policy, we
may expect them to outperform others during this event window also. In particular, in this
instance, there was market concern that the failure of Bear Stearns would cause market dis-
ruption or some form of contagion. The Federal Reserve became involved in helping JPMorgan
acquire Bear Stearns, including by providing some insurance against losses that might occur
on mortgage-related securities.39
       However, we find no bump up for Geithner-connected firms on or after Monday, March 17,
2008 (the purchase was announced on March 16). This is consistent with the notion that even
  39
    As president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Geithner was closely involved in the details of this
deal — and the presence of Jamie Dimon, CEO of JPMorgan, on the board of the New York Fed raised some
eyebrows at the time.


                                                     27
as head of the New York Fed, Geithner was operating within a constrained environment with
strong oversight — including by the Board of Governors in Washington, D.C. In addition, the
overall macroeconomic situation was not viewed as dire as it became in fall 2008. There was
little sense that a major crisis was approaching.
       In a similar vein, we also look for a statistically significant gain in value for Geithner-
connected firms when AIG received support in September 2008, when Congress struggled to
pass emergency economic legislation in late September and early October 2008, and when
capital injections to big firms were announced shortly afterwards. In none of these instances
did Geithner-connected firms show significant diﬀerential gains relative to other firms using
the synthetic matching methodology.40
       We also examine the connections of Henry Paulson, the previous Treasury Secretary, ap-
plying the same method of identifying personal connections. His only identifiable connection
on muckety.com is with Goldman Sachs — where Mr. Paulson spent most of his career. On
the day of Paulson’s announcement (May 30, 2006), Goldman Sachs stock fell by 2.0% (the
S&P 500 fell by 1.6% that day), and in the 10 days following the announcement, Goldman fell
by 5.2% (the S&P fell by 3.3%). Clearly this is only one observation, but Paulson’s appoint-
ment (during an economic boom) did not appear to have a positive eﬀect on his connections,
consistent with the idea that connections matter more during crisis periods.
       Finally, we study the reaction of firms linked to other leading candidates for the position of
Treasury Secretary. If some unobservable characteristic makes some firms both more likely to
be connected to Geithner and also more likely to perform well during our event window, then
we might expect the same characteristic to lead to greater connections to other candidates. If
connections to other candidates also matter during the event window, this would raise questions
about our interpretation. Our results in this section do not indicate such a pattern.
       After Geithner, the next leading candidates in the week prior to the announcement were
Lawrence Summers, Jon Corzine, Paul Volcker, and Sheila Bair.41 As of November 15, 2008,
  40
     There was no stock market rally on the day EESA/TARP passed Congress (October 3, 2008); the S&P
return was -1.4% that day. There was a large decline on the day that TARP did not pass the House (September
29, 2008), with the S&P down -8.8%. In calculating the response to capital injections, we exclude firms that
received direct injections of capital.
  41
     There are reasons why people might have expected some other candidates to follow diﬀerent policies as
Treasury Secretary — policies that might have been less favorable to the types of financial firms with which
Geithner was connected. For example, Corzine, despite having served as chair of Goldman Sachs in the 1990s,
was now the favored candidate for at least part of the labor movement. Bair favored a narrower loan guarantee
program than Geithner in October, and also eventually supported the sale of Wachovia to Wells Fargo — while
Geithner preferred Citigroup as a buyer. Bair also advocated for relatively more assistance for homeowners
and relatively less for financial institutions. Volcker’s primary reputational attribute was the idea that he was
willing to make hard choices for the good of the country, including inflicting pain when necessary, a reputation


                                                       28
the probabilities of each candidate obtaining the job, according to Intrade’s prediction market,
were 45% for Geithner, 26% for Summers, 10% for Corzine, 9% for Volcker, and 8% for Bair.42
We follow the procedure discussed above, using data from muckety.com, to find personal con-
nections to firms for these candidates. We list the firms connected to the other candidates and
the nature of those connections in Appendix Table A8.
    We conduct OLS regressions to test the eﬀect of connections to all candidates on cumulative
abnormal returns following the Geithner announcement.43 We employ the full sample in these
tests in order to retain a reasonable number of connections to the other candidates (although
we continue to exclude Citigroup from the regressions). Results of these tests are reported in
Table 9. The first three columns report results with [0 1] as the dependent variable. For
purposes of comparison, Column 1 reports coeﬃcients for Geithner connections alone. Column
2 reports the result with the measures of Summers, Corzine, Volcker, and Bair connections
included. The coeﬃcient on Geithner connections remains significant — the coeﬃcient increases
from 0.020 to 0.023 and the standard error increases from 0.005 to 0.010. The coeﬃcients on
connections for Summers and Corzine are positive but not significant.44 The coeﬃcients are
negative for the other two candidates.
    In Column 3, we create a combined connections variable — this is a dummy variable equal
to one if a firm is connected to either Summers, Corzine, Volcker, or Bair. When included in
a regression with the Geithner connection variable, this variable is small and positive but far
from significant (coeﬃcient of 0.002 with a standard error of 0.007). The Geithner connections
coeﬃcient remains significant: a coeﬃcient of 0.017 with a standard error of 0.010.45
    In the final three columns of Table 9 we repeat the same structure of regressions but with
the percentage change in CDS spreads as the dependent variable (this is a small sample and
we do not have data on any Bair-connected firms). The coeﬃcient on Geithner connections
earned in combating high inflation during the early 1980s. Although he had worked for Chase Manhattan in the
1950s and 1960s, and had been president of the New York Fed in the 1970s, by 2008 he was considered highly
independent of any influence.
   42
      James Pethokoukis, “Geithner Tops Odds for Next Treasury Secretary,” U.S. News & World Report, No-
vember 15, 2008.
   43
      There is no straightforward equivalent of the synthetic matching approach in this case because there are
multiple connections (“treatments”).
   44
      One might expect a negative reaction of Summers-connected firms because these firms did not get a Treasury
Secretary with which they had connections. But this expectation is clouded by two factors. First, because
Geithner and Summers have interacted with people in similar circles, there is a large overlap between Geithner
connections and Summers connections (correlation = 0.87). Second, on the day of Geithner’s announcement as
Treasury Secretary, Barack Obama also announced Summers as his choice for director of the National Economic
Council. Summers would still have been expected to have major influence over economic decisions.
   45
      We find similar results when we include connections to other potential candidates one by one, but this is a
less compelling specification from a theoretical perspective, and we do not report the details here.



                                                       29
is negative and significant in Columns 4, 5, and 6, again indicating that the market expected
benefits specifically for Geithner-connected firms.
         When included separately, the coeﬃcients are positive and significant for Corzine- and
Volcker-connected firms; the coeﬃcient on Summers-connected firms is negative but not signif-
icant.46 When we combine all non-Geithner connections in Column 6, this variable is positive
(and thus opposite-signed) and significant. In this case, the Geithner eﬀect is twice the magni-
tude as in Column 4 (-0.070 compared with -0.035), although the standard error also doubles,
reflecting some degree of multicollinearity in the smaller CDS sample.
         Overall, the falsification exercises reported in this subsection do not suggest that we are
spuriously capturing the reaction of Geithner-connected firms to major events (unrelated to
the nomination of Timothy Geithner). Nor are we picking up the response of a certain type of
firm that tends to be both highly connected to leading figures and more likely to benefit from
certain kinds of (potentially) sound macroeconomic policies that Timothy Geithner may have
been expected to pursue. Our results also suggest that the timing of Geithner’s appointment,
in the midst of the crisis, was crucial to our finding that connections matter — as we do not
find similar reactions to the announcement of Henry Paulson as Treasury Secretary.


5         Geithner’s Tax Problems

A secondary event related to Geithner’s nomination as Treasury Secretary allows us to further
test the relation between Geithner connections and firm value. On Tuesday, January 13, 2009,
the Senate Finance Committee publicly disclosed that Geithner had failed to pay over $34,000
in taxes while an employee of the International Monetary Fund. This disclosure cast doubt
on whether Geithner would be confirmed by the Senate. If the market expected Geithner-
connected firms to derive value from his position as Treasury Secretary, then this event should
have been associated with negative stock returns for Geithner-connected firms, at least to the
extent that the market believed that Geithner’s confirmation was truly in jeopardy.
         To measure the impact of this news on Geithner-connected firms, we define event day 0
as January 14, 2009, because the Senate Finance Committee announcement was made after
the market closed on January 13, 2009. As for the end of the event period, it is impossible to
determine exactly when it became clear to most market participants that Geithner would be
confirmed, despite the tax issue. We examined all articles concerning Geithner and his taxes
    46
    The samples for stock prices and for CDS spreads are very diﬀerent — hence the diﬀerence in results between
Columns 1 through 3 and 4 through 6, e.g., for Corzine connections.


                                                      30
appearing in The Wall Street Journal, beginning on January 14. The first article to predict
that Geithner would be confirmed appeared on Wednesday, January 21, or event day 4.47 (The
markets were closed on Monday, January 19.)
       We first perform univariate tests in which we compare actual returns between connected
and non-connected firms for event days 0 through 4. In these tests we alter the base sample
to also exclude the top 10% of firms based on return correlation with Bank of America, as the
Geithner tax event occurred shortly after a new Bank of America bailout was announced. We
find that from event day 0 through event day 3, using the schedule measure of connections,
connected firms underperformed non-connected firms by 7.9 percentage points, a diﬀerence that
is significant at the 5% level. This result is consistent with a loss of value for Geithner-connected
firms due to his tax issues. Personal connections and New York connections demonstrate
this same underperformance, although the results are not statistically significant using these
measures of connections. We also find that the fortunes of connected firms reversed on event
day 4, when Geithner’s confirmation appeared to be solidified, as connected firms outperformed
non-connected firms on this day. The positive abnormal returns on event day 4 are statistically
significant for two of the three mesaures of connections.
       We perform similar univariate tests for actual returns for the full sample, as well as for
cumulative abnormal returns for both the base sample and the full sample.                 These sets of
results show a similar pattern of negative and significant returns through day 3 that tend
to reverse on day 4, although there are exceptions to this pattern. Generally speaking, the
pattern is stronger and more statistically significant when using the full sample rather than
the base sample, and the pattern is weaker when using cumulative abnormal returns rather
than actual returns. Appendix Table A9 presents all of these results in detail. Overall, the
pattern of returns in the univariate results is consistent with the hypothesis that Geithner’s
tax problems created a negative shock to Geithner connections, and that concern over the news
dissipated after a few days, particularly on event day 4.
       We also estimate the eﬀect of Geithner connections during his tax problems in a regression
framework. We estimate equation (1) for the tax event, including all standard control variables
as in our previous regressions. The OLS results show that Geithner connections tend to be
associated with negative returns when Geithner’s tax problems were disclosed, though these
estimates are less precise than our main results and often are not significant. In some cases
  47
    Deborah Solomon, “The Inauguration: Tax Issue Won’t Derail Geithner,” The Wall Street Journal, January
21, 2009.



                                                   31
the coeﬃcient on Geithner connections is positive, particularly for New York connections. The
synthetic matching results are more consistent with the univariate results, as the coeﬃcient
on Geithner connections is almost always negative and often significant. Appendix Table A10
presents these regression results in detail. Overall, although the regression results are fairly
imprecise, the univariate and regression results together are consistent with the hypothesis
that connections to Geithner were a source of value for connected firms, but the market may
have correctly anticipated that tax issues would not prevent Geithner’s confirmation.


6         After the Announcement

The results above imply that market participants expected a Geithner Treasury to benefit
financial institutions that had connections to the incoming Secretary. Even without specifying
a precise channel of influence, the finding that people — via the markets — thought that connec-
tions to the incoming Treasury Secretary would pay oﬀ in financial terms is itself noteworthy.
         There is a further question that still deserves consideration, however: whether the expec-
tations revealed by this event study were sensible. In particular, did the “social connections
meets the crisis” view make sense around the time of Timothy Geithner’s nomination as Trea-
sury Secretary? By its nature, this is not a question that can be answered conclusively, but at
least some pieces of evidence — which we now discuss — are consistent with this interpretation.

6.1        Hiring

Geithner hired a number of key people from prominent Wall Street firms, including from those
with which he had a strong connection. Mark Patterson, a former Goldman Sachs lobbyist,
became his chief of staﬀ. Lee Sachs, previously with Bear Stearns and Mariner Investment
Group, became a senior adviser to Geithner with responsibility for helping to design financial
sector policies. Herb Allison, who was brought in to run TARP as assistant secretary, was
formerly a senior executive at Merrill Lynch and TIAA-CREF. David Miller, a Goldman Sachs
alumnus, became TARP’s chief investment oﬃcer; as a member of the Paulson Treasury, he
had been involved in the bailouts of late 2008 and early 2009.48
         Not all of Geithner’s staﬀ came from Wall Street. For example, Neal Wolin, whose pri-
vate sector experience was at The Hartford, an insurance company, became Deputy Treasury
Secretary. However, Wolin had previously worked in the Rubin-Summers Treasury, so this is
    48
    Michael J. De La Merced, “Treasury’s Warrior at the Negotiating Table,” The New York Times, January
31, 2011.



                                                   32
consistent with Geithner hiring people from within his personal network.

6.2      From Nomination to Confirmation

Geithner’s nomination was leaked to the press on November 21, 2008, but he was not con-
firmed by the Senate until January 26, 2009. In the interim, he undoubtedly had influence on
policymaking within Treasury, both as president of the New York Fed and the likely incoming
Treasury Secretary. This period was marked by two high-profile interventions: the bailout of
Citigroup in late November and the bailout of Bank of America in January. These bailouts
represented major emergency subsidies from the Treasury Department. In each case, the bank
received additional TARP capital, but the government also agreed to guarantee a pool of assets
against declines in value. These guarantees were eﬀectively a non-transparent and underpriced
form of insurance (compared with what such guarantees would have cost in the free market).49
       While the Citigroup bailout (November 2008 edition) was always understood as a means of
saving the bank, it was reported in January 2009 that the Bank of America bailout had been
promised in exchange for the bank agreeing to complete its acquisition of Merrill Lynch, then
the third-largest investment bank on Wall Street. In April 2009, an investigation by New York
Attorney General Andrew Cuomo further revealed that then-Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson
had threatened to replace Ken Lewis as CEO of Bank of America if he refused to complete
the Merrill acquisition. These interventions clearly benefited Citigroup, which otherwise might
have failed, and Merrill Lynch, which otherwise would almost certainly have failed. Whether
they benefited Bank of America is another question that is diﬃcult to answer. As losses
mounted at Merrill in December 2008, it may have become rational for Bank of America to
walk away from the planned acquisition; the subsidy provided by the government in the form
of the January bailout may or may not have compensated it for those additional losses. The
net eﬀect was to press a North Carolina-based bank (with relatively small investment banking
operations) to complete its acquisition of a New York-based investment bank.

6.3      Rescue Programs Under Geithner

Geithner’s Capital Assistance Program (CAP) was one mechanism for providing capital to
banks that needed it. The terms of the CAP were generally favorable to the recipients of
capital, but it is not obvious whether the program was more or less favorable than the Capital
  49
    According to the TARP Congressional Oversight Panel, the Citigroup bailout contained an implicit subsidy
of 50%, as compared to a subsidy of 22% in the TARP Capital Purchase Program. Congressional Oversight
Panel, “February Oversight Report: Valuing Treasury’s Acquisitions,” February 6, 2009.



                                                    33
Purchase Program that was created by Paulson in October 2008. Investments under the CAP
were in convertible preferred stock, which has the potential to dilute existing bank shareholders.
However, the conversion option was held by the bank, not by Treasury.50
       At the same time, the CAP was coupled with bank stress tests that were conducted in
March and April 2009 on 19 major financial institutions. Of the 19 institutions, ten were
found to need additional capital. The complexity of bank balance sheets, and the process by
which the test results were released, left significant room for firm-specific negotiation. At least
Citigroup, Bank of America, PNC Financial, and Wells Fargo negotiated with the government
over the final stress test results. According to The Wall Street Journal, “The Federal Reserve
significantly scaled back the size of the capital hole facing some of the nation’s biggest banks
shortly before concluding its stress tests, following two weeks of intense bargaining.”51 This
created latitude for regulators to take actions that might favor some banks over others.52
       The Public-Private Investment Program (PPIP) delivered on the expectation that Geithner
would revive Paulson’s original plan to purchase banks’ troubled assets. The PPIP oﬀered
non-recourse government loans and FDIC loan guarantees to private sector investors willing to
acquire troubled assets. This plan eﬀectively provided a subsidy to these investors in order to
increase their willingness to pay for the assets and help close the gap that separated bids and
asks in the open market. Therefore, the plan aimed to benefit banks holding large amounts of
troubled assets, but it also benefited buy-side institutions such as hedge funds, private equity
firms, and asset management firms that could participate in the program. According to Neil
Barofsky, then Special Inspector General for TARP, “PPIP had been designed by Wall Street,
for Wall Street” — in particular, by BlackRock, the Trust Company of the West Group, and
PIMCO, suggesting that there was some potential for well-connected financial institutions to
influence government policy at key moments during the financial crisis.53
       Following Geithner’s confirmation, Treasury engaged in fewer firm-specific interventions
than in the November 2008—January 2009 period. The two big exceptions were the Citigroup
bailout on February 27, 2009, and the AIG bailout on March 2, 2009.
  50
      “Capital Assistance Program, Summary of Mandatorily Convertible Preferred Stock (‘Convertible Pre-
ferred’) Terms,” Treasury Department fact sheet, February 25, 2009, available at www.treasury.gov/press-
center/press-releases/Documents/tg40_captermsheet.pdf.
   51
      David Enrich, Dan Fitzpatrick, and Marshall Eckblad, “Banks Won Concessions on Tests,” The Wall Street
Journal, May 9, 2009.
   52
      For example, the decision to base capital requirements on Tier 1 common capital rather than tangible
common equity aﬀected diﬀerent banks diﬀerently, arguably hurting Wells Fargo the most. Ibid.; Felix Salmon,
“Chart of the Day: Common Capital vs. TCE,” Reuters, May 9, 2009.
   53
      Barofsky (2012), p. 129. Bloomberg reports that BlackRock did very well on its TTIP-related investments,
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2012-12-05/blackrock-liquidates-ppip-fund-earning-u-s-treasury-24-.html.


                                                     34
         In late February 2009, there were signs that Citigroup was facing another wholesale bank
run, most evident in its declining stock price, the falling price of its subordinated bonds, and the
rising price of credit default swap protection on its senior bonds. Geithner’s initial proposal was
to split Citigroup into a “good bank” and a “bad bank”. According to Sheila Bair, this would
have transferred all of the bank’s losses to the FDIC, “without imposing any loss absorption on
shareholders and bondholders,” and letting “Citi’s private stakeholders take all of the upside”
(Bair (2012), p. 167). The government’s eventual response was to engineer a preferred-for-
common swap including both the Treasury Department and several large investors in Citigroup;
however, many of the preferred shareholders and subordinated debt investors were not required
to convert their investments into common stock.54 The bank’s common stock price fell on the
news, so presumably the market was expecting an even more generous bailout.55
         After a disastrous fourth quarter of 2008 that threatened AIG’s viability as a going concern,
the government improved the terms on its existing preferred stock and AIG’s credit line, and
invested more cash in exchange for more preferred stock.56 By this point, AIG was largely
owned by the U.S. government, so the bailout was not intended to benefit AIG’s shareholders;
instead, its goal was to keep AIG afloat in order to minimize collateral damage to other firms.
Because it was still considered solvent, AIG was able to honor its commitments to its counter-
parties, largely credit default swap protection it had sold to other financial institutions such as
Goldman Sachs, Merrill Lynch, Bank of America, Citigroup, Wachovia, Morgan Stanley, and
JPMorgan Chase. As a result of AIG being able to make its counterparties whole, these banks
received more cash than they would have if AIG had failed.57


7         Conclusion

The announcement of Timothy Geithner as President-elect Obama’s nominee for Treasury
Secretary in November 2008 produced a cumulative abnormal return for financial firms with
    54
      “Transaction Outline,” Treasury Department fact sheet, February 27, 2009, available at
www.treasury.gov/press-center/press-releases/Documents/transaction_outline.pdf.
   55
      Citigroup (along with GM and AIG) also benefited from “Notices” issued by the Treasury Department
allowing the company to keep the tax benefits provided by its past net operating losses — a policy that has been
contested by a number of commentators and legal scholars. See, for example, Ramseyer and Rasmussen (2011).
   56
      “U.S.    Treasury   and    Federal  Reserve     Board     Announce      Participation     in    AIG    Re-
structuring     Plan,”   Treasury   Department     press    release,    March     2,    2009,      available  at
www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/other/20090302a.htm
   57
      Goldman Sachs claimed that even if AIG had collapsed, its positions with AIG were fully hedged. Peter
Edmonston, “Goldman Insists It Would Have Lost Little If A.I.G. Had Failed,” The New York Times, March
20, 2009. Barofsky argues that AIG did not need to pay 100 cents on the dollar, but there was no serious
attempt to negotiate a reduction in payments (Barofsky (2012), pp. 186-187).



                                                      35
which he had a connection relative to other comparable, non-connected firms. According to
our estimates, this excess return was about 6% at the close of the first full day of trading after
the announcement and about 12% after ten trading days. Our findings are fairly robust and
similar using diﬀerent measures of connections, with flexible controls for firm size and other
characteristics, and also with a synthetic matching methodology. There were subsequently
abnormal negative returns for connected firms when news broke that Geithner’s confirmation
might be derailed by tax issues, although these returns are less precisely estimated.
   It is implausible to interpret these results as evidence of Geithner being corrupted or seek-
ing material gain. Instead, in our view, the excess returns for being connected to Geithner
reflect the market’s expectation that, during a period of turbulence and unusually high policy
discretion, the new Treasury Secretary would need to rely on a core group of employees and
a small social network for real-time advice — and that these employees were likely to be hired
from financial institutions with which Geithner had connections. This motivates the “social
connections meets the crisis” interpretation.
   We lean towards this interpretation because our results cannot be explained by the idea
that Geithner just brought a safe pair of hands to the management of the economy, or by the
notion that Geithner and his advisors solely favored large, complex Wall Street firms at the
expense of other financial institutions. Our results control flexibly for firm size, profitability,
and leverage, and are based, therefore, on diﬀerences between connected and non-connected
financial institutions of roughly the same size. Consistent with this interpretation, Geithner’s
Treasury initially hired key personnel from financial institutions with which he was connected,
and some of the decisions of his department can be interpreted as being, at the margin, favorable
to connected firms (in particular for Citigroup, on which we have the most detailed anecdotal
evidence).
   If our interpretation is correct, benefits to connected firms are temporary — and very much
related to the crisis atmosphere of November 2008. Once policy discretion declines and the
speed with which important decisions have to be taken slows down, these connections should
become less important. This is consistent with Querubín and Snyder’s (2013) findings from
the Civil War era, where the excess wealth gains of congressmen disappear after the end of the
large government expenditures and discretion. Whether this is in fact the case in the modern
U.S. context remains an area for further research.




                                                36
   References
   Abadie, A., and J. Gardeazabal, 2003. The economic costs of conflict: a case study of the
Basque country. American Economic Review 93, 113-132.
   Abadie, A., A. Diamond, and J. Hainmueller, 2010. Synthetic control methods for com-
parative case studies: estimating the eﬀect of California’s tobacco control program. Journal of
the American Statistical Association, 105, 493-505.
   Akey, P., 2013. Valuing changes in political networks: evidence from campaign contribu-
tions to close congressional elections. Unpublished working paper, January.
   Bair, S., 2012. Bull by the horns: fighting to save Main Street from Wall Street and Wall
Street from itself. Free Press, New York.
   Barofsky, N., 2012. Bailout: an inside account of how Washington abandoned Main Street
while rescuing Wall Street. Free Press, New York.
   Becker, B., G. Subramanian, and D.B. Bergstresser, 2013. Does shareholder proxy access
improve firm value? Evidence from the Business Roundtable challenge. Journal of Law &
Economics, 56(1), 127-160.
   Bertrand, M., M. Bombardini, and F. Trebbi, 2011. Is it whom you know or what you
know? An empirical assessment of the lobbying process. NBER Working Paper 16765.
   Bhagwati, J., 1998. The capital myth. Foreign Aﬀairs, May.
   Blanes-i-Vidal, J., M. Draca, C. Fons-Rosen, 2012. Revolving door lobbyists. American
Economic Review, 102(7), 3731-48.
   Campbell, J.Y., A.W. Lo, and A.C. MacKinlay, 1997. The econometrics of financial mar-
kets. Princeton University Press: Princeton, New Jersey.
   Chiu, M.M., and S.W. Joh, 2004. Loans to distressed firms: political connections, related
lending, business group aﬃliations, and bank governance. The Chinese University of Hong
Kong working paper.
   Dinç, I.S., 2005. Politicians and banks: political influences on government-owned banks in
emerging countries. Journal of Financial Economics 77, 453-479.
   Dube, A., E. Kaplan and S. Naidu, 2011. Coups, corporations, and classified information.
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(3), 1375-1409.
   Duchin, R. and D. Sosyura, 2012. The politics of government investment, Journal of
Financial Economics 106, 24-48.
   Erel, I., T. Nadauld, and R. Stulz, 2013. Why did holdings of highly-rated securitization
tranches diﬀer so much across banks? Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.

                                              37
   Faccio, M., 2006. Politically connected firms. American Economic Review 96, 369-386.
   Faccio, M., R. Masulis, and J. McConnell, 2006. Political connections and government
bailouts. Journal of Finance 61, 2597-2635.
   Ferguson, T. and H.-J. Voth, 2008. Betting on Hitler — the value of political connections
in Nazi Germany. Quarterly Journal of Economics 123, 101—137.
   Fisman, R., 2001. Estimating the value of political connections. American Economic
Review 91, 1095-1102.
   Fisman, D., R. Fisman, J. Galef, R. Khurana, and Y. Wang, 2012. Estimating the value
of connections to Vice-President Cheney. B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy 13,
1-18.
   Goldman, E., J. Rocholl, and J. So 2009. Do politically connected boards add firm value?
Review of Financial Studies, 22, 2331-2360.
   Gomez, E.T. and Jomo K.S., 1997. Malaysia’s political economy: politics, patronage and
profits. Cambridge University Press, First Edition.
   Gomez, E.T. and Jomo K.S., 1998. Malaysia’s political economy: politics, patronage and
profits. Cambridge University Press, Second Edition.
   Greenwood, R., 2005. Short-and long-term demand curves for stocks: theory and evidence
on the dynamics of arbitrage. Journal of Financial Economics 75(3), 607-649.
   Igan, D., P. Mishra, and T. Tressel, 2011. A fistful of dollars: lobbying and the financial
crisis, NBER Macro Annual, Volume 26, 195-230.
   Igan, D. and P. Mishra, 2012. Three’s company: Wall Street, Capitol Hill, and K Street,
unpublished, August.
   Jayachandran, S., 2006. The Jeﬀords eﬀect. Journal of Law and Economics 49, 397-425.
   Johnson, S. and J. Kwak, 2011. 13 bankers: the Wall Street takeover and the next financial
meltdown, Vintage Books: New York.
   Johnson, S. and T. Mitton, 2003. Cronyism and capital controls: evidence from Malaysia.
Journal of Financial Economics 67, 351-382.
   Khwaja, A.I. and A. Mian, 2005. Do lenders favor politically connected firms? Rent
provision in an emerging economy. Quarterly Journal of Economics 120, 1371-1411.
   Li, W., and E. Lie, 2006. Dividend changes and catering incentives. Journal of Financial
Economics 80, 293-308.
   Mian, A., A. Sufi, and F. Trebbi, 2010. The political economy of the U.S. mortgage default
crisis, American Economic Review, 100(5), 1967-98.

                                              38
   Querubín, P. and J.M. Snyder, Jr., 2013. The control of politicians in normal times and
times of crisis: Wealth accumulation by U.S. Congressmen, 1850-1880. Quarterly Journal of
Political Science 8, 409-450.
   Ramseyer, J.M., and E.B. Rasmussen, 2011. Can the Treasury exempt its own companies
from tax? The $45 billion GM NOL carryforward. Cato Papers on Public Policy 1, 1-54.
   Roberts, B.E., 1990. A dead senator tells no lies: seniority and the distribution of federal
benefits. American Journal of Political Science 34, 31-58.
   Scheiber, N., 2011. The escape artists: how Obama’s team fumbled the recovery. Simon &
Schuster, New York.
   Suskind, R., 2011. Confidence men: Wall Street, Washington, and the education of a
president. Harper, New York.
   Tahoun, A., 2013. The role of stock ownership by US members of Congress on the market
for political favors. Unpublished working paper, August.
   Useem, M., 1984. The inner circle, Oxford University Press: Oxford.
   Veronesi, P. and L. Zingales, 2010. Paulson’s gift, Journal of Financial Economics 97(3),
339-368.




                                              39
                                                                         Panel A: Connected firms
                                                 0.1
  Geithner connection coefficient




                                                0.05


                                                                                                  Geithner
                                                                                                  Connection
                                                                                                  Effect
                                                   0




                                                -0.05




                                                 -0.1
                                                 31st Oct   7th Nov               14th Nov                 21st Nov     1st Dec




                                                                      Panel B: Highly connected firms
                                                 0.3




                                                 0.2
              Geithner connection coefficient




                                                 0.1




                                                   0                                                       Geithner
                                                                                                           Connection
                                                                                                           Effect

                                                -0.1




                                                -0.2
                                                31st Oct    7th Nov              14th Nov                  21st Nov     1st Dec



Fig. 1. Time-series plots of the synthetic matching estimate of the coefficient on Geithner
connections for cumulative abnormal returns measured over the interval [x, x+1] for each
trading day x in November 2008. Connected firms are represented in Panel A and highly
connected firms in Panel B. Confidence intervals at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels are also shown.
Citigroup-correlated firms are excluded. November 21, 2008 is the day of the Geithner
nomination announcement.
                                                                         Table 1
                                                                   Descriptive Statistics
The table presents descriptive statistics of firm-level data used in subsequent tables. The sample includes firms listed on NYSE or NASDAQ and classified
as banks or financial services firms in the Datastream database. The base sample excludes firms with returns highly correlated to Citigroup. Schedule
connections denote the number of meetings between the firm's executives and Geithner during 2007-08; personal connections denote the number of shared
board memberships between the firm's executives and Geithner; New York connections indicate firms headquartered in New York City. Size (log of total
assets), profitability (return on equity), and leverage (total debt to total capital) are from the Worldscope database as of 2008. CDS spreads are from the
Markit database and are for five-year contracts, stated in percents. Asterisks denote significance levels of a two-tailed t-test (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).

Panel A: Summary Statistics (Full sample)
                                                       Mean        Min      25th Pctile     Median 75th Pctile       Max       St. Dev.     N
 (1)    Geithner Connections (Schedule)                 0.21        0.00        0.00          0.00     0.00          34.00        1.74     603
 (2)    Geithner Connections (Personal)                 0.08        0.00        0.00          0.00     0.00           9.00        0.60     603
 (3)    Geithner Connection (New York)                  0.07        0.00        0.00          0.00     0.00           1.00        0.26     603
 (4)    Size                                           21.33       16.32       20.23        21.03     22.10          28.41        1.72     596
 (5)    Profitability                                  -0.05       -3.62       -0.06          0.04     0.09           0.82        0.35     585
 (6)    Leverage                                        0.57        0.00        0.43          0.61     0.71           3.10        0.27     592
 (7)    CAR[0]                                         -0.02       -0.24       -0.04         -0.01     0.01           0.35        0.06     603
 (8)    CAR[0,1]                                       -0.02       -0.46       -0.07         -0.02     0.03           0.48        0.11     603
 (9)    CAR[0,10]                                       0.02       -0.69       -0.10         -0.02     0.09           1.38        0.21     603
(10)    CDS Spread, Day 1                               4.65        0.23        1.16          2.33     5.32          29.29        6.15      30
(11)    % Change in CDS Spread[1]                      -0.04       -0.49       -0.03          0.00     0.00           0.02        0.10      30
(12)    % Change in CDS Spread[1,10]                   -0.06       -0.49       -0.12         -0.03     0.00           0.15        0.13      30
Panel B: Geithner Connected vs. Non-connected (Full sample)
                                                 Schedule          Non        Diff.   Personal           Non         Diff.   New York      Non     Diff.
(13) Size                                           24.40          21.20      3.20*** 25.00              21.20       3.80***   21.78      21.30    0.48*
(14) Profitability                                   0.04          -0.06      0.10      -0.15            -0.05      -0.10      -0.17      -0.04   -0.13**
(15) Leverage                                        0.73           0.56      0.17***    0.60             0.56       0.04       0.57       0.56    0.00
(16) Number of observations in full sample             25            578                   21              582                    45        558
Panel C: Geithner Connected vs. Non-connected (Base sample)
                                                 Schedule          Non        Diff.   Personal           Non        Diff.   New York       Non     Diff.
(17) Size                                          23.13           20.98      2.16*** 23.17              21.00      2.17***   20.95       21.04   -0.09
(18) Profitability                                  0.06           -0.07      0.13      -0.42            -0.06     -0.36***   -0.20       -0.05   -0.14**
(19) Leverage                                       0.71            0.56      0.15**     0.52             0.57     -0.05       0.54        0.57   -0.03
(20) Number of observations in base sample            15             530                    9              536                   38         507
Panel D: Correlation Coefficients (Full sample)
                                                     Schedule Personal New York              Size     Profitability Leverage
(21)    Geithner Connections (Schedule)                   1.00
 (22)   Geithner Connections (Personal)                   0.86     1.00
 (23)   Geithner Connection (New York)                    0.35     0.39     1.00
 (24)   Size                                              0.35     0.37     0.10               1.00
(25)    Profitability                                     0.00    -0.03    -0.11               0.05         1.00
(26)    Leverage                                          0.04     0.06    -0.15               0.28        -0.16        1.00
                                                                    Table 2
                             Connections to Geithner and Stock Price Reactions to Treasury Secretary Announcement
The table presents stock returns of financial firms around the announcement of Barack Obama's nomination of Timothy Geithner as Treasury Secretary.
Event day 0 is November 21, 2008 from 3pm (when the news leaked) to market closing; the announcement was made on event day 1. Abnormal returns are
calculated using the market model with an estimation window of 250 trading days ending 30 days prior to event day 0. The base sample excludes firms with
returns highly correlated to Citigroup. Schedule connections indicate meetings between the firm's executives and Geithner during 2007-08; personal
connections indicate shared board memberships between the firm's executives and Geithner; New York connections indicate firms headquartered in New
York City. Asterisks denote significance levels of a two-tailed t-test (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).

Panel A: Actual returns, Base sample
                                   Schedule Connections                      Personal Connections                        New York Connections
Event Day     Date          Conn.     Non-Conn.     Difference         Conn.     Non-Conn.     Difference          Conn.    Non-Conn. Difference
    0       11/21/2008          0.086        0.042    0.043 **            0.075        0.043     0.033                0.085      0.040      0.044 ***
    1       11/24/2008          0.130        0.046    0.084 ***           0.143        0.047     0.096 ***            0.078      0.046      0.031 *
    2       11/25/2008          0.026        0.015    0.011               0.057        0.014     0.043                0.032      0.014      0.018
    3       11/26/2008          0.112        0.041    0.071 ***           0.112        0.042     0.071 **             0.087      0.040      0.048 ***
    4       11/28/2008          0.056        0.018    0.038 *             0.085        0.018     0.067 **             0.016      0.019     -0.003
    5        12/1/2008         -0.131       -0.076   -0.056 **           -0.144       -0.076    -0.067 **            -0.105     -0.075     -0.030 *
    6        12/2/2008          0.046        0.043    0.003               0.044        0.043     0.001                0.090      0.040      0.050 ***
    7        12/3/2008          0.034        0.018    0.016               0.043        0.018     0.024                0.031      0.018      0.013
    8        12/4/2008         -0.009       -0.013    0.005               0.005       -0.014     0.019               -0.020     -0.013     -0.008
    9        12/5/2008          0.063        0.024    0.038 **            0.042        0.025     0.017                0.050      0.024      0.026 **
   10        12/8/2008          0.064        0.027    0.037               0.072        0.028     0.045 **             0.050      0.027      0.023
  0-10 (Cumulative)             0.551        0.180    0.371 ***           0.645        0.183     0.463 ***            0.468      0.169      0.299 ***
Panel B: Cumulative abnormal returns, Base sample
                                Schedule Connections                         Personal Connections                        New York Connections
Event Day    Date        Conn.      Non-Conn.     Difference           Conn.     Non-Conn.     Difference          Conn.    Non-Conn. Difference
    0      11/21/2008       -0.013       -0.015     0.001                -0.034       -0.014    -0.020               -0.005     -0.015     0.010
    1      11/24/2008        0.024       -0.022     0.046                 0.005       -0.021     0.026               -0.011     -0.021     0.010
    2      11/25/2008        0.039       -0.013     0.052                 0.052       -0.012     0.064                0.012     -0.013     0.025
    3      11/26/2008        0.099       -0.001     0.101 **              0.107        0.000     0.108 *              0.053     -0.002     0.055 *
    4      11/28/2008        0.141        0.009     0.132 ***             0.177        0.009     0.167 ***            0.056      0.009     0.048
    5       12/1/2008        0.136        0.006     0.129 ***             0.175        0.007     0.168 ***            0.067      0.006     0.061 **
    6       12/2/2008        0.124        0.017     0.107 **              0.156        0.017     0.138 **             0.105      0.013     0.092 ***
    7       12/3/2008        0.120        0.013     0.107 **              0.156        0.014     0.142 **             0.101      0.010     0.091 ***
    8       12/4/2008        0.152        0.024     0.129 **              0.208        0.024     0.184 ***            0.118      0.021     0.098 ***
    9       12/5/2008        0.162        0.018     0.144 ***             0.192        0.019     0.172 ***            0.121      0.015     0.106 ***
   10       12/8/2008        0.171        0.014     0.157 ***             0.173        0.015     0.158 **             0.120      0.010     0.110 ***
                                                                                 Table 3
                                   Connections to Geithner and Reactions to Treasury Secretary Announcement, OLS Regression Results

The table reports coefficient estimates of OLS regressions of cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) surrounding the announcement of Geithner as Treasury Secretary on
measures of connections to Geithner. Event day 0 is November 21, 2008 from 3pm (when the news leaked) to market closing; the announcement was made on event day 1.
The CAR is measured as day 0 only, from day 0 to day 1, or from day 0 to day 10, as indicated. Abnormal returns are calculated using the market model with an estimation
window of 250 trading days ending 30 days prior to event day 0. The base sample excludes firms with returns highly correlated to Citigroup. Schedule connections denote
the number of meetings between the firm's executives and Geithner during 2007-08; personal connections denote the number of shared board memberships between the firm's
executives and Geithner; New York connections indicate firms headquartered in New York City. Control variables include cubics in size (log of total assets), profitability
(return on equity), and leverage (total debt to total capital) as of 2008. Robust standard errors, adjusted for pre-event correlations between firms, are below coefficients in
parentheses. Asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).

                                   (1)             (2)            (3)               (4)             (5)             (6)              (7)             (8)             (9)
                                    Dependent variable is CAR [0]                   Dependent variable is CAR [0,1]                  Dependent variable is CAR [0,10]
                                           (Full sample)                                    (Base sample)                                    (Base sample)
                                Schedule      Personal       New York            Schedule      Personal      New York             Schedule      Personal       New York
Geithner Connections            0.0033 *** 0.0073 **         0.0132 *             0.011 ***     0.050 ***      0.005               0.009         0.070 ***      0.108 ***
                               (0.0009)     (0.0031)        (0.0072)             (0.003)       (0.010)        (0.011)             (0.007)       (0.023)        (0.023)

Size                            -0.146          -0.109         -0.004             0.789           0.882           0.963            2.640           2.663           2.387
                                (0.204)         (0.208)        (0.203)           (0.668)         (0.685)         (0.687)          (1.636)         (1.664)         (1.657)

Size2                            0.007           0.005          0.000            -0.039          -0.044          -0.048           -0.129          -0.131          -0.117
                                (0.009)         (0.010)        (0.009)           (0.032)         (0.033)         (0.033)          (0.078)         (0.080)         (0.079)

Size3                            0.000           0.000          0.000             0.001           0.001           0.001            0.002 *         0.002 *         0.002
                                (0.000)         (0.000)        (0.000)           (0.001)         (0.001)         (0.001)          (0.001)         (0.001)         (0.001)

Profitability                    0.039 ***       0.039 ***      0.038 ***         0.029           0.033           0.029           -0.156 **       -0.150 **       -0.164 **
                                (0.014)         (0.014)        (0.014)           (0.024)         (0.024)         (0.024)          (0.064)         (0.065)         (0.064)

Profitability2                   0.011           0.010          0.008             0.005           0.003           0.004           -0.175 *        -0.178 *        -0.205 **
                                (0.020)         (0.020)        (0.020)           (0.035)         (0.035)         (0.035)          (0.091)         (0.091)         (0.090)

Profitability3                  -0.001          -0.001         -0.001             0.006           0.005           0.005           -0.034          -0.035          -0.040 *
                                (0.006)         (0.006)        (0.006)           (0.010)         (0.010)         (0.010)          (0.023)         (0.023)         (0.023)

Leverage                        -0.012          -0.013         -0.011            -0.075          -0.063          -0.096            0.567 ***       0.599 ***       0.670 ***
                                (0.061)         (0.062)        (0.063)           (0.079)         (0.079)         (0.082)          (0.146)         (0.147)         (0.153)

Leverage2                        0.087           0.088          0.088             0.091           0.078           0.128           -1.872 ***      -1.916 ***      -0.203 ***
                                (0.181)         (0.181)        (0.182)           (0.226)         (0.226)         (0.229)          (0.463)         (0.464)         (0.476)

Leverage3                       -0.095          -0.096         -0.096            -0.008          -0.007          -0.033            1.449 ***       1.467 ***       1.539 ***
                                (0.142)         (0.142)        (0.142)           (0.177)         (0.177)         (0.179)          (0.388)         (0.387)         (0.395)

Number of firms                 583             583             583               525            525             525               525             525            525
R-squared                      0.038           0.036           0.036             0.043          0.049           0.038             0.065           0.070          0.078
                                                                                                                  Table 4
                                                                    Connections to Geithner and Reactions to Treasury Secretary Announcement, OLS Robustness Checks

The table reports coefficient estimates of OLS regressions of cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) surrounding the announcement of Geithner as Treasury Secretary on measures of connections to Geithner. Event day 0 is November
21, 2008 from 3pm (when the news leaked) to market closing; the announcement was made on event day 1. The CAR is measured as day 0 only, from day 0 to day 1, or from day 0 to day 10, as indicated. Abnormal returns are
calculated using the market model with an estimation window of 250 trading days ending 30 days prior to event day 0. The base sample excludes firms with returns highly correlated to Citigroup. Schedule connections denote the
number of meetings between the firm's executives and Geithner during 2007-08 (only 2007 in Column 15); personal connections denote the number of shared board memberships between the firm's executives and Geithner. Control
variables (not reported) include cubics in size (log of total assets), profitability (return on equity), and leverage (total debt to total capital) as of 2008. In Columns 1 and 2, other controls (not reported) include the CAR[0,4] for the firm
upon the collapse of Lehman Brothers, a dummy variable equal to one if the firm takes deposits, and a dummy variable equal to one if the firm had accepted TARP funding prior to the announcement. In Columns 3 and 4, a control for
the CAR[0,1] surrounding the announcement that TARP would be used for capital injections is included. In Columns 5 and 6, the estimation window is a five-week window surrounding the collapse of Lehman Brothers. In Columns
7 and 8, toxic asset exposure is a measure of mortgage/asset-backed security holdings scaled by total assets, and the full sample is used in all panels. In Columns 11 and 12, "systemic importance" firms are those that were later
evaluated in government-administered stress tests. Robust standard errors, adjusted for pre-event correlations between firms, are below coefficients in parentheses. Asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).

                             (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)          (6)              (7)           (8)            (9)           (10)           (11)         (12)           (13)         (14)            (15)
                            Control for crisis         Control for response to        Lehman collapse             Control for toxic asset                                     Exclude "systemic          Exclude extreme CARs        2007 appts.
                               vulnerability           TARP capital injections         estimation beta                   exposure               Top size decile only          importance" firms                (1%/99%)                 only
                          Schedule     Personal        Schedule      Personal       Schedule     Personal         Schedule      Personal       Schedule     Personal        Schedule     Personal        Schedule     Personal        Schedule
Panel A: Dependent variable is CAR [0] (Full sample)
Geithner Connections 0.0034 *** 0.0079 *** 0.0032 *** 0.0075 ** 0.0046 *** 0.0144 *** 0.0030 *** 0.0108 *** 0.0029 *** 0.0058 *                                            0.0037 *       0.0052        0.0032 *** 0.0070 ** 0.0043 ***
                      (0.0010)     (0.0029)      (0.0009) (0.0031) (0.0009) (0.0031)  (0.0010)   (0.0037)   (0.0009)  (0.0033)                                            (0.0022)       (0.0065)      (0.0009)    (0.0031)  (0.0013)

Number of firms            576            576           579            579           583            583           196            196            58            58             566           566            571           571            583
R-squared                 0.040          0.037         0.049          0.047         0.063          0.064         0.063          0.061          0.358         0.303          0.036         0.035          0.043         0.039          0.037
Panel B: Dependent variable is CAR [0,1] (Base sample)
Geithner Connections    0.011 *** 0.051 *** 0.011 ***                 0.048 ***      0.015 ***      0.065 ***     0.014 ***      0.051 ***    -0.002          0.039 ***      0.012 ***     0.051 ***      0.009 ***     0.048 ***      0.030 ***
                       (0.003)      (0.010)       (0.003)            (0.010)        (0.003)        (0.010)       (0.001)        (0.006)       (0.003)        (0.013)        (0.003)       (0.010)        (0.003)       (0.011)        (0.005)

Number of firms            518            518           521            521           525            525           196            196            52            52             523           523            517           517            525
R-squared                 0.042          0.050         0.039          0.045         0.057          0.065         0.232          0.217          0.217         0.250          0.040         0.048          0.056         0.065          0.048
Panel C: Dependent variable is CAR [0,10] (Base sample)
Geithner Connections    0.004        0.045 **      0.008              0.064 ***      0.023 ***      0.120 ***     0.020 ***      0.076 ***     0.002          0.140 ***      0.018 **      0.065 ***      0.010         0.072 ***     -0.003
                       (0.006)      (0.021)       (0.006)            (0.021)        (0.007)        (0.023)       (0.004)        (0.014)       (0.008)        (0.032)        (0.007)       (0.022)        (0.007)       (0.023)        (0.010)

Number of firms            518            518           521            521           525            525           196            196            52            52             523           523            516           516            525
R-squared                 0.120          0.122         0.074          0.078         0.073          0.080         0.246          0.240          0.117         0.229          0.071         0.073          0.067         0.074          0.064
                                                                                       Table 5
                                      Connections to Geithner and Reactions to Treasury Secretary Announcement, Synthetic Matching Estimation

The table reports synthetic matching estimates of the effect of connections to Geithner on cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) surrounding the announcement of Geithner as
Treasury Secretary. Event day 0 is November 21, 2008 from 3pm (when the news leaked) to market closing; the announcement was made on event day 1. The CAR is measured as
day 0 only, from day 0 to day 1, or from day 0 to day 10, as indicated. Abnormal returns are calculated using the market model with an estimation window of 250 trading days
ending 30 days prior to event day 0. The base sample excludes firms with returns highly correlated to Citigroup. Schedule connections indicate meetings between the firm's
executives and Geithner during 2007-08; "Highly connected" indicates more than two meetings; "Mildly connected" indicates one or two meetings. The matching window is the
250 trading days ending 30 days prior to event day 0. Confidence intervals for hypothesis testing of the effect of Geithner connections being equal to zero are computed according
to 5,000 placebo simulations. The number of times in which the Geithner coefficient is significant for a test window of 100 trading days is also reported. OLS results (on a dummy
for connections) are reported for comparison, and include control variables (not reported) for cubics in size (log of total assets), profitability (return on equity), and leverage (total
debt to total capital) as of 2008. Asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).
                                                 (1)            (2)             (3)              (4)            (5)             (6)              (7)             (8)             (9)
                                                    All Geithner connections                            Highly connected                                 Mildly connected
                                                OLS         Matching      Corrected            OLS         Matching      Corrected              OLS         Matching      Corrected
Panel A: Dependent variable is CAR [0] (Full sample)
Geithner Connections (Schedule)            0.014              0.005           0.005           0.029 *         0.011           0.011           0.009            0.000           0.000
  Confidence interval (2.5%)                                 -0.029          -0.027                          -0.043          -0.039                           -0.037          -0.034
  Confidence interval (97.5%)                                 0.014           0.012                           0.029           0.026                            0.021           0.019
  Number of sig. coefficients (10%)            29              8              14               27             13              16               25               0               6
  Number of sig. coefficients (5%)             19              4               8               25              6               9               17               0               0
  Number of sig. coefficients (1%)             11              0               0               17              1               1                5               0               0

Number of firms                               583            583             466              570             570            462              574             574             453
Number in treatment group                      22             22              22               9               9              9               13              13              13
Panel B: Dependent variable is CAR [0,1] (Base sample)
Geithner Connections (Schedule)            0.059 ***          0.060 ***       0.060 ***       0.149 ***       0.153 ***       0.153 ***       0.028 *          0.034 *         0.034 *
  Confidence interval (2.5%)                                 -0.068          -0.066                          -0.126          -0.113                           -0.077          -0.074
  Confidence interval (97.5%)                                 0.036           0.029                           0.099           0.091                            0.042           0.038
  Number of sig. coefficients (10%)            23             13              17               23              3               5               22               5              11
  Number of sig. coefficients (5%)             17              5               9               11              0               2               18               2               4
  Number of sig. coefficients (1%)              9              0               2                6              0               0                9               0               1

Number of firms                               525            525             439              516             516            436              522             522             429
Number in treatment group                      12             12             12                3               3              3                9               9               9
Panel C: Dependent variable is CAR [0,10] (Base sample)
Geithner Connections (Schedule)            0.111 ***     0.124 ***            0.124 ***       0.069           0.169 *         0.169 *         0.101 ***        0.110 **        0.110 **
  Confidence interval (2.5%)                            -0.110               -0.099                          -0.197          -0.191                           -0.119          -0.112
  Confidence interval (97.5%)                            0.079                0.071                           0.217           0.194                            0.093           0.085
  Number of sig. coefficients (10%)        41            18                   28               26             16              19               51              13              18
  Number of sig. coefficients (5%)         32             8                   11               17              8              10               43               3               7
  Number of sig. coefficients (1%)         21             0                    3                4              1               1               26               0               1

Number of firms                               525            525             439              516             516            436              522             522             429
Number in treatment group                      12            12              12                3               3              3                9               9               9
                                                                                     Table 6
                                Connections to Geithner and Reactions to Treasury Secretary Announcement, Synthetic Matching Robustness Checks
The table reports synthetic matching estimates of the effect of connections to Geithner on cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) surrounding the announcement of Geithner as
Treasury Secretary. Event day 0 is November 21, 2008 from 3pm (when the news leaked) to market closing; the announcement was made on event day 1. The CAR is measured
from day 0 to day 1. Abnormal returns are calculated using the market model with an estimation window of 250 trading days ending 30 days prior to event day 0 (a five-week
window surrounding the collapse of Lehman Brothers in Panel A). The base sample (used throughout the table) excludes firms with returns highly correlated to Citigroup. Schedule
connections denote the number of meetings between the firm's executives and Geithner during 2007-08 (only 2007 in Panel D); personal connections denote the number of shared
board memberships between the firm's executives and Geithner; New York connections indicate firms headquartered in New York City. "Highly connected" indicates more than one
connection (more than two in Panel A); "Mildly connected" indicates one connection (one or two in Panel A). The matching window is the 250 trading days ending 30 days prior to
event day 0. Confidence intervals for hypothesis testing of the effect of Geithner connections being equal to zero are computed according to 5,000 placebo simulations. OLS results
(on a dummy for connections) are reported for comparison, and include control variables (not reported) for cubics in size (log of total assets), profitability (return on equity), and
leverage (total debt to total capital) as of 2008. Asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).
                                               (1)             (2)            (3)              (4)            (5)             (6)             (7)            (8)             (9)
                                                  All Geithner connections                           Highly connected                                 Mildly connected
                                              OLS         Matching      Corrected             OLS        Matching       Corrected            OLS         Matching      Corrected
                                                                                               Dependent variable is CAR [0,1]
Panel A: Financial crisis estimation window, Schedule connections
Geithner Connections                        0.060 *        0.071 *          0.071 *          0.179 ***      0.192 **        0.192 **        0.018          0.043           0.043
  Confidence interval (2.5%)                              -0.064           -0.062                          -0.126          -0.123                         -0.073          -0.070
  Confidence interval (97.5%)                              0.056            0.055                           0.131           0.131                          0.065           0.065

Number of firms                              525            525             473             516             516            476              522            522            463
Number in treatment group                    12             12              12               3               3              3                9              9              9
Panel B: Personal connections
Geithner Connections                         0.059 ***       0.032          0.032            0.091 ***      0.104 **        0.104 **        0.037         -0.010          -0.010
  Confidence interval (2.5%)                                -0.080         -0.078                          -0.126          -0.125                         -0.100          -0.099
  Confidence interval (97.5%)                                0.041          0.044                           0.096           0.099                          0.069           0.066

Number of firms                              525            525             501             520             520            505              522            522            491
Number in treatment group                     8              8               8               3               3              3                5              5              5
Panel C: New York connections
Geithner Connections                         0.005           0.009 *        0.014 **
  Confidence interval (2.5%)                                -0.049         -0.048
  Confidence interval (97.5%)                                0.010          0.008

Number of firms                              525            525             507
Number in treatment group                    34             34              33

Panel D: 2007 Schedule
Geithner Connections                         0.083 ***       0.053 *        0.053 **         0.144 ***      0.122 **        0.122 **        0.027         -0.012          -0.012
  Confidence interval (2.5%)                                -0.090         -0.081                          -0.127          -0.110                         -0.123          -0.113
  Confidence interval (97.5%)                                0.056          0.049                           0.099           0.078                          0.096           0.072

Number of firms                              525            525             382             522             522            387              522            522            374
Number in treatment group                     6              6               6               3               3              3                3              3              3
                                                  Table 7
                Connections to Geithner and Returns Prior to Treasury Secretary Announcement

The table reports synthetic matching estimates of the effect of connections to Geithner on cumulative abnormal
returns (CARs) surrounding the announcement of Geithner as Treasury Secretary. Event day 0 is November 21,
2008 from 3pm (when the news leaked) to market closing; the announcement was made on event day 1. The
CAR is measured from event day -1 to event day 0, day -5 to day 0, or day -10 to day 0 as indicated. Abnormal
returns are calculated using the market model with an estimation window of 250 trading days ending 30 days
prior to event day 0. The base sample (used throughout the table) excludes firms with returns highly correlated
to Citigroup. Schedule connections denote the number of meetings between the firm's executives and Geithner
during 2007-08; personal connections denote the number of shared board memberships between the firm's
executives and Geithner; New York connections indicate firms headquartered in New York City. "Highly
connected" indicates more than two meetings, "Mildly connected" indicates one or two meetings. Confidence
intervals for hypothesis testing of the effect of Geithner connections being equal to zero are computed according
to 5,000 placebo simulations. Asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).

                                             (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)               (5)
                                          All Conn.    Highly Conn. Mildly Conn.              All Conn.
                                                        Schedule                     Personal       New York
Panel A: Dependent variable is CAR[-1,0]
Geithner Connections                   -0.013           -0.040         -0.005        -0.016         -0.017
  Confidence interval (2.5%)           -0.049           -0.119         -0.060        -0.061         -0.026
  Confidence interval (97.5%)           0.044            0.092          0.052         0.056          0.027

Number of firms                           525            516            522           525            525
Number in treatment group                  12             3              9             8              34
Panel B: Dependent variable is CAR[-5,0]
Geithner Connections                   -0.053           -0.047         -0.055        -0.040        -0.0143
  Confidence interval (2.5%)           -0.060           -0.159         -0.074        -0.082        -0.0272
  Confidence interval (97.5%)           0.072            0.142          0.086         0.088        0.04866

Number of firms                           525            516            522           525            525
Number in treatment group                  12             3              9             8              34
Panel C: Dependent variable is CAR[-10,0]
Geithner Connections                  -0.064            -0.021         -0.077        -0.090         -0.040 *
  Confidence interval (2.5%)          -0.087            -0.216         -0.102        -0.119         -0.041
  Confidence interval (97.5%)          0.087             0.166          0.099         0.107          0.055

Number of firms                           525            516            522           525            525
Number in treatment group                  12             3              9             8              34
                                                                                                          Table 8
                                                                 Connections to Geithner and Reactions to Treasury Secretary Announcement, CDS Spreads
The table reports estimates of the effect of connections to Geithner on CDS spreads surrounding the announcement of Geithner as Treasury Secretary. Panel A reports OLS estimates and Panel B reports synthetic
matching estimates. Event day 0 is November 21, 2008 from 3pm (when the news leaked) to market closing; due to a lack of liquidity and intraday quotes, the changes are measured from day 1, when the announcement
was made. The % change in CDS spread is measured as day 1 only, or from day 1 to day 10, as indicated. Schedule connections denote the number of meetings between the firm's executives and Geithner during 2007-
08; personal connections denote the number of shared board memberships between the firm's executives and Geithner; New York connections indicate firms headquartered in New York City. In Panel A, control
variables (not reported) include cubics in size (log of total assets), profitability (return on equity), and leverage (total debt to total capital) as of 2008; robust standard errors, adjusted for pre-event correlations between
firms, are below coefficients in parentheses. In Panel B, the matching window is the 100 days ending 30 days prior to event day 0; confidence intervals for hypothesis testing of the effect of Geithner connections being
equal to zero are computed according to 5,000 placebo simulations. Asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).
                                     (1)           (2)            (3)               (4)             (5)           (6)               (7)              (8)             (9)               (10)             (11)             (12)
Panel A: OLS estimates
                                                 Dependent variable is % change in CDS spread [1]                                                Dependent variable is % change in CDS spread [1,10]
                                          Citigroup included                         Citigroup excluded                                   Citigroup included                             Citigroup excluded
                                 Schedule       Personal    New York        Schedule        Personal    New York                 Schedule      Personal      New York         Schedule        Personal      New York
Geithner Connections             -0.014 *** -0.035 *** -0.113 **             -0.010 ** -0.019 ** -0.072                          -0.011         -0.030        -0.202           -0.010          -0.019        -0.176
                                 (0.002)       (0.007)      (0.044)          (0.005)       (0.010)      (0.049)                  (0.007)        (0.028)       (0.150)          (0.022)         (0.038)      (0.164)

Number of firms                    27             27            27                26              26             26                27              27               27                 26              26               26
R-squared                        0.941          0.795         0.615             0.772           0.834          0.748             0.671           0.639            0.726              0.479           0.493            0.674
Panel B: Synthetic matching estimates
                                                 Dependent variable is % change in CDS spread [1]                                                Dependent variable is % change in CDS spread [1,10]
                                          Citigroup included                         Citigroup excluded                                   Citigroup included                             Citigroup excluded
                                 Schedule      Personal     New York        Schedule       Personal     New York                 Schedule      Personal      New York         Schedule        Personal      New York
Geithner Connections             -0.087 *** -0.047 *** -0.119 ***            -0.026 *** -0.024 *** -0.044 ***                    -0.042         -0.092 ***    -0.203 ***        0.018          -0.071 ***    -0.150 ***
  Confidence interval (2.5%)     -0.003        0.000        -0.005           -0.004        0.000        -0.006                   -0.067         -0.019        -0.068           -0.072          -0.034        -0.072
  Confidence interval (97.5%)     0.003        0.001         0.008            0.005        0.001         0.011                    0.040          0.000         0.055            0.054           0.006         0.072

Number of firms                    27            27             27                26              26            26                27               27              27                 26               26              26
Number in treatment group          7             11             6                  6              10            5                  7               11               6                  6               10               5
                                                                 Table 9
                   Connections to Other Treasury Secretary Candidates and Reactions to Treasury Secretary Announcement
The table reports coefficient estimates of OLS regressions of cumulative abnormal stock returns (CARs) and percent changes in CDS spreads
surrounding the announcement of Geithner as Treasury Secretary on measures of connections to Treasury Secretary candidates. Event day 0
is November 21, 2008 from 3pm (when the news leaked) to market closing; the announcement was made on event day 1. In Columns 1 to 3,
the CAR is measured from day 0 to day 1, and in Columns 4 to 6, the percent change in CDS spreads is measured for day 1. Abnormal stock
returns are calculated using the market model with an estimation window of 250 trading days ending 30 days prior to event day 0. Estimates
for the full sample (excluding Citigroup in CAR results) are reported. Connections denote the number of shared board memberships between
the firm's executives and the candidate. Control variables (not reported) include cubics in size (log of total assets), profitability (return on
equity), and leverage (total debt to total capital) as of 2008. Robust standard errors, adjusted for pre-event correlations between firms, are
below coefficients in parentheses. Asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).

                                       (1)              (2)               (3)                   (4)                (5)             (6)
                                          Dependent variable is CAR [0,1]                    Dep. variable is % change in CDS spread [1]
Geithner Connections                  0.020 ***        0.023 **          0.017 *              -0.035 ***         -0.063 ***      -0.070 ***
                                     (0.005)          (0.010)           (0.010)               (0.007)            (0.015)         (0.014)

Summers Connections                                      0.011                                                    -0.024
                                                        (0.016)                                                   (0.034)

Corzine Connections                                      0.020                                                     0.089 **
                                                        (0.015)                                                   (0.033)

Volcker Connections                                     -0.018                                                     0.052 **
                                                        (0.019)                                                   (0.021)

Bair Connections                                        -0.022
                                                        (0.038)

Other Candidates Combined                                                  0.002                                                     0.028 ***
                                                                          (0.007)                                                   (0.010)

Number of firms                      582               582               582                    27                27                27
R-squared                           0.048             0.049             0.048                 0.795             0.941             0.880
ONLINE APPENDIX: ADDITIONAL TABLES (NOT FOR PUBLICATION)
                                                                 Appendix Table A1
                                          Comparison of Geithner-Connected Firms to Non-Connected Firms
The table compares firms with identifiable connections to Geithner to those with no connections. Schedule connections (Panel A) denote the number of
meetings between the firm's executives and Geithner during 2007-08; personal connections (Panel B) denote the number of shared board memberships
between the firm's executives and Geithner. "Base Sample" indicates whether the firm is included in the base sample (by virtue of not being highly
correlated to Citigroup). CAR [0,10] is the cumulative abnormal return for the firm surrounding the announcement of Geithner as Treasury Secretary.
Total assets are for the year 2008 from Worldscope.

Panel A: Schedule Connections
                            On Geithner's Schedule                                               Not on Geithner's Schedule (25 Largest)
                                              Base
            Firm                 Occurrences Sample CAR [0,10] Total Assets ($Bn)                Firm                 CAR [0,10] Total Assets ($Bn)
JP MORGAN CHASE & CO.                    14    N          0.186           2,175.00    WELLS FARGO & CO                     0.124           1,310.00
CITIGROUP INCO.                          34    N          0.743           1,938.00    FREDDIE MAC                          0.659             835.60
BANK OF AMERICA CORP.                     4    N          0.168           1,818.00    US BANCORP                           0.078             265.90
FANNIE MAE                                1    N          1.008             908.50    SUNTRUST BANKS INCO.                 0.200             189.10
THE GOLDMAN SACHS GPIN.                  10    N          0.192             876.20    SLM CORP.                            0.064             168.80
MORGAN STANLEY                            9    N          0.224             658.80    CAPITAL ONE FINL.CORP.              -0.053             165.90
PNC FINL.SVS.GP.INCO.                     3    N          0.044             291.10    BB&T CORP.                          -0.131             152.00
BANK OF NY.MELLON CORP.                   7    Y         -0.095             237.50    REGIONS FINL.CORP.                  -0.206             146.20
STATE STREET CORP.                        1    Y          0.091             173.60    FIFTH THIRD BANCORP                 -0.232             119.50
AMERICAN EXPRESS CO.                      2    N          0.029             122.60    KEYCORP                              0.062             104.50
NORTHERN TRUST CORP.                      1    Y          0.117              82.05    AMERIPRISE FINL.INCO.                0.297              94.67
CME GROUP INCO.                           2    Y          0.010              48.16    CIT GROUP INCO.                      0.500              80.45
NY.CMTY.BANC.INCO.                        2    N         -0.078              32.33    COMERICA INCO.                       0.037              67.55
ASTORIA FINL.CORP.                        2    N         -0.132              21.98    M&T BK.CORP.                        -0.045              65.82
BLACKROCK INCO.                          13    Y          0.082              19.91    MARSHALL & ILSLEY CORP.             -0.300              62.34
NYSE EURONEXT                             2    N          0.089              13.28    ZIONS BANCORPORATION                -0.255              54.61
THE NASDAQ OMX GP.INCO.                   2    Y          0.212              12.05    HUNTINGTON BCSH.INCO.               -0.073              54.35
THE BLACKSTONE GROUP LP.                  6    Y          0.345               8.41    HUDSON CITY BANC.INCO.              -0.231              54.09
PROVIDENT FINL.SVS.INCO.                  2    Y         -0.145               6.51    CHARLES SCHWAB CORP.                -0.141              51.17
LAZARD LTD.                               1    Y          0.126               2.79    MF GLOBAL LTD.                      -0.180              49.18
MOODY'S CORP.                             2    N          0.114               1.55    E*TRADE FINANCIAL CORP.              0.051              47.50
OCH-ZIFF CAP.MAN.GP.LLC.                  1    N          0.107               1.02    DISCOVER FINANCIAL SVS.              0.122              39.20
BEACON FED.BANC.INCORP.                   1    Y          0.039               1.02    POPULAR INCO.                       -0.194              38.53
FEDERATED INVRS.INCO.                     1    Y          0.065               0.85    SYNOVUS FINL.CORP.                  -0.031              35.62
EVERCORE PARTNERS INCO.                   1    Y          0.485               0.68    FIRST HORIZON NAT. CORP.            -0.124              31.02

Panel B: Personal Connections
                       Personal Connection to Geithner                                             No Personal Connection (21 Largest)
                                              Base
            Firm                 Connections Sample CAR [0,10] Total Assets ($Bn)                Firm         CAR [0,10] Total Assets ($Bn)
JP MORGAN CHASE & CO.                     5    N          0.186           2,175.00    FREDDIE MAC                 0.659              835.60
CITIGROUP INCO.                           9    N          0.743           1,938.00    US BANCORP                  0.078              265.90
BANK OF AMERICA CORP.                     1    N          0.168           1,818.00    BANK OF NY.MELLON CORP.    -0.095              237.50
WELLS FARGO & CO                          1    N          0.124           1,310.00    SUNTRUST BANKS INCO.        0.200              189.10
FANNIE MAE                                1    N          1.008             908.50    STATE STREET CORP.          0.091              173.60
THE GOLDMAN SACHS GPIN.                   8    N          0.192             876.20    SLM CORP.                   0.064              168.80
MORGAN STANLEY                            3    N          0.224             658.80    BB&T CORP.                 -0.131              152.00
PNC FINL.SVS.GP.INCO.                     1    N          0.044             291.10    REGIONS FINL.CORP.         -0.206              146.20
CAPITAL ONE FINL.CORP.                    1    N         -0.053             165.90    FIFTH THIRD BANCORP        -0.232              119.50
AMERICAN EXPRESS CO.                      1    N          0.029             122.60    KEYCORP                     0.062              104.50
CIT GROUP INCO.                           2    Y          0.500              80.45    AMERIPRISE FINL.INCO.       0.297                94.67
M&T BK.CORP.                              1    N         -0.045              65.82    NORTHERN TRUST CORP.        0.117                82.05
POPULAR INCO.                             1    Y         -0.194              38.53    COMERICA INCO.              0.037                67.55
BLACKROCK INCO.                           2    Y          0.082              19.91    MARSHALL & ILSLEY CORP.    -0.300                62.34
NYSE EURONEXT                             1    N          0.089              13.28    ZIONS BANCORPORATION       -0.255                54.61
THE NASDAQ OMX GP.INCO.                   1    Y          0.212              12.05    HUNTINGTON BCSH.INCO.      -0.073                54.35
FRANKLIN RESOURCES INCO.                  1    N          0.046               9.18    HUDSON CITY BANC.INCO.     -0.231                54.09
THE BLACKSTONE GROUP LP.                  4    Y          0.345               8.41    CHARLES SCHWAB CORP.       -0.141                51.17
FORTRESS INV.GP.LLC.                      1    Y         -0.131               1.17    MF GLOBAL LTD.             -0.180                49.18
CARVER BANCORP INCO.                      1    Y         -0.116               0.79    CME GROUP INCO.             0.010                48.16
GAMCO INVESTORS INCO.                     1    Y         -0.147               0.67    E*TRADE FINANCIAL CORP.     0.051                47.50
                                                                         Appendix Table A2
                                                     Personal Connections of Timothy Geithner to Financial Firms
The table lists firms to which Timothy Geithner has connections through one or more individuals. The connections are compiled from March 2009 relationship maps on
muckety.com. The connections represent either known connections between Geithner and an individual or potential connections in that Geithner and the individual are
associated with the same organization.
                                                                                                                         Geithner's Position Connected Person's
         Firm              Connected Person              Position with Firm                   Connection to Geithner      with Connection Position with Connection
American Express      Kenneth I. Chenault        chairman & CEO                      National Academy Foundation         director          director
American Express      Kenneth I. Chenault        chairman & CEO                      Partnership for New York City       board member      vice chair
Bank of America       Patricia E. Mitchell       director                            Council on Foreign Relations        member            member
BlackRock             James E. Rohr              director                            RAND Corporation                    trustee           trustee
BlackRock             John A. Thain              director                            Unofficial Adviser to Geithner      NA                NA
Blackstone Group      J. Tomilson Hill           vice chairman                       Council on Foreign Relations        member            director
Blackstone Group      Paul H. O'Neill            special adviser                     RAND Corporation                    trustee           trustee
Blackstone Group      Peter G. Peterson          chairman and co-founder             Unofficial Adviser to Geithner      NA                NA
Blackstone Group      Richard E. Salomon         adv. board chair, alt. asset mgt.   Council on Foreign Relations        member            vice chairman
Capital One           Patrick W. Gross           director                            Council on Foreign Relations        member            member
Carver Bancorp        Deborah C. Wright          chairman & president & CEO          Partnership for New York City       board member      director
CIT Group             Jeffrey M. Peek            chairman & CEO                      Partnership for New York City       board member      director
CIT Group             Seymour Sternberg          director                            Council on Foreign Relations        member            member
CIT Group             Seymour Sternberg          director                            Partnership for New York City       board member      director
Citigroup             Alain J.P. Belda           director                            Partnership for New York City       board member      director
Citigroup             C. Michael Armstrong       director                            Council on Foreign Relations        member            member
Citigroup             Judith Rodin               director                            Council on Foreign Relations        member            member
Citigroup             Kenneth T. Derr            director                            Council on Foreign Relations        member            member
Citigroup             Michael B.G. Froman        managing director                   Council on Foreign Relations        member            member
Citigroup             Pamela P. Flaherty         director, corporate citizenship     Council on Foreign Relations        member            member
Citigroup             Richard D. Parsons         chairman                            Partnership for New York City       board member      chair emeritus, director
Citigroup             Robert E. Rubin            director                            Geithner is Protégé of Rubin        NA                NA
Citigroup             Roberto H. Ramirez         director                            Federal Reserve Bank of New York    president         int'l advisory board
Fannie Mae            Herbert M. Allison Jr.     President & CEO                     Economic Club of New York           trustee           trustee
Fannie Mae            Herbert M. Allison Jr.     President & CEO                     Partnership for New York City       board member      director
Fortress Inv. Group   Richard N. Haass           director                            Council on Foreign Relations        member            president
Franklin Resources    Anne M. Tatlock            director                            Council on Foreign Relations        member            member
GAMCO Investors       Eugene R. McGrath          director                            Economic Club of New York           trustee           trustee
Goldman Sachs         Ashton B. Carter           consultant                          Council on Foreign Relations        member            member
Goldman Sachs         E. Gerald Corrigan         managing director                   Unofficial Adviser to Geithner      NA                NA
Goldman Sachs         James A. Johnson           director                            Council on Foreign Relations        member            member
Goldman Sachs         John C. Whitehead          foundation chairman                 International Rescue Committee      trustee           trustee
Goldman Sachs         Lloyd C. Blankfein         chairman & CEO                      Partnership for New York City       board member      director
Goldman Sachs         Robert D. Hormats          vice chairman, GS International     Economic Club of New York           trustee           trustee, vice chair
Goldman Sachs         Ruth J. Simmons            director                            Council on Foreign Relations        member            member
Goldman Sachs         Stephen Friedman           director                            Council on Foreign Relations        member            director
Goldman Sachs         Stephen Friedman           director                            Federal Reserve Bank of New York    president         chair
JPMorgan Chase        Andrew D. Crockett         executive committee member          Group of Thirty                     member            member
JPMorgan Chase        Ellen V. Futter            director                            Council on Foreign Relations        member            member
JPMorgan Chase        James Dimon                chairman & CEO                      Federal Reserve Bank of New York    president         director
JPMorgan Chase        James Dimon                chairman & CEO                      Partnership for New York City       board member      director
JPMorgan Chase        Ratan N. Tata              international advisory board        RAND Corporation                    trustee           trustee
JPMorgan Chase        William M. Daley           chairman midwest region             Council on Foreign Relations        member            member
M&T Bank              Robert G. Wilmers          chairman & CEO                      Council on Foreign Relations        member            member
Morgan Stanley        Frederick B. Whittemore    partner & managing director         Council on Foreign Relations        member            trustee
Morgan Stanley        John J. Mack               chairman & CEO                      Partnership for New York City       board member      director
Morgan Stanley        Philip Lader               senior adviser                      RAND Corporation                    trustee           trustee
NASDAQ                Robert Greifeld            president & CEO                     Partnership for New York City       board member      director
NYSE                  Shirley Ann Jackson        director                            Council on Foreign Relations        member            director
PNC Fin. Services     James E. Rohr              chairman & CEO                      RAND Corporation                    trustee           trustee
Popular               Richard L. Carrion         chairman, president, & CEO          Federal Reserve Bank of New York    president         director
Wells Fargo           Donald B. Rice             director                            RAND Corporation                    trustee           trustee
                                                               Appendix Table A3
                                               Comparison of New York Firms to Non-New York Firms
The table compares firms in the sample headquartered in New York City with firms in the sample headquartered elsewhere. CAR [0,10] is the cumulative
abnormal return for the firm surrounding the announcement of Geithner as treasury secretary. Total assets are for the year 2008 from Worldscope.

                         New York                                                                   Non-New York (Largest 45)
                           Base
Firm                      Sample CAR [0,10]               Total Assets ($Bn)     Firm                              CAR [0,10]    Total Assets ($Bn)
JP MORGAN CHASE & CO.        N        0.186                          2,175.00    BANK OF AMERICA CORP.                  0.168               1,818.00
CITIGROUP INCO.              N        0.743                          1,938.00    WELLS FARGO & CO                       0.124               1,310.00
THE GOLDMAN SACHS GPIN.      N        0.192                            876.20    FANNIE MAE                             1.008                 908.50
MORGAN STANLEY               N        0.224                            658.80    FREDDIE MAC                            0.659                 835.60
BANK OF NY.MELLON CORP.      Y       -0.095                            237.50    PNC FINL.SVS.GP.INCO.                  0.044                 291.10
AMERICAN EXPRESS CO.         N        0.029                            122.60    US BANCORP                             0.078                 265.90
CIT GROUP INCO.              Y        0.500                              80.45   SUNTRUST BANKS INCO.                   0.200                 189.10
E*TRADE FINANCIAL CORP.      Y        0.051                              47.50   STATE STREET CORP.                     0.091                 173.60
BLACKROCK INCO.              Y        0.082                              19.91   SLM CORP.                              0.064                 168.80
JEFFERIES GP.INCO.           N        0.071                              19.60   CAPITAL ONE FINL.CORP.                -0.053                 165.90
ICAHN ENTERPRISES LP.        Y        0.764                              18.82   BB&T CORP.                            -0.131                 152.00
NYSE EURONEXT                N        0.089                              13.28   REGIONS FINL.CORP.                    -0.206                 146.20
THE NASDAQ OMX GP.INCO.      Y        0.212                              12.05   FIFTH THIRD BANCORP                   -0.232                 119.50
THE BLACKSTONE GROUP LP.     Y        0.345                               8.41   KEYCORP                                0.062                 104.50
SIGNATURE BK.                Y       -0.064                               7.11   AMERIPRISE FINL.INCO.                  0.297                   94.67
LABRANCHE & CO.INCO.         Y        0.127                               3.73   NORTHERN TRUST CORP.                   0.117                   82.05
INTERVEST BCSH.CORP.         Y       -0.259                               2.26   COMERICA INCO.                         0.037                   67.55
STERLING BANC.               Y       -0.137                               2.19   M&T BK.CORP.                          -0.045                   65.82
FINL.FED.CORP.               Y        0.277                               1.94   MARSHALL & ILSLEY CORP.               -0.300                   62.34
INV.TECH.GP.                 Y        0.164                               1.68   ZIONS BANCORPORATION                  -0.255                   54.61
ALLBERN.HLDG.LP.             Y        0.401                               1.60   HUNTINGTON BCSH.INCO.                 -0.073                   54.35
MOODY'S CORP.                Y        0.114                               1.55   HUDSON CITY BANC.INCO.                -0.231                   54.09
NAT.FINL.PTNS.CORP.          Y        0.989                               1.52   CHARLES SCHWAB CORP.                  -0.141                   51.17
FORTRESS INV.GP.LLC.         Y       -0.131                               1.17   MF GLOBAL LTD.                        -0.180                   49.18
GFI GROUP INCO.              Y       -0.278                               1.09   CME GROUP INCO.                        0.010                   48.16
BGC PARTNERS INCO.           Y        0.328                               1.07   DISCOVER FINANCIAL SVS.                0.122                   39.20
OCH-ZIFF CAP.MAN.GP.LLC.     Y        0.107                               1.02   POPULAR INCO.                         -0.194                   38.53
MSCI INCO.                   Y        0.090                               1.02   SYNOVUS FINL.CORP.                    -0.031                   35.62
BERKSHIRE BANCORP INCO.      Y       -0.190                               0.91   NY.CMTY.BANC.INCO.                    -0.078                   32.33
CARVER BANCORP INCO.         Y       -0.116                               0.79   FIRST HORIZON NAT.CORP.               -0.124                   31.02
BROADPOINT SECS.GP.INCO.     Y        0.204                               0.69   THE STUDENT LN.CORP.                   0.321                   28.14
EVERCORE PARTNERS INCO.      Y        0.485                               0.68   INTACT.BCK.GP.INCORP.                  0.073                   28.00
MEDALLION FINL.CORP.         Y        0.146                               0.65   THE COLO.BANCGROUP INCO.               0.020                   25.50
KBW INCO.                    Y       -0.382                               0.57   ASSOCIATED BANC-CORP                  -0.056                   24.19
GLG PARTNERS INCO.           Y       -0.012                               0.49   BOK FINL.CORP.                        -0.065                   22.73
DUFF & PHELPS CORP.          Y        0.438                               0.35   ASTORIA FINL.CORP.                    -0.132                   21.98
COHEN & STEERS INCO.         Y        0.204                               0.28   RAYMOND JAMES FINL.INCO.              -0.020                   20.62
GREENHILL & CO.INCO.         Y       -0.064                               0.23   PEOPLES UTD.FINL.INCO.                -0.174                   20.17
MARKETAXESS HDG.INCO.        Y        0.040                               0.21   FIRST BANC.                           -0.093                   19.49
COWEN GROUP INCORPORATED     Y        0.057                               0.20   CAPITALSOURCE INCO.                    0.135                   18.41
CMS BANCORP INCO.            Y        0.100                               0.20   COMMERCE BCSH.INCO.                   -0.106                   17.53
PZENA INV.MAN.INCO.          Y       -0.151                               0.06   WEBSTER FINL.CORP.                     0.067                   17.39
EPOCH HOLDING CORP.          Y        0.030                               0.05   FIRST CTZN.BCSH.INCO.                 -0.053                   16.75
RODMAN & RENSHAW CAP.GP.     Y        0.217                               0.05   TCF FINANCIAL CORP.                   -0.026                   16.74
SIEBERT FINANCIAL CORP.      Y       -0.031                               0.04   AMERICREDIT CORP.                      0.363                   16.23
                                                                                          Appendix Table A4
                                                                                       Other Non-New York Firms
The table lists firms in the sample not listed in Appendix Table A4. The firms are listed in descending order of size (total assets).
City National               Amcore Financial          Wilshire Banc.              Stewart Info.Svs.            Dollar Financial           Comm Bancorp               Greene County Banc.
Fulton Financial            Fed.Agri.Mge.             First Regl.Banc.            Oritani Financial            Legacy Bancorp             Landmark Bancorp           LSB Finl.
TD Ameritrade               Irwin Finl.               Fcstone Group               Firstbank                    Nat.Bankshares             Central Jersey Bancorp     River Valley Bancorp
Cullen Fo.Bankers           First Merchants           Ameris Bancorp              Centrue Finl.                Fox Chase Bancorp          Monarch Finl.Hdg.          WSB Financial Gp.
Ictl.Ex.                    Pncl.Finl.Ptns.           Lakeland Finl.              Horizon Financial            Eaton Vance                Parke Bancorp              Summit State Bank
Valley National Bancorp     PMI Group                 Camden Nat.                 Mutualfirst Finl.            Patriot Nat.BanInc         Northeast Bancorp          Coml.Nat.Finl.
Flagstar Bancorp            Banner                    Seacoast Bkg.Fla.           Alliance Finl.               Washington Banking Co.     Pamrapo Ban                Patriot Cap.Fdg.
Susquehanna Bcsh.           1st Source                First Finl.                 Peapack-Gladstone Finl.      Clifton Svg.Banc.          Sun American Bancorp       Citizens First
Sth.Finl.Gp.                First Busey               Cascade Bancorp             PAB Bankshares               Peoples Finl.              Capital Southwest          Pathfinder Banc.
UCBH Holdings               S & T Bancorp             Enter.Finl.Svs.             SEI Invs.Co.                 Unity Bancorp              Cmty.Vly.Banc.             Liberty Bancorp
Bancorpsouth                Taylor Cap.Gp.            United Wstn.Banc.           Mrch.Bcsh.                   WGNB                       Cowlitz Bancorporation     Rome Bancorp
Sterling Finl.              Frontier Finl.            Viewpoint Financial Gp.     Centerstate Bks.of Fla.      Riverview Bancorp          BCB Bancorp                Cheviot Finl.
KKR Financial Hdg.Llc       Dime Cmty.Bcsh.           Mercantile Bk.              Sierra Bancorp               Cmty.Bk.Shs.of Indna.      Alliance Bksh.             Glen Burnie Bancorp
Whitney Holding             Benl.Mut.Banc.            Farmers Capital Bk.         City Bank                    1st.Sth.Banc.              Vil.Bk.&.Tst.Finl.         Firstcity Finl.
East Ws.Banc.               Westamerica Ban           Macatawa Bank               Horizon Banc.                North Vly.Ban              Central Banc.              Louisiana Bancorp
Wilmington Tst.             Flushing Finl.            Penn.Com.Banc.              Pulaski Financial            1st.Pactrust Banc.         Community Partners Banc.   Oak Ridge Finl.Svs.
Legg Mason                  Chemical Finl.            First Cmty.Bcsh.            Ctzn.& Nthn.                 PVF Capital                Pico Hdg.                  Old Line Bcsh.
Wash.Fed.                   Bancfirst                 Banctrust Finl.Gp.          First Mariner Ban            Ames Nat.                  American River Bksh.       MSB Financial
Cathay Gen.Bancorp          Hanmi Finl.               Univest of Penn.            Hawthorn Bcsh.               K-Fed Bancorp              First Fed.Bksh.            Ezcorp
Firstmerit                  First Finl.Banc.          Kearny Financial            First Security Gp.           Federated Invrs.           Community Ctl.Bk.          Somerset Hills Banc.
UMB Finl.                   Renasant                  Ocwen Finl.                 The 1st.of Lng.Isl.          C&F Finl.                  Encore Cap.Gp.             Sanders Mos.Har.Gp.
TFS Financial               Heartland Finl.Usa        Newbridge Bancorp           Colony Bankcorp              SI Finl.Gp.                The Bank Holdings          Monarch Cmty.Banc.
Bank of Hawaii              Independent Bk.           Fnb United                  First Financial Nw.          Nwh.Thrift Bcsh.           1st Cnt.Ban                Thomas Weisel Ptns.Gpin.
Wintrust Financial          Sun Bancorp               Center Finl.                Piper Jaffray Cos.           Bridge Bancorp             Hampden Bancorp            Amer.Phys.Ser.Gp.
Doral Financial             Advanta                   Trico Bcsh.                 Tennessee Com.Banc.          Tradestation Gp.           Oneida Finl.               Bay National
Privatebancorp              Midwest Banc Hdg.         Peoples Banc.               1st.Marblehead               Harleysville Svg.Finl.     Southcoast Finl.           Atlantic Bancgroup
SVB Financial Group         Trustco Bk.Ny             ESB Finl.                   Bofi Holding                 Monroe Ban                 Colonial Bksh.             First Csh.Finl.Svs.
Trustmark                   Ampal-Amer.Isr.           Cadence Financial           German Amer.Banc.            Ctzn.Sth.Bkg.              Evans Bancorp              Optimumbank Hdg.
Pacific Cap.Banc.           Bank Mut.                 Citizens 1st.Banc.          Cash Am.Intl.                Rainier Pac.Finl.Gp.Inco   Chicopee Bancorp           Cmty.Shores Bk.
Nat.Penn Bcsh.              Wsfs Finl.                1st.Defiance Finl.          Appalachian Bcsh.            First Nat.Bcsh.            NB&T Finl.Gp.              Kentucky First Fed.Banc.
1st.Niag.Finl.Gp.           First Ste.Ban             Knight Capital Gp.          Abington Bancorp             Hingham Instn.For Svg.     First Key.Finl.            1st.Fed.of Nthn.Mi.Banc.
Mgic Investment             Integra Bank              Finl.Institutions           Harrington Ws.Fgp.           Herit.Oaks Banc.           Magyar Bancorp             Bank of Soca.
Franklin Resources          First Pl.Finl.            Amer.West Ban               First Cal.Finl.Gp.           Marlin Bus.Svs.            Norwood Finl.              Mayflower Bancorp
Prosperity Bcsh.            Janus Capital Gp.         Smithtown Banc.             Enterprise Bancorp           Primus Guaranty Ltd.       Heritage Financial Group   FPB Bancorp
MB Finl.                    Tierone                   Oppenheimer Hdg.            Pac.Merc.Ban                 1st.Fed.Bcsh.of Ark.Inco   1st.Cmty.Bk.of Am.         Safegd.Scientifics
Umpqua Hdg.                 Sandy Spring Banc.        Oceanfirst Finl.            Royal Bcsh.of Penn.          Amer.Nat.Bksh.             PSB Holdings               GS Financial
Utd.Cmty.Bks.               Equifax                   Parkvale Finl.              Princeton Nat.Banc.          Community Capital          Brooklyn Fed.Banc.         Park Bancorp
First Midwest Banc.         Affiliated Mgrs.Gp.Inc    Sthn.Cmty.Finl.             Bank of Granite              Ohio Valley Banc           Elmira Svg.Bk.Fsb          Triangle Capital
FNB                         Bank of The Ozarks        The Bancorp                 Bryn Mawr Bank               United Panam Finl.         Citizens Cmty.Banc.        VSB Bancorp NY
Corus Bankshares            First Finl.Bksh.          Northfield Bancorp          Credit Accep.                Waddell & Reed Finl.Inc    Central Va.Bksh.           Intersections
Newalliance Bcsh.           Townebank                 Fidelity Sthn.              HMN Financial                Bank of Commerce Hdg.      North Ctl.Bcsh.            Oh.Legacy
Fid.Nat.Financial           Columbia Bkg.Sys.         Cardinal Finl.              LNB BanInc                   Citizens Co.               First State Finl.          Nicholas Financial
Capitol Fed.Finl.           Hampton Roads Bksh.       Ste.Banc.                   Triad Gty.                   LSB                        Asta Funding               First Bankshares
Utd.Bksh.                   Old Second Banc.          Arrow Finl.                 Columbia Bancorp             United Security Bcsh.      World Acceptance           Ffd Finl.
Santander Bancorp           Provident Ny.Banc.        Porter Bancorp              CFS Bancorp                  Meta Financial Gp.         Ameriana Bancorp           Main Street Cap.
Old Nat.Banc.(Indiana)      Wash.Tst.Banc.            Capital Bk.                 Dearborn Banc.               Auburn Nat.BanInc          Plumas Banc.               Commercefirst Banc.
Radian Gp.                  First Finl.Hdg.           Cascade Finl.               Westfield Finl.              Ctl.Vly.Cmty.Banc.         Mackinac Financial         Bank of Mckenney
Bstn.Priv.Finl.Hdg.         Independent Bk.           Summit Finl.Gp.             Pacific Cont.                TF Financial               Adv.Am.Csh.Adv.Cntrs.      Carolina Trust Bank
Hancock Holding Co.         Community Tst.Banc.       Provident Finl.Hdg.         Roma Financial               Pac.Premier Banc.          Wsb Holdings               Am.1st.Tax Exem.Invrs.Lp
Northwest Banc.             Green Bankshares          Sy Bancorp                  Cmwl.Bksh.                   Premier Finl.Bancorp Inc   Scty.Nat.Finl.             Osage Bancshares
CVB Financial               Simmons First Nat.        First Utd.                  First Ctzn.Banc              Home Federal Banc.         United Bancorp Oh.         QC Holdings
Moneygram Intl.             Mainsource Finl.Gp.       TIB Finl.                   Wainwright Bk.& Tst.Co.      Fidelity Ban               Sussex Bancorp             JMP Group
Provident Bksh.             Southwest Bancorp         QCR Hdg.                    Bank of Marin Bancorp        Resource Am.               Intl.Assets                Investors Title Co.
Provident Finl.Svs.         Security Bank             First M & F                 Shore Bcsh.                  Tidelands Bcsh.            Union Bankshares           Microfinancial
1st.Cmwl.Finl.              Eurobancshares            Consumer Prtf.Svs.          Eastern Va.Bksh.             Peoples Cmty.Banc.         Jacksonvl.Banc.Fla.        Cougar Biotech.
Investors Bancorp           Lazard Ltd.               Suffolk Banc.               CNB Finl.                    Access National            First Cap.Bancorp          Arbinet Thexchange
Oriental Finl.Gp.           SCBT Financial            Encore Bancshares           First Finl.Ser.              Codorus Vly.Banc.          Prvt.Cmty.Bcsh.            Westwood Hdg.Gp.
Mastercard                  First Bancorp             Bnc Bancorp                 Beacon Fed.Banc.In           Tower Finl.                Newport Bancorp            US Global Invrs.
Bankatlantic Banc.          T Rowe Price Gp.          Metrocorp Bcsh.             Center Banc.                 Sthn.First Bcsh.           Sthn.Nat.Banc.of Va.Inco   Dia.Hill Inv.Gp.
Capitol Banc.Ltd.           Va.Com.Bancorp            Bankfinancial               Essa Bancorp                 Timberland Banc.           Ntheast.Cmty.Banc.         Paulson Cap.
Iberiabank                  Southside Bcsh.           Mbt Finl.                   Northrim Bancorp             Ocean Shore Co.            WVS Finl.                  Arrowhead Resh.
Western Union Co.(The)      Cobiz Financial           West Ban                    Atl.Sthn.Finl.Gp.            Gamco Investors            All.Banc.of (Penn.)        Kent Finl.Svs.
Glacier Bancorp             Berk.Hills Banc.          Bank of Florida             Atlantic Cst.Fed.            Guaranty Fed.Bcsh.         Southern Mo.Banc.          Community Bancorp
Penson Worldwide            Nara Banc.                Compucredit                 Severn Banc.                 Bch.First Nat.Bcsh.        Abigail Adams Nat.Banc.    Bankunited Finl.
Harleysville Nat.           Great Sthn.Bancorp        Banc.Rhode Isl.             Middleburg Finl.             Prtf.Rec.Assocs.           Britton & Koontz Cap.      Benjamin Frank.Banc.Inco
Central Pac.Finl.           Lakeland Bancorp          Rockville Finl.             Compass Diversified Hdg.     Rurban Finl.               Asset Accep.Cap.           W Holding Company
NBT Bancorp                 United Cmty.Finl.         Yadkin Valley Finl.         Optionsxpress Hdg.           Community West Bcsh.       Broadway Financial         Vineyard National Banc.
Wesbanco                    Brookline Bancorp         Stifel Finl.                Hopfed Bancorp               First Clover Leaf Finl.    Lake Shore Bancorp         Cape Fear Bank
Western All.Ban             Home Bancshares           NASB Finl.                  Crescent Financial           Penns Woods Banc.          Wayne Svg.Bcsh.            Amer.Cmty.Bcsh.
Cmty.Bk.Sy.                 Union Bankshares          Heritage Com.               Ameriserv Finl.Inc           First Cmty.                Carrollton Banc.
Anchor Banc.Wi.             Newstar Financial         Temecula Vly.Banc.          Coop.Bankshares              Amer.Bancorp of Nj.        Jeffersonville Bancorp
Texas Capital Bcsh.         City Co.                  Eagle Banc.                 Rep.First Banc.Inco          Carolina Bk.Hdg.           Calamos Asset Man.
SWS Gp.                     West Coast Bancorp        Premier West Bancorp        Bridge Cap.Hdg.              Utd.Bcsh.Ohio              Cal.1st.Nat.Bancorp
Sterling Bcsh.              Cap.City Bk.Gp.           Preferred Bank              Heritage Financial           New Century Banc.          United Community Bancorp
                                                              Appendix Table A5
                      Connections to Geithner and Stock Price Reactions to Treasury Secretary Announcement, Full Sample
The table presents stock returns of financial firms around the announcement of Barack Obama's nomination of Timothy Geithner as Treasury Secretary.
Event day 0 is November 21, 2008 from 3pm (when the news leaked) to market closing; the announcement was made on event day 1. Abnormal returns are
calculated using the market model with an estimation window of 250 trading days ending 30 days prior to event day 0. Schedule connections indicate
meetings between the firm's executives and Geithner during 2007-08; personal connections indicate shared board memberships between the firm's executives
and Geithner; New York connections indicate firms headquartered in New York City. Asterisks denote significance levels of a two-tailed t-test (***=1%,
**=5%, *=10%).

Panel A: Actual returns, Full sample
                                   Schedule Connections                      Personal Connections                        New York Connections
Event Day     Date          Conn.     Non-Conn.     Difference         Conn.     Non-Conn.     Difference          Conn.    Non-Conn. Difference
    0       11/21/2008          0.093        0.047    0.046 ***           0.096        0.047     0.049 ***            0.089      0.046      0.043 ***
    1       11/24/2008          0.165        0.054    0.111 ***           0.185        0.054     0.131 ***            0.107      0.055      0.052 ***
    2       11/25/2008          0.032        0.015    0.017               0.047        0.015     0.032                0.033      0.014      0.019
    3       11/26/2008          0.087        0.042    0.045 **            0.076        0.043     0.034                0.085      0.040      0.045 ***
    4       11/28/2008          0.051        0.018    0.033 **            0.054        0.018     0.036 **             0.021      0.019      0.002
    5        12/1/2008         -0.151       -0.083   -0.068 ***          -0.165       -0.083    -0.082 ***           -0.118     -0.083     -0.034 **
    6        12/2/2008          0.054        0.046    0.008               0.058        0.046     0.012                0.086      0.043      0.043 ***
    7        12/3/2008          0.045        0.020    0.024               0.056        0.020     0.036 **             0.035      0.020      0.015
    8        12/4/2008         -0.009       -0.014    0.005              -0.003       -0.015     0.011               -0.021     -0.014     -0.008
    9        12/5/2008          0.060        0.029    0.031 **            0.056        0.029     0.027 *              0.054      0.028      0.026 **
   10        12/8/2008          0.073        0.027    0.046 **            0.072        0.028     0.045 **             0.057      0.027      0.030 **
  0-10 (Cumulative)             0.584        0.197    0.387 ***           0.646        0.197     0.448 ***            0.512      0.189      0.323 ***
Panel B: Cumulative abnormal returns, Full sample
                                Schedule Connections                         Personal Connections                        New York Connections
Event Day    Date        Conn.      Non-Conn.     Difference           Conn.     Non-Conn.     Difference          Conn.    Non-Conn. Difference
    0      11/21/2008       -0.016        -0.015    0.000                -0.025       -0.015    -0.010               -0.007     -0.016     0.009
    1      11/24/2008        0.046        -0.020    0.066 ***             0.046       -0.020     0.065 ***            0.010     -0.020     0.029 *
    2      11/25/2008        0.067        -0.011    0.079 ***             0.080       -0.011     0.091 ***            0.033     -0.011     0.045 **
    3      11/26/2008        0.097        -0.002    0.099 ***             0.093       -0.001     0.094 ***            0.069     -0.003     0.072 ***
    4      11/28/2008        0.131         0.007    0.124 ***             0.130        0.008     0.121 ***            0.076      0.007     0.069 **
    5       12/1/2008        0.120         0.005    0.115 ***             0.120        0.005     0.115 ***            0.083      0.003     0.079 ***
    6       12/2/2008        0.110         0.014    0.096 ***             0.107        0.015     0.092 **             0.113      0.010     0.103 ***
    7       12/3/2008        0.112         0.010    0.102 ***             0.116        0.011     0.105 **             0.111      0.007     0.104 ***
    8       12/4/2008        0.149         0.022    0.126 ***             0.163        0.023     0.140 ***            0.130      0.019     0.111 ***
    9       12/5/2008        0.150         0.018    0.132 ***             0.154        0.018     0.135 ***            0.133      0.014     0.119 ***
   10       12/8/2008        0.161         0.010    0.151 ***             0.157        0.011     0.147 ***            0.136      0.006     0.129 ***
                                                                          Appendix Table A6
                                                   Cumulative Abnormal Returns of Connected Firms, Matching Estimators
The table reports results from various matching estimators. Panels A and B compare cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) of firms connected to Geithner with cumulative abnormal
returns of non-connected firms matched by propensity score. The CAR is measured from day 0 to day 1 or from day 0 to day 10, as indicated. Matching is done in one of three
ways, as indicated: by firm size, by the primary control variables (size, profitability, and leverage), or by the primary control variables plus other control variables (a TARP
participation dummy, a deposit-taking dummy, and the CAR surrounding the Lehman collapse). Matching is performed as one-to-one matching without replacement. Panel C
reports the weighted average estimates computed separately for every covariate cell of regressions of cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) surrounding the announcement of
Geithner as Treasury Secretary on measures of connections to Geithner. Covariates are quartiles of log of total assets, profitability, and leverage, which results in 64 cells. Controls
for log of total assets, profitability, and leverage are included in each regression. Standard errors are in parentheses, and asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%,
*=10%).
                                            (1)             (2)             (3)               (4)             (5)            (6)               (7)             (8)             (9)

Panel A: Propensity-score matched, CAR [0,1]
                                                 Match on Firm Size                        Match on Primary Control Variables                   Primary Controls and Others
                                         Conn.    Non-Conn.         Difference            Conn.      Non-Conn.       Difference            Conn.      Non-Conn.        Difference
Geithner Connections (Schedule)            0.046      -0.026          0.072 **              0.060        0.006         0.054 *               0.064         0.016         0.048
                                                                     (0.030)                                          (0.033)                                           (0.034)
Geithner Connections (Personal)            0.046       0.006          0.039                 0.054       -0.002         0.057                 0.054         0.015         0.039
                                                                     (0.033)                                          (0.032)                                           (0.034)
Geithner Connections (New York)            0.010      -0.015          0.025                 0.010       -0.008         0.018                 0.015        -0.014         0.029
                                                                     (0.022)                                          (0.027)                                           (0.027)

Panel B: Propensity-score matched, CAR [0,10]
                                                 Match on Firm Size                        Match on Primary Control Variables                   Primary Controls and Others
                                         Conn.    Non-Conn.         Difference            Conn.      Non-Conn.       Difference            Conn.      Non-Conn.        Difference
Geithner Connections (Schedule)            0.161       0.021           0.140 **             0.127       -0.013          0.140 ***            0.131        0.087           0.045
                                                                     (0.066)                                          (0.052)                                           (0.069)
Geithner Connections (Personal)            0.157       0.009           0.149 *              0.115        0.022          0.093                0.115        0.021           0.094
                                                                     (0.078)                                          (0.068)                                           (0.068)
Geithner Connections (New York)            0.136       0.098           0.038                0.139        0.026          0.112 **             0.140        0.052           0.088 *
                                                                     (0.059)                                          (0.054)                                           (0.053)

Panel C: Nonparametric matching estimator
                                             Dependent variable is CAR [0]                    Dependent variable is CAR [0,1]                 Dependent variable is CAR [0,10]
                                                    (Full sample)                                     (Base sample)                                    (Base sample)
                                         Schedule      Personal       New York             Schedule    Personal        New York             Schedule     Personal       New York
Geithner Connections                     0.0047 *** 0.0238 *** 0.0413 ***                   0.022 ***     0.054 ***      0.066 **            0.050 ***     0.098 ***      0.292 ***
                                        (0.0014)     (0.0028)        (0.0098)              (0.005)       (0.009)        (0.026)             (0.010)       (0.021)        (0.058)
                                                                                     Appendix Table A7
                                                                               Weights for Synthetic Matching
The table presents the weights used for the control group (non-connected) firms in the synthetic matching estimates. The weights presented are for the full sample where the treatment group
is defined as firms connected according to the schedule measure of connections, as in Panel A of Table 5. Weights less than 0.005 are not reported in the table.
                                                                                                 Treatment Group (Connected Firms)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      JP MORGAN CHASE & CO.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            FEDERATED INVRS.INCO.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              NORTHERN TRUST CORP.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Total contribution to weights
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PNC FINL.SVS.GP.INCO.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       EVERCORE PARTNERS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NY.CMTY.BANC.INCO.
                                                                                                       BANK OF NY.MELLON




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PROVIDENT FINL.SVS.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             STATE STREET CORP.
                                                              ASTORIA FINL.CORP.
                                          AMERICAN EXPRESS




                                                                                                                            BEACON FED.BANC.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              MORGAN STANLEY
                                                                                    BANK OF AMERICA




                                                                                                                                                BLACKROCK INCO.




                                                                                                                                                                                                    CME GROUP INCO.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     GOLDMAN SACHS
                                                                                                                                                                                 CITIGROUP INCO.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            NYSE EURONEXT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                NASDAQ OMX
                                                                                                                                                                   BLACKSTONE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LAZARD LTD.
Control Group (Synthetic Matches)
1ST.CMWL.FINL.CORP.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.03                                         0.03
1ST.NIAG.FINL.GP.INCO.                  0.05                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.18                                                            0.29                                         0.52
ADV.AM.CSH.ADV.CNTRS.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.13                  0.13
AFFILIATED MGRS.GP.INC                  0.09                                                                                                        0.13                                           0.04                                                                                                       0.17                             0.08                                                        0.09                                                                                   0.61
ALLBERN.HLDG.LP.                                                                                                                               0.16 0.08                                                                                                                                                                     0.23                                                                                                                                                                 0.48
AMERIPRISE FINL.INCO.                   0.07                                                                                                                                    0.01                                                       0.15 0.04                                                                         0.19                            0.12                                          0.03                                                                                   0.61
ASSOCIATED BANC-CORP                                                               0.01                                                                                         0.13                                                                                                 0.05                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.18
BANK MUT.CORP.                                                                                                             0.07                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.07
BANK OF HAWAII CORP.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.05                                                                                                         0.05
BB&T CORP.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.06                                                                  0.06
BROOKLINE BANCORP INCO.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.16                                         0.16
CAPITAL ONE FINL.CORP.                  0.24 0.06 0.02                                                                                         0.04                             0.10                                                                                                 0.03                                                                                                                                   0.03                                                                  0.52
CAPITOL BANC.LTD.                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.16                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.16
CAPITOL FED.FINL.                                                                                                          0.11                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.11
CASCADE FINL.CORP.                                                                                                         0.03                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.03
CHARLES SCHWAB CORP.                    0.04                                                          0.25                                     0.19                                                                                                                                                           0.12                                           0.18                                                                                                           0.23                  1.00
CHICOPEE BANCORP INCO.                                                                                                     0.44                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.44
CITY BANK                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.05                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.05
CITY NATIONAL CORP.                                                                                                                            0.11 0.11                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.05                                                                                                                                 0.27
CMTY.BK.SHS.OF INDNA.                                                                                                      0.14                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.14
COMERICA INCO.                                               0.13                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.13
COOP.BANKSHARES INCO.                                                                                                      0.05                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.05
CULLEN FO.BANKERS INCO.                                      0.11                                     0.06                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.07 0.05 0.07                                                        0.36
CVB FINANCIAL CORP.                                                                                                                            0.02                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.08                                                                  0.10
DOLLAR FINANCIAL CORP.                                                                                                     0.01                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.01
EATON VANCE CORP.                                                                                     0.22                                                                      0.10                                                                                                                                         0.06                                                                          0.18                                                             0.08                  0.64
EQUIFAX INCO.                           0.23                                                                                                                                                                                               0.26 0.18                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.67
FIFTH THIRD BANCORP                                                                                   0.18                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.17                  0.34
FIRST FINL.HDG.INCO.                    0.05                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.05
FIRST HORIZON NAT.CORP.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.02                  0.02
FIRSTMERIT CORP.                                                                                                                                                                                   0.10                                                                                                                                                      0.06 0.06 0.06                                                 0.09 0.04                                                             0.41
FLUSHING FINL.CORP.                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.08                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.08
FPB BANCORP INCO.                                                                                                          0.06                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.06
FRANKLIN RESOURCES INCO.                0.09 0.10 0.08                                                                                                                          0.09               0.10                                                                              0.03                                                      0.11                                                        0.14                                                                                   0.73
FULTON FINANCIAL CORP.                                                                                                                                            0.08                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.08
HARLEYSVILLE NAT.CORP.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.07                                         0.07
HUDSON CITY BANC.INCO.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.27 0.25                                                                                                                            0.51
ICTL.EX.INCO.                                                                                                                                                                                      0.39                                                                                                                                        0.19                                                        0.19                                                                                   0.78
INDEPENDENT BK.CORP.                                                                                                                           0.01                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.01
INVESTORS BANCORP INCO.                                                                                                    0.08                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.08
JANUS CAPITAL GP.INCO.                  0.04                                                                                                                                    0.08                                  0.02                                                                                                                                                                                 0.08                                                             0.03                  0.25
JEFFERIES GP.INCO.                                                                                                                             0.02                             0.08                                  0.07 0.01                                                                               0.02                             0.03                                                                                                                                               0.23
KEYCORP                                                                            0.08                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.12                            0.03                                                                                                                                 0.23
LEGG MASON INCO.                                                                                                                                                                                   0.04                                    0.14                                                                              0.05                                                                                                                                                                 0.23
M&T BK.CORP.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.01                                   0.08                                                                  0.10
MARKETAXESS HDG.INCO.                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.14                                                                                                   0.18                                                                                                                                                                 0.32
MARSHALL & ILSLEY CORP.                                                            0.04                                                                                         0.21                                                                                                 0.10                                                                                                                                                            0.05                                         0.40
MB FINL.INCO.                                                                      0.06                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.02                                                                  0.08
NAT.PENN BCSH.INCO.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.07                                         0.07
NBT BANCORP INCO.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.27                                                                                                                                                                                0.27
NEWALLIANCE BCSH.INCO.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.04                  0.04
OPTIONSXPRESS HDG.INCO.                                                                                                                                           0.27                                                                     0.04                                                               0.18                             0.20                                                                                                                                               0.70
PEOPLES UTD.FINL.INCO.                                       0.27                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.21                                                                                                         0.48
PIPER JAFFRAY COS.                                                                 0.17                                                                                         0.10                                                       0.05 0.09                                 0.10                                    0.15                                                                          0.04                                                                                   0.70
PNCL.FINL.PTNS.INCO.                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.18                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.18
PROSPERITY BCSH.INCO.                                        0.03                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.06                                                                  0.09
RAYMOND JAMES FINL.INCO.                                                                                                                                                        0.10                                                                                0.04             0.11                                    0.01                            0.02                                          0.05                                                                                   0.33
REGIONS FINL.CORP.                                           0.05 0.13                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.18
SEI INVS.CO.                                                                                          0.25                                                                                         0.03 0.26 0.14 0.27                                                                                                                                       0.14                                                                                                           0.21                  1.31
STIFEL FINL.CORP.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.11                                                                                                                                                                                0.11
SUN BANCORP INCO.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.06                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.06
SWS GP.INCO.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.06                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.06
T ROWE PRICE GP.INCO.                   0.04                                                                                                   0.07                                                0.14                                                             0.07             0.06                                                                    0.08                                                                                                                                 0.46
TD AMERITRADE HLDG.CORP.                                                                                                                       0.08 0.02                                                                                                            0.09                                                                       0.07                                                                                                                                               0.26
TRADESTATION GP.INCO.                                                                                                                          0.27 0.21                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.49
TRICO BCSH.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.10                                                                                                                                               0.10
TRUSTCO BK.CORP.NY                                           0.12                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.12
TRUSTMARK CORP.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.04                                         0.04
US BANCORP                                                   0.07                                                                                                                                  0.14                                                                              0.27                                                      0.09                                  0.02 0.11                              0.41                                            0.04                  1.14
UTD.BKSH.INCO.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.21                                         0.21
WADDELL & REED FINL.INC                                                                                                                                                                                               0.04                                          0.04                                                                       0.05                                                                                                                                               0.13
WEBSTER FINL.CORP.                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.13                                          0.08                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.21
WELLS FARGO & CO                                                                   0.30 0.04                                                                                                                                                                                         0.19                                                                    0.05                                                           0.06                                                                  0.64
WEST COAST BANCORP                                                                                                                                                0.10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.10
WHITNEY HOLDING CORP.                                        0.03                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.06                                  0.07                                                                                                         0.16
WILMINGTON TST.CORP.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.10                                                                                                         0.10
WINTRUST FINANCIAL CORP.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.04                                                                                                         0.04
WORLD ACCEPTANCE CORP.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.12                                                                                                                                                                                0.12
ZIONS BANCORPORATION                                                               0.11                                                                                                                                                                                              0.05                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.16
Sum of smaller weights not listed       0.06 0.02                0.01      0.01                                                                                                                              0.01 0.04                                                               0.02                               0.02      0.01 0.03                                                                                 0.04 0.02                                                             0.28
Total weights                           1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00                                                                                                                    1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00                                                               1.00                     1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00                                                                                 1.00 1.00 1.00
                                                                                    Appendix Table A8
                                                       Personal Connections of Other Treasury Secretary Candidates to Financial Firms
The table lists firms to which other Treasury Secretary candidates have connections through one or more individuals. The connections are compiled from March 2009 relationship maps on
muckety.com. The connections represent either known connections between the candidate and an individual or potential connections in that the candidate and the individual are associated with
the same organization.
                                                                                                                                              Candidates' Position with   Connected Person's
Firm                     Connected Person             Position with Firm                  Connection to Candidate                                   Connection          Position with Connection
Panel A: Lawrence Summers
BlackRock             Laurence D. Fink                chairman & CEO                      Informal Adviser                                   NA                        NA
Blackstone Group      Richard E. Salomon              adv. board chair, alt. asset mgt.   Peterson Institute for International Economics     director                  director
Blackstone Group      Peter G. Peterson               chairman and co-founder             Peterson Institute for International Economics     director                  chairman
Charles Schwab        Donald G. Fisher                director                            Teach for America                                  director                  director
Charles Schwab        Paula A. Sneed                  director                            Teach for America                                  director                  director
Citigroup             Robert E. Rubin                 director                            Summers is Protégé of Rubin                        NA                        NA
Citigroup             Richard D. Parsons              chairman                            Obama-Biden economic advisory team                 member                    member
Citigroup             Judith Rodin                    director                            Brookings Institution                              trustee                   honorary trustee
Citigroup             Anne M. Mulcahy                 director                            Obama-Biden economic advisory team                 member                    member
Goldman Sachs         James A. Johnson                director                            Brookings Institution                              trustee                   honorary trustee
Goldman Sachs         John C. Whitehead               foundation chairman                 Brookings Institution                              trustee                   honorary trustee
Goldman Sachs         Richard A. Friedman             managing director                   Mount Sinai Medical Center (New York)              trustee                   trustee
Goldman Sachs         Suzanne Nora Johnson            senior director                     Brookings Institution                              trustee                   trustee
Goldman Sachs         Abby Joseph Cohen               senior investment strategist        Brookings Institution                              trustee                   trustee
Icahn Enterprises     Carl C. Icahn                   owner                               Mount Sinai Medical Center (New York)              trustee                   trustee
JP Morgan Chase       George P. Shultz                chairman international council      American Corporate Partners                        adv. council member       adv. council member
JP Morgan Chase       William M. Daley                chairman Midwest division           Obama-Biden economic advisory team                 member                    member
JP Morgan Chase       Ernesto Zedillo                 int'l advisory board member         Peterson Institute for International Economics     director                  director
Lazard                Vernon E. Jordan Jr.            director                            Brookings Institution                              trustee                   honorary trustee
Morgan Stanley        Laura D'Andrea Tyson            director                            Brookings Institution                              trustee                   trustee
Morgan Stanley        Laura D'Andrea Tyson            director                            Obama-Biden economic advisory team                 member                    member
Morgan Stanley        Hutham S. Olayan                director                            Peterson Institute for International Economics     director                  director
Morgan Stanley        Laura D'Andrea Tyson            director                            Peterson Institute for International Economics     director                  director
NASDAQ                Glenn H. Hutchins               director                            Brookings Institution                              trustee                   trustee
NYSE                  Shirley Ann Jackson             director                            Brookings Institution                              trustee                   trustee
Och-Ziff              David Windreich                 partner                             Mount Sinai Medical Center (New York)              trustee                   trustee
Sallie Mae            Barry A. Munitz                 director                            Broad Foundations                                  governor                  governor
VISA                  Suzanne Nora Johnson            director                            Brookings Institution                              trustee                   trustee
Panel B: Paul Volcker
Blackstone Group         Peter G. Peterson            chairman & co-founder               Concord Coalition                                  director                  founding president
Blackstone Group         Peter G. Peterson            chairman & co-founder               Japan Society                                      life director             life director
Blackstone Group         Peter G. Peterson            chairman & co-founder               Peterson Institute for International Economics     director                  chairman
Blackstone Group         Richard E. Salomon           adv. board chair, alt. asset mgt.   Peterson Institute for International Economics     director                  director
Capital One              Patrick W. Gross             director                            Aspen Institute                                    lifetime trustee          trustee
CIT Group                James S. McDonald            director                            Japan Society                                      life director             director
Citigroup                Richard D. Parsons           chairman                            Obama-Biden economic advisory team                 member                    member
Citigroup                Robert E. Rubin              director                            Concord Coalition                                  director                  director
Citigroup                Anne M. Mulcahy              director                            Obama-Biden economic advisory team                 member                    member
Goldman Sachs            Stephen Friedman             director                            Aspen Institute                                    lifetime trustee          trustee
Goldman Sachs            John C. Whitehead            foundation chairman                 Financial Services Volunteer Corps                 honorary chairman         co-founder & chairman
Goldman Sachs            John C. Whitehead            foundation chairman                 International House                                chairman                  honorary trustee
Goldman Sachs            Josef Joffe                  foundation member                   Aspen Institute                                    lifetime trustee          member
Goldman Sachs            E. Gerald Corrigan           managing director                   Group of Thirty                                    chairman of the board     member
Goldman Sachs            Henry Cornell                managing director                   Japan Society                                      life director             director
JPMorgan Chase           William M. Daley             chairman Midwest division           Obama-Biden economic advisory team                 member                    member
JPMorgan Chase           William H. Gray III          director                            Concord Coalition                                  director                  director
JPMorgan Chase           Andrew D. Crockett           executive committee member          Group of Thirty                                    chairman of the board     member
JPMorgan Chase           Ernesto Zedillo              int'l advisory board member         Peterson Institute for International Economics     director                  director
Moody's                  Henry A. McKinnell Jr.       director                            Japan Society                                      life director             life director
Morgan Stanley           Laura D'Andrea Tyson         director                            Obama-Biden economic advisory team                 member                    member
Morgan Stanley           Hutham S. Olayan             director                            Peterson Institute for International Economics     director                  director
Morgan Stanley           Laura D'Andrea Tyson         director                            Peterson Institute for International Economics     director                  director
Morgan Stanley           Frederick B. Whittemore      partner/managing director           Aspen Institute                                    lifetime trustee          trustee
NASDAQ                   Merit E. Janow               director                            Japan Society                                      life director             director
NYSE                     James S. McDonald            director                            Japan Society                                      life director             director
Panel C: Sheila Bair
NYSE                     Self                         senior vice president (former)      NA                                                 NA                        NA
Panel D: Jon Corzine
Bank of New York         Gerald L. Hassell            president                           New York Philharmonic                              director emeritus         director
Fannie Mae               Philip A. Laskawy            chairman                            New York Philharmonic                              director emeritus         director
Goldman Sachs            Self                         chairman & CEO (former)             NA                                                 NA                        NA
Goldman Sachs            John F. W. Rogers            partner & foundation trustee        Corzine's former chief of staff                    NA                        NA
Lazard                   Philip A. Laskawy            director                            New York Philharmonic                              director emeritus         director
US Bancorp               Jerry W. Levin               director                            New York Philharmonic                              director emeritus         director
                                                                Appendix Table A9
                                         Connections to Geithner and Stock Price Reactions to Tax Problems
The table presents stock returns of financial firms around the announcement of Geithner's tax errors and delayed confirmation hearing. Event day 0 is January
14, 2009; the tax problems were disclosed by the Senate Finance Committee on January 13, 2009 after market closing. Abnormal returns are calculated using
the market model with an estimation window of 250 trading days ending 30 days prior to event day 0. The base sample excludes firms with returns highly
correlated to Citigroup or Bank of America. Schedule connections denote the number of meetings between the firm's executives and Geithner during 2007-08;
personal connections denote the number of shared board memberships between the firm's executives and Geithner; New York connections indicate firms
headquartered in New York City. Asterisks denote significance levels of a two-tailed t-test (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).

Panel A: Actual returns, Base sample
                                   Schedule Connections                         Personal Connections                         New York Connections
Event Day     Date          Conn.     Non-Conn.     Difference            Conn.     Non-Conn.     Difference           Conn.    Non-Conn. Difference
    0        1/14/2009         -0.054       -0.029    -0.025                -0.053       -0.029    -0.024                -0.054     -0.028     -0.027 **
    1        1/15/2009         -0.008        0.000    -0.009                -0.024        0.001    -0.025                 0.020     -0.001      0.021 **
    2        1/16/2009          0.005       -0.002     0.007                -0.011       -0.002    -0.009                -0.002     -0.002      0.000
    3        1/19/2009         -0.119       -0.061    -0.058 **             -0.070       -0.062    -0.009                -0.076     -0.061     -0.015
   0-3    (Cumulative)         -0.169       -0.090    -0.079 **             -0.145       -0.091    -0.054                -0.110     -0.090     -0.020
    4        1/20/2009          0.071        0.039     0.032                 0.101        0.038     0.062 **              0.085      0.036      0.049 ***
Panel B: Cumulative abnormal returns, Base sample
                                 Schedule Connections                           Personal Connections                         New York Connections
Event Day    Date         Conn.      Non-Conn.    Difference              Conn.     Non-Conn.     Difference           Conn.    Non-Conn. Difference
    0       1/14/2009       -0.014        -0.006    -0.008                  -0.008       -0.006    -0.002                -0.018     -0.006     -0.012
    1       1/15/2009       -0.024        -0.007    -0.018                  -0.034       -0.007    -0.028                 0.000     -0.008      0.008
    2       1/16/2009       -0.029        -0.014    -0.015                  -0.056       -0.014    -0.042                -0.010     -0.015      0.005
    3       1/19/2009       -0.085        -0.039    -0.046                  -0.056       -0.040    -0.016                -0.028     -0.041      0.013
    4       1/20/2009       -0.066        -0.030    -0.037                  -0.014       -0.031     0.017                 0.009     -0.034      0.043 **
Panel C: Actual returns, Full sample                                               .
                                   Schedule Connections                         Personal Connections                         New York Connections
Event Day     Date          Conn.     Non-Conn.     Difference            Conn.      Non-Conn.    Difference           Conn.    Non-Conn. Difference
    0        1/14/2009         -0.058       -0.032    -0.026 **             -0.063       -0.032    -0.031 **             -0.059     -0.031     -0.028 ***
    1        1/15/2009         -0.026       -0.003    -0.023 *              -0.051       -0.003    -0.048 ***             0.007     -0.005      0.012
    2        1/16/2009         -0.011       -0.003    -0.009                -0.031       -0.002    -0.029 **             -0.006     -0.003     -0.003
    3        1/19/2009         -0.145       -0.066    -0.078 ***            -0.132       -0.067    -0.065 ***            -0.091     -0.068     -0.023 *
   0-3    (Cumulative)         -0.217       -0.101    -0.116 ***            -0.243       -0.101    -0.142 ***            -0.140     -0.103     -0.037 *
    4        1/20/2009          0.130        0.043     0.087 ***             0.148        0.043     0.105 ***             0.104      0.042      0.063 ***
Panel D: Cumulative abnormal returns, Full sample
                                Schedule Connections                            Personal Connections                        New York Connections
Event Day    Date        Conn.      Non-Conn.     Difference              Conn.     Non-Conn.     Difference          Conn.    Non-Conn. Difference
    0       1/14/2009       -0.013        -0.007   -0.006                   -0.015       -0.007    -0.008               -0.018     -0.006     -0.012
    1       1/15/2009       -0.041        -0.011   -0.030 *                 -0.068       -0.010    -0.058 ***           -0.013     -0.012     -0.001
    2       1/16/2009       -0.064        -0.020   -0.044 **                -0.111       -0.018    -0.093 ***           -0.028     -0.021     -0.007
    3       1/19/2009       -0.137        -0.047   -0.091 ***               -0.166       -0.046    -0.120 ***           -0.055     -0.050     -0.005
    4       1/20/2009       -0.067        -0.037   -0.031                   -0.083       -0.036    -0.047 *             -0.004     -0.041      0.037 **
                                                                                              Appendix Table A10
                                                          Connections to Geithner and Reactions to Tax Problems, OLS and Synthetic Matching Estimates
The table reports estimates of the effect of connections to Geithner on cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) surrounding the announcement of Geithner's tax problems. Panel A reports OLS estimates and
Panel B reports synthetic matching estimates. Event day 0 is January 14, 2009; the tax problems were disclosed by the Senate Finance Committee on January 13, 2009 after market closing. In Columns 1 to 6,
the CAR is measured from day 0 to day 1, and in Columns 7 to 12, the CAR is measured from day 0 to day 3. Abnormal returns are calculated using the market model with an estimation window of 250
trading days ending 30 days prior to event day 0. The base sample excludes firms with returns highly correlated to Citigroup or Bank of America. Schedule connections denote the number of meetings
between the firm's executives and Geithner during 2007-08; personal connections denote the number of shared board memberships between the firm's executives and Geithner; New York connections indicate
firms headquartered in New York City. "Highly connected" indicates more than two meetings, "Mildly connected" indicates one or two meetings. In Panel A, control variables (not reported) include cubics in
size (log of total assets), profitability (return on equity), and leverage (total debt to total capital) as of 2008; robust standard errors, adjusted for pre-event correlations between firms, are below coefficients in
parentheses. In Panel B, the matching window is the 250 days ending 30 days prior to event day 0; confidence intervals for hypothesis testing of the effect of Geithner connections being equal to zero are
computed according to 5,000 placebo simulations. Asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).

                                          (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)              (7)            (8)           (9)            (10)           (11)          (12)
Panel A: OLS estimates
                                                              Dependent variable is CAR [0,1]                                                            Dependent variable is CAR [0,3]
                                                    Base sample                             Full sample                                        Base sample                             Full sample
                                       Schedule      Personal    New York      Schedule       Personal           New York         Schedule      Personal    New York      Schedule       Personal           New York
Geithner Connections                   -0.002        -0.010        0.014       -0.003 *** -0.005                  0.016            0.001         0.004        0.026 *     -0.001          0.005              0.032 **
                                       (0.003)       (0.010)      (0.011)      (0.001)        (0.004)            (0.010)          (0.005)       (0.014)      (0.015)      (0.002)        (0.006)            (0.014)

Number of firms                         515            515            515           583            583            583              515            515            515            583            583            583
R-squared                              0.058          0.058          0.059         0.116          0.113          0.115            0.113          0.113          0.116          0.209          0.209          0.213
Panel B: Synthetic matching estimates
                                                             Dependent variable is CAR [0,1]                                                            Dependent variable is CAR [0,3]
                                                    Base sample                            Full sample                                         Base sample                            Full sample
                                       All Conn.    Highly Conn. Mildly Conn.       All Conn.    Highly Conn. Mildly Conn.         All Conn.    Highly Conn. Mildly Conn.      All Conn.    Highly Conn. Mildly Conn.
Geithner Connections (Schedule)        -0.020         -0.048        -0.014         -0.002         -0.031    *     0.016           -0.051 **      -0.081         -0.044 *       -0.056 ***     -0.173 ***     0.012
  Confidence interval (2.5%)           -0.035         -0.108        -0.040         -0.018         -0.035         -0.028           -0.040         -0.126         -0.049         -0.021         -0.046        -0.033
  Confidence interval (97.5%)           0.042          0.094         0.050          0.032          0.046          0.040            0.072          0.142          0.078          0.055          0.080         0.066

Number of firms                         515            507           513            583            570            574              515            507            513            583            570           574
Number in treatment group               10              2             8             22              9             13               10              2              8             22              9            13
