NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EFFICIENCY AND FORECLOSURE EFFECTS OF VERTICAL REBATES:
EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE
Christopher T. Conlon
Julie Holland Mortimer
Working Paper 19709
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19709

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2013

Previously circulated as "All-Units Discounts: Experimental Evidence from the Vending
Industry" and "Efficiency and Foreclosure Effects of All-Units Discounts: Empirical Evidence."
We thank Mark Stein, Bill Hannon, and the drivers at Mark Vend Company for implementing the
experiment used in this paper, providing data, and generally educating us about the vending
industry. We thank Susanto Basu, Michaela Draganska, Scott Hemphill, Wills Hickman, J. F.
Houde, Sylvia Hristakeva, Robin Lee, Joe Quinn, Michael Riordan, Greg Shaffer, Mike
Whinston, and seminar participants at Bates White, Boston College, Boston University, Harvard
Business School, Harvard University (Economics Department), MIT, Pennsylvania State
University, Rochester University, SUNY Stony Brook, Tufts University, Universitat Autonoma
de Barcelona, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, University of Toronto, and Washington University in
St. Louis, Yale University, and participants at the Quantitative Marketing and Economics
conference and the Workshop on Conditional Pricing Practices (held jointly by the Department of
Justice and the Federal Trade Commission), for helpful comments. Any remaining errors are our
own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2013 by Christopher T. Conlon and Julie Holland Mortimer. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Efficiency and Foreclosure Effects of Vertical Rebates: Empirical Evidence
Christopher T. Conlon and Julie Holland Mortimer
NBER Working Paper No. 19709
December 2013, Revised August 2016
JEL No. L0,L4,L42
ABSTRACT
Vertical rebates are prominently used across a wide range of industries. These con- tracts may
induce greater retail effort, but may also prompt retailers to drop competing products. We study
these offsetting efficiency and foreclosure effects empirically, using data from one retailer. Using
a field experiment, we show how the rebate allocates the cost of effort between manufacturer and
retailer. We estimate structural models of demand and retailer behavior to quantify the rebate's
effect on assortment and retailer effort. We find that the rebate increases industry profitability and
consumer utility, but fails to maximize social surplus and leads to upstream foreclosure.

Christopher T. Conlon
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 W. 118th St.
New York City, NY 10027
cc3264@columbia.edu
Julie Holland Mortimer
Department of Economics
Boston College
140 Commonwealth Avenue
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
julie.mortimer.2@bc.edu

1

Introduction

Vertical arrangements between manufacturers and retailers have important implications for
how markets function. These arrangements may align retailers’ incentives with those of manufacturers, and induce retailers to provide demand-enhancing effort. However, they may also
result in exclusion of competitors, restricting competition and limiting product choice for
consumers. Many types of vertical arrangements can induce these offsetting efficiency and
foreclosure effects, including vertical integration, bundling, and rebates, among other contractual forms. Accordingly, these arrangements are a primary focus of antitrust authorities
in many countries. Vertical rebates in particular are prominently used across a wide range
of industries, including pharmaceuticals, hospital services, microprocessors, snack foods, and
heavy industry, and have been the focus of several recent Supreme Court cases and antitrust
settlements.1
Although vertical rebate contracts are important in the economy and have the potential to
induce both pro- and anti-competitive effects, understanding their economic impacts can be
challenging. Tension between the potential for efficiency gains from mitigating downstream
moral hazard on one hand, and exclusion of upstream rivals on the other hand, implies
that the contracts must be studied empirically in order to gain insight into the relative
importance of the two effects. Unfortunately, the existence and terms of these contracts
are usually considered to be proprietary information by their participating firms, frustrating
most efforts to study them empirically. An additional challenge for analyzing the effect of
vertical contracts is the difficulty in measuring downstream effort, both for the upstream
firm and the researcher.
We address these challenges by examining a vertical rebate known as an All-Units Discount (AUD). The specific AUD we study is used by the dominant chocolate candy man1

Depending on the form of the vertical rebate, it may be referred to as a loyalty contract (if it uses a
market-share requirement) or an all-units discount (if it is based on a retailer’s total purchases). The use
of a vertical rebate contract was central to several recent antitrust cases involving Intel. In 2009, AMD vs.
Intel was settled for $1.25 billion, and the same year the European Commission levied a record fine of e1.06
billion against the chipmaker. In a 2010 FTC vs. Intel settlement, Intel agreed to cease the practice of
conditioning rebates on exclusivity or on sales of other manufacturer’s products. Similar issues were raised
in the European Commission’s 2001 case against Michelin, and LePage’s v. 3M. In another recent case, Z.F.
Meritor v. Eaton (2012), Eaton allegedly used rebates to obtain exclusivity in the downstream heavy-duty
truck transmission market. The 3rd Circuit ruled that the contracts in question were a violation of the
Sherman and Clayton Acts, as they were de facto (and partial) exclusive dealing contracts. In 2014, Eisai
v. Sanofi-Aventis applied the Meritor reasoning to loyalty contracts between Sanofi and hospitals for the
purchase of a blood-clotting drug, ruling in favor of the drug manufacturer on the basis of a predatory pricing
standard. The DOJ and the FTC, in June 2014, held a joint workshop on Conditional Pricing Practices
exploring the implications of this class of contracts for antitrust policy.

1

ufacturer in the United States: Mars, Inc.2 The AUD implemented by Mars consists of
three main features: a retailer-specific per-unit discount, a retailer-specific quantity target
or threshold, and a ‘facing’ requirement that the retailer carry at least six Mars products.
Mars’ AUD stipulates that if a retailer meets the facing requirement and his total purchases
exceed the quantity target, Mars pays the retailer an amount that is equal to the per-unit
discount multiplied by the retailer’s total quantity purchased. We examine the effect of
the rebate contract through the lens of a retail vending operator, Mark Vend Company,
for whom we are able to collect extremely detailed information on sales, wholesale costs,
and contractual terms. The retailer also agreed to run a large-scale field experiment on our
behalf, which provides us with additional insight into how the AUD might influence the
retailer’s decisions. To the best of our knowledge, no previous study has had the benefit of
examining a vertical rebate contract using such rich data and exogenous variation.
The insights that we gain from studying Mars’ rebate contract allow us to contribute to
understanding principle-agent models in which downstream moral hazard plays an important role. Downstream moral hazard is an important feature of many vertically-separated
markets, and is thought to drive a variety of vertical arrangements such as franchising and
resale price maintenance (RPM).3 However, empirically measuring the effects of downstream
moral hazard is difficult. Downstream effort may be impossible to measure directly, and vertical arrangements are endogenously determined, making it difficult to identify the effects of
downstream moral hazard on upstream firms. Our ability to exogenously vary the result of
downstream effort (in this case, retail product availability), combined with detailed data on
wholesale prices, allows us to directly document the effects of downstream moral hazard on
the revenues of upstream firms.
In order to analyze the effect of Mars’ AUD contract, we specify a discrete-choice model of
consumer demand and a model of retailer behavior, in which the retailer chooses two actions:
a set of products to stock, and an effort level. We hold retail prices fixed throughout the
analysis, consistent with the data and common practice in this industry.4 The number of
units the retailer can stock for each product is constrained by the capacity of his vending
2

With revenues in excess of $50 billion, Mars is the third-largest privately-held company in the United
States (after Cargill and Koch Industries).
3
See, among others, Shepard (1993) for an early empirical study of principle-agent problems in the context
of gasoline retailing, and Hubbard (1998) for an empirical study of a consumer-facing principle-agent problem.
4
By holding retail prices fixed, we do not require an equilibrium model of downstream pricing responses
to the AUD contract. In practice, we see almost no pricing variation over time or across products within a
category (i.e., all candy bars are priced the same as each other, and this price holds throughout the period of
analysis). Over a short-run horizon of about three to five years, the retailer has exclusive contractual rights
to service a location, and these terms may also commit him to a pricing structure during that time.

2

machines, and we interpret retailer effort as the frequency with which the retailer restocks
his machines. In order to calculate the retailer’s optimal effort level, we compute a dynamic
restocking model à la Rust (1987), in which the retailer chooses how long to wait between
restocking visits.5 Due to the capacity constraints of a vending machine, the number of
unique products the retailer can stock is relatively small. Thus, we compute the dynamic
restocking model for several discrete sets of products, and we assume that the retailer chooses
to stock the set of products that maximizes his profits. These features of the market (i.e.,
fixed capacities for a discrete number of unique products) make it well-suited to studying
the impacts of the AUD contracts, because the retailer’s decisions are discrete and relatively
straightforward.6
Identification of our demand and supply-side models benefits from the presence of exogenous variation in retailer stocking decisions that were implemented for us by the retailer
in a field experiment. One approach to measuring the impact of effort on profits might be
to persuade the retailer to directly manipulate the restocking frequency, but this has some
disadvantages. For example, the effects of effort (through decreased stock-out events) are
only observed towards the end of each service period, and measuring these effects might
prove difficult. Instead, we focus on manipulating the likely outcome of reduced restocking
frequency – by exogenously removing the best-selling Mars products. We find that in the
absence of the rebate contracts, Mars bears almost 90% of the cost of stock-out events,
as many consumers substitute to competing brands, which often have higher retail margins.
The rebate, which effectively lowers the retailer’s wholesale price for Mars products, increases
the retailer’s share of the cost of stock-out events from around 10% to nearly 50%, and the
quantity-target aspect of the rebate provides additional motivation for the retailer to set a
high service level.
After estimating the models of demand and retailer behavior, we explore the welfare
implications of the retailer’s optimal effort and assortment decisions. Mars’ AUD contract
is designed to induce greater retailer effort through more frequent re-stocking.7 However,
when the retailer increases his re-stocking effort under the contract, he re-stocks all products,
regardless of manufacturer. Over the relevant range of the retailer’s re-stocking policy, more
frequent re-stocking reduces sales of Hershey and Nestle products, because these products
5

Rather than assuming retailer wait times are optimal and using the dynamic model to estimate the cost
of re-stocking, we do the reverse: we use an outside estimate of the cost of re-stocking based on wage data
from the vending operator, and use the model to compute the optimal wait time until the next restocking
visit.
6
These features also characterize other industries, such as brick-and-mortar retail and live entertainment.
7
Downstream effort in other settings might also include promotional activities or price reductions.

3

no longer benefit from forced substitution when the dominant Mars products sell out. Thus,
downstream effort is substitutable across upstream firms and implies that Hershey and Nestle
do not have an incentive to offer a rebate of the same form.8 We provide evidence that the
rebate induces greater retailer effort, and that the level of retailer effort that is optimal from
the perspective of a hypothetical vertically-integrated Mars-retailer entity is slightly higher
than the effort level preferred by the industry as a whole.
Once we have characterized the retailer’s optimal re-stocking policy, we ask whether or not
the downstream firm could increase profits by replacing a Mars product with a competitor’s
product in the absence of the AUD contract. The ability to do this is an indication of
possible foreclosure. We find evidence that the retailer can increase profits by substituting
a Hershey product for a Mars product, but that the threat of losing the rebate discourages
him from doing so. Thus, the AUD does result in foreclosure.
In spite of the evidence of foreclosure and the failure of the AUD to implement the
industry-optimal level of downstream effort, the overall welfare effects of the AUD depend on
what Mars would do in the absence of the AUD. We consider three counterfactual scenarios.
First, we measure the effect of dropping the AUD, holding wholesale prices fixed. Under this
scenario, the retailer drops some Mars products and reduces his restocking effort. As a result,
Mars and the retailer are both worse off, and consumer surplus falls. Hershey and Nestle
both benefit from the reduced retailer effort and alternative product assortment, but these
effects are small, and overall, social welfare goes down when the AUD is removed. Second,
we drop the AUD but allow Mars to re-optimize its wholesale price against the wholesale
prices of its competitors, which we hold fixed. In this scenario, Mars is worse off (compared
to the current outcome with the AUD), but the retailer benefits. The change to consumer
surplus is quite small, and whether the change is positive or negative depends on the level
of the quantity threshold under the AUD.
In our third and final exercise, we note that the impacts of upstream mergers are often felt
not through the price in the final-goods market, but rather in the wholesale market. Thus,
we simulate the impact of various upstream mergers on the willingness of the dominant firm
to offer rebate contracts, and the impact that this has on social welfare. Interestingly, we
find conditions under which an upstream merger of a dominant firm (Mars) with a close
competitor (Hershey) can lead to socially-efficient downstream effort and product assortment. This happens because the merger addresses the demand externalities that lead to
8

If the retailer reduces his effort below this range, all products stock out, so that more frequent restocking increases sales of all products, including those of Hershey and Nestle. Downstream effort would be
complementary in this range, but it is not profitable for the retailer.

4

the substitutability of retail effort across Mars and Hershey products. We also find that
an upstream merger of two smaller rivals (Hershey and Nestle) can bid up the price of a
downstream firm’s shelf space, even though it cannot necessarily prevent exclusion.
Having estimated the demand and supply-side models, one can, in principle, conduct a
wider range of counterfactual exercises. For example, one can examine alternative contracts,
such as two-part tariffs or conventional quantity discounts. Rather than pursue a list of these
alternative contractual forms, we consider whether or not there is any action that Hershey
could take to avoid exclusion when facing the Mars AUD contract. We find that the answer
is, in many cases, “no.”

1.1

Relationship to Literature

There is a long tradition of theoretically analyzing the potential efficiency and foreclosure
effects of vertical contracts. The literature that explores the efficiency-enhancing aspects
of vertical restraints goes back at least to Telser (1960) and the Downstream Moral Hazard
problem discussed in Chapter 4 of Tirole (1988).9 An important theoretical development on
the potential foreclosure effects of vertical contracts is the so-called Chicago Critique of Bork
(1978) and Posner (1976), which makes the point that because the downstream firm must be
compensated for any exclusive arrangement, one should only observe exclusion in cases for
which it maximizes industry profits. Much of the subsequent theoretical literature focuses
on demonstrating that the Chicago Critique’s predictions are a bit special.10 A separate, but
related, theoretical literature has explored the potential anti-competitive effects of vertical
arrangements in the context of upfront payments or slotting fees paid by manufacturers
to retailers in exchange for limited shelf space (primarily in supermarkets).11 A broader
9

In addition, Deneckere, Marvel, and Peck (1996), and Deneckere, Marvel, and Peck (1997) examine
markets with uncertain demand and stock-out events, and show that vertical restraints can induce higher
stocking levels that are good for both consumers and manufacturers. For situations in which retailers have
the ability to set prices, Klein and Murphy (1988) show that without vertical restraints, retailers “will have
the incentive to use their promotional efforts to switch marginal customers to relatively known brands...which
possess higher retail margins.”
10
For example, Aghion and Bolton (1987) show that long-term contracts that require a liquidated damages
payment from the downstream firm to the incumbent can result in exclusion for which industry profits are
not maximized; while Bernheim and Whinston (1998) show that the Chicago Critique ignores externalities
across buyers, and that once externalities are accounted for, it is again possible to generate exclusion that
fails to maximize industry profits. Later work by Fumagalli and Motta (2006) links exclusion to the degree
of competition in the downstream market. While extremely influential with economists, these arguments
have (thus far) been less persuasive with the courts than Bork (1978).
11
This literature includes Shaffer (1991a) and Shaffer (1991b), which analyze slotting allowances, RPM,
and aggregate rebates to see whether or not they help to facilitate collusion at the retail level. Sudhir and
Rao (2006) analyze anti-competitive and efficiency arguments for slotting fees in the supermarket industry.

5

literature has also examined the conditions under which bilateral contracting might lead to
(perhaps partial) exclusion.12
Recent theoretical work related to AUDs specifically includes Kolay, Shaffer, and Ordover
(2004), which shows that a menu of AUD contracts can more effectively price discriminate
than a menu of two-part tariffs when the retailer has private information about demand.13
More recently, Chao and Tan (2014) show that AUD and quantity-forcing contracts can be
used to exclude a capacity-constrained rival, and O’Brien (2013) shows that an AUD may be
efficiency enhancing if both upstream and downstream firms face a moral-hazard problem.
We depart from the basic theoretical framework of the Chicago Critique of Bork (1978)
and Posner (1976) in some key ways. First, we allow for downstream moral hazard and potential efficiency gains, similar to much of the later theoretical work on vertical arrangements.
Second, we study an environment in which the degree of competition across upstream firms
may vary across the potential sets of products carried by the retailer, because upstream
firms own multiple, differentiated products. Finally, we restrict the retailer to carrying a
fixed number of these differentiated products.14
The theoretical literature following the Chicago Critique focuses on a wide range of settings when considering the potential effects of vertical contracts. Specifically, this literature
has studied contracts used by dominant vs. non-dominant firms, contracts that do or do not
reference rivals, contracts for which downstream price competition is a major concern for
upstream firms (or not), and contracts that apply to single products vs. multiple products.
Our setting provides empirical evidence on a vertical rebate used by a dominant firm covering multiple products, for which excessive downstream price competition is not a concern.
Although the contract does not explicitly reference rivals, the facing requirement, combined
with the typical capacity constraints of most vending machines, effectively limits the presence
of competing brands.
One challenge for understanding the effects of vertical arrangements across this wide
range of settings is that empirical evidence has primarily been available only through the
course of litigation. This has the potential effect that debates about these contracts may
be based on a selected sample. An important distinction of our setting is that we study a
12

Some key examples include Rasmusen, Ramseyer, and Wiley (1991), Segal and Whinston (2000), and
more recently Asker and Bar-Isaac (2014) and Chen and Shaffer (2014).
13
In addition, Elhauge and Wickelgren (2012) and Elhauge and Wickelgren (2014) explore the potential
of loyalty contracts to soften price competition, and Figueroa, Ide, and Montero (2014) examines the role
that rebates can play as a barrier to inefficient entry.
14
This contrasts with the “naked exclusion” of Rasmusen, Ramseyer, and Wiley (1991), in which there is
a single good.

6

contract that has not been litigated, and for which we have detailed information on contract
terms and exogenous variation in the results of the retailer’s effort. Although the welfare
effects of vertical rebate contracts in other situations may differ from the impacts we estimate
in our setting, we hope that our work provides a road-map for how to model the impacts of
these contracts empirically.
Outside of the theoretical literature on vertical rebate contracts, our work also connects
to the empirical literature on the impacts of vertical arrangements. One strand of this
literature examines issues of downstream moral hazard in the context of vertical integration
and the boundaries of the firm, rather than through vertical contracts per se.15 More recently,
another strand of this literature examines exclusive contracts, without necessarily focusing
on downstream moral hazard or effort decisions.16 The most closely-related empirical work
is work on vertical bundling in the movie industry, and on vertical integration in the cable
television industry. The case of vertical bundling, known as full-line forcing, is studied by Ho,
Ho, and Mortimer (2012a) and Ho, Ho, and Mortimer (2012b), which examine the decisions
of upstream firms to offer bundles to downstream retailers, the decisions of retailers to
accept these ‘full-line forces,’ and the welfare effects induced by the accepted contracts. The
case of vertical integration is studied by Crawford, Lee, Whinston, and Yurukoglu (2015),
which examines efficiency and foreclosure effects of vertical integration between regional
sports networks and cable distributors. A distinction between our work and Crawford, Lee,
Whinston, and Yurukoglu (2015) is that we examine the potential for upstream foreclosure
(i.e., manufacturers being denied access to retail distribution), while that study examines
the potential for downstream foreclosure (i.e., distributors not having access to inputs).17
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides the theoretical framework
for the model of retail behavior. Section 3 describes the vending industry, data, and the
15

A few key examples that address downstream (and in some cases upstream) issues of moral hazard
include Lafontaine (1992) and Brickley and Dark (1987), which study franchise arrangements, and Baker
and Hubbard (2003) and Gil (2007), which study trucking and movies respectively; many other contributions
are reviewed in Lafontaine and Slade (2007).
16
Examples of this literature include Asker (2005), Sass (2005), and Chen (2014), which each examine the
efficiency and foreclosure effects of exclusive dealing in the beer industry, and Chipty (2001) and Sinkinson
(2014), which study the cable television and mobile phone markets respectively. Lee (2013) focuses on the
interaction of exclusive contracts and network effects and competition between downstream firms. Lafontaine
and Slade (2008) surveys this literature.
17
From a methodological perspective, Crawford, Lee, Whinston, and Yurukoglu (2015) differ from us
in their use of a bargaining model to describe the equilibrium carriage decisions of cable channels and
downstream distributors. These carriage decisions are equivalent to a retailer’s choice of product assortment.
The exogenous variation in product assortment induced by our field experiment makes a bargaining model
unnecessary in our context.

7

design and results of the field experiment, and section 4 provides the details for the empirical
implementation of the model. Section 5 provides results, and section 6 concludes.

2

Theoretical Framework

In a conventional nonlinear discount contract, the retailer pays a linear price w for the first
qM units of a good, and then pays w −∆ (for ∆ > 0) thereafter. Under an AUD, the discount
applies retroactively to all previous units, as well as to all additional units, so that a retailer’s
variable cost of inputs from a rebating manufacturer is C(q) = wq − 1[q > q] · ∆ · q. Figure
1 provides an illustration of the pricing schedule associated with a conventional quantity
discount for a single product with a wholesale price of 1 and a discounted price of 0.75 for
quantities greater than six, and an All-Units Discount with a wholesale price of 1, a threshold
of 6, and a discounted price of 0.67. The structure of the AUD implies that for some quantity
range, the retailer can make a lower total payment but receive more total units of the good.
This use of a negative marginal cost has lead some to believe that the use of an AUD is de
facto evidence of anticompetitive behavior.18
A defense of AUD contracts is that they have the potential to be efficiency enhancing if
the retailer is encouraged to exert costly effort required to sell the good.19 This effect enters
through both features of the contract: (1) the lower marginal price, w − ∆, and (2) the
choice of the threshold qM , which triggers the transfer payment from the manufacturer to
the retailer. Much like a two-part tariff, an appropriate choice of qM can induce an efficient
level of retail effort.20
Consider a simple framework with a single downstream retailer R, a dominant upstream
firm M , and an upstream competitor N .21 The two upstream firms each sell several competing differentiated products, and set a single linear wholesale price per unit for all of their
products, (wM , wN ).22 Taking wholesale prices as given, the dominant firm M proposes a
nonlinear rebate contract, which consists of a discount and a threshold, (∆, qM ), for which
18

For discussion of alternative legal standards for adjudicating loyalty contracts, see Klein and Lerner
(2014).
19
This defense was employed by Intel in its recent antitrust cases, for example.
20
Related to the potential quantity-forcing effect of the threshold, lower retail prices are a non-contractible
form of effort that is costly for the retailer to provide, and demand enhancing for an upstream firm.
21
In our empirical application, we allow for two upstream competitors, but one is sufficient for conveying
the intuition of our model.
22
Although demand may be different for different products sold by the same manufacturer within a product
category, uniform wholesale pricing is a common feature of many markets. For example, manufacturers of
many consumer packaged goods do not generally charge different prices for different products or flavors,
despite different levels of demand and cost (i.e., snack foods, yogurt, and juice/beverages).

8

the threshold qM refers to total sales across all of M ’s products.23 After observing the wholesale prices and the terms of the rebate contract, the retailer chooses a set of products a, and
a level of effort e. We assume that the number of unique products R chooses in a is exogenously determined.24 Finally, sales are realized, q(a, e), which depend on both the product
assortment and the retailer effort level. We assume that the retailer sets a fixed uniform price
across all products (independent of manufacturer). While this assumption is restrictive, it
accurately depicts the industry we study, and many others, in which competition is over
downstream service quality and product assortment, rather than retail prices.25
We consider a single scalar version of non-contractible retailer effort, e, rather than
product- or manufacturer-specific effort. In our application, effort corresponds to how often
a retailer restocks, and all products are restocked simultaneously. The benefit of increased
effort is that products are more likely to be available when consumers arrive; thus, consumers
always benefit from more effort. The cost of increased effort is that restocking is a costly
activity for the retailer. Thus, the retailer solves:
max πR (a, e) − c(e).
a,e

(1)

where πR (a, e) is the variable profit of the retailer, given by pqM − [wM qM − 1[qM > qM ] ·
∆ · qM ] + (p − wN )qN , where p is the retail price common to all products, qM and qN are
the total quantities sold for products of manufacturers M and N respectively, and c(e) is
the cost of retail effort. When the profit of M is increasing in effort, there is an incentive
for M to offer a contract to the retailer that enhances his effort. We do not make any
restrictions as to whether the profit of the upstream competitor is increasing or decreasing
in retailer effort. Specifically, we consider the possibility that increased retailer effort may
benefit competing upstream firms by leading to more frequent restocking of their products
too, or may harm upstream competitors by preventing stock-outs of the dominant firm’s
brands, which might otherwise lead consumers to substitute to the competitor’s products.
23

We abstract away from any potential facing requirement in this example. A facing requirement can
substitute for a higher quantity threshold, but may be more difficult for the manufacturer to enforce.
24
For example, the number of unique products is often determined by shelf-space constraints at the retail
location. For vending operators, there is a fixed number of “columns” (or coils) that are sized for candy
bars. The only flexibility a vending operator has for changing the number of products in a machine arises if
he stocks the same product in two columns.
25
For vending, uniform pricing is reinforced by technological constraints on providing change (e.g., nickels
are thick, so prices requiring nickels to make change for $1.00 are usually avoided). Other prominent examples
of retail settings with fixed, uniform pricing include the theatrical and streaming markets for movies, digital
download markets such as iTunes, and many consumer packaged goods. Retailers in these markets generally
do not carry all possible products, so retailer assortment decisions are an important aspect of competition.

9

These demand externalities, which arise from changes in the retailer’s effort, imply that a
vertically-integrated firm consisting of (R, M ) might set an effort level that is either too high
or too low from the perspective of the industry as a whole. Whether the vertically-integrated
M − R firm would choose a level of effort that is too high or too low depends on whether
retailer effort is a substitute or a complement to the profits of the upstream competitor. In
other words, the upstream competitor might be able to “free-ride” on the enhanced effort
that M ’s contract induces, or enhanced effort may lower N ’s sales.
Having specified the choice of effort, one can examine the retailer’s choice of product
assortment a. The rebate contract may induce the retailer to stock more products by M
and fewer products by N , or to induce the retailer to select products made by N that do
not compete closely with M ’s products. The retailer can compute the optimal effort level e
for each choice of a for a given set of wholesale prices and rebate contract terms. Given the
optimal choice of effort, we assume that the retailer chooses the assortment a, that maximizes
his profits (inclusive of potential rebate transfers): πR (a, e(a)) ≥ πR (a0 , e(a0 )) for all a0 6= a.26
Once we have characterized the retailer’s choice of (a, e) for a given set of wholesale
prices, one can determine whether or not a particular rebate contract is individually rational
for M to offer, and whether a rebate contract that induces (partial or full) exclusion of N
is individually rational (IR) and incentive compatible (IC) for R. Conditional on a contract
(∆, q), one may also examine whether or not N would be willing to set a different wholesale
price than the one we observe in order to avoid (full or partial) exclusion. Alternatively, if
there is no non-negative price at which N can avoid exclusion, one may also consider the
amount by which M may be able to reduce the discount ∆ and still obtain the same product
assortment a (i.e., not violate the IR constraints of the retailer).
Using backward induction to solve for the optimal assortment, we may also consider the
decision of the manufacturer to offer an AUD contract at existing prices.27 We do not fully
endogenize the initial wholesale prices (wM , wN ), because allowing wM to freely adjust results
in a continuum of equilibria in the game.28 We cannot derive analytic predictions, because
26

For a discussion of the challenges involved in solving for optimal assortment, and a numerical example
of assortment choice, holding prices fixed, please see appendix A.1.
27
This parallels recent work by Asker and Bar-Isaac (2014) and implies that the retailer is unable to precommit to a higher level of service (or an enhanced presence in retail product assortment) for a given set
of contracts, in order to extract a better deal from the upstream firm. Asker and Bar-Isaac (2014) provide
a theoretical examination of practices by which upstream firms transfer profits to retailers. Their work
employs Markov Perfect Equilibria using information on observed profits plus some uncertainty. Our results
use information on expected profits, instead of observed profits plus uncertainty. This makes it easier to
compute results and compare alternative contractual forms.
28
To illustrate, consider increasing the wholesale price to (wM + ) and the rebate to (∆ + ). This results

10

the optimal assortment a(wM , wN ) and the effort level e(a, wM , wN ) need not be smooth
functions of prices. Small changes in wholesale prices can result in replacing products from
one manufacturer with those of another.29
The goal of the empirical section will be to measure the key quantities described in the
framework above: the substitutability of products in the retail market, how the benefits of
increased effort are distributed among the retail and manufacturer tiers, and whether effort
serves as a substitute or complement in the profits of upstream firms.

3
3.1

The Vending Industry and Experimental Data
Vertical Arrangements in the Vending Industry

AUD rebate programs are the most commonly-used vertical arrangement in the vending
industry.30 Under the rebate program, a manufacturer refunds a portion of a vending operator’s wholesale cost at the end of a fiscal quarter if the vending operator meets a quarterly
sales goal. The sales goal for an operator is typically set for the combined sales of a manufacturer’s products, rather than for individual products. Mars’ rebate contract also stipulates a
minimum number of product ‘facings’ that must be present in an operator’s machines. The
amount of the rebate and the precise threshold of the sales goal or facing requirement is specific to an individual vending operator, and these terms are closely guarded by participants
in the industry.
We are fortunate to observe the specific terms of the Mars rebate program for the vending
operator with whom we worked. We include some promotional materials in figure 2.31 The
in the same post-rebate wholesale price (wM − ∆), and implies the same cost function for the retailer for
any quantity in excess of qM . If one continues increasing both the wholesale price wM and the rebate ∆,
this approaches a quantity-forcing contract with a linear tariff for any quantity in excess of qM in the limit.
For this reason, we do not consider upward deviations of wM . In practical terms, this may be justified
by the ability of retailers to purchase from other channels. In the case of confections, if wholesale prices
increased substantially, the retailer could purchase inventory at warehouse clubs like Costco, supermarkets,
or even other retailers. Downward deviations, in which M sets the wholesale price to (wM − ) and the
rebate to (∆ − ), undercut the AUD’s ability to leverage previous sales to induce greater downstream effort.
In the limit, this approaches simple linear pricing. Section A.2 in the appendix provides further detail on
comparisons to other contracts.
29
Section A.3 in the appendix provides further discussion of endogenous linear prices and an illustration
of this effect using our estimated model.
30
For confections products, Mars is the dominant manufacturer in vending, and is the only manufacturer
to offer a true AUD contract. Hershey and Nestle offer wholesale ‘discounts,’ but these have a quantity
threshold of zero (i.e., their wholesale pricing is equivalent to linear pricing). We do not examine beverage
sales, because many beverage machines at the locations we observe are serviced directly by Coke or Pepsi.
31
A full slide deck, titled ‘2010 Vend Program’ materials, dated December 21, 2009, is available at
http://vistar.com/KansasCity/Documents/Mars%202010%20Operatopr%20rebate%20program.pdf. (Last

11

program employs the slogan The Only Candy You Need to Stock in Your Machine!, and
specifies a facing requirement of six products and a quarterly sales target. We also observe,
but cannot report, the amount of the rebate received by our retailer, Mark Vend Company.
Unlike the Intel rebate program, these rebates do not explicitly condition on market share
or the sales of competitors. However, most vending machines typically carry between six
and eight candy bar varieties, so the facing requirement may limit shelf space for competing
brands.32
In table 1 we report the national sales ranks, availability, and shares in the vending
industry for the 10 top-ranked products nationally, as well as the availability and shares for
the same products from Mark Vend. There are some patterns that emerge. The first is that
Mark Vend stocks some of the most popular products sold by Mars (Snickers, Peanut M&Ms,
Twix, and Skittles) in most of the machines in our sample. However, Mark Vend only stocks
Hershey’s best-selling product (Reese’s Peanut Butter Cups) in 29% of machine-weeks, even
though nationally Reese’s Peanut Butter Cups is the fourth most popular product. On the
other hand, Raisinets, a Nestle product, is stocked in 78% of machine weeks for Mark Vend
and constitutes almost 9% of sales, despite a national rank below the top 45.
There are two possible explanations for Mark Vend’s departures from the national bestsellers. One is that Mark Vend has better information on the tastes of its specific consumers,
and that the product mix is geared towards those tastes. These are mostly high-income,
professional office workers in Chicago, and they may have very different tastes than consumers
from other demographic groups.33 The alternative explanation is that the rebate may induce
Mark Vend to substitute from Nestle/Hershey brands to Mars brands when making stocking
decisions, or that when Mark Vend does stock products from competing manufacturers (e.g.,
Nestle Raisinets), he chooses brands that do not steal business from key Mars products.

3.2

Data Description and Experimental Design

All of our price and quantity data are provided by Mark Vend. Data on the quantity
and price of all products vended are recorded internally at each vending machine used in our
experiment. The data track vends and revenues since the last service visit, but do not include
time-stamps for each sale. Any given machine can carry roughly 35 products at one time,
accessed on April 19, 2015.)
32
While there is some ability for a vending operator to adjust the overall number of candy bars in a
machine, it is often difficult to do without upgrading capital equipment, because candy bars and salty snacks
do not use the same size ‘slots.’
33
For example, Skittles, a fruit flavored candy sold by Mars, is primarily marketed to younger consumers.

12

including salty snacks, cookies, and other products in addition to confections. We observe
retail and wholesale prices for each product at each service visit during our 38-month panel.
There is relatively little price variation over time within a site, and almost no price variation
within a product category (e.g., confections) at a site. ‘Natural,’ or non-experimental, stockouts are extremely rare for our set of machines.34 Over all sites and months, we observe 185
unique products. We consolidate some products with very low levels of sales using similar
products within a category produced by the same manufacturer, until we are left with the
73 ‘products’ that form the basis of the rest of our exercise.35
In addition to sharing the terms of his rebate contact with us, the owner of Mark Vend
implemented a field experiment for us in which his drivers exogenously removed either one
or two top-selling Mars confection products from a set of 66 vending machines. The product
removals are recorded during each service visit to individual vending machines.36 Implementation of each product removal was fairly straightforward; we removed either one or
both of the two top-selling Mars products from all machines for a period of roughly 2.5 to
3 weeks. The focal products were Snickers and Peanut M&Ms.37 The dates of the interventions range from June 2007 to September 2008, with all removals run during the months of
May - October. We collected data for all machines for 38 months, from January of 2006 until
February of 2009. During each 2-3 week experimental period, most machines receive about
34

Mark Vend commits to a low level of stock-out events in its service contracts. This implies that much
of the variation in product assortment comes either from product rotations, or our own exogenous product
removals. Product rotations tend to occur primarily for ‘marginal’ products, so in the absence of exogenous
variation in availability, the substitution patterns between marginal products is often much better identified
that substitution patterns between continually-stocked best-selling products.
35
For example, we combine Milky Way Midnight with Milky Way, and Ruffles Original with Ruffles
Sour Cream and Cheddar. In addition to the data from Mark Vend, we also collect data on product
characteristics online and through industry trade sources. For each product, we note its manufacturer,
as well as the following set of product characteristics: package size, number of servings, and nutritional
information. Nutritional information includes weight, calories, fat calories, sodium, fiber, sugars, protein,
carbohydrates, and cholesterol. For consolidated products, we collect data on product characteristics at the
disaggregated level. The characteristics of the consolidated product are computed as the weighted average
of the characteristics of the component products, using vends to weight. In many cases, the observable
characteristics are identical.
36
The machines are located in office buildings, and have substitution patterns that are very stable over
time. In addition to the three treatments described here, we also ran five other treatment arms, for saltysnack and cookie products, which are described in Conlon and Mortimer (2010) and Conlon and Mortimer
(2013b). The reader may refer to our other papers for more details.
37
Whenever a product was experimentally stocked-out, poster-card announcements were placed at the
front of the empty product column. The announcements read “This product is temporarily unavailable. We
apologize for any inconvenience.” The purpose of the card was two-fold: first, we wanted to avoid dynamic
effects on sales as much as possible, and second, the firm wanted to minimize the number of phone calls
received in response to the stock-out events.

13

three service visits. However, the length of service visits varies across machines, with some
machines visited more frequently than others. Machines are serviced on different schedules,
and as a result, it is convenient to organize observations by machine-week, rather than by
visit when analyzing the results of the experiment. When we do this, we assume that sales
are distributed uniformly among the business days in a service interval, and assign those
business days to weeks. Different experimental treatments start on different days of the
week, and we allow our definition of when weeks start and end to depend on the client site
and experiment.38
Two features of demand are important for determining the welfare implications of the
AUD contract. These are, first, the degree to which Mark Vend’s consumers prefer the
marginal Mars products (Milky Way, Three Musketeers, Plain M&Ms) to the marginal
Hershey products (Reese’s Peanut Butter Cup, Payday), and second, the degree to which
any of these products compete with the dominant Mars products (Peanut M&Ms, Snickers,
and Twix). Our experiment mimics the impact of a reduction in retailer effort (i.e., restocking
frequency) by simulating the stock-out of the best-selling Mars confections products. This
provides direct evidence about which products are close substitutes, and how the costs of
stock-outs are distributed throughout the supply chain. It also provides exogenous variation
in the choice sets of consumers, which helps to identify the discrete-choice model of demand.
In principle, calculating the effect of product removals is straightforward. In practice,
however, there are two challenges in implementing the removals and interpreting the data
generated by them. First, there is considerable variation in overall sales at the weekly
level, independent of our exogenous removals. Second, although the experimental design
is relatively clean, the product mix presented in a machine is not necessarily fixed across
machines, or within a machine over long periods of time, because we rely on observational
data for the control weeks. To mitigate these issues, we report treatment effects of the
product removals after selecting control weeks to address these issues. We provide the
details of this procedure in section A.4 of the appendix.

3.3

Results of Product Removals

Our first exogenous product removal eliminated Snickers from all 66 vending machines involved in the experiment; the second removal eliminated Peanut M&Ms, and the third eliminated both products.39 These products correspond to the top two sellers in the confections
38

For example, at some site-experiment pairs, we define weeks as Tuesday to Monday, while for others we
use Thursday to Wednesday.
39
As noted in table 1, both Snickers and Peanut M&Ms are owned by Mars.

14

category, both at Mark Vend and nationwide.
We summarize substitution to the top five substitutes for all three removals in table 2.40
In general, the substitution patterns we recover are reasonable; the top substitutes generally
include Snickers or Peanut M&Ms if one of the two products is available. Twix, the third-best
selling Mars brand both nationally and in our sample, is also a top substitute.41 Consumers
also substitute to products outside the confections category, such as Planters Peanuts or
Rold Gold Pretzels.
One of the results of the product removal is that many consumers purchase another
product in the vending machine. While many of the alternative brands are owned by Mars,
several of them are not. If those other brands have similar (or higher) margins for Mark
Vend, substitution may cause the cost of each product removal to be distributed unevenly
across the supply chain. Table 3 summarizes the impact of the product removals for Mark
Vend. In the absence of any rebate payments, we see the following results. Total vends
decrease by 217 units and retailer profits decline by $56.75 when Snickers is removed. When
Peanut M&Ms is removed, vends go down by 198 units, but Mark Vend’s average margin on
all items sold in the machine rises by 0.78 cents, and retailer revenue declines only by $10.74
(a statistically insignificant decline). Similarly, in the joint product removal, overall vends
decline by roughly 283 units, but Mark Vend’s average margin rises by 1.67 cents per unit,
so that revenue declines by only $4.54 (again statistically insignificant).42
Table 4 examines the impact of the product removals on the upstream firms. Removing
Peanut M&Ms costs Mars about $68.38, compared to Mark Vend’s loss of $10.74; thus
roughly 86.4% of the cost of stocking out is born by Mars (reported in the fifth column).
In the double removal, because Peanut M&M customers can no longer buy Snickers, and
Snickers customers can no longer buy Peanut M&Ms, Mars bears 96.7% of the cost of the
stockout. In the Snickers removal, most of the cost appears to be born by the downstream
firm; one potential explanation is that among consumers who choose another product, many
select another Mars Product (Twix or Peanut M&Ms). We also see the impact of each
product removal on other manufacturers. Hershey (which owns Reese’s Peanut Butter Cups
40

We report detailed product-level results from the joint removal in table 16 of the appendix (section A.5);
product-level results from the two single-product removals are described in Conlon and Mortimer (2010).
The product-level results suggest that the rebates may lead Mark Vend to stock products that compete less
strongly with the major Mars brands.
41
Reese’s Peanut Butter Cups were not stocked by Mark Vend during either of the single-product removals,
and so it does not appear as a top five substitute in those results.
42
Total losses appear smaller in the double-product removal in part because we sum over a smaller sample
size of viable machine-treatment weeks (89) for this experiment, compared to the Peanut M&Ms removal
(with 115 machine-treatment weeks).

15

and Hershey’s Chocolate Bars) enjoys relatively little substitution in the Snickers removal,
in part because Reese’s Peanut Butter cups are not available as a substitute. In the double
removal, when Peanut Butter Cups are available, Hershey profits rise by nearly $61.43,
capturing about half of Mars’ losses. We see substitution to the two Nestle products in the
Snickers removal, so that Nestle gains $19.32 as consumers substitute to Butterfinger and
Raisinets; Nestle’s gains are a smaller percentage of Mars’ losses in the other two removals.
Direct analysis of the product removals can only account for the marginal cost aspect of
the rebate (i.e., the price reduction given by ∆); one requires a model of restocking in order
to account for the threshold aspect, qM . By more evenly allocating the costs of stocking
out, the rebate should better align the incentives of the upstream and downstream firms,
and lead the retailer to increase the overall service level. Similar to a two-part tariff, the
rebate lowers the marginal cost to the retailer and reduces the margin of the manufacturer.
Returning to table 3, the right-hand panel reports the retailer’s profit loss from the product
removals after accounting for his rebate payments, assuming he qualifies. We see that the
rebate reallocates approximately ($17, $30, $50) of the cost of the Snickers, Peanut M&Ms,
and joint product removals from the upstream to the downstream firm. The last column of
table 4 shows that after accounting for the rebate contract, the manufacturer bears about
50% of the cost of the Peanut M&Ms removal, 60% of the cost of the joint removal, and 12%
of the cost of the Snickers removal.

4
4.1

Estimation
Demand

The intuition provided in our theoretical framework is that the welfare effects of the vertical
rebate depends on a few critical inputs. Those are: the substitutability of products in the
downstream market, how the costs of reduced effort are distributed across the supply chain,
and whether or not effort acts as a substitute or a complement in the profit function of
upstream manufacturers. In order to consider the optimal product assortment, we need a
parametric model of demand that predicts sales for a variety of different product assortments.
We consider two such models: the nested logit and the random-coefficients logit, which are
estimated from the full dataset (including both experimental and non-experimental periods).
We discuss the random-coefficient model here; discussion and results from the nested-logit
specification are contained in section A.6 of the appendix.
We consider a model of utility in which consumer i receives utility from choosing product

16

j in market t of:
uijt = δjt + µijt + εijt .

(2)

The parameter δjt is a product-specific intercept that captures the mean utility of product
j in market t, and µijt captures individual-specific correlation in tastes for products.
A random-coefficients logit specification allows for correlation in tastes across observed
product characteristics.43 This correlation in tastes is captured by allowing the term µijt to
be distributed according to f (µijt |θ). A common specification is to allow consumers to have
P
independent normally distributed tastes for product characteristics, so that µijt = l σl νilt xjl
where νilt ∼ N (0, 1) and σl represents the standard deviation of the heterogeneous taste for
product characteristic xjl . The resulting choice probabilities are a mixture over the logit
choice probabilities for many different values of µijt , shown here:
Z
pjt (δ, θ, at ) =

1+

eδjt +
P

P

k∈at

σl νilt xjl
P
f (vilt |θ).
eδkt + l σl νilt xkl
l

(3)

We define at as the set of products stocked in market t, and a market as a machine-visit
pair (i.e., at is the product assortment stocked in a machine between two service visits).44
We specify δjt = dj + ξt ; that is, we allow for 73 product intercepts as well as market-specific
demand shifters. We allow for three random coefficients, corresponding to consumer tastes
for salt, sugar, and nut content.45 We estimate the parameters of the choice probabilities
via maximum simulated likelihood (MSL). The log-likelihood is:
lt (yt |δjt , θ, at ) ∝

X

yjt log pj (δjt , θ, at ).

(4)

j
43

See Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes (1995).
There are virtually no ‘natural’ stock-outs in the data; thus, changes to product assortment happen for
two reasons: (1) Mark Vend changes the assortment when re-stocking, or (2) our field experiment exogenously
removes one or two products.
45
Nut content is a continuous measure of the fraction of product weight that is attributed to nuts. We
do not allow for a random coefficient on price because of the relative lack of price variation in the vending
machines. We also do not include random coefficients on any discrete variables (such as whether or not
a product contains chocolate). As we discuss in Conlon and Mortimer (2013a), the lack of variation in a
continuous variable (e.g., price) implies that random coefficients on categorical variables may not be identified
when product dummies are included in estimation. We did estimate a number of alternative specifications in
which we include random coefficients on other continuous variables, such as carbohydrates, fat, or calories.
In general, the additional parameters were not significantly different from zero, and they had no appreciable
effect on the results of any prediction exercises.
44

17

where yjt are sales of product j in market t.46
We report the parameter estimates in table 5. We report two levels of aggregation for
ξt . The first allows for 15,256 fixed effects, at the level of a machine-service visit, while
the second allows for 2,710 fixed effects, at the level of a machine-choice set. We report
the log-likelihood, Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) and Bayesian Information Criterion
(BIC) for each specification. We use BIC to select the specification with 2,710 fixed effects.

4.2

Dynamic Model of Re-stocking

A crucial question for empirically evaluating the welfare effects of vertical rebate contracts is
the size of the efficiency gains that are due to greater retailer effort, relative to the potential
effects of foreclosure. Comparing the two effects is often challenging, because one needs
to understand how effort endogenously responds to different contractual forms and product
assortments. In most empirical contexts, the econometrician has very little data on the
cost of effort. In this section we consider the specific case in which the retailer chooses the
restocking frequency.
Our approach follows Rust (1987), but ‘in reverse.’ Rather than assuming that observed
retailer wait times are optimal and using Rust’s model to estimate the cost of re-stocking,
we use an outside estimate of the cost of re-stocking based on wage data from the vending
operator, and compute the optimal wait time until the next restocking visit from the model.
Specifically, we consider a multi-product (s, S) policy, in which the retailer pays a fixed cost
F C and fully restocks (all products) to target inventory S. The challenge is to characterize
the critical re-stocking inventory level, s. For modeling the retailer’s decision, it is more
convenient to work with the number of potential consumer arrivals, which we denote x,
rather than s, because in a multi-product setting, s is multi-dimensional (and may not define
a convex set), while x is a scalar. This implies an informational restriction on the retailer:
namely, that he observes the number of potential consumers (for example, the number of
consumers who walk through the door) but not necessarily the actual inventory levels of each
individual product when making restocking decisions. This closely parallels the problem of
Mark Vend.47
46

As in previous work, we do not estimate a price coefficient because there is no price variation in our
data to identify the parameter. See Conlon and Mortimer (2013a) for a discussion of this issue.
47
That is, Mark Vend has information on whether particular days are likely to be busy or not, but does
not observe the actual inventory levels of individual products until visiting the machine to restock it. In
other retail contexts this assumption might be less realistic and could be relaxed; its role is primarily to
reduce the computational burden in solving the re-stocking problem.

18

Mark Vend solves the following dynamic stocking problem, where u(x) denotes the cumulative variable retailer profits after x potential consumers have arrived. Profits are not
collected by Mark Vend until he restocks. His value function is:
V (x) = max{u(x) − F C + βV (0), βEx0 [V (x0 |x)]}.

(5)

The problem posed in (5) is similar to the ‘Tree Cutting Problem’ of Stokey, Lucas, and
Prescott (1989), which for concave u(x) and increasing x0 ≥ x, admits a monotone policy
such that the firm re-stocks if x ≥ x∗ . Given a guess of the optimal policy, we can compute
the post-decision transition-probability-matrix P̃ and the post-decision pay-off ũ, defined as:
ũ(x, x∗ ) =


0

if x < x∗

u(x) − F C

if x ≥ x∗ .

This allows us to solve the value function at all states in a single step:
V (x, x∗ ) = (I − β P̃ (x∗ ))−1 ũ(x, x∗ ).

(6)

This also enables us to evaluate profits under alternative stocking policies x0 , or policies
that arise under counterfactual market structures. For example, in order to understand the
incentives of a vertically-integrated firm, M-R, we can replace u(x) with (uR (x) + uM (x)),
which incorporates the profits of the dominant upstream manufacturer. Likewise, we can
consider the industry-optimal policy by replacing u(x) with (uR (x)+uM (x)+uH (x)+uN (x)).
To find the optimal policy we iterate between (6) and the policy improvement step:
x∗ = min x : u(x) − F C + βV (0, x∗ ) ≥ βP (x0 |x)V (x0 , x∗ ).

(7)

The fixed point (x∗ , V (x, x∗ )) maximizes the long-run average profit of the agent Γ(x∗ )V (x, x∗ )
where ΓP̃ = Γ is the ergodic distribution corresponding to the post-decision transition matrix. These long-run profits will become the basis on which we compare contracts and product
assortment choices.
In order to compute the dynamic restocking model, we use the following procedure.
To obtain u(x), we use the demand system generated by the random-coefficients model
to simulate consumer arrivals and update inventories accordingly. We use actual machine
capacities for each product.48 We simulate 100,000 chains of consumer arrivals and construct
48

These capacities are nearly uniform across machines, and are: 15-18 units for each confection product,

19

the expected profit after X consumers arrive. We define our state variable to be the number
of consumers expected to make a purchase from a hypothetical ‘full machine,’ and we define
a ‘full machine’ as one that contains a set of 29 products, which we report in table 6, plus
all of the products in the confections category.49
We recover the transition matrix P (x0 |x) to match the observed distribution of incremental daily sales. This is similar to Rust (1987), which uses the observed distribution of
incremental mileage. We convert the expected profits from a function of ‘the number of
consumers,’ to a function of ‘the number of consumers who would have made a purchase at
a hypothetical full machine.’ We then fit a smooth Chebyshev polynomial, and use this as
our approximation of accumulated variable profits, û(x).50
There is some heterogeneity in both the arrival rate of consumers to machines, as well as
the service level of different machines in the data, so we divide our sample into four groups of
machines based on the arrival rate, and the amount of revenue collected at a service visit. We
use a k-means clustering algorithm and report those results in table 7. Our counterfactual
analyses are based on cluster D, which is the largest cluster, containing 28 of the 66 machines
in our sample. Machines in clusters A and C are smaller in size, while the seven machines
in cluster B represent the very highest volume machines in the sample. We focus on cluster
D because it is a large cluster of ‘higher than average volume’ machines, which we think is
the most important determinant of the re-stocking decision of the firm. The distribution of
daily sales for the machines in cluster D determine the transition rule for our re-stocking
model.
We choose a daily discount factor β = 0.99981, which corresponds to a 7% annual interest
rate. We assume a fixed cost of a restocking visit, F C = $10, which approximates the permachine restocking cost using the driver’s wage and average number of machines serviced
per day. As a robustness test, we also consider F C = {5, 15}, which generate qualitatively
similar predictions. In theory, one should able to estimate F C directly off the data using
the technique of Hotz and Miller (1993). However, our retailer sets a level of service that
is too high to rationalize with any optimal stocking behavior, often refilling a day before
11-12 units for each salty snack product, and around 15 units for each cookie/other product.
49
A typical machine in our dataset holds fewer products than this.
50
We designate our state space in terms of ‘expected sales at a full machine’ rather than the market size,
because the share of the outside good is often large in discrete choice demand settings. This needlessly
increases the dimension of the state space without any additional information. Also, under the hypothetical
‘full machine’ with outside good share s0 , the relationship between the number of consumers in the demand
system X and the state space x is well defined, because x ∼ Bin(X, 1 − s0 ) by construction. In practice this
1
merely requires inflating all of the ‘inside good’ probabilities by 1−s
when simulating consumer arrivals to
0
compute π(x). The fit of the 10th order Chebyshev polynomial is in excess of R2 ≥ 0.99.

20

any products have stocked-out.51 This is helpful as an experimental control, but makes
identifying F C from data impossible.52

5
5.1

Results
Endogenous Effort

We now consider the results of the model in which we allow the re-stocking policy to endogenously respond to the wholesale prices (wM , wH , wN ) and the AUD contract (∆, q). We
begin by analyzing the retailer’s choice of effort, conditional on product assortment. For
this analysis we construct a representative machine for which demand is described by the
random-coefficients model from table 5, and the arrival rate of consumers is described by the
process from the previous section, drawing from the distribution of daily sales for machines
in cluster D. We assume that the representative machine is stocked with the set of 29 base
products of our hypothetical ‘full machine,’ including five confections products, plus two additional products from the confections category, which we allow to vary. We fix Mark Vend’s
five most commonly-stocked chocolate confections products: four Mars products (Snickers,
Peanut M&Ms, Twix, and Plain M&Ms), and Nestle’s Raisinets. We also assume that confections prices are the uniform $0.75 per unit we observe in the data, and that manufacturer
marginal cost is zero.53 We allow the retailer to choose from six different products for the
final two slots in the confections category: two Mars products (Milky Way and Three Musketeers), two Hershey products (Reese’s Peanut Butter Cup and PayDay), and two Nestle
products (Butterfinger and Crunch).54
51

In conversations with the retailer about his service schedule, he mentioned two points. First, he suspected
that he was over-servicing, and reduced service levels after our field experiment. Second, he explained that
high service levels are important to obtaining long-term (3-5 year) exclusive service contracts with locations.
These specific locations almost certainly do not reflect a company-wide servicing policy. Specifically, these are
high-end office buildings with high service expectations. Public locations, such as museums and hospitals,
have much higher levels of demand and higher rates of stock-out events. These public locations affect
company-wide servicing policies, but are not good candidates for running a successful field experiment.
52
We do not consider possible dynamic considerations, in which a lower service level leads to a lower arrival
rate of consumers (i.e., as consumers facing stock-outs grow discouraged and stop visiting the machine, or
the client location terminates Mark Vend’s service contract). In other work, we find very little evidence that
the subsequent consumer arrival rate is affected by the history of stock-outs.
53
The assumption of zero manufacturer marginal costs implies that any efficiency gains we estimate represent an upper bound, because higher manufacturer costs would reduce the upstream firm’s revenues from
restocking, leading to smaller efficiency gains from increased downstream effort.
54
We do not have sufficient information on other products to consider them in our counterfactual analysis.
For example, Hershey’s with Almonds is popular nationally, but is rarely stocked in our data. As a robustness
test, we also consider the counterfactual in which Mark Vend substitutes for the five base confection products,
and we try a third Mars product, Skittles. Mark Vend is always worse off in these cases, and for space concerns

21

We compute the optimal re-stocking policy under four variants of the profit function and
report those results in table 8. The optimal policy is stated as the answer to the question “Restock after how many expected sales?,” so a lower number implies more frequent restocking
(and higher cost) to the retailer. Consistent with industry practice, we assume that all
products are restocked when the downstream retailer visits a machine. In the first variant
of the profit function, we consider the policy that maximizes retailer profit at the pre-rebate
wholesale prices (wM , wH , wN ); in the second variant, we consider the policy that maximizes
retailer profit at the post-rebate prices (wM − ∆, wH , wN ). We label these ‘Retailer-Pre,’
and ‘Retailer-Post.’ In the third variant, we consider the joint profits of the retailer and
Mars, which we label ‘Integrated.’ For that case, wM and ∆ are irrelevant because they are
merely a transfer between integrated parties. The policy of the vertically-integrated firm
is important, because it provides information on the threshold qM . If Mars were perfectly
informed about retail demand, it could choose the level of qM in order to maximize the
bilateral surplus. Finally, we report the policy that would be optimal for the confections
industry as a whole (i.e., it maximizes the joint profit of R, M, H, and N ). We label this
‘Industry.’ Table 8 reports the optimal restocking policies for five of the fifteen (i.e., ‘six
choose two’) possible product combinations. The remaining combinations are dominated for
the retailer.
In the absence of the rebate, the retailer sets an effort level that is 9-11% too low compared
to a vertically-integrated (Retailer-Mars) firm. Our experiment indicated that the marginal
cost aspect of the rebate, ∆, shifts approximately 40% of the stock-out cost onto the retailer.55 However, this appears to have modest effects on the retailer’s stocking policy, which
increases by around 2% (or 20-25% of the effort gap). This implies that qM , the threshold,
plays a larger role than the marginal cost reduction in enhancing downstream effort. When
the two additional products are both Nestle or Hershey products, the vertically-integrated
firm sets the highest stocking level (replacing after 232 or 237 consumers), and the gap between the retailer and the vertically-integrated firm’s incentives are largest, at about 11%.
When both additional products are owned by Mars (Three Musketeers and Milky Way) the
difference in incentives is smallest, at 8.6%. In other words, when both of the marginal
products are owned by the vertically-integrated Mars-Retailer firm, the firm is willing to
tolerate the higher levels of stock-out events that result from lower retailer effort, because
substitute products are owned by the firm.
we do not report those results.
55
For example, table 4 reports that the retailer’s share of the cost of a stock-out increases from 14% to
50% for the Peanut M&Ms removal, and from 3% to 40% for the joint Peanut M&Ms/Snickers removal.

22

The industry-optimal policy (i.e., the policy that maximizes the joint profits of RetailerMars-Hershey-Nestle) might involve more or less effort than the vertically-integrated (RetailerMars) policy, depending on whether downstream effort acts as a substitute or a complement
across different upstream firms. In this case, we find that near the optimum level of effort,
the vertically-integrated M − R firm would prefer a higher effort level than the Industry
optimum, though only 1-2% higher (i.e., 244 versus 247 for the Reeses’ Peanut Butter Cup Three Musketeers assortment). In other words, downstream effort is substitutable across upstream firms, so that increased retailer effort lowers competitors’ sales, rather than allowing
competitors to free-ride on effort.
Figure 3 reports the variable profits of each firm, ignoring the fixed cost of restocking, as
a function of the restocking policy. We report these profits for the case in which the retailer
stocks Reese’s Peanut Butter Cups (Hershey) and Three Musketeers (Mars) in the final two
slots, and we denote this assortment as (H, M ). We see that for both Mars and the Retailer,
profits are monotonically decreasing as downstream effort falls, or the expected number of
consumers between restocking visits rises. However, for Hershey and Nestle, profits initially
increase as downstream effort falls. This happens because a few key Mars products sellout faster than the Hershey and Nestle products, so that Hershey and Nestle benefit from
forced substitution by consumers who arrive to the machine after the Mars products have
sold out. Once effort falls below 400 expected sales, Hershey’s and Nestle’s profits increase
with downstream effort, in line with Mars and the Retailer. At these low levels of service,
downstream effort is complementary across upstream firms, so that all upstream firms benefit
from greater downstream effort.
The optimal policies identified in table 8 are always less than 270, implying that over the
relevant part of the curve, downstream effort is substitutable, and thus, increased retailer
effort has a negative impact on Hershey and Nestle. As a result, if Mars chose qM to perfectly
implement the vertically-integrated level of effort, it may lead to an over-provision of effort
from the industry perspective (though not necessarily from a social perspective, because
consumers benefit from the reduced stock-out events that result from greater retailer effort).
The second implication of the results in figure 3 is that neither Hershey nor Nestle have an
incentive to induce retailer effort through the use of a vertical rebate as Mars does. This is
consistent with the fact that neither company does so in reality.56
56

Hershey offers a ‘rebate,’ but it is equivalent to a reduced wholesale cost because the sales threshold and
facing requirement are both zero.

23

5.2

Effects of the AUD on Product Assortment

Our next goal is to understand the relationship between the contractual structure and the
retailer’s endogenous choice of product assortment. One obvious impact of the contract
for product assortment occurs through the facing requirement. Four of our five baseline
products are produced by Mars. A six-product facing requirement implies that both of the
two additional products stocked by Mark Vend would need to be Mars products in order
for him to quality for the rebate payment. However, facing requirements can be difficult to
enforce, and are rarely used in the absence of more easily enforced requirements such as a
quantity target. Thus, it is instructive to examine the potential effect that the discount and
quantity target have for Mark Vend’s assortment decision.
In order to do this, we consider three of the downstream re-stocking policies from table
8: Retailer-Pre, Retailer-Post, and Integrated. We do not consider the Industry-optimal
policy, because there is no credible way to implement it with bilateral vertical arrangements.
We compute profits throughout the supply chain for each of the three re-stocking policies
using the five product assortments in table 8. In table 9, we report a subset of the three
most relevant product assortment choices using the long-run expected profit from a single
machine in cluster D (our ‘above-average’ group).57
5.2.1

Role of the Discount

Table 9 shows that at the observed wholesale prices (wM , wH , wN ) ignoring any rebate payments, the retailer would choose to stock two Hershey products in the final two slots: Reese’s
Peanut Butter Cup and Payday, which we refer to as the (H,H) assortment. This is illustrated
by comparing across the three ‘Retailer-Pre’ rows to choose the assortment that maximizes
profits in the ‘Retail No Rebate’ column.58 This outcome is obtained because the retail
margin is higher on Hershey products (i.e., retail prices are the same for both products, but
wH < wM ), and despite the fact that the Hershey products achieve slightly lower sales than
the Mars products.59
If we assume prices are fixed at the post-rebate levels for all product assortments (wM −
57

Specifically, we report results for the three assortments for which at least one variant of the payoff
function is maximized. For example, the choice of the two Nestle products (Butterfinger and Nestle Crunch)
in the final two slots is never preferred by the retailer to the two better-selling Hershey products for any
variant of the payoff function.
58
The Retailer-Pre row that corresponds to the retailer’s optimal assortment of (H,H) is highlighted.
59
This is confirmed by examining the columns that report total Industry profits and consumer surplus,
which are higher for both the Three Musketeers - Milky Way, or (M,M) and (H,M) assortments.

24

∆, wH , wN ), with no quantity threshold or facing requirement, then the retailer would choose
the Retailer-Post level of service, and he would earn $36, 086 + $2, 096 = $38, 182 for stocking the two Mars products (M,M) (Milky Way and Three Musketeers), $36, 656 + $1, 617 =
$38, 273 for stocking (H,H), and $36, 394 + $1, 882 = $38, 276 for stocking an (H,M) assortment (Reese’s Peanut Butter Cups and Three Musketeers). Thus, in the absence of any
quantity threshold, the retailer would stock the (H,M) assortment. This would be a bad outcome for Mars, because it would earn only $11,763 - $1,882 = $9,881 under this assortment
and effort level, whereas under the Retailer-Pre assortment and effort in which the retailer
chooses (H,H) and Mars does not pay a rebate, it earns $10,055. Thus, the rebate is not
individually rational for Mars in the absence of the quantity threshold or facing requirement,
and should not be offered in equilibrium.60
5.2.2

Role of the Facing Requirement and Quantity Threshold

If Mars sets a facing requirement of six products, then the retailer chooses a Retailer-Post
level of service, and stocks both Mars products (M,M).This may be verified by comparing
the Retailer-Post rows in table 9. Under this regime, the retailer earns $36,086 + $2,096
= $38,182 by stocking (M,M) instead of the $36,661 he earns by stocking (H,H) and not
collecting the rebate (i.e., the rebate provides a $1,521 increase in Retailer profit compared to
the Retailer-Pre outcome).61 Thus, the rebate leads to foreclosure of both Hershey products.
In the absence of the facing requirement, Mars can alternatively use the quantity threshold to achieve the same retail assortment. To illustrate, suppose that Mars sets a sales
threshold so that the rebate is only paid if Mars makes more than $11,912 in revenue.62 This
has the same effect as using a facing requirement because the retailer only obtains the rebate
payment when he stocks (M,M).
Given the choice of an (M,M) assortment, Mars can also use the quantity threshold aspect
of the rebate to push the retailer to a higher level of service. This may be seen in table 9
in the row associated with the Integrated stocking policy for the (M,M) assortment. At a
threshold of $13,195 in Mars revenues, the retailer would increase his service level to the
60

For this reason, the Retailer-Post row for the (H,M) assortment is not highlighted in table 9.
One may work directly with Mars revenue in this example rather than qM because the retail and wholesale
prices are uniform and we have assumed a zero marginal cost of production. One also needs to confirm that
offering the rebate is individually rational for Mars. It is, as we describe in the next subsection.
62
A threshold of $11,912 reflects Mars’ profits under a level of effort for the (H,M) assortment that just
exceeds the vertically-integrated effort. One needs this threshold instead of the Retailer-Post Mars revenues
of $11,763 under the (H,M) assortment to prevent the retailer from increasing his effort level slightly while
still choosing the (H,M) assortment.
61

25

Integrated policy of 243 expected sales, and would earn $36,035 + $2,111 = $38,146, which
is better than the profit that he attains by forgoing the rebate, providing the Retailer-Pre
level of service, and choosing the (H,H) assortment.
These effects on product assortment and effort are illustrated in figure 4, which plots the
post-rebate retail profits under the two relevant product assortments, (H,M) and (M,M).
The post-rebate retail profits are plotted against Mars’ profits on the horizontal axis. The
curve on the left, which is associated with lower levels of profit for Mars, reflects the retailers’
post-rebate profits under the (H,M) assortment. Two red marks on the curve illustrate two
of the stocking policies reported in table 9: the red mark at the apex of the profit function
reflects the optimal service level at post-rebate prices; the red mark to the right of the
apex reflects the service level that would be optimal from the perspective of a verticallyintegrated Mars-Retailer firm. The product assortment associated with higher retail profit
is the (H,M) assortment (i.e., the curve on the left attains higher retail profits than the
curve on the right). However, Mars can use the threshold to induce the retailer to change
from the (H,M) assortment to the (M,M) assortment. The vertical line that intersects the
post-rebate retail profit curve (just to the right of the red mark indicating the optimal level
of effort for the vertically-integrated M-R firm) is the point at which the retailer wants to
switch from the (H,M) profit curve on the left to the (M,M) profit curve on the right. Thus,
a threshold between $11,912 and $13,101 induces the retailer to drop the Hershey product
in favor of the second Mars product. Once the retailer has switched to the (M,M) product
assortment, Mars can push the retailers’ service level (and Mars’ profits) up a bit more by
increasing the threshold to $13,195, which is the level of retailer effort that is optimal for
the vertically-integrated M-R firm.63
In table 10, we summarize the potential competitive responses to the Retailer-Post and
Integrated quantity thresholds under an (M,M) assortment. We compare both outcomes
against the Retailer’s optimal choice in the absence of the Mars rebate contract, which is an
assortment choice of (H,H) at a Retailer-Pre level of effort, holding all other wholesale prices
fixed.
The first alternative we examine is the (M,M)/Retailer-Post assortment, in which Mars’
AUD payments would require sales of Mars products to exceed the threshold of 11,912
identified in figure 4. By stocking (M,M) and providing the ‘Retailer-Post’ level of effort, the
Retailer’s profits increase by $1,521 ($38,182 - $36,661 from table 9). Mars’ revenues increase
63

The retailer’s profit curve associated with an (H,H) assortment would lie below and to the left of the
(H,M) curve, and would not affect MArs’ choice of the quantity threshold. Retail profits under the (H,H)
assortment could potentially affect assortment if his binding constraint is the facing requirement.

26

from $10,055 (the (H,H) assortment at Retailer-Pre effort level) to $13, 101 − $2, 096 =
$11, 005, which is an extra $950 for Mars. Thus, the rebate contract increases overall bilateral
surplus by $2,471 ($1,521 for the retailer and $950 for Mars). However, because Hershey’s
loss (of $2,173) exceeds the retailer’s gain, Hershey could avoid exclusion by lowering its
wholesale price to cw = 12.83 cents per unit from its current level of around 40 cents, thus
transferring $1,521 to the retailer. We do not have hard evidence on manufacturing costs
in the industry, but we believe them to be in the neighborhood of 15-20 cents per bar. If
so, Hershey would not be able to avoid exclusion once manufacturing costs were taken into
account. Such foreclosure may be positive or negative from a social welfare perspective.
Nestle loses $31 under the new retail assortment and effort levels, so the rebate appears to
increase overall profit for the industry by $267.64 Consumer utility is also higher by 291
units.
The second alternative sets a higher threshold (equal to 13,195) in order to induce the
higher, vertically-integrated level of retailer effort. At this higher threshold, the Retailer’s
profit increases by $1,485 relative to the non-rebating (H,H) option, and Mars’ profits increase by $1,029. Hershey still loses $2,173, implying that they could avoid exclusion with a
wholesale price of 13.54 cents per unit, holding fixed all of Mars’ contractual terms. Overall
industry profits again exceed those under the (H,H)/Retailer-Pre outcome, by $302 for the
industry, and consumer utility increases by 444 units.
These results suggest that Hershey would not be able to avoid exclusion by outbidding
Mars for placement in the retail assortment. One may conversely ask whether Mars could
reduce its discount and still obtain exclusivity. The last row in table 10 provides insight into
this question. In this row, we assume that each manufacturer’s production cost is $0.15 per
unit, so that Hershey’s best offer to the retailer is a wholesale price of $0.15. Assuming that
Hershey lowers its wholesale price to $0.15, we compute the per-unit transfer that Mars must
make to the Retailer to make him indifferent between the (H,H) assortment at Hershey’s best
price of $0.15 and the (M,M) assortment under Mars’ current facing and quantity threshold
requirements. We report this transfer as a percentage change from Mars’ current discount,
∆. Under the lower Retailer-Post threshold, Mars could reduce the generosity of its discount
by 5.3% and maintain exclusivity. Under the higher Integrated threshold, the discount may
be reduced by 3.5%. Assuming that the $0.15 production cost estimate is reasonable, this
gives some indication that the terms of Mars’ current rebate program are well designed.
64

The change in industry profit is the $2,471 Retailer-Mars gain, less Hershey’s $2,173 and Nestle’s $31
losses.

27

5.3

Pure Efficiency Effect

Setting aside the potential competitive effects of the contract, one may also examine its pure
efficiency effect. We define the pure efficiency effect as the mitigation of downstream moral
hazard and inducement of additional downstream effort. To quantify this effect, we hold
assortment fixed, and measure the welfare impact of moving from the ‘Retailer-Pre’ row to
the ‘Integrated’ row in table 9.65 This is likely to represent an upper bound on the efficiency
effect because it assumes a zero marginal cost of production upstream.66
We report these efficiency calculations in table 11 for the three product assortments
(M,M), (H,M), and (H,H). The first row reports the policy change that would result from
moving from the Retailer-Pre effort level to the Integrated level of effort (i.e., the same ‘Retail
Understock’ from table 8). For the case of (M,M), the likely result under the AUD, Retailer’s
profits decline (from increased effort) by $55, Mars’ revenues rise by $128, and Nestle’s profits
fall by $10 (due to less forced substitution from stocked-out Mars products to Raisinets. This
results in an industry-wide change to producer surplus of $64. Consumer utility rises by 209
units, which represents a gain of roughly one percent relative to the consumer surplus that is
achieved without the additional effort induced by the AUD. Table 11 shows similar efficiency
gains using the same calculations for the two other product assortment choices ((H,M) and
(H,H)) from table 9. Thus, conditional on the product assortment, potential efficiencies from
increased effort are small, and primarily accrue to consumers rather than firms. This is due
to the fact that retail prices do not adjust, and is in spite of the fact that the potential
impact of the contract on Retailer effort is substantial, requiring increases in the re-stocking
rate of 8.6-11% in order to achieve the vertically-integrated outcome.

5.4

Comparison to Linear Pricing

The results reported so far hold fixed the wholesale prices of all three upstream firms. While
allowing for endogenous wholesale pricing is outside the scope of our model, we can construct
an important alternative baseline comparison, which is to allow Mars to re-optimize its
wholesale price in the absence of an AUD.67 We consider a subgame perfect solution for
which, in the first stage, Mars sets wM , and in the second stage, the retailer chooses a
product assortment a and an effort level or restocking frequency e. We hold (wH , wN ) fixed
65

The vertically-integrated level of downstream effort is a convenient baseline for comparison. Recall that
as long as effort acts as a substitute upstream, Mars’ profits rise more quickly than the cost of the rebate.
66
We use the $10 cost per restocking visit for the retailer.
67
One can interpret this as an AUD contract where the threshold q = 0.

28

and examine Mars’ unilateral response.68 We consider this exercise more like a comparative
static rather than a counterfactual equilibrium.
Table 12 provides details on the outcome of this linear pricing approach. The first two
columns provide the benchmark restocking policies and profit/surplus numbers from table 9,
and the last column reports the same figures for Mars’ optimal linear wholesale price. Holding
competitors’ prices fixed, but allowing for endogenous retailer decisions for assortment and
effort, Mars undercuts Hershey’s prices in order to obtain the exclusive (M,M) assortment.69
The resulting linear price of 41.36 cents per unit is more than 15% lower than the observed
post-rebate price. This lower price induces greater retail effort than the post-Rebate prices
(ignoring the facing and quantity threshold requirements), resulting in a retailer restocking
policy of waiting for 257 expected sales, instead of 259. However, the lower linear price does
not not reach the vertically-integrated optimal rate of restocking, which is after 243 expected
sales.70 We hold retail prices fixed, so consumer utility is affected only by changes in the
assortment and retailer effort level, and not the wholesale prices directly. Consumers are
slightly better off with the effort and assortment decisions that arise under linear wholesale
pricing than they are under the post-rebate wholesale pricing, but not as well off as they are
under the vertically-integrated rebate outcome (which can be attained with an Integrated
choice of qM under the AUD). From a social surplus perspective, the costs of banning the
AUD and restricting Mars to linear contracts appear to be small, especially if it is difficult
to choose an appropriate threshold qM . For example, if Mars sets the sales threshold too
low, the linear contract outperforms the AUD contract both for the industry as a whole, and
for consumers. However, consistent with some of the existing literature (see Kolay, Shaffer,
and Ordover (2004)) the AUD has the potential to shift substantial rents from retailers to
upstream firms (in this case, almost 10% of Mars’ revenue).
68

A potential justification might be if retailers could purchase Hershey or Nestle products through some
other channel at prevailing wholesale prices, such as through a warehouse club like Costco. One might also
want to allow Hershey or Nestle to adjust their prices in response to Mars’ price. We again refer the reader
to section A.3 of the appendix, in which we show that this problem is very difficult, and need not lead
to an equilibrium outcome because the discreteness of the retailer’s product assortment decision leads to
discontinuities in the reaction functions of the wholesalers.
69
Mars must provide more compensation to the retailer than wH −  because Reese’s Peanut Butter Cups
is preferred to Milky Way.
70
We also considered a deviation in which we reduced Hershey’s price by 50% and solved for the endogenous
Mars price, though for space considerations we do not report those results. In that case, and assuming that
Mars is restricted to a single linear wholesale price on all products, it is no longer worthwhile for Mars to
undercut Hershey. Instead, Mars responds by setting a higher linear wholesale price (i.e., a price between
the pre- and post-rebate prices), at which price, the retailer selects (H,M) at a slightly lower level of effort
than the post-rebate (H,M) level of 261.

29

5.5

Implications for Mergers

Vending is one of many industries for which retail prices are often fixed across similar products and under different vertical arrangements. Indeed, there are many industries for which
the primary strategic variable is not retail price, but rather a slotting fee or other transfer
payment between vertically-separated firms. Thus, our ability to evaluate the impact of a
potential upstream merger may turn on how the merger affects payments between firms in
the vertical channel.
In this analysis, we consider the impact of three potential mergers (Mars-Hershey, MarsNestle, and Hershey-Nestle) on the AUD terms offered to the retailer by Mars. Given
the degree of concentration in the confections industry, antitrust authorities would likely
investigate proposed mergers, especially mergers involving Mars.71 In order to analyze the
impact of any potential merger, we conduct a similar exercise as before, but consider the
incentives of the merged firm.
Table 13 considers the assortment and effort decisions of the retailer after a hypothetical
Mars-Hershey merger. We assume that the Hershey product (Reeses Peanut Butter Cup) is
priced at the Mars wholesale price and included in Mars’ rebate contract after the merger.
The merged (Mars-Hershey) firm is now happy for consumers to substitute to Reese’s Peanut
Butter Cups, and the AUD is able to achieve the industry-optimal (and socially-optimal)
product assortment of (H,M). The merged firm faces competition from Nestle (Crunch and
Butterfinger), which charges lower wholesale prices.72 In the absence of an AUD, the Retailer
maximizes profits by stocking the two Nestle products (earning $36,594), but the AUD
induces the retailer to choose (H,M), as well as the effort level that would be set by the
vertically-integrated firm (earning $36,340 + $2,105 = $38,445). Section A.7 of the Appendix
provides details and discussion on two additional mergers: Mars-Nestle and Hershey-Nestle.
A pattern similar to the results from table 9 emerges in both cases. Specifically, the retailer’s
optimal assortment in the absence of an AUD is (H,H), but the AUD induces the retailer to
stock (M,M). The (M,M) assortment attains greater industry and social surplus, but does
not achieve the industry- or socially-optimal assortment of (H,M).
We summarize the impact of all three mergers for the AUD contract in Table 14. We
focus on the extent to which Mars could reduce the generosity of the rebate, holding retail
prices fixed and assuming a 15 cent marginal cost of production for all upstream firms.
The first column reports outcomes in the absence of any mergers, replicating the second
71
72

For a related analysis of diversion ratios in this market, see Conlon and Mortimer (2013b).
We assume Nestle’s wholesale prices do not adjust after the Mars-Hershey merger.

30

column of table 10 The second column reports outcomes after a hypothetical merger of
Mars and Hershey. In this case, the merged Mars-Hershey firm is able to implement the
industry-optimal product assortment of (H,M). Holding fixed the terms of the rebate, this
merger appears to be an unambiguous improvement for consumers, the industry, and to the
merging parties. However, since Nestle is less strong as a competitor, and because (H,M)
is more profitable than (M,M), Mars may reduce the generosity of the rebate significantly,
lowering the discount by as much as 42.3%, assuming a 15 cent marginal cost for the industry.
The third column reports outcomes after a hypothetical Mars-Nestle merger. The primary effect of this merger is that Mars is able to control additional profits from Raisinets.
This means that Mars can transfer the same amount of profits to the retailer with a smaller
rebate (in percentage terms). Assuming a 15 cent marginal cost, the merged firm could
reduce the rebate by roughly 12%. Finally, the last column provides outcomes under a
hypothetical Hershey-Nestle merger. The primary impact in this case is that the merged
firm has control of more surplus when trying to avoid exclusion. However, the profit loss is
relatively unaffected, so it appears unlikely to substantially impact the rebate paid to the
retailer.
Throughout the paper, we report the variable profits for the retailer; it is likely that his
overall operating profits after accounting for administrative and overhead costs, are substantially lower. In the Intel case, the rebate program was reported to account for more than
one quarter of Dell’s operating profits. Based on communication with industry participants,
we think that the Mars rebate may be an even larger fraction of operating profits in the
vending industry. This means that a 42% rebate reduction (implied by the hypothetical
Mars-Hershey merger) may represent a substantial fraction of the overall operating profits
of the retailer.

6

Conclusion

Using a new proprietary dataset that includes exogenous variation in product availability,
we provide empirical evidence regarding the potential efficiency and foreclosure aspects of an
AUD contract. Similar vertical rebate arrangements have been at the center of several recent
large antitrust settlements, and have attracted the attention of competition authorities in
many jurisdictions.
In order to understand the relative size of the potential efficiency and foreclosure effects
of the contract, our framework incorporates endogenous retailer effort and product assortment decisions. A discrete-choice demand model allows us to characterize the downstream
31

substitutability of competing products, and combining this with a model of retailer effort
allows us to estimate the impact of downstream effort across upstream and downstream
firms. Identification of both the demand and retailer-effort models benefit from exogenous
variation in product availability made possible through a field experiment. We show that the
vertical rebate we observe has the potential to increase effort provision by roughly 9-11%,
but these rents are mostly captured by consumers. The rebate also enables the dominant
firm, Mars, to foreclose Hershey by leveraging profits from dominant brands such as Snickers
and Peanut M&Ms, and to obtain shelf-space for brands such as Milky Way.
We find that at the prevailing wholesale prices, this foreclosure enhances the profitability
of the overall industry and improves social surplus, but does not lead to a product assortment
that maximizes industry profits. We note that in the absence of the vertical rebate, manufacturers may charge different wholesale prices. In a limited comparison of Mars’ optimal
linear wholesale prices to the AUD contract, we find that the primary difference between
Mars’ AUD and linear wholesale pricing is the allocation of profits between the dominant
upstream firm and the retailer. The differential impact on social welfare is small, and depends on how the dominant firm sets the quantity threshold in the AUD. Finally, we explore
the potential impact of three potential upstream mergers on the likely terms of the AUD
contract, holding retail prices fixed. We find that a merger between the two largest upstream
firms has the potential to induce the socially-optimal product assortment, but may also lead
to a reduction in the rebate payments to retailers.
In addition to providing a road-map for empirical analyses of vertical rebates, and results on one specific vertical rebate, our detailed data and exogenous variation allow us
to contribute to the broader literature on the role of vertical arrangements for mitigating
downstream moral hazard and inducing downstream effort provision. Empirical analyses of
downstream moral hazard are often limited not only by data availability, but also by the
ability to measure effort, and our setting proves a relatively clean laboratory for measuring
the effects of downstream effort.

32

References
Aghion, P., and P. Bolton (1987): “Contracts as Barriers to Entry,” American Economic
Review, 77(3), 388–401.
Asker, J. (2005): “Diagnosing Foreclosure due to Exclusive Dealing,” Working Paper.
Asker, J., and H. Bar-Isaac (2014): “Raising Retailers’ Profits: On Vertical Practices
and the Exclusion of Rivals,” American Economic Review, 104(2).
Baker, G. P., and T. N. Hubbard (2003): “Make Versus Buy in Trucking: Asset
Ownership, Job Design, and Information,” American Economic Review, 93(3), 551–572.
Bernheim, B. D., and M. Whinston (1998): “Exclusive Dealing,” Journal of Political
Economy, 106(1), 64–103.
Berry, S. (1994): “Estimating discrete-choice models of product differentiation,” RAND
Journal of Economics, 25(2), 242–261.
Berry, S., J. Levinsohn, and A. Pakes (1995): “Automobile Prices in Market Equilibrium,” Econometrica, 63(4), 841–890.
Bork, R. (1978): The Antitrust Paradox. New York: Free Press.
Brickley, J., and F. Dark (1987): “The Choice of Organizational Form: The Case of
Franchising,” Journal of Financial Economics, 18, 401–420.
Chao, Y., and G. Tan (2013): “All-Units Discounts, Quantity Forcing, and Capacity
Constraint,” Working Paper.
(2014): “All-Units Discounts as a Partial Foreclosure Device,” Working Paper.
Chen, C.-W. (2014): “Estimating the Foreclosure Effect of Exclusive Dealing: Evidence
from the Entry of Specialty Beer Producers,” Working Paper.
Chen, Z., and G. Shaffer (2014): “Naked Exclusion with Minimum-Share Requirements,” Rand Journal of Economics, 45(1), 64–91.
Chipty, T. (2001): “Vertical Inegration, Market Foreclosure, and Consumer Welfare in the
Cable Television Industry,” American Economic Review, 91(3), 428–53.
Conlon, C., and J. H. Mortimer (2013a): “Demand Estimation Under Incomplete
Product Availability,” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 5(4), 1–30.
Conlon, C. T., and J. H. Mortimer (2010): “Effects of Product Availability: Experimental Evidence,” NBER Working Paper No. 16506.

33

(2013b): “An Experimental Approach to Merger Evaluation,” NBER Working
Paper No. 19703.
Crawford, G., R. Lee, M. Whinston, and A. Yurukoglu (2015): “The Welfare
Effects of Vertical Integration in Multichannel Television Markets,” Working Paper.
Deneckere, R., H. Marvel, and J. Peck (1996): “Demand Uncertainty Inventories
and Resale Price Maintenance,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(3), 885–914.
(1997): “Demand Uncertainty and Price Maintenance: Markdowns as Destructive
Competition,” American Economic Review, 87(4), 619–641.
Elhauge, E., and A. Wickelgren (2012): “Anticompetitive Market Division through
Loyalty Discounts without Buyer Commitment,” Working Paper.
(2014): “Robust Exclusion and Market Division Through Loyalty Discounts with
Buyer Commitment,” Working Paper.
Figueroa, N., E. Ide, and J.-P. Montero (2014): “Discounts as a Barrier to Entry,”
Working Paper.
Fumagalli, C., and M. Motta (2006): “Exclusive Dealing and Entry, when Buyers
Compete,” American Economic Review, 96(3), 785–795.
Gil, R. (2007): “Make-or-buy in Movies: Integration and Ex-post Renegotiation,” International Journal of Industrial Organization, 25(4), 643–655.
Ho, J., K. Ho, and J. H. Mortimer (2012a): “Analyzing the Welfare Impacts of Full-line
Forcing Contracts,” Journal of Industrial Economics, 60(3), 468–498.
(2012b): “The Use of Full-line Forcing Contracts in the Video Rental Industry,”
American Economic Review, 102(2), 686–719.
Hotz, V. J., and R. A. Miller (1993): “Conditional Choice Probabilities and the Estimation of Dynamic Models,” Review of Economic Studies, 60(3), 497–529.
Hubbard, T. N. (1998): “An empirical examination of moral hazard in the vehicle inspection market,” Rand Journal of Economics, 29(2), 406–426.
Klein, B., and A. Lerner (2014): “The Economics of Alternative Antitrust Standards
for Loyalty Contracts,” Working Paper.
Klein, B., and K. M. Murphy (1988): “Vertical Restraints as Contract Enforcement
Mechanisms,” Journal of Law and Economics, 31(2), 265–297.
Kolay, S., G. Shaffer, and J. A. Ordover (2004): “All-Units Discounts in Retail
Contracts,” Journal of Economics and Managment Strategy, 13(3), 429–459.
34

Lafontaine, F. (1992): “Agency Theory and Franchising: Some Empirical Results,”
RAND Journal of Economics, 23, 263–283.
Lafontaine, F., and M. Slade (2007): “Vertical Integration and Firm Boundaries: The
Evidence,” Journal of Economic Literature, 45(3), 629–685.
(2008): “Exclusive Contracts and Vertical Restraints: Empirical Evidence and
Public Policy,” in Handbook of Antitrust Economics, ed. by P. Buccirossi, pp. 391–414.
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Lee, R. S. (2013): “Vertical Integration and Exclusivity in Platform and Two-Sided Markets,” American Economic Review, 103(7), 2960–3000.
McFadden, D. (1978): “Modelling the Choice of Residential Location,” in Spatial Interaction Theory and Planning Models, ed. by A. Karlqvist, L. Lundsqvist, F. Snickars, and
J. Weibull. North-Holland.
O’Brien, D. P. (2013): “All-Units Discounts and Double Moral Hazard,” Working Paper.
Posner, R. (1976): Antitrust Law: An Economic Perspective. University of Chicago Press.
Rasmusen, E. B., J. M. Ramseyer, and J. Wiley, John S. (1991): “Naked Exclusion,”
The American Economic Review, 81(5), pp. 1137–1145.
Rust, J. (1987): “Optimal Replacement of GMC Bus Engines: An Empirical Model of
Harold Zurcher,” Econometrica, 55(5), 999–1033.
Sass, T. (2005): “The competitive effects of exclusive dealing: Evidence from the U.S. beer
industry,” International Journal of Industrial Organization, 23(3-4), 203–225.
Segal, I. R., and M. D. Whinston (2000): “Naked Exclusion: Comment,” American
Economic Review, 90(1), 296–309.
Shaffer, G. (1991a): “Capturing Strategic Rent: Full-Line Forcing, Brand Discounts,
Aggregate Rebates, and Maximum Resale Price Maintenance,” Journal of Industrial Economics, 39(5), 557–575.
(1991b): “Slotting Allowances and Resale Price Maintenance: A Comparison of
Facilitating Practices,” RAND Journal of Economics, 22(1), 120–135.
Shepard, A. (1993): “Contractual Form, Retail Price, and Asset Characteristics in Gasoline
Retailing,” RAND Journal of Economics, 24(1), 58–77.
Sinkinson, M. (2014): “Pricing and Entry Incentives with Exclusive Contracts: Evidence
from Smartphones,” Working Paper.
Stokey, N. L., R. Lucas, and E. Prescott (1989): Recursive Methods for Economic
Dynamics. Harvard University Press.
35

Sudhir, K., and V. R. Rao (2006): “Are Slotting Allowances Efficiency-Enhancing or
Anti-Competitive?,” Journal of Marketing Research, 43(2), 137–155.
Telser, L. (1960): “Why Should Manufacturers Want Fair Trade?,” Journal of Law and
Economics, 3, 86–105.
Tirole, J. (1988): The Theory of Industrial Organization. MIT Press.
Train, K. (2003): Discrete Choice Methods with Simulation. Cambridge University Press.

36

Figure 1: Conventional Quantity Discount and All-Units Discount
10
Q
9

8
W2

7

W1

Y Axis

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

X Axis
10
Q
9
W2
8

7

Y Axis

6

W1

5

4

3

2

1
No Man's Land
0

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

X Axis

Notes: The top panel illustrates a conventional non-linear pricing schedule, in which a retailer pays a
wholesale price of 1 and receives a discounted price of 0.75 for quantities greater than 6. The bottom panel
illustrates an All-Units Discount with a wholesale price of 1, a threshold equal to 6, and a discounted price
equal to 0.67.

37

Figure 2: Mars Vend Operator Rebate Program

The Only Candy You Need To Stock In Your
Machine!
Spiral#1

Spiral#2

M &M 's® Peanut
SNICKERS® Bar
Candies

#1 Selling
Confection
Item in
Vending!

#2 Selling
Confectio
n Item in
Vending!

Spiral#3

Spiral#4

Spiral#5

Tw ix® Carm el 3 M USKETEERS®
M ILKY W AY® Bar
Cookie Bar
Bar

#3 Selling
Confectio
n Item in
Vending!

#4 Selling
Confectio
n Item in
Vending!

#11 Selling
Confection
Item in
Vending!

Spiral#6

Spiral#7

Spiral#8

M &M 's® M ilk
Chocolate
Candies

SKITTLES®
Candies Original

STARBURST®
FruitChew s
Original

#6 Selling
Confection
Item in
Vending!

#5 Selling
Confection
Item in
Vending!

#9 Selling
Confection
Item in
Vending!

• Based on the current business environment, vend operators
are looking for one supplier to cover all of their Candy
needs
 MARS - 100% Real Chocolate!
 MARS - 100% Real Sales!

52 Weeks Ending 10/4/09
6

2010 Vend Operator Program
Platinum Rebate Level
• Receive a great Every Day Low Cost from your
Authorized Vend Product Distributor
• Purchase brand level targets for 6 singles or king
size items
 Reduction from 7 must-stock items in 2009!
 You pick the six items!
 Will consolidate item variants to qualify (by brand, excluding
SNICKERS ® Bar and M&M’s ® Peanut Candies)

• No Growth Requirement
Low Cost PLUS Rebate:
• PLUS a Rebate Payment
Item
All
Items

Rebate
%

Rebate $ Per
Bar (singles)

8%

4.0¢

11

Notes: From ‘2010 Vend Program’ materials, dated December 21, 2009; last accessed on February 2, 2015
at http://vistar.com/KansasCity/Documents/Mars%202010%20Operatopr%20rebate%20program.pdf.

38

Figure 3: Profits Per Consumer as a Function of the Restocking Policy
Retailer

0.4

0.3

0.1

0.2

0.05

0.1

0

0

0

200

400

600

800

Hershey

0.015

−0.05

0.01

0.005

0.005

0

200

400

0

200

600

0

800

400

600

800

600

800

Nestle

0.015

0.01

0

Mars

0.15

0

200

400

Notes: Reports the profits of the retailer, Mars, Hershey and Nestle as a function of the retailer’s restocking
policy, using the product assortment in which the retailer stocks 3 Musketeers (Mars) and Reese’s Peanut
Butter Cups (Hershey) in the final two slots. Specifically, the vertical axes report variable profit per consumer
for each of the four firms, and the horizontal axes report the number of expected sales between restocking
visits.

39

Figure 4: Impact of AUD Quantity Threshold on Retail Assortment Choice

Notes: Figure reports retailer profit under two assortment choices ((H,M) on the left and (M,M) on the
right), against sales of Mars products. For a quantity requirement of 11,912 or greater (noted by the vertical
dashed line), the retailer prefers to switch his assortment from (H,M) to (M,M).

40

Table 1: Comparison of National Availability and Shares with Mark Vend
National:
Mark Vend:
ManuAvailAvailfacturer Product
Rank ability Share ability Share
Mars
Snickers
1
89
12.0
96
22.0
Mars
Peanut M&Ms
2
88
10.7
96
23.0
Mars
Twix Bar
3
67
7.7
79
13.0
Hershey Reeses Peanut Butter Cups
4
72
5.5
29
3.7
Mars
Three Musketeers
5
57
4.3
34
4.3
Mars
Plain M&Ms
6
65
4.2
47
6.4
Mars
Starburst
7
38
3.9
16
1.0
Mars
Skittles
8
43
3.9
77
6.5
Nestle
Butterfinger
9
52
3.2
33
2.7
Hershey Hershey with Almond
10
39
3.0
0
0
Nestle
Raisinets
>45
N/R N/R
78
8.9
Notes: National Rank, Availability and Share refers to total US sales for the 12 weeks ending May 14, 2000,
reported by Management Science Associates, Inc., at http://www.allaboutvending.com/studies/study2.htm,
accessed on June 18, 2014. National figures not reported for Raisinets because they are outside of the 45
top-ranked products. By manufacturer, the national shares of the top 45 products (from the same source)
are: Mars 52.0%, and Hershey 20.5%. For Mark Vend, shares are: Mars 80.0%, Hershey 8.5% (calculations
by authors). Mark Vend averages 6.86 confection facings per machine.

Table
Snickers
Peanut M&Ms*
Twix Caramel*
Assorted Pretzel/Popcorn
Assorted Nuts*
Assorted Fruit Snack*
Focal (-535.0)
Top 5 (539.9)
Total (-216.8)

2: Top 5 Substitutes (Based on Vends)
Peanut M&Ms
Both
Snickers*
Assorted Chocolate*
Assorted Pretzel/Popcorn* Twix Caramel*
Assorted Nuts*
Reese’s Peanut Butter Cups*
Twix Caramel*
Assorted Pastry*
Plain M&Ms*
Plain M&Ms*
Focal (-605.5)
Focal (-782.7)
Top 5 (494.3)
Top 5 (468.6)
Total (-197.6)
Total (-282.7)

Notes: Asterisks indicate a statistically significant increase in sales during the treatment period (vs. the
control period) at the 95% level.

41

Table 3: Downstream Profit Impact
Before Rebate
After Rebate
Exogenous
Difference In: T-Stat Difference In: T-Stat
Removal
Vends Obs Margin Profit of Diff Margin Profit of Diff
Snickers
-216.82 109
0.39 -56.75
-2.87
0.24 -73.26
-4.33
Peanut M&Ms -197.58 115
0.78 -10.74
-0.58
0.51 -39.37
-2.48
Double
-282.66
89
1.67 -4.54
-0.27
1.01 -54.87
-3.72
Notes: Calculations by authors, using exogenous product removals from the field experiment.

Table 4: Upstream (Manufacturer) Profits

Exogenous Removal
Snickers
Peanut M&Ms
Snickers + Peanut M&Ms

% Born by Mars
Before
After
Mars Hershey Nestle Other
Rebate Rebate
-26.37
5.89 19.32 -20.26
31.7% 11.9%
-68.38
32.76 11.78 -9.36
86.4% 50.2%
-130.81
61.43 20.22 37.10
96.7% 59.5%

Notes: Calculations by authors, using exogenous product removals from the field experiment. The ‘% Born
by Mars Before Rebate’ reports the percentage of the total cost of a product removal that is born by Mars,
shout accounting for the rebate payment to the retailer. ‘% Born by Mars After Rebate’ is equivalently
defined.

Table 5: Random Coefficients Demand Model

σSalt
σSugar
σP eanut
# Fixed Effects ξt
LL
BIC
AIC

Parameter
0.506
[.006]
0.673
[.005]
1.263
[.037]
15,256
-4,372,750
8,973,960
8,776,165

Estimates
0.458
[.010]
0.645
[.012]
1.640
[.028]
2,710
-4,411,184
8,863,881
8,827,939

Notes: The random coefficients estimates correspond to the choice probabilities described in section 4,
equation 3. Both specifications include 73 product fixed effects. Total sales are 2,960,315.

42

Table 6: Products Used in Counterfactual Analyses
‘Typical Machine’ Stocks:
Confections:
Peanut M&Ms
Plain M&Ms
Snickers
Twix Caramel
Raisinets
Cookie:
Strawberry Pop-Tarts
Oat ’n Honey Granola Bar
Grandma’s Chocolate Chip Cookie
Chocolate Chip Famous Amos
Raspberry Knotts
Other:
Ritz Bits
Ruger Vanilla Wafer
Kar Sweet & Salty Mix
Farley’s Mixed Fruit Snacks
Planter’s Salted Peanuts
Zoo Animal Cracker Austin

Salty Snacks:
Rold Gold Pretzels
Snyders Nibblers
Ruffles Cheddar
Cheez-It Original
Frito
Dorito Nacho
Cheeto
Smartfood
Sun Chip
Lays Potato Chips
Baked Lays
Munchos Potato Chips
Hot Stuff Jays

Notes: These products form the base set of products for the ‘typical machine’ used in the counterfactual
exercises. For each counterfactual exercise, two additional products are added to the confections category,
which vary with the product assortment selected for analysis.

Table 7: Summary of Sales and Revenues for Four Clusters of Machines
Group Size
A
B
C
D

4
7
27
28

Vends/Visit
Mean S.D.
39.0 26.1
88.9 39.5
56.9 31.5
71.6 33.8

Revenue/Visit
Mean
S.D.
28.3
18.7
70.6
33.4
41.5
23.2
54.3
26.8

Avg Sales/Day
Mean
S.D.
5.8
1.4
24.9
3.0
9.2
1.4
15.1
2.0

Notes: The 66 machines in our analyses are divided into four groups of machines based on the arrival rate and
the amount of revenue collected at a service visit, using a k-means clustering algorithm. Our counterfactual
analyses are based on cluster D.

43

Table 8: Stocking Policies (Restock after how many expected sales?)
Additional Products Stocked*:
Reeses PB Cup (H), 3 Musketeers (M)
Reeses PB Cup (H), Payday (H)
3 Musketeers (M), Milkyway (M)
Reeses PB Cup (H), Butterfinger (N)
Butterfinger (N), Crunch (N)

Retailer
-Pre
267
263
264
263
257

Retailer
-Post
261
257
259
257
251

Integrated
244
237
243
238
232

Industry
247
241
244
241
234

Retail
Understock
9.4%
11.0%
8.6%
10.5%
10.8%

Rebate
Increase
2.2%
2.3%
1.9%
2.3%
2.3%

Notes: The five base products are: Snickers, Peanut M&Ms, Twix, Plain M&Ms (Mars), and Raisinets
(Nestle). Manufacturers are denoted as (H) for Hershey’s, (N) for Nestle, and (M) for Mars. ‘Retail
understock’ reports (Retail-Pre - Integrated)/Integrated.

Table 9: Profits under Alternate Product Assortments and Stocking Policies
Policy

Retail
(No Reb.)

Rebate

Mars

Hershey

Nestle

Integrated

Industry

(H,M) Assortment: Reeses Peanut Butter Cup and Three Musketeers
Retailer-Pre (267)
36,399
1,875
11,719
1,302
1,260
48,117
50,679
Retailer-Post (261)
36,394
1,882
11,763
1,299
1,257
48,157
50,713
Integrated (244)
36,335
1,899
11,871
1,290
1,249
48,206
50,744
(H,H) Assortment: Reeses Peanut Butter Cup and Payday
Retailer-Pre (263)
Retailer-Post (257)
Integrated (237)
Retailer-Pre (264)
Retailer-Post (259)
Integrated (243)

36,661
1,609
36,656
1,617
36,578
1,640
(M,M) Assortment:
36,090
36,086
36,035

2,091
2,096
2,111

Consumer
Utility
21,685
21,752
21,911

10,055
2,173 1,285 46,716
10,106
2,167
1,282
46,762
10,251
2,149
1,272
46,829
Three Musketeers and Milkyway

50,174
50,211
50,250

20,845
20,914
21,102

13,067
13,101
13,195

50,412
50,441
50,476

21,080
21,136
21,289

0
0
0

1,256
1,254
1,246

49,156
49,187
49,230

Notes: Profit numbers represent the long-run expected profit from a single machine in Group D. Each panel
represents one of the product assortments in table 8.

44

Table 10: Potential Competitive Responses (Comparison is (H,H) Pre-Rebate)
Threshold

> 11,912
< 13,101
(M,M)
Retailer-Post
1,521
950
-2,173
-31
-652
291
267
12.83
5.27%

Assortment
Policy
∆ Retail Profit
∆ Mars Revenue
∆ Hershey Revenue
∆ Nestle Revenue
∆ Retailer+Hershey
∆ Consumer Utility
∆ Industry Profit
Price to Avoid Exclusion
Rebate Reduction (c = .15)

= 13,195
(M,M)
Integrated
1,485
1,029
-2,173
-39
-688
444
302
13.54
3.53%

Notes: Comparisons are to the retailer’s ‘Pre-Rebate’ optimal stocking policy and (H,H) assortment. Results refer to the
long-run impacts for a single machine in Group D. The small changes to Nestle’s profit result from changes in the retailer effort
level (i.e., Retailer-Post or Integrated effort vs. Pre-Rebate for the (H,H) assortment). Hershey’s price is 42.75 cents per unit.

Table 11: Potential Efficiency Gains from Vertically-Integrated Stocking Decisions
Policy Change
∆ Retail
∆ Mars
∆ Mars + Retailer
∆ Hershey
∆ Nestle
∆ Producer Surplus
%∆ Consumer Utility

(M,M)
8.6%
-55
128
73
-10
64
0.99%

(H,M)
9.4%
-64
196
132
-12
-11
65
1.04%

(H,H)
11.0%
-83
196
113
-24
-13
76
1.23%

Notes: Calculations based on holding assortment fixed and measuring the welfare impact of moving from the ‘Retailer-Pre’
row to the ‘Integrated’ row in table 9. Policy Change refers to the percentage change in restocking frequency that results from
changing from a Retailer-Pre policy to an Integrated policy, and is also reported in table 8.

Table 12: Linear Pricing vs. AUD (Assortment is (M,M))
Threshold
Restocking Policy
Retail Profit (including rebate)
Mars Profit
Nestle Profit
Consumer Utility

Post-Rebate
>11,912
259
38,182
11,005
1,254
21,136

Integrated
=13,195
243
38,146
11,084
1,246
21,289

Linear Pricing
=0
257
39,103
10,094
1,253
21,158

Notes: The optimal wholesale price under linear pricing is estimated to be 41.36 cents per unit. Hershey is excluded in the
(M,M) assortment for all three arrangements, and earns zero profit. The small changes in Nestle’s profits are due to the effect
of changes in the retailer’s choice of restocking policy on the sales of Raisinets.

45

Table 13: Profits after Mars-Hershey Merger
Policy

Retail Rebate
Mars/ Nestle
Inte- Industry Consumer
(No Reb.)
Hershey
grated
Utility
(H,M) Assortment: Reeses Peanut Butter Cup and Three Musketeers
Retailer-Pre (267)
36,399
2,083
13,021
1,260
49,419
50,679
21,685
Retailer-Post (262)
36,395
2,089
13,055 1,257 49,451
50,708
21,741
Integrated (245)
36,340
2,105
13,155 1,249 49,496
50,745
21,903
(N,N) Assortment: Butterfinger and Crunch
Retailer-Pre (257)
36,594
1,631
10,193 2,707 46,787
49,494
19,430
Retailer-Post (251)
36,589
1,639
10,246
2,700
46,835
49,535
19,502
Integrated (232)
36,514
1,662
10,386
2,681
46,900
49,581
19,687
Notes: Profit numbers represent the long-run expected profit from a single machine in Group D. The two
panels represent the two product assortments that offer the greatest potential retailer profit under different
stocking policies and rebate payments.

Table 14: Comparison under Alternate Ownership Structures
AUD Assortment
Alternative
Policy
∆ Retail
∆ Mars
∆ Bilateral
∆ Competitor
∆ Retailer + Competitor
∆ Consumer Surplus
∆ Industry
Price to Avoid Exclusion
Rebate Reduction (c = 0.15)

No Merger
(M,M)
(H,H)
Integrated
1,485
1,029
2,514
-2,173
-688
444
302
13.54
3.5%

M-H Merger
(H,M)
(N,N)
Integrated
1,851
857
2,708
-1,458
393
2,473
1,251
n/a
42.3%

M-N Merger
(M,M)
(H,H)
Integrated
1,689
785
2,474
-2,173
-484
436
302
9.52
12.1%

H-N Merger
(M,M)
(H,H)
Integrated
1,485
1,029
2,514
-2,212
-727
444
302
14.05
2.3%

Notes: Table compares the welfare impacts of an exclusive Mars stocking policy under alternative ownership
structures. This assumes threshold is set at the vertically-integrated level in order to maximize efficiency
gains.

46

Appendix
A.1: Retailer Choice of Product Assortment
Even the simple problem faced by the retailer in (1) can be extremely challenging to solve.
Begin by profiling out the optimal effort level conditional on e(a), so that the retailer chooses
a vector a with elements aj to solve:
max πR (a, e(a)) − c(e(a)) s.t.
a

X

aj ≤ k

with aj ∈ {0, 1}.

j

This is a binary integer programming problem, and it is quite challenging because there

are Jk possible product assortments to consider. Even in the case where π(a) − c(a) is a
linear function of the vector a, the problem reduces to the “Knapsack Problem” and is NPhard. Once we allow for substitutes or complements in the profit function, only brute-force
solutions exist. This means that for each possible a, we must solve a dynamic programming
problem for retailer effort and calculate profits. For the case in which the retailer chooses

seven products to stock from a set of 12, or 12
, there are 792 possible combinations that
7
73
must be considered.
In order to illustrate the role that an AUD plays in a retailer’s choice of product assortment, this section instead provides a numerical example in which an AUD contract can be
used to achieve exclusion. In order to keep the example simple, we recast the retailer’s effort
decision as a capacity constraint (i.e., higher capacity is equivalent to greater retailer effort).
This allows us to gain insight into the potential of an AUD contract to induce exclusion
through the retailer’s choice of product assortment using a static model. If the efficiency
gains from an AUD contract are relatively small, this intuition should mimic the results of
the dynamic model of retailer effort.
The intuition is captured by considering the situation in which M sells two products
(products 1 and 3) and offers an AUD, and N sells a single product (product 2) under a
simple linear price. We assume both upstream firms face production costs of zero, and sell
73

To avoid considering all possible combinations, we consider several heuristics in our empirical work. One
useful heuristic is the “greedy heuristic” where the retailer adds the next most profitable product in each slot.
In order of profitability of Mars products, the ranking is (Peanut M&Ms, Snickers, Twix, Plain M&Ms, 3
Musketeers, Milkyway, Skittles). We do not present results that consider removing Peanut M&Ms, Snickers,
Twix, Plain M&Ms, or Raisinets from the choice set. In practice, we consider robustness to replacing Plain
M&Ms or Raisinets, although we do not present those results because they
 are always strictly worse than
the ones we do report. This implies the retailer’s decision is over only 72 = 21 alternatives, which is much
more manageable. We report only the best alternatives among those 21 in table 8.

47

their products to the downstream firm at wholesale prices of (wM , wH ) (i.e., M sells products
1 and 3 at the same wholesale price). We also assume that the downstream firm chooses two
products to stock (i.e., [1,2], [2,3], or [1,3]), sets a single price p for all products, and faces a
per-product capacity constraint r, which is equal for all products.
Consumers choose a single product from the pair of products stocked by the downstream
firm, or the outside good (product 0). Each consumer has a preference ranking over two
of the four possible products (e.g., a consumer’s preference ranking might be [1,3], or [2,0],
etc.), which determine his type. No consumer in the market ranks the outside good first. If
a consumer’s first-choice product is not available, he chooses his second-choice product. If
neither the first- or second-choice product is available, the consumer exits the market. We
choose the distribution of consumer types so that demand is strongest for product 1 and
weakest for product 3, and we allow for random consumer arrivals. Consumer arrivals are
selected for the whole population with replacement, so demand is stochastic.74
The choice variables are: wM , and the threshold and discount terms for the AUD, qM
and ∆, (for firm M), wN (for firm N), and a (for the downstream firm). We are interested
in the conditions under which the AUD prompts the downstream firm to drop product 2 in
favor of product 3 (i.e., to contract exclusively with firm M ), and the welfare implications
of this decision. We generate random arrivals of 100 consumers with replacement, setting p
equal to $1, wM equal to $0.40, wN equal to $0.20, ∆ equal to $0.15, and the AUD threshold
equal to 65. We assume production costs are zero, and we examine the outcome of the model
under two different retail capacity constraints: 45 units for each product, or 65 units for each
product. We simulate the model 100,000 times to account for differences in outcomes based
on the random ordering of consumers and the stochasticity of demand.
The results of the model are shown in Table 15. Under either capacity, the rebate is paid
if and only if the retailer exclusively sells M ’s products [1, 3]. Thus, even in the presence of
stochastic demand, the AUD can be used to obtain exclusivity. Under either capacity, the
profits of the retail firm and firm M are higher under the exclusive arrangement 74%(99.4%)
of the time for the retailer under low(high) capacity, and 99.5%(85.4%) of the time for firm
M for the low(high) capacity. The retailer prefers the exclusive arrangement less than 1% of
the time in the absence of the AUD. Given the nature of demand and the expected profits
of R and M , both firms would have an incentive to agree to an AUD contract that led to
de-facto exclusivity.
74

Random selection of consumers without replacement implies deterministic demand, although realized
sales may vary based on arrival order and capacity.

48

However, the two capacities yield different predictions for total (industry-level) sales. In
the low capacity case (first column), total sales under the non-exclusive stocking arrangement
[1, 2] exceed sales under the exclusive [1, 3] about 66% of the time, and are lower about 26%
of the time. In the high capacity case, the results are flipped, with higher sales under
the exclusive arrangement [1, 3] about 66% of the time. We note that prices and costs are
the same across products (and the marginal cost of production is zero), so total sales are
equivalent to overall industry profits. Thus, for the low-capacity case, the non-exclusive
arrangement maximizes industry profits about two-thirds of the time, while in the highcapacity case the exclusive arrangement maximizes industry profits about two-thirds of the
time. Thus, whether or not the exclusion that results from the AUD maximizes industry
profits depends on whether the impact of retail capacity on realized sales is complementary
or substitutable across upstream firms.
A.2: Comparison with Other Contracts
One may consider how the AUD rebate contract compares to other potential contracts. We
consider the four most likely alternatives to the AUD: a purely linear wholesale price (LP),
a two-part tariff (2PT), a quantity-forcing contract (QF), and a quantity discount (QD). We
focus primarily on the efficiency aspect, holding fixed the set of products a. This section is
expositional, and does not present any original theoretical results.
Throughout our analysis we assume that retail prices are fixed. Following the previous
section, we consider the problem of the retailer as trading off variable profit πR (a, e) and
cost of effort c(e):
max πR (a, e) − c(e).
a,e

For the purpose of comparison, we note that the vertically-integrated firm M-R would maximize the joint variable profits of the retailer and the dominant upstream manufacturer:
max πR (a, e) − c(e) + πM (a, e).
a,e

With probability p(a, e) (which is increasing in R’s effort and the number of M ’s products
contained in a), M pays R a transfer t(a, e):
max πR (a, e) − c(e) + p(a, e)t(a, e).
a,e

49

(8)

In the absence of vertical restraints, and holding the product assortment, a, fixed, the retailer
0
sets the value of e too low: πR0 (e) = c0 (e). The vertically-integrated firm would set πM
(e) +
0
0
πR (e) = c (e), and it is possible to implement the vertically-integrated effort level through
the probabilistic transfer payment from M to R if:
0
p0 (e)t(e) + p(e)t0 (e) = πM
(e).

One may now characterize different contracts. The 2PT achieves the integrated level of e
under the familiar sell-out contract, in which M charges a fixed fee and sells at marginal
0
cost: t0 (e) = πM
(e) with p(e) = 1 and t < 0.75 The QD contract can only achieve the
0
integrated level of effort if t0 (e) = πM
(e) (i.e., M sells at marginal cost). To illustrate, note
that if e denotes the level of effort for which qM is achieved, t(e) = 0 by the continuity of
the QD contract. Thus, the effect of the QD contract comes completely through marginal
cost, because the threat of failing to reach the threshold has no impact on retailer profit.
The same is true of the linear wholesale price contract, LP.76 The AUD has a positive value
of t(e), because it is able to leverage all previous sales (rather than only the marginal unit);
thus, the threat of not paying the rebate p0 (e) has bite. This means the upstream firm need
0
(e) − t0 (e) > 0.77 The QF contract
not give up all of her profit on the margin, so that πM
allows M to offer a contract that requires the integrated level of effort, through qM . The
only difference between the AUD and the QF contract arises from the fact that the AUD
allows a linear schedule both before and after qM , which means the AUD is more flexible
when there is uncertainty about downstream demand. In the absence of this uncertainty,
the AUD mimics a QF contract.78
75

The challenge of the 2PT is that the upstream firm M must determine the appropriate fixed fee t(0).
Kolay, Shaffer, and Ordover (2004) shows that a menu of AUD contracts may be a more effective tool in
price discriminating across retailers than a menu of 2PTs. Of course, in the absence of uncertainty an
individually-tailored 2PT enables full extraction by M , but is a likely violation of the Robinson-Patman
Act.
76
For the setting in which rebate contracts are not allowed and firms are required to offer linear wholesale
prices, solving for optimal prices is difficult, because the solution depends both on the effort of the downstream
retailer, and the endogenous product assortment, neither of which needs to be a smooth continuous function
of wholesale prices. For this reason our empirical work considers deviations from observed prices rather
than fully solving for a new equilibria in linear wholesale prices. The following section, A.3, provides further
discussion.
77
This leads O’Brien (2013) to show that an AUD contract can enhance efficiency under the double moralhazard problem (when the upstream firm also needs to provide costly effort such as advertising).
78
Chao and Tan (2013) explore connections between QF, AUD, and 3PT when a dominant manufacturer
faces a capacity-constrained rival.

50

A.3: Solving for Endogenous Linear Prices
Allowing for endogenous linear prices (even in the absence of rebates) is a challenging extension. In our setting, the retail price is fixed, and the retailer chooses a product assortment
by solving a binary integer programming problem. Even with two wholesale prices that are
the same across all of a manufacturer’s products (wM , wN ), this is a challenging problem.
The principle challenge is that small changes in one of the wholesale prices (e.g., wM ) can
result in discrete changes in the product assortment, and discontinuous jumps in upstream
profits. For Bertrand competition in homogeneous products, this results in the well-known
limit pricing result. With multiple differentiated products, this implies that First-Order
Conditions are not sufficient to characterize the equilibrium, and that many such equilibria
(or none at all) may exist.
When we report Mars’ wholesale price under a linear contract in section 5, we hold the
prices of competitors (Hershey and Nestle) fixed and solve for the optimal Mars price wM .
Even this simplified setting is challenging because Mars’ residual profit as a function of price
takes on a sawtooth form. Mars’ profit increases with the wholesale price, until the retailer
chooses to drop a Mars product in favor of a competitor’s product. There are potentially as
many peaks on the sawtooth as there are dropped Mars products. This is demonstrated in
figure 5.
A.4: Computing Treatment Effects
One goal of the exogenous product removals is to determine how product-level sales respond
to changes in availability. Let qjt denote the sales of product j in machine-week t, superscript
1 denote sales when a focal product(s) is removed, and superscript 0 denote sales when a
focal product(s) is available. Let the set of available products be A, and let F be the set of
P
P
1
0
products we remove. Thus, Q1t = j∈A\F qjt
and Q0s = j∈A qjs
are the overall sales during
P
0
0
treatment week t, and control week s respectively, and qf s = j∈F qjs
is the sales of the
1
0
removed products during control week s. Our goal is to compute ∆qjt = qjt
− E[qjt
], the
treatment effect of removing products(s) F on the sales of product j.
There are two challenges in implementing the removals and interpreting the data generated by them. The first challenge is that there is a large amount of variation in overall sales
at the weekly level, independent of our exogenous removals. This can be seen in figure 6,
which plots the overall sales of all machines in our sample on a weekly basis. For example, a
law firm may have a large case going to trial in a given month, and vend levels will increase
at the firm during that period. In our particular setting, many of the product removals were
51

done during the summer of 2007, which was a high-point in demand at these sites, most
likely due to macroeconomic conditions. In this case, using a simple measure like previous
0
] could result in unreasonable treatment effects,
weeks’ sales, or overall average sales for E[qjt
such as sales increasing due to product removals, or sales decreasing by more than the sales
of the focal products.
In order to deal with this challenge, we impose two simple restrictions based on consumer
theory. Our first restriction is that our experimental product removals should not increase
overall demand, so that Q0t − Q1s ≥ 0 for treatment week t and control week s. Our second
restriction is that the product removal(s) should not reduce overall demand by more than
the sales of the products we removed, or Q0t − Q1s ≤ qf0s . This means we choose control weeks
s that correspond to treatment week t as follows:

{s : s 6= t, Q0t − Q1s ∈ [0, qf0s ]}.

(9)

While this has the nice property that it imposes the restriction on our selection of control
weeks that all products are weak substitutes, it has the disadvantage that it introduces the
potential for selection bias. The bias results from the fact that weeks with unusually high
sales of the focal product qf0s are more likely to be included in our control. This bias would
likely overstate the costs of the product removal, which would be problematic for our study.
We propose a slight modification of (9) which removes the bias. That is, we replace qf0s
0
0
0
with qc
f s = E[qf s |Qs ]. An easy way to obtain the expectation is to run an OLS regression
of qf0s on Q0s , at the machine level, and use the predicted value. This has the nice property
that the error is orthogonal to Q0s , which ensures that our choice of weeks is unbiased.
The second challenge is that, although the experimental design is relatively clean, the
product mix presented in a machine is not necessarily fixed across machines, or within a
machine over long periods of time, because we rely on observational data for the control
weeks. For example, manufacturers may change their product lines, or Mark Vend may
change its stocking decisions over time. Thus, while our field experiment intends to isolate
the treatment effect of removing Snickers, we might instead compute the treatment effect of
removing Snickers jointly with Mark Vend changing pretzel suppliers.
To mitigate this issue, we restrict our set of potential control weeks to those at the same
machine with similar product availability within the category of our experiment. In practice,
two of our three treatments took place during weeks where 3 Musketeers and Reese’s Peanut
Butter Cups were unavailable, so we restrict our set of potential control weeks for those
52

experiments to weeks where those products were also unavailable. We denote this condition
as As ≈ At .
We use our definition of control weeks s to compute the expected control sales that
correspond to treatment week t as:
St = {s : s 6= t, At ≈ As , Q0t − Q1s ∈ [0, bˆ0 + bˆ1 Q0s ]}.

(10)

And for each treatment week t we can compute the treatment effect as
1
∆qjt = qjt
−

1 X 0
q .
#St s∈S js

(11)

t

While this approach has the advantage that it generates substitution patterns consistent
with consumer theory, it may be the case that for some treatment weeks t the set of possible control weeks St = {∅}. Under this definition of the control, some treatment weeks
constitute ‘outliers’ and are excluded from the analysis. Of the 1470 machine-experimentweek combinations, 991 of them have at least one corresponding control week, and at the
machine-experiment level, 528 out of 634 have at least one corresponding control. Each
included treatment week has an average of 24 corresponding control weeks, though this can
vary considerably from treatment week to treatment week.79
Once we have constructed our restricted set of treatment weeks and the set of control
weeks that corresponds to each, inference is fairly straightforward. We use (11) to construct
a set of pseudo-observations for the difference, and employ a paired t-test.
A.5 Product-level Results of Exogenous Removal of Snickers and Peanut M&Ms
Table 16 reports the detailed product-level results of the joint Snickers-Peanut M&M removal.
Nearly 123 consumers substitute to other Assorted Chocolate products within the same
product category, representing an increase of 117%. This includes several products from
Mars (i.e., Milky Way and Three Musketeers), but also products from other manufacturers
(i.e., Nestle’s Butterfinger). Meanwhile, Raisinets (Nestle), a product that Mark Vend stocks
frequently, sees an increase in sales of only 17% when Snickers and Peanut M&Ms are
removed, indicating that Raisinets may not be a close competitor to the removed products.80
In contrast, 93 consumers substitute to Reese’s Peanut Butter Cups (an 85.6% increase in
79

Weeks in which the other five treatments were run (for the salty-snack and cookie categories) are excluded
from the set of potential control weeks.
80
Substitution to Raisinets is only 3.3% when Snickers is removed by itself.

53

sales for the Hershey product), which Mark Vend stocks much less frequently. This provides
some descriptive evidence that the rebate may lead Mark Vend to favor products that do
not steal business from the major Mars brands over better-selling products that do.
A.6 Results of Nested-Logit Demand Estimation
Table 17 reports the parameter estimates for the nested logit specification, which assumes
that (µijt + εijt ) is distributed generalized extreme value, so that the error terms allow for
correlation among products within a pre-specified group.81 In this model, consumers first
choose a product category l composed of products gl , and then choose a specific product j
within that group. The resulting choice probability for product j in market t is given by:
P
eδjt /λl ( k∈gl ∩at eδkt /λl )λl −1
P P
,
pjt (δ, λ, at ) =
δkt /λl )λl
k∈gl ∩at e
∀l (

(12)

where the parameter λl governs within-group correlation.82 Just as we do for the randomcoefficients logit model, we assume δjt = dj +ξt , and we use five nesting categories: Chocolate,
Non-chocolate Candy, Cookie/Pastry, Salty Snack, and Other. Estimation is via maximum
likelihood (ML) for the same two definitions of ξt used in the random-coefficients specification
of table 5.
A.7: Additional Merger Analyses
Table 18 considers the impact of a Mars-Nestle merger. Again, we set the wholesale price
of the Nestle products to Mars’ wholesale price after the merger. Mars acquires Raisinets,
which is nearly always stocked by the retailer, and which provides the merged firm with
additional profits to leverage. Substitutability between Mars’ products and Nestle’s products
(Butterfinger, Crunch, and Raisinets) is much lower than between the Hershey’s product,
Reeses Peanut Butter Cups, and Mars’ products, and unlike the Mars-Hershey merger, we
no longer achieve the industry-optimal choice of products in the retail market. We essentially
replicate the patterns from table 9, in which the rebate induces the retailer to stock (M,M)
instead of (H,H). Table 19 considers the impact of the Hershey-Nestle merger, and achieves
81

See McFadden (1978) and Train (2003).
Note that this is not the IV regression/‘within-group share’ presentation of the nested-logit model in
Berry (1994), in which σ provides a measure of the correlation of choices within a nest. Roughly speaking,
in the notation used here, λ = 1 corresponds to the plain logit, and (1 − λ) provides a measure of the
‘correlation’ of choices within a nest (as in McFadden (1978)). The parameter λ is sometimes referred to as
the ‘dissimiliarity parameter.’
82

54

similar results. The only exception is that the merged firm controls more brands and is a
somewhat stronger competitor to Mars.
Figure 5: Mars Profits as a Function of Price (Linear Pricing)
10000

9500

9000

8500

Mars Profit

8000

7500

7000

6500

6000

5500

5000
0.3

0.32

0.34

0.36

0.38

0.4
Mars Price

0.42

0.44

0.46

0.48

0.5

Notes: Reports Mars’ profit at different linear wholesale prices, holding fixed the wholesale prices of Hershey
and Nestle. The discontinuities reflect prices at which the retailer drops a Mars product from its assortment.

600

800

1000

1200

1400

1600

Figure 6: Overall Weekly Sales at Site 93

0

50

100

150

Week
TotalVends

(mean) totalvends

Notes: Figures calculated by authors, and represent all product categories in the machines (i.e., confections,
snack foods, cookies, and other).

55

Table 15: Results from Varying Capacity (Numerical Example)
Threshold q = 65
Market:
Total Sales([1,2]) > Total Sales([1,3])
Total Sales([1,2]) < Total Sales([1,3])
Total Sales([1,2]) = Total Sales([1,3])
Mean(Sales([1,2])-Sales([1,3]))
as percent of sales
Retailer:
Retailer prefers [1,2]
Retailer prefers [1,3], No Rebate
Retailer prefers [1,3]
Mean Retailer profit([1,2])
Mean Retailer profit([1,3]), No Rebate
Mean Retailer profit([1,3])
Firm M:
Firm M prefers [1,2]
Firm M prefers [1,3]
Mean Firm M profit under [1,2]
Mean Firm M profit under [1,3]
Firm M pays rebate under [1,2]
Firm M pays rebate under [1,3]
Firm N:
Mean Firm N profits under [1,2]

Capacity = 45

Capacity = 65

66.72%
26.49%
6.79%
2.92
3.36%

24.16%
66.59%
9.25%
-2.00
-2.17%

25.80%
0.33%
74.20%
60.41
50.36
62.88

0.61%
0.69%
99.39%
63.21
56.68
70.85

0.19%
99.55%
17.98
20.96
0%
100%

13.78%
85.43%
21.52
23.62
0%
100%

8.36

7.73

Notes: Under the assumed demand patterns, retailer always stocks product 1.

56

Table 16: Results from Snickers and Peanut M&Ms Joint Experiment
Product
Assorted Chocolate
Twix Caramel
Reese’s Peanut Butter Cups
Assorted Pastry
Plain M&Ms
Assorted Nuts
Assorted Cookie
Assorted Nonchocolate Candy
Assorted Chips
Raisinets
Choc Chip Famous Amos
Raspberry Knotts
Assorted Pretzel/Popcorn
Assorted Fruit Snack
Dorito Nacho
Assorted Baked Chips
Assorted Cracker
Sun Chips
Cheeto
Assorted Salty Snack
Assorted Energy
Zoo Animal Cracker Austin
Snickers
Peanut M&Ms
Total

Control
104.5
213.0
109.0
287.4
132.0
359.3
314.7
263.4
548.2
184.0
227.0
70.7
962.0
103.6
284.5
262.8
114.4
198.1
349.8
711.9
272.1
292.1
379.4
425.9
7,170.0

Treatment
227.8
313.3
202.2
374.2
196.9
415.8
359.3
301.1
585.6
215.9
241.2
79.7
969.8
107.7
282.6
255.8
93.3
174.6
325.7
678.1
229.0
235.0
13.2
9.4
6887.3

Change
123.2
100.3
93.3
86.9
64.9
56.6
44.6
37.7
37.4
31.9
14.1
8.9
7.8
4.1
-1.9
-7.0
-21.1
-23.5
-24.1
-33.9
-43.1
-57.1
-366.2
-416.5
-282.7

% Change
117.9
47.1
85.6
30.2
49.2
15.7
14.2
14.3
6.8
17.3
6.2
12.6
0.8
4.0
-0.7
-2.7
-18.5
-11.9
-6.9
-4.8
-15.8
-19.6
-96.5
-97.8
-3.9

Difference
1.79
1.43
1.23
1.16
1.18
0.73
0.51
0.45
0.43
0.44
0.16
0.11
0.09
0.06
-0.02
-0.08
-0.28
-0.29
-0.27
-0.38
-0.61
-0.64
-4.11
-4.68
-3.18

Notes: Control weeks are defined according to the procedure described in appendix A.4.

57

T-Stat
6.12
5.64
4.30
3.60
3.59
2.28
1.75
1.80
1.35
1.99
0.73
0.82
0.24
0.31
-0.10
-0.35
-1.18
-1.34
-1.38
-1.16
-1.90
-3.18
-16.00
-18.19
-12.07

Obs
69
70
76
75
55
78
88
83
87
73
89
79
89
71
89
88
75
80
89
89
71
89
89
89
89

Table 17: Nested Logit Estimates

λChocolate
λCandyN on−Choc
λCookie/P astry
λOther
λSaltySnack
# Fixed Effects ξt
LL
BIC
AIC

Parameter
0.828
[.003]
0.908
[.007]
0.845
[.004]
0.883
[.005]
0.720
[.003]
15,256
-4,372,147
8,972,783
8,774,962

Estimates
0.810
[.005]
0.909
[.009]
0.866
[.006]
0.894
[.006]
0.696
[.004]
2,710
-4,410,649
8,862,840
8,826,873

Notes: The nested logit estimates correspond to the choice probabilities described in section 4, equation 12.
Both specifications include 73 product fixed effects. Total sales are 2,960,315.

Table 18: Profits after Mars-Nestle Merger
Policy

Retail Rebate
Mars/ Hershey
Inte- Industry
(No Reb.)
Nestle
grated
Reeses Peanut Butter Cup (H), Three Musketeers (M)
Retailer-Pre (267)
36,399
2,077
12,978
1,302
49,377
50,679
Retailer-Post (262)
36,395
2,082
13,013
1,299
49,409
50,708
Integrated (245)
36,340
2,098
13,114
1,290
49,455
50,745
Reeses Peanut Butter Cup (H), Payday (H)
Retailer-Pre (263)
36,661
1,815
11,341
2,173
48,001
50,174
Retailer-Post (257)
36,656
1,822
11,388
2,167
48,045
50,211
Integrated (239)
36,591
1,842
11,511
2,151
48,102
50,253
Three Musketeers (M), Milkyway (M)
Retailer-Pre (264)
36,090
2,292
14,323
0
50,412
50,412
Retailer-Post (259)
36,086
2,297
14,354
0
50,441
50,441
Integrated (244)
36,040
2,310
14,436
0
50,476
50,476

Consumer
Surplus
21,685
21,741
21,903
20,845
20,914
21,086
21,080
21,136
21,281

Notes: Profit numbers represent the long-run expected profit from a single machine in Group D. The two
panels represent the two product assortments that offer the greatest potential retailer profit under different
stocking policies and rebate payments.

58

Table 19: Profits after Hershey-Nestle Merger
Policy

Retail Rebate
Mars Hershey/
Inte- Industry
(No Reb.)
Nestle
grated
Reeses Peanut Butter Cup (H), Three Musketeers (M)
Retailer-Pre (267)
36,399
1,875
11,719
2,562
48,117
50,679
Retailer-Post (261)
36,394
1,882
11,763
2,556
48,157
50,713
Integrated (244)
36,335
1,899
11,871
2,538
48,206
50,744
Reeses Peanut Butter Cup (H), Payday (H)
Retailer-Pre (263)
36,661
1,609 10,055
3,458 46,716
50,174
Retailer-Post (257)
36,656
1,617
10,106
3,449
46,762
50,211
Integrated (237)
36,578
1,640
10,251
3,421
46,829
50,250
Three Musketeers (M), Milkyway (M)
Retailer-Pre (264)
36,090
2,091
13,067
1,256
49,156
50,412
Retailer-Post (259)
36,086
2,096 13,101
1,254 49,187
50,441
Integrated (243)
36,035
2,111 13,195
1,246 49,230
50,476

Consumer
Surplus
21,685
21,752
21,911
20,845
20,914
21,102
21,080
21,136
21,289

Notes: Profit numbers represent the long-run expected profit from a single machine in Group D. The two
panels represent the two product assortments that offer the greatest potential retailer profit under different
stocking policies and rebate payments.

59

