NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EXCHANGE RATE DYNAMICS REVISITED
Jorge Braga de Macedo
Urho Lempinen
Working Paper 19718
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19718
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2013

This paper was written after a presentation in memory of Pentti Kouri held at the Bank of Finland
on 24 January, 2012 and earlier versions were presented at the Helsinki Center for Economic Research;
ETLA (Research Institute of the Finnish Economy) and the Bank of Finland. We are grateful to seminar
participants especially Pertti Haaparanta, Vesa Kanniainen, Vesa Vihriala and Seppo Honkapohja
for comments and to Maurice Obstfeld for discussions, with the usual caveat. The authors are with
Nova School of Business and Economics in Lisbon and CD Financial Technology in Helsinki respectively.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Jorge Braga de Macedo and Urho Lempinen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Exchange rate dynamics revisited
Jorge Braga de Macedo and Urho Lempinen
NBER Working Paper No. 19718
December 2013
JEL No. F31,F32
ABSTRACT
Many monetary and fiscal policy decision makers and economists hold the view that exchange rates
are volatile even though nominal exchange rates vary less than many other financial market prices
and yields. This paper seeks an explanation for this puzzle by contrasting exchange rate dynamics
in a general equilibrium model to those presented in Dornbusch (1976) and Kouri (1978). Kouri introduced
the "acceleration hypothesis'', according to which the rate of currency depreciation is given by the
ratio of the current account deficit to the sum of holdings of foreign assets by domestic agents and
holdings of domestic assets by foreign agents. In this paper, we derive the "generalized acceleration
hypothesis'', assuming price flexibility but imperfect substitutability of assets. A Kouri type gradual
adjustment of the current account induces stickiness in portfolio adjustments and exchange rate adjustment.
Uncertainty in the model arises from monetary policy and supply side shocks. Due to general equilibrium
constraints on wealth and investment behavior, the speed of adjustment is defined by the sum of speculative
(expectations sensitive) demand for foreign (domestic) assets by domestic (foreign) agents, deducted
by the stock of domestic assets traded out by domestic residents. The adjustment speed is then higher
and the market correction mechanism through the current account stronger. The model developed
in this paper includes the three key channels of external adjustment of an economy: the capital account
or portfolio allocation channel as applied by Kouri (and also by Dornbusch, although under perfect
substitutability of assets), the current account channel as applied by Kouri and the asset valuation channel
as applied in Gourinchas & Rey (2007). In a linearized testing environment, we study three different
cases of exchange rate dynamics. Sampling 10 000 continuous time paths of Monte Carlo simulations
for 30 years, and using the 90% variation range as the metric, the Dornbusch formulation yields a 200%
variation range about the mean, reduced to 100% in the Kouri case and to 20% in the general equilibrium
case.
Jorge Braga de Macedo
Nova School of Business and Economics
Campus Campolide
1099-032 Campolide, Lisboa
Portugal
and NBER
jbmacedo@fe.unl.pt
Urho Lempinen
CD Financial Technology Ltd. .
Aikatalo, Mikonkatu 8 00100 Helsinki
Finland
Tel: +358 9 612 3322. Fax: +358 9 278 2335
urho.lempinen@cdgroup.fi

1

Introduction

A common paradigm among many monetary and fiscal policy decision makers and
economists has been that exchange rates tend to be rather volatile. This paradigm
has its roots in open economy macroeconomics. In the mainstream literature the
volatility of real exchange rates is often benchmarked against the volatility of inflation
indices. The latter volatilities are typically found very low whereby real exchange rate
variations appear relatively very high.
On the other hand if nominal exchange rate variations are benchmarked against
variations of financial market prices and yields, the former appear to be relatively very
moderate if not even low. When estimating standard deviations of yields on currency
holdings of a number of currency pairs we find that both in several years long periods
before and after the introduction of the euro currency average standard deviations
were all within the range of 9-12 per cent in annual terms. Turbulent high volatility
periods were clearly observable in the data but those appeared to be smoothed out
by market correction mechanism rather fast. The introduction of the euro does not
make any practical diﬀerence in the results. In financial market terms such standard
deviations (or in market jargon volatilities) are rather low to the extent that only
money market and up to medium term fixed income investments have significantly
lower volatilities. In many countries e.g. household real estate and stock investments
are considerably more risky than open currency exposures. Yet hedging possibilities
of currency exposures are typically much better than those of real estate (and most
other) investments.
High volatilities of exchange rates has also been one of the key arguments in favor
of the European financial integration and in establishing the eurozone. However, if
volatilities of exchange rates are moderate or low and the respective exposures can
be hedged by private sector entities if desired, the weight of such an argument is
correspondingly diminished1 .
In the literature the still dominating model of exchange rate behavior is the one
presented by Rudiger Dornbusch in his seminal (1976) contribution. Currently the
Dornbusch model is more broadly seen as an extension of the Mundell-Fleming model.
1

This has been noted since Frenkel and Mussa (1980) and Bergstrand (1983), both quoted in
Obstfeld (1985), who also drew our attention to Sercu and Upall (2006).

1

The fundamental intuition in the Dornbusch partial equilibrium model is that only
capital account adjustments matter in explaining exchange rate variations. This result
relies on assumptions of the quantity equation and gradually adjusting price levels,
and on perfect substitutability of domestic and foreign assets. With no correction
mechanism possibly introduced through current account adjustments the Dornbusch
model predicts a strong possibility of exchange rate overshooting and rather high
volatilities of exchange rates at least in speculation driven market conditions.
As a Ph.D. student of Dornbusch’s, Pentti Kouri in his July 1975 dissertation
introduced the view of the exchange rate as a variable determined by the capital
account of the balance of payments in the short run and by the current account in
the long run2 . In 1978 he wrote “The balance of payments and the foreign exchange
market: a dynamic partial equilibrium model”, where he introduced the “acceleration
hypothesis”, arguing that, in the absence of central bank intervention, international
capital flows must be financed by appropriate current account flows. This implies that
the exchange rate must adjust so that in the equilibrium both capital flows and current
account flows must be equal 3 . Furthermore, it implies that, without introducing any
external price rigidity, but due to imperfect substitutability of assets and the flow
nature of components of the current account, exchange rate adjustment is gradual.
In the Kouri model current account adjustments smooth exchange rate variations
relative to the Dornbusch model. However, in some of Kouri’s own demonstrating
calculations and some empirical work the smoothing eﬀect is so weak that it may well
take 30 years before the new stationary state is achieved. This implies that the Kouri
quantitative implications are not much diﬀerent from those of Dornbusch.
2

The first essay, presented at the Stockholm conference on Flexible Exchange Rates and Stabilization Policy in August 1975, became Kouri (1976a), one of his most influential papers see de
Macedo and Lempinen (2011, p. 15, 32, 45). The fourth essay, which had been presented at the 1974
Wingspread conference became Kouri (1976c) and was published in a volume edited by Bob Aliber.
It is relevant for our work because it uses stochastic calculus
3
Kouri (1978) is a revision of Kouri(1976b), see de Macedo and Lempinen (2011, p. 29, 275).Obstfeld (2004) states that the Gourinchas and Rey (2007) "are also consistent with models of home
currency portfolio bias, as embodied in the portfolio balance models of the 1970s developed by Branson, Henderson, Kouri and others-all inspired by Tobin’s seminal 1969 general equilibrium model of
monetary policy" and notes that “Economists devoted considerable eﬀort to the microfoundations of
the portfolio balance model, but they moved on to other more tractable issues after the mid-1980s,
with the 1985 Handbook survey of Branson and Henderson (1985) a high-water mark (and to a large
extent a terminus) of that earlier research eﬀort”.

2

In celebrating the 25th anniversary of the Dornbusch paper, Rogoﬀ (2002, p.18)
mentions that empirically “current account dynamics can have large medium term
impacts on real exchange rates” and that this “is perhaps no less important than
the connection between monetary expansion and real exchange rates highlighted by
the Dornbusch model”. He underlines this with graphs showing the correlations in
Thailand, Korea, Indonesia and Mexico in the 1990s as well as the United States,
Japan and the United Kingdom. Except for this last case, he believes that “the
wealth channel was quite important” and integrates the two models, with the Kouri
(1975) mechanism being “central to the long run change in the real exchange rate”
(p.19)4 .
Blanchard, Giavazzi and Sa (2005) build on “an old (largely and unjustly forgotten) set of papers” who “relax the interest parity condition and assume instead
imperfect substitutability of domestic and foreign assets”. They add in footnote 1 that
there were two fundamental papers written in 1976, one by Dornbusch, who explored
the implications of perfect substitutability, the other by Kouri, who explored the implications of imperfect substitutability. “The Dornbusch approach, and its powerful
implications, has dominated research since then. But imperfect substitutability seems
central to the issues we face today”5 .
In his survey of current account imbalances, Obstfeld (2012) warns against a complete markets or “consenting adults” view of the world: “current account imbalances,
while very possibly warranted by fundamentals and welcome, can also signal elevated
macroeconomic and financial stresses, as was arguably the case in the mid-2000”. He
adds that valuation changes in net international investment positions, “while possibly
important in risk allocation, cannot be relied upon systematically to oﬀset the changes
in national wealth implied by the current account”6 .
4

Other parts are quoted in de Macedo and Lempinen (2011, p. 16-17), including the “unified
model” in Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ (1995).
5
As stated in Rey (2005), the portfolio balance model in Blanchard et al. (2005) draws “on the
work of Pentti Kouri, Stanley Black, Dale Henderson and Kenneth Rogoﬀ, and William Branson in
the 1980s to model jointly the dynamics of the current account and of the exchange rate, allowing
for imperfect substitutability between assets and for (some) valuation eﬀects”. This follows the line
quoted in note 2 above and de Macedo and Lempinen (2011, p. 15-21).
6
Obstfeld (2012) continues: “Thus, Germany itself experienced neither a current account deficit
nor a housing boom in the 2000s, yet flows from German banks to economies that did display
those symptoms led to problems later on. Unfortunately, the ways in which gross financial positions propagated the recent global crisis across borders became obvious only after the fact”.He also

3

At the other extreme of the quantitative implications of Dornbusch and Kouri is
the famous Lucas (1982) complete markets model in which flexible prices, identical
agents and instantaneously adjusting stocks are assumed and in which the exchange
rate does not vary and can be normalized to unity 7 .
In this paper we first develop a general equilibrium two-country model where we
let representative agents, monetary policies, endowments and productivity processes
diﬀer. Following Dornbusch, domestic price levels and inflation rates are determined
by quantity equations in the two countries. No price rigidities are introduced in the
model in any other way than the ones potentially caused by assumptions of flow nature of the components of the current account and the imperfect substitutability of
domestic and foreign assets, as in Kouri. The set-up allows us to analyze the impact of
a variety of factors on exchange rate adjustment. These factors include consumption
and investment behavior, saving and spending patterns, monetary policies, productivity processes and relative size of the two countries. Sections 2 through 6 build the
general equilibrium model from the partial equilibrium one and compare key results
with those of the Kouri partial equilibrium framework. In the latter the rate of change
of the exchange rate is proportional to the ratio of current account deficit to the sum
of holdings of foreign assets by domestic residents and holdings of domestic assets by
foreign residents.
According to the “generalized acceleration hypothesis”, the acceleration coeﬃcient
is smaller and adjustment speed therefore higher than in the small open economy partial equilibrium framework. Specifically, speed of adjustment is not defined by the sum
of total holdings of foreign assets by domestic residents and total holdings of domestic
assets by foreign residents, but by the sum of the speculative (expectations sensitive)
holdings of foreign (domestic) assets by domestic (foreign) residents deducted by the
stock of domestic assets traded out by domestic residents in exchange for the corresponding stock of foreign assets. In the model developed in this paper, the external
adjustment of an economy and the exchange rate is then determined through three
channels: the capital account channel (portfolio allocation adjustments as in Kouri),
quotes in that connection Gourinchas and Rey (2007) and Devereux and Sutherland (2010). On the
center/periphery schism in the Euro Zone, see de Macedo and Lempinen (2012).
7
The influence of Kouri in Lucas (1978) is mentioned in Rossi and Sajari (2011, .p. 42): “It
turned out to be one of my most popular papers. I wrote to Pentti and asked if he wanted to be the
co-author of the paper, but he didn’t seem that interested. A generous guy, I guess.”

4

current account adjustments as in Kouri and Gourinchas & Rey (2007), and through
valuation adjustments as in Gourinchas & Rey.
As it turns out, general equilibrium constraints on wealth and investment behavior
reflect to a substantial degree the stylized facts of liquid foreign exchange markets
reported above. These are demonstrated by Monte Carlo simulations reported and
discussed in Section 7. A strong correction mechanism of the exchange rates through
the current account implies that market disturbances originating in underlying shocks
or in capital flows may be smoothed out faster than thought possible. This is contrary
to the made up image of foreign exchange market volatility among practitioners 8 .

2

The Kouri Partial Equilibrium Model and Key
Results

Kouri (1978) specifies a two country model for demand and supply of foreign exchange
under certainty and under conditions in which the central banks of the two countries
do not intervene in the foreign exchange market. Consequently the supply of foreign
exchange in the market must be financed by changes in holdings of foreign assets or
by imbalances in the current account. The short term equilibrium in the Kouri model
(eq. (14) in Kouri (1978); using the same notation as in the model to be introduced
in the following section 3 and leaving out autonomous factors driving asset and goods
demand for simplicity) is defined by the following condition:
(1)(   + ) − ( −   ) ∗ =   =   = 0 − 0 
where
 =nominal rate of return on domestic assets in domestic currency
 = nominal rate of return on foreign assets in foreign currency
= expected rate of change in the domestic currency price of foreign currency
 =domestic marketable wealth in domestic currency
 ∗ =foreign marketable wealth in foreign currency
=domestic currency price of foreign exchange
8

The discussion of Michael Mussa’s paper by Jacob Frenkel, Dornbusch and Kouri at the 1983
Bellagio conference is summarized in de Macedo and Lempinen (2011, p. 17), together with a recent
endorsement of “Rudi Dornbusch’s classic overshooting analysis” model by Paul Krugman (ibid.
note 1).

5

 ()=domestic (foreign) demand functions for foreign (domestic) assets
 =net foreign assets (supply and demand)
0 (0 ) are initial domestic (foreign) holdings of foreign exchange
The equilibrium condition simply states that in the absence of central bank intervention the diﬀerence between demand for foreign assets by domestic agents and
demand for domestic assets by foreign agents must equal the diﬀerence of respective
initial stocks of assets, all denominated in foreign currency.
Eq. (1) only defines equilibrium in a steady state. Over time foreign currency
values of assets, due to capital gains and losses, will change when the exchange rate
changes. Simultaneously the current account will adjust. Kouri postulates in eq. (16)
the following dynamical balance of payments equilibrium condition (again leaving out
autonomous determinants of the current account):
1
= −()
(2) ≡ ( ∗ + ) 
 
where
 = net outflow of capital
 = current account surplus
Kouri solves the equation for the rate of change of the exchange rate, obtaining
the famous ”acceleration equation” (eq. (17)):
1
= −(; )(  +  ∗ ) ≡ −(; ) ;  is the Kouri acceleration
(3) 
 
coeﬃcient
Eq. (3) states that the rate of depreciation (appreciation) of the exchange rate
is equal to the ratio of the current account deficit (surplus) to the sum of domestic
holdings of foreign assets and foreign holdings of domestic assets. Note that Kouri
abstracts away from any autonomous factors potentially driving the exchange rate,
such as diﬀerences in monetary policies and growth rates. He also assumes wealth
levels W and W* insensitive to potential changes in exchange rates, given portfolio
allocations. The two factors together imply that current account imbalances simply
drive portfolio re-allocations based on exchange rate expectations in the model.
Note also that stickiness in exchange rate adjustment in eq. (3) is due to the
fact that the current account surplus is specified as a flow, which can most easily be
seen in eq. (2). This is a very natural specification as it simply states that material
transfers of goods and services between countries take time and that e.g. 5 % of
GDP cannot be transferred across the border in a split second. In the Kouri portfolio
6

balance approach the core of gradual adjustments is in the flow specification of the
current account surplus, while at the same time portfolio shares f and g might jump
instantaneously to new optimal levels.
As mentioned, in a number of tables Kouri presents calculations about adjustment speeds and adjustment times, given diﬀerent parameter values in equation (3)
and its linearized version assuming that foreign agents do not hold domestic assets.
Calculations suggest that for many parameter values rather long adjustment periods
are to be expected, before the exchange rate converges within a set distance from the
equilibrium value9 .
Kouri also analyses the model under two alternative assumptions on exchange rate
expectations - static expectations and rational expectations. He shows that given a
shock in the market the initial jump in the exchange rate and its adjustment speed
is smaller (larger) under static than under rational expectations. Furthermore, the
equilibrium under static expectations is stable while it is of the saddle path type under
rational expectations.

3

A Simple General Equilibrium Model

Kouri analysed consequences of shocks and decision making without giving a specific
structure to the nature and source of uncertainty, to investment, consumption and
saving decisions, monetary policies in the two countries, or to the relative sizes of
the two economies. In his model analysis of autonomous factors in exchange rate
determination, such as inflation and growth, was not natural or easy. In the following
general equilibrium model framework, these drivers of analysis are specified in more
detail, which is expected to lead to both new insights and more specific results than
those obtained in the Kouri partial equilibrium framework.
While the model structure is on a general level not much diﬀerent from Lucas
(1982) complete markets model, we deliberately let representative agents, monetary
policies, endowments, productivity processes diﬀer, without introducing price rigidities in the model in any other way than through the gradual adjustment of portfolios
9

In some empirical analyses, quoted in de Macedo and Lempinen (2011, p. 22 note 10) adjustment
periods as long as 15-40 years appear possible.

7

and trade flows as specified by Kouri10 . But unlike in the Kouri partial equilibrium
model, the monetarist model background implies that domestic and foreign price levels
and inflation rates are determined by the quantity equation.
The home country model and its specifications are stated and derived in detail,
while the model of the foreign country may diﬀer in parameter values but is qualitatively similar, and can hence be reviewed quickly. In the home country, the representative agent consumes home and foreign goods and invests in domestic and foreign
assets. He makes decisions by maximising the expected utility of consumption and
portfolio decisions. For convenience, just one good (or index of goods) is assumed to
be produced in each country, and one (dominating) risky asset specifies investment
opportunities in each country. A continuous time formulation is assumed throughout
the analysis. By choice of preferences and stochastic process type, consumption and
portfolio decisions separate and are stationary, unless there are changes in relevant
parameter values.
The general decision making problem of the home country representative agent is
the following:
R∞
(4)0 =0 [− ( ( )  ( ))] = 0 ( () ))
{    }
 = () + (1 − )(∗  ∗ ) −  − ∗ 
where
(   ) =instantaneous utility function
 =rate of time preference
 =consumption of domestic goods
10

In connection with this model, Obstfeld (2012) writes: “Complete market models with investment
can result in current account deficits or surpluses, but they are likely to be smaller than in the
incomplete market case, sometimes much smaller. For example, Coeurdacier, Kollmann, and Martin
(2010) analyze a model with equity claims and real consols, an asset structure suﬃcient to reproduce
complete markets up to a first-order approximation in a model with two shocks, shocks to productivity
and to investment eﬃciency. In that model (again up to a first-order approximation), optimal
portfolio behavior implies a zero current account as bond flows always oﬀset equity flows”. He
continues: “For the rich industrial countries, much of the expansion of gross external asset and
liability stocks has necessarily taken the form of debt instruments. There is considerable trade in
equity too, as in the Lucas (1982) model, but the fact of home bias in equity ownership remains
(although it is declining over time). Furthermore there is only so much real capital to underlie equity
claims. The extreme ratios of external asset stocks to GDP that some countries display are not
feasible except on the basis of extensive two way trade in debt or debt-like instruments, including
derivatives”.

8

 =consumption of foreign goods
 =price of domestic goods, in home currency
∗ =price of foreign goods, in foreign currency
 =exchange rate (in /$)
 =  + (1 − )∗  ∗ =domestic wealth ()
 = wealth share of domestic assets
( () ) =Value function
Let us assume that the instantaneous utility function is of the following type:
(   ) =  log  + (1 − ) log  ;  is the expenditure share of domestic goods.
The problem then yields the following optimal consumption and investment rules:
(5) = 

(5) = (1−)
∗
 2 −
 ( − )
(5) =  2 − 
≡  +  ( −  )

2
where
  =standard deviation of return on the foreign asset
  =standard deviation of return on the domestic asset
  =covariance of domestic and foreign assets
 2 =portfolio variance term

=the inverse of the coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion
− 

   =expected rate of return on domestic and foreign assets
 =minimum variance portfolio share
 =speculative portfolio share
In (5c) the separability of consumption and investment decisions under isoelastic
preferences has been invoked in that the inverse of the coeﬃcient of relative risk
aversion has been used in  as the weight of the speculative portfolio share. In the
limiting case of logarithmic preferences, of course this weight would be one.
Note that in this economy no stock of money is held as an asset by agents as money
only has the roles of unit of account and means of exchange. This is based on the
institutional structure such that the central bank is assumed to operate an electronic
clearinghouse through which all payments in the economy are settled. The clearinghouse awards settlement limits to agents accepting claims on wealth as collateral for
settlements. Monetary policy then consists of decisions of the central bank on how

9

large settlement limits it will award to agents for clearing of payments11 .
The shock structure in home country includes disturbances arising from production
process and from monetary policy. The central bank controls money supply, and the
quantity equation determines the domestic price level. Formally,
 and
(6) () = ()
()
2



(6)  =  − 
− 
+ 

 
2
where
() = (stochastic) money supply
() = (stochastic) production
 () = (stochastic) price level
Production flow is assumed to be proportional to the resource endowment K,
which is assumed to be constant. The rate of productivity of the endowment grows
at a stochastic rate. Formally,
(7) =  exp( +    )
where
 = the drift of the productivity process
 = normally distributed domestic productivity shocks with mean 0 and standard deviation 1
The firms operating the technology receive nominal revenues at price p(t) for flow
of production y(t). For convenience the revenues are assumed to be net of any costs.
The value of shares of the firms is the discounted present value of the revenue flows
from the present time to infinity. Formally, and assuming the discount rate to be
equal to the rate of time preference  the price of the share Q(t) is
R∞
() =  [−  ( )( )] ≡  ()()
Diﬀerentiating the price Q(t) the rate of return on shares follows the following
stochastic process


= 
− 
− 12 
+ 12 ( 
)2 + 
= 
− 12 
+ 12 ( 
)2
(8) 



 



 

It is assumed that the central bank has an inflation target in executing its monetary
policy. Specifically, it is assumed that the central bank calibrates the policy so that
the expected inflation rate is . However, it is also assumed that the central bank
is only partially able to control the impact on inflation rate of productivity shocks.
11

See the discussion in Woodford (2000).

10

Let the proportional control factor be . With these assumptions the inflation rate
in (6b) and rate of return on domestic shares in (8) can be expressed in the following
form:
=  − (1 − ) 
(9) 


(9)  = ( +  + ) +   ≡   +  
where  = 12 ( 
− 
) 



The stochastic processes of inflation and rate of return on domestic assets contain
in this specification both monetary policy and productivity (supply) shocks.
In the foreign country the structure of the economy is modeled in a similar way,
only allowing for diﬀerences in parameters determining demand and supply behavior
and monetary policy. In most of the notation to follow, foreign country parameter values are referred to by a superscript , while in some separately defined cases
more specific notation is used. The general decision making problem of the foreign
representative agent is (in $):
¤
R∞ £ ∗
(10)0 =0 −  ∗ (∗ () ∗ ()) = 0  ∗ ( ∗ () ))
{∗  ∗   ∗ }
∗
) −  − ∗ ∗
 ∗ =  ∗ (∗  ∗ ) + (1 −  ∗ )( 

where
∗ (∗  ∗ ) =instantaneous utility function
 ∗ =rate of time preference
∗ =consumption of domestic goods by foreign residents
∗ =consumption of foreign goods by foreign residents
 =price of domestic goods, in home currency
∗ =price of foreign goods, in foreign currency
 =exchange rate (in /$)
=foreign wealth (in $)
 ∗ =  ∗ ∗  ∗ + (1 −  ∗ ) 

∗
 = wealth share of foreign assets of foreign residents
 ∗ ( ∗ () ) =Value function
Assuming again an instantaneous utility function of the type
(∗  ∗ ) = ∗ log ∗ + (1 − ∗ ) log ∗ ; ∗ is the expenditure share of foreign goods
by foreign residents.
Assuming again separable preferences and general isoelastic preferences in risk
behavior, the problem then yields the following optimal consumption and investment
11

rules:
(11)∗ =
(11)∗ =
(11) ∗ =

4

∗  ∗  ∗
∗
(1−∗ )∗  ∗ 

∗
2 − 

( − )
−
2
∗

  ∗
2

≡ ∗ + ∗ ( −  )

General Equilibrium Considerations

The general equilibrium framework imposes certain structure between some key variables of the model. Following the choice of Kouri, let us first consider the determination and distribution of wealth, when both domestic and foreign wealth are denoted
in dollars. In capital market equilibrium, the following conditions must hold:
(12) ∗  ∗ + (1 − )  = ∗  ∗
(12)  + (1 −  ∗ ) ∗ = 

From these conditions solutions in terms of values of endowments for domestic and
foreign wealth in $ can be obtained as
(13)  = (+1∗ −1) [ ∗ 
− (1 −  ∗ )∗  ∗ ] = (+1∗ −1) ( ∗  − ∗  ∗ ) =

= (+1∗ −1) [( ∗ − (1 − )) ]
] = (+1∗ −1) ( − 
)=
(13) ∗ = (+1∗ −1) [∗  ∗ − (1 − ) 


1
= (+ ∗ −1) [( − ) ]
+ ∗  ∗ = global wealth in $
where  = 



and
 =  = share of the value of domestic endowment of global wealth
Domestic (foreign) wealth is then the share of foreign (domestic) agents of global
wealth, deducted by the value of foreign (domestic) endowment, scaled to units of
wealth by a factor depending on portfolio shares. Intuitively this means that e.g. the
domestic wealth is a multiple of the diﬀerence between the portfolio share of global
wealth of foreign residents and the value of foreign endowment, after exchange of
assets has taken place in the market. It is easy to verify that

+  ∗ = 
+ ∗  ∗


which reflects the assumption that there is no stock demand for money by agents.
In addition to requiring that the global wealth identity holds, it is natural to require
in this type of model that national wealths must be positive. This requirement arises
from the fact that e.g. consumption is positive in this model only, if the national

12

wealth of the respective country is positive.
Using Eq. (13a) and (13b) the positivity constraints can be written in the following
form:
∗
−(1−))
0
(14) ((+
∗
−1)
(−)
(14) (+ ∗ −1)  0
From Eq. (14a) and (14b) it can be seen that the numerators of the both conditions
are positive as long as investment shares in domestic assets in the both countries are
bigger than the shares of the values of endowments of global wealth. In order for the
positivity requirement to hold, at the same time the common denominator should be
positive, which requires that the sum (+ ∗ ) of investment shares must be bigger than
one. This would typically be quite natural, but not necessary, as investment shares are
determined by the preferences of the representative investor. An interesting polar case
often used in partial equilibrium open economy analyses is the one in which foreign
agents do not hold domestic assets at all, i.e.  ∗ = 1. In such a case in Eq. (14b)
the denominator is positive. In order for the positivity condition to be fulfilled in this
case    must hold, i.e. the willingness of domestic agents to hold domestic assets
must exceed the share of the value of domestic endowment out of global wealth. As
all the foreign assets are held by the foreign investors this is not possible.
Given the formulation of the model in terms of underlying stochastic processes
it is to be expected that the solution for the exchange rate will also be a stochastic
process, parameters of which will be determined in the general equilibrium. The
solution will not be one with a fixed steady state towards which the exchange rate is
gradually adjusting, but a stochastic process with a finite non-negative mean path.
Under certain conditions certainty equivalence states for the process can be defined.

5

Derivation of the Stochastic Process of Exchange
Rate in General Equilibrium

In the current general equilibrium model framework, the immediate counterpart of the
Kouri acceleration equation can be written in a straight-forward way. The holdings
in dollars of foreign (domestic) assets by domestic (foreign) agents are the following
(15)(1 − )  = stock of foreign assets held by domestic agents =  =   in
13

Kouri notation
(15)(1 −  ∗ ) ∗ = stock of domestic assets held by foreign agents =  =  ∗ in
Kouri notation
Similarly, current account surplus, denoted by B, in the general equilibrium specification is the following
∗ ∗
∗
(16) = ∗ −  = (1− )  − (1−)

Applying (15 a and b) and (16) in the Kouri equation (3), we obtain the equation
in the general equilibrium model corresponding directly with the Kouri equation
(1−)

−

(1−∗ ) ∗  ∗



= (1−)
(17) 


+(1− ∗ ) ∗

According to (17) the euro rate of depreciation is determined precisely in the same
way as in the Kouri partial equilibrium model. The acceleration coeﬃcient is the
sum of foreign assets held by domestic agents and domestic assets held by foreign
agents. Two questions have to be raised regarding the solution. First, even assuming
neutral foreign exchange policy of the central banks, whenever the exchange rate is
such that B is not equal to zero, assets must move between countries. This implies
that portfolio holdings of domestic and foreign agents must change, most likely both
through deliberate allocation changes and through capital gains and losses. However,
the latter is not allowed in the derivation of the Kouri acceleration equation. Secondly,
it is clear from investment rules (5c) and (11c) that only a fraction of portfolio holdings
are sensitive to changes in expected returns of assets, while - depending on investor
risk tolerance - the rest of the asset demand is based on variance minimization.
In order to find answers to the above questions, let us move next to derivation of the
stochastic process of the exchange rate in the general equilibrium model. Maintaining
the denomination of all variables in dollars and assuming absence of central bank
intervention, the net outflow of capital from the home country must be funded by the
flow of current account deficits. In formal terms this condition can be written in the
following form
(18)[(1 − )  ] − [(1 −  ∗ ) ∗ ] = − = (  − ∗ )
The left hand side of equation (18) is the diﬀerence of the (stochastic) diﬀerential of foreign assets held by domestic agents and diﬀerential of domestic assets held
by foreign agents. The left hand side then is likely to include value changes due
to autonomous factors (monetary policies and productivities), due to capital gains

14

and losses induced by exchange rate changes, and due to changes in portfolio allocations potentially induced by expectations of exchange rate changes. After performing
appropriate diﬀerentiations in (18), we derive the general equilibrium stochastic differential equation for the exchange rate, which determines exchange rate adjustments
such that the economy is in general equilibrium.
In order to take properly into account the impact of exchange rate expectations
on portfolio decisions of domestic and foreign agents, we have to invoke the notions of
minimum variance and speculative portfolio shares introduced in equations (5c) and
(11c). From the general portfolio theory it is known that
P
P
=1  = 1; and
=1   = 0 for  = 1   assets.
Intuitively this means that in a two-moment optimization model the investor always invests all of his capital on diversification (variance minimization) basis in the
absence of risk-free assets. In the context of currency positions this reason for holding
assets can be called the safe haven demand, and it is completely immune to changes in
yields of alternatives. However, the investor takes also speculative positions in search
for yield in various assets, but long speculative positions are always financed by short
speculative positions. Hence the sum of speculative portfolio shares is 0. Let us call
speculative portfolio holdings as yield enhancement demand.
In this simple two risky assets model the speculative portfolio shares of the domestic and foreign agents have opposite signs, as −( −  ) = ( −  ). The diﬀerence
between these shares comes from diﬀerences of investor risk preferences and underlying
risks of the two assets. The opposite signs represent the fact that in (18) expectations of depreciation of the home currency will lower the demand for domestic asset
holdings by both domestic and foreign investors.
Investor behavior in deriving equations (5c) and (11c) assumed for convenience a
flexible exchange rate regime, but with stable and constant expectations of exchange
rate change. While solving for the general equilibrium stochastic process of the exchange rate this can no longer be the case. Allowing for a possibility of exchange rate
movements and movements in rational expectations about them, the portfolio shares
can be written as:
(19) =  +  [ − ( ) −  ]
(19) ∗ = ∗ + ∗ [ − ( − ( )]
= (  ) +   (  ) and ( ) and   (  ) are mean rate of
where 

15

depreciation and standard deviation of that rate, both possibly depending on time
and other factors f. The term  is an i.i.d. disturbance with mean 0 and standard
deviation 1.
Ignoring the time and other factor dependence of the exchange rate process in
notation, equation (18) can be written in the following form:
(20) −   + (1 − )(  ) +  ∗  ∗ − (1 −  ∗ ) ∗ = (  − ∗ ),
and after several steps and regrouping of terms (see Appendix 1)
(1−) 
(1−) 
(1− ∗ )
] − (+
   = (+
∗  ∗ (  +   ) −
[  + ∗  ∗ − (+
∗
∗
∗
−1) 
−1) 
−1)
(1−) 
[( − 12   +  2 ) +   ] + (  − ∗ )
(+ ∗ −1) 
Using the fact that in order for a stochastic diﬀerential equation to have a solution
the random terms must be equal on both sides of the equation, we have that
∗
) ∗  ∗ 
  
(21)   =   − (1−
(1−) 
Using (21) we are able to solve for the terms   and 2  letting  = correlation
coeﬃcient between disturbances  and  :
∗
) ∗  ∗ 
    
 = 2 − (1−
(1−) 
∗ 2

∗2

∗2 2

∗

∗

∗

)   
)  
 2 = 2 + (1−
 2 − 2 (1−
    
(1−)2
2  2
(1−) 
Having the disturbance term solved in (21) we move to solve for the mean term
 in (20). The following solution is obtained:
(1−)  −1 (1− ∗ )
(1−) 
] [ (+ ∗ −1) ∗  ∗  − (+
( −   +
(22) = [  + ∗  ∗ − (+
∗
∗
−1) 
−1) 
 2 )+
+(  − ∗ )]
It is illustrative at this point to change variables and use the definition of global
wealth  as introduced above in (13a,b), using also the explicit form of the current
account surplus as shown in (16).
Using these specifications the stochastic process of the exchange rate can be written
in the following form:
= [ ( ∗ − (1 − )) + ∗ ( − ) − (1 − )]−1 {(1 −  ∗ )(1 − ) − (1 − )( −
(23) 

  +  2 )+
∗
∗
∗ ∗
)(1−)
  
+[ (1−)(−(1−)) − (1− ) (−) ]} +   − (1−
(1−)
Equation (23) is the general equilibrium solution for the stochastic process of
the exchange rate in the model. The process does not include explicitly notions of
wealth or income, and is therefore seemingly stationary. However, as long as there

16

are diﬀerences in the nominal growth rates of the two economies (inflation targets,
real growth rates or both) then the parameter  =   (representing the share
of the value of domestic endowment out of global wealth) becomes dependent on
growth rates and time. Hence the process is not necessarily stationary. Considering
long term empirical growth patterns, very persistent or eventually permanent material
diﬀerences in growth and inflation rates between countries are not typical.
The exchange rate process comprizes both autonomous terms and the current account term. The general equilibrium acceleration coeﬃcient is fundamentally diﬀerent
in structure from Kouri’s partial equilibrium coeﬃcient. First, while Eq. (22) contains
terms   + ∗  ∗ , which structurally correspond with the Kouri partial equilibrium
terms (1 − )  + (1 −  ∗ ) ∗ in Eq. (17), the former coeﬃcients are a subset of the
latter and therefore smaller given absence of borrowing possibilities. Secondly, Eq.
(1−) 
, which does not exist in the Kouri partial
(22) also includes coeﬃcient − (+
∗
−1) 
equilibrium model at all. This term has a negative sign, and therefore it will make
the acceleration coeﬃcient smaller and speed up exchange rate adjustment relative to
the partial equilibrium model.
It is useful to observe that the Kouri terms in Eq. (22) imply simultaneous realisation of current account deficits and home currency depreciation, which many
economists would find plausible. But they also imply simultaneous occurrence of
home currency depreciation and inflationary monetary policy abroad. Furthermore,
Kouri was aware that his analysis could not do justice to inflationary or real growth
conditions as they would result in home currency appreciation. He indicates that, if
the real interest earnings are spent on imports, his analysis applies to the real exchange
rate and the real, or inflation adjusted, balance of payments. However, he continues to
assume that ”there is no inflation or real growth” as a satisfactory treatment thereof
requires an analysis of its own 12 .
The additional general equilibrium wealth eﬀect term in Eq. (22) has opposite
qualitative implications. It appears to drive the currency weaker when the current
account is in surplus, but associate domestic inflationary monetary policy with weakening currency and foreign inflationary policy with strengthening currency.
It is clear from Eq. (21) and (22) that with the Lucas (1982) assumptions of
12

Section 4.2.5 titled “balance of payments equilibrium with inflation” (de Macedo and Lempinen,
2011, p. 348)

17

identical agents, endowments and technologies implemented in this model both 
and   would equal zero, and the current account would always be in equilibrium.
The exchange rate would be constant and could be normalized to 1.
According to equation (23) the exchange rate follows a stochastic process, which
theoretically never stands still. A notion of a certainty equivalent stationary state can,
however, be computed for the process. If assumptions are made that the shocks 
and  are temporarily zero, that at the same time the autonomous terms net each
other out, and that investment shares   ∗  (1 − ) and (1 −  ∗ ) remain unaﬀected,
the following solution for the certainty equivalent stationary state exchange rate 0
can be computed:
[(1−)  −(1−) ∗ −(1−∗ ) ∗ (1−) ]
(24)0 = [(1−
∗
)  −(1−∗ )∗  −(1−)(1− ∗ )]∗  ∗
The certainty equivalent stationary state exchange rate is still a simultaneous
solution as e.g. portfolio shares, asset prices, wealth and consumption levels depend
on productivity growth rates and central bank inflation targets. For a large vs. large
eonomy case (the Eurozone vs. USA) assuming a candidate set of parameter values
(altogether 21 germaine parameters driving the model) some local comparative static
properties of the steady state exchange rate can be determined. It can be illustrated
e.g. that the home currency (euro) depreciates (increases) with increases in and 
and appreciates (decreases) with increases in ∗ and  ∗ . In intuitive terms the home
currency is the stronger the more open the home country is in trade, and the smaller
it is when measured in terms of the real endowment . The home currency is also
the stronger the more closed the foreign economy is in trade, and the larger it is when
measured in terms of the real endowment  ∗ .

6

Exchange Rate Adjustment and the Current Account: Acceleration in General Equilibrium and
Partial Equilibrium

The key reasons for the diﬀerent implications of the Kouri terms and the additional
general equilibrium term is that the Kouri terms represent capital flows eﬀected by
actual portfolio restructuring decisions induced by changes in expectations, while the

18

general equilibrium term represents impact of direct capital gains and losses on the
existing portfolio holdings. This fact can be easily seen by observing that it is only
the additional general equilibrium term that drives the impact of both anticipated
and unanticipated changes in market factors.
In order to compare the general equilibrium and the Kouri partial equilibrium
models in a consistent manner and purely in the context of current account adjustments, let us assume that by feasible policy coordination in (23) the autonomous drift
terms net each other. Then the process of the exchange rate becomes the following:
∗
∗ ∗
= [ ( ∗ −(1−))+∗ ( −)−(1−)]−1 [ (1−)(−(1−)) − (1− ) (−) ]+
(25) 

∗
)(1−)
  
+  − (1−
(1−)
and exchange rate changes are essentially driven by random shocks. These induce
changes in the current account which are then translated into exchange rate adjustments by the acceleration coeﬃcient. The general equilibrium acceleration coeﬃcient
 , written in terms of domestic, foreign and global wealth, is
(1−)
 ]
(26) = [  + ∗  ∗ − (+
∗
−1)
Note first that the general equilibrium acceleration coeﬃcient  makes it possible
that a J-curve type of adjustment of the exchange rate can result in the model, which
is not possible in the partial equilibrium framework. Specifically, if
(1−)
    + ∗  ∗
(+ ∗ −1)
then the acceleration coeﬃcient becomes negative and an exchange rate depreciation is expected to coincide with a current account surplus and an appreciation
to coincide with a current account deficit, at least in the short term. The negative
acceleration coeﬃcient raises some technical issues about stability of the solution.
Typically, a negative adjustment coeﬃcient in a feedback mechanism of the type of
Eq. (22) implies unstable adjustment paths, which cannot be feasible at least in the
long term in an economics application. These issues are discussed in more detail in
Appendix 2.
Comparison of the general equilibrium acceleration coeﬃcient  with the Kouri
partial equilibrium coeﬃcient  requires interpretation of the latter in terms of the
current model. As indicated in (2) above, Kouri defines cash flow as the capital gain
due to exchange rate changes in percentage terms multiplied by the sum of holdings
of domestic assets by foreign agents and holdings of foreign assets by domestic agents.
This is a very specific way of defining cash outflow, as was discussed in the previous
19

section.
A natural way to understand the Kouri definition of cash flow is to conjecture that
Kouri in fact only considered yield enhancement demand in his cash flow identity. As
was discussed above, in a two-asset model speculative portfolio shares of diﬀerent
agents are of opposite sign relative to yield and only diﬀer in magnitude from each
other in terms of risk preferences. This interpretation would make Kouri’s postulation
of Eq. (2) understandable. In empirical applications, in which total asset holdings
have been typically used, this re-interpretation would likely lead to a quite substantial
reduction in the value of  . But Kouri himself appears to have used total asset
holdings in his numerical calculations.
Kouri’s omission of the wealth eﬀect may be due to the facts that he used a partial
equlibrium framework, and that his analysis was performed in a nonstochastic framework, in which unanticipated capital gains and losses on existing potfolio holdings are
not a very natural issue to address. But it is clear that in particular, when long term
projections of exchange rates are simulated, asset valuation adjustments cannot be
ignored.
Following the interpretation discussed above and denoting the Kouri acceleration
coeﬃcient in the current model by  we have:
 =   + ∗  ∗ , and that
(1−)
  0
(27) −  = (+
∗
−1)
Clearly, the Kouri coeﬃcient as interpreted in the general equilibrium framework
- applying the separation between safe haven demand and yield enhancement demand
- in the general equilibrium form, is (considerably) larger than  , the general equilibrium acceleration coeﬃcient. This implies that exchange rate adjustment will be
faster and adjustment periods shorter in the general equilibrium model than in the
partial equilibrium model. The diﬀerence between the coeﬃcients has a natural interpretation. It represents the component of wealth the holding of which is subject
to wealth eﬀects due to exchange rate adjustment. This component of wealth is the
share of domestic endowment which the domestic agent does not want to hold but
trades in exchange for foreign assets to benefit from diversification gains.
The possibility of the J-curve type eﬀect in the model depends crucially on parameter values. Gourinchas & Rey (2007) estimated that for the USA 27% of the
20

external adjustment is explained by asset valuation eﬀects. The sum of the speculative portfolio holdings   + ∗  ∗ in  can be rather small in many economies
under normal conditions. This may be the case especially due to holdings of US assets
by foreign investors, which are likely motivated among many foreign investors by the
safe haven demand. In fact Gourinchas & Rey also maintain that altogether capital
account transactions are suﬃciently small in case of the US market that they can be
omitted from the analysis. This view would suggest that for some markets it would
be quite natural for the J-curve type conditions to prevail.
It is useful to keep in mind, however, that speculative portfolio holdings are sensitive to the state of the market. Whenever there are larger shifts in the market,
expectations of market movements are typically generated. These would instantaneously increase the size of speculative portfolio holdings, which would begin to oﬀset
and possibly dominate asset valuation eﬀects. On these grounds it is possible that in
some markets under normal market conditions asset valuation eﬀects dominate while
during more turbulent periods speculative portfolio holdings eﬀects prevail.

7

Simulation experiments

In this section the relevance and importance of the findings of analysis are investigated
by means of a set of Monte Carlo simulation experiments with parameter values and
diagrams presented in Appendices 3 and 4 respectively. Two broad issues are covered
in the simulation experiments. First, the impact of the partial equilibrium and general
equilibrium acceleration models in smoothing out exchange rate variations through
the current account mechanism are compared with a Dornbusch style specification,
in which no direct current account mechanism aﬀects exchange rate adjustments.
Second, the quantitative significance of the general equilibrium specification relative to
the partial equilibrium specification in terms of the adjustment speed of the exchange
rate is investigated. As an important specific topic the nature of the J curve style
adjustment process in the general equilibrium specification is analysed.
To provide background for the analysis it is useful to review briefly some stylized
facts of liquid foreign exchange markets. We estimated volatilities of numerous exchange rates and found that they were quite moderate, even low, considering their

21

made up image among central bank and other practitioners. In broad terms the
rolling 3 month volatilities (one of the most used measures of risk in e.g. currency
option markets) estimated from daily market data through the Euro period and the
pre-Euro floating rates period were all between 9 and 12 percent in annual terms,
averaging at about 10. These are lower than most assets volatilities. Only money
market and short-to-medium term fixed income markets and other comparable assets
are significantly less risky than currencies. Real estate markets, stock markets and
commodities markets are typically much more risky than currency markets. A number of eurozone and other currencies, including smaller and larger economies, were
analysed relative to the US dollar. Relatively short financial crisis periods generated higher volatilities, but these were smoothed out quite rapidly within the two
estimation periods (pre-euro 9/1992-12/1998, euro 1/1999-12/2011), summarized in
diagrams 1-2 (rolling daily estimates of standard deviations in the two periods) and
in diagrams 3-4 (sample averages of standard deviations in the two periods). Given
the fact that foreign exchange markets have experienced numerous very turbulent
sub-periods during the years covered, including several speculative attacks involving
large reshuﬄing of portfolios, the findings would seem to suggest that a rather strong
smoothing out mechanism exists, which prevents crises from escalating.
For the simulation experiments a very simple testing environment is set up. First,
autonomous factors are assumed to net each other so that only current account adjustments translate impact of changes in fixed parameters and random shocks to changes
in the exchange rate. Secondly, the testing platform includes two rather similar large,
relatively open economies, which could be considered remotely relevant for the analysis
of the euro/USD rate. Other specifications could naturally be rather easily considered
and analysed. Thirdly, impact of two shifts in a single fixed parameter ∗ are studied,
letting ∗ to jump permanently up and down. These shifts imply jumps up and down
in the temporary steady state exchange rate 0 as defined in Eq. (24). However,
the actual exchange rate adjusts gradually towards the new steady state due to the
acceleration mechanism. Fourth, random events with 10% annual standard deviation feed unexpected shocks in the adjustment process, causing perturbations in the
adjustment process towards the steady state.
Note that we have deliberately postponed any linearization until as late as the
specification of the testing environment because we prefer direct simulation of the
22

nonlinear general equilibrium solution, which would be the only way to establish reliable comparative dynamics properties of the heavily simultaneous stochastic model.
By linearizing the model as in the original Kouri contribution, we could elaborate the
discussion of comparative properties of the stationary state. Meanwhile, the testing
environment is specified by the following general equation, consistent with Eq. (25):
(28) = ∆ [0 − ] +    (0 1) distributed noise and  = 01
Specification (28) allows us to study three diﬀerent cases. The general equilibrium
framework includes the Kouri style imperfect substitutibility of assets, whereby a
Dornbusch specification cannot be directly implemented in the testing environment.
However, a rather close formulation is obtained by assuming that in the Dornbusch
case the coeﬃcient ∆ equals zero and only random shocks drive the exchange rate.
The adjustment coeﬃcients in the three cases to be analysed are then the following:
∆ = 0; The Dornbusch case
∆ = 1 ; The partial equilibrium Kouri case
∆ = 1 ; The general equilibrium case
In the three cases 10 000 continuous time paths of Monte Carlo simulations are
sampled typically for a period of 30 years. In some cases, when we analyse the model
with the negative coeﬃcient ∆ resulting in the J curve type of eﬀect with stability
issues, shorter time horizons are applied. In each case three statistics, the mean path
and the 5% lower tail and upper tail fractile paths are reported. The mean path is used
for assessing adjustment speeds of the diﬀerent cases towards the long term steady
state. The 90% variation range between low and high fractiles is used as the metric
to evaluate exchange rate variability implied by the three diﬀerent specifications.
The starting value of the exchange rate is normalized at 1 and shifts in the foreign
propensity to consume ∗ are calibrated so that in the two types of experiments
the value of 0 = 1 jumps 10 % up and down to values 0+ = 11 and 0− =
091. In both the cases the actual value of the exchange rate then starts to adjust
gradually from 1 towards either 1.1 or 0.91. All other parameter values are presented
in Appendix 3.
Simulations of the Dornbusch formulation in the current framework are reported
in diagram 5. Only one diagram is needed in this case as the changes in the steady
state values of the exchange rate are irrelevant when ∆ = 0. The non-stationary
nature of exchange rate behaviour is seen in the pattern where the 90% range about
23

the median path expands all the time. At 30 years time point the 90% variation range
is approximately 200% of the mean level.
Simulations of the Kouri partial equilibrium case are shown in diagrams 6 and 7.
The adjustment process both upwards and downwards is very slow and convergence
of the mean exchange rate towards the new steady states is still continuing at a
noticeable rate at the 30 years time point. While the partial equilibrium adjustment
process is rather slow, the impact of that in smoothing out exchange rate variations is
substantial compared with the Dornbusch case. In the Kouri case the 90% variation
range at 30 years time point is about 100% of the level of the initial steady state
value, i.e. just about one half of the corresponding range in the Dornbusch case.
Simulations of the general equilibrium case are shown in diagrams 8 and 9. The
adjustment process is rather fast in this case. Already 2 years after the start of
simulations the actual exchange rate is very close to the new steady state value. The
significance of the smoothing eﬀect through current account adjustment in the general
equilibrium case can be seen very clearly in looking at the variation range defined by
the 90% confidence level boundaries. The variation range of the exchange rate at the
30 years time point is now just about 20% of the initial steady state value, which is
about 10% of the corresponding range of the Dornbusch case and 20% of the range in
the Kouri partial equilibrium case.
In the J curve case the coeﬃcient ∆ is negative, which would imply unstable
adjustment paths of the exchange rate converging eventually to either plus or minus
infinity. However, it can be concluded that if there is a feasible solution in the negative
∆ case, such a solution must involve overshooting of the exchange rate. In Eq. (28)
consider a transform in which the sign of ∆ is reversed. The equation remains valid
only if the sign of the term [0 − ] is also reversed. The value of 0 is determined
by exogenous parameter values so that it cannot be changed. However, if the value of
s changes in an appropriate direction and by a suﬃcient amount the sign of [0 − ]
will be reversed. Thus, when the news about the increase or decrease of foreign
demand of domestic goods enters the market 0 appreciates or depreciates by 10%,
respectively, and the term [0 − ] becomes negative or positive. The desired sign
reversal is achieved if at the same time the nominal exchange rate s depreciates or
appreciates more than 10%. The exchange rate will then overshoot the steady state
value, and during the adjustment process in the case of overshooting up (immediate
24

jump up) the exchange rate will gradually appreciate towards the new steady state
value (diagram 10). In the case of overshooting down the exchange rate will gradually
depreciate towards the new steady state value (diagram 11). Further analysis of the
J curve case is in Appendix 2.

8

Conclusions

In this paper we first developed a general equilibrium two-country complete markets model to analyze a variety of factors on exchange rate adjustment, focusing in
particular on the role and nature of the Kouri Acceleration Hypothesis in general
equilibrium. In the Kouri partial equilibrium framework the rate of change of the
exchange rate is proportional to the ratio of current account imbalance to the sum
of holdings of foreign assets by domestic residents and holdings of domestic assets by
foreign residents.
It was shown that in general equilibrium the acceleration coeﬃcient is for two
reasons considerably smaller than the Kouri coeﬃcient. First, in the Kouri partial
equilibrium model the coeﬃcient is the sum of foreign assets held by domestic agents
and the domestic assets held by foreign agents. In the general equilibrium model
only the sum of expectations sensitive (speculative) asset holdings is relevant, likely
to be a rather small subset of the total asset holdings at least under normal market
conditions and assuming risk averse preferences. Secondly, this sum is further reduced
by an additional term omitted in the Kouri partial equilibrium framework. This term
is the stock of domestic assets not held by domestic investors but traded in exchange
for foreign assets to benefit from diversification gains and yield enhancement. The
result implies that current account and exchange rate adjustments are likely to be
substantially faster than predicted by Kouri’s analysis and empirical implementations
of it.
One interesting connection of the result is that it reflects some stylized facts of
liquid foreign exchange markets. Estimated exchange rate volatilities observed in
market data appear to be lower than thought among market practitioners. This is
consistent with a correction mechanism of the exchange rates through the current
account being stronger than the one implied by Kouri’s partial equilibrium analysis.

25

Consequently market disturbances may be smoothed out faster than thought possible,
both when they originate in underlying shocks, or in capital flows induced by shocks
and by changes in expectations and preferences.
Furthermore the finding has an important implication regarding the significance
of current account relative to capital market factors and disturbances. Long current
account adjustment periods would undermine the relevance of current account in
analysis of exchange rate movements and capital flows. Conversely short current
account adjustment periods enhance the relevance of the current account. In short,
the general equilibrium analysis brings additional relevance to the current account
dynamics. In addition to this, it can be seen in Eq. (24) that the general equilibrium
certainty equivalent stationary state exchange rate is determined jointly by factors
typically associated with the current account or the capital account, and that these
contributions are eﬀectively inseparable.
The significance of the general equilibrium specification can also be seen through
the J-curve eﬀect: in driving expected exchange rate movements the partial equilibrium terms and the general equilibrium capital gains and losses term have opposite
signs.
While associating current account deficits with a weakening home currency the
Kouri terms associate e.g. domestic inflationary policy with an appreciating currency.
The general equilibrium term works in the opposite way. The Kouri adjustment
process is intuitively appealing in terms of the current account channel but much less
so in terms of the autonomous factors of the exchange rate. The general equilibrium term has intuitively plausible implications relative to the autonomous factors.
The key reasons for the diﬀerences are that the Kouri terms represent capital flows
through forward-looking reshuﬄing portfolio decisions, while the general equilibrium
term represents impact of direct capital gains and losses on the existing portfolios.
The view held by many monetary and fiscal policy decision makers and economists
that exchange rates tend to be rather volatile may reflect exchange rate dynamics
implied by the partial equilibrium models of especially Dornbusch (1976) and to a
lesser degree Kouri (1978). A complete opposite of this view is obtained in the general
equilibrium complete markets model by Lucas (1982) in which the exchange rate does
not vary.
After contrasting Dornbusch’s fundamental intuition that only capital account
26

shocks matter in exchange rate adjustments to Kouri’s “acceleration hypothesis”,
we derived the “generalized acceleration hypothesis” in a model with two countries
with potentially diﬀerent endowments, production technologies, consumption and saving/investment preferences and monetary policies, where uncertainty arises from monetary policy and supply side shocks. We extended the analyses of Kouri and Lucas
by introducing in a general equilibrium Lucas type model a Kouri style portfolio balance adjustment mechanism with imperfect substitutibility of assets. A key element
of the Kouri specification towards introducing a partial exchange rate rigidity in the
model is that portfolio allocations can be adjusted towards new optima only over
time, through gradually accumulating flows of the current account. Due to general
equilibrium constraints on wealth and investment behavior, the general equilibrium
acceleration coeﬃcient is defined by the stock of domestic assets not held by domestic
residents, adjusted for speculative (expectations sensitive) portfolio allocation terms.
In a testing environment defined by a general linearized equation for exchange rate
dynamics, we studied three diﬀerent cases. We assumed that in the Dornbusch case
only random shocks drive the exchange rate. Sampling 10 000 continuous time paths
of Monte Carlo simulations for 30 years and using the 90% confidence level variation
range about the mean at the 30 years time point relative to the mean as the metric
of exchange rate variability, the Dornbusch formulation implied a variation range of
200%, reduced to 100% in the Kouri case and to 20% in the general equilibrium case.
In addition to the variation range results, the simulations also showed very clearly
that the speed of adjustment in the general equilibrium case is much faster than
in the partial equilibrium, let alone in the Dornbusch case where it is not defined.
Already at 2 year time point the extent of exchange rate adjustment in the general
equilibrium model exceeded the corresponding adjustment at 30 year timepoint in the
Kouri framework.

References
Bergstrand, Jeﬀrey H. "Is Exchange Rate Volatility ’Excessive’?" ( New England Economic Review), September/October 1983, 5-14.
Blanchard, Olivier, Francesco Giavazzi and Filipa Sa (2005), International In27

vestors, the U.S. Current Account and the Dollar, Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity 1, pp. 1-66 revision of MIT Department of Economics Working Paper 05/02
Braga de Macedo, Jorge and Urho Lempinen (2011), editors, Open Economy Dynamics Selected Papers by Pentti Kouri, Helsinki: Taloustieto Oy, 400 pp
Coeurdacier, Nicolas, Robert Kollmann, and Philippe Martin. "International
Portfolios, Capital Accumulation, and Foreign Assets Dynamics." Journal of International Economics 80 (January 2010): 100-112.
Devereux, Michael B. and Alan Sutherland, "Valuation Eﬀects and the Dynamics
of Net External Assets." Journal of International Economics 80 (January 2010): 129143.
Dornbusch, Rudiger (1976), Expectations and exchange rate dynamics, Journal of
Political Economy 84, 1161{1176.
Frenkel, Jacob A., and Michael L. Mussa. 1980. "The Eﬃciency of Foreign Exchange Markets and Measures of Turbulence." American Economic Review, Papers
and Proceedings 70 (2): 374-81.
Gourinchas Pierre-Olivier and Hélène Rey. "International Financial Adjustment."
( Journal of Political Economy) 115 (August 2007b): 665-703.
Kouri, Pentti (1975), “Essays in the theory of flexible exchange rates”, Ph.D.
dissertation, MIT Department of Economics, published in de Macedo and Lempinen
(2011, pp. 57-272).
Kouri, Pentti (1976a), The Exchange rate and the balance of payments in the
short run and in the long run: a monetary approach, The Scandinavian Journal of
Economics, 78 no. 2, pp. 280-304, a revised version of the first essay in Kouri (1975).
Kouri, Pentti (1976b), “Capital Flows and the Dynamics of the Exchange Rate”,
Institute of International Economic Studies, University of Stockholm, no. 67.
Kouri, Pentti (1976c), "International Investment and Interest Rate Linkages under
Flexible Exchange Rates", ( The Political Economy of Monetary Reform), edited by
28

Robert Z Aliber, Palgrave Macmillan 1976 a revised version of the first essay in Kouri
(1975)pp. 74-96 a revised version of the fourth essay in Kouri (1975)
Kouri, Pentti (1978), “The balance of payments and the foreign exchange market:
a dynamic partial equilibrium model”, a revised version of Kouri (1976b), Cowles
Foundation Discussion Paper no. 510, November, published in Economic Interdependence and Flexible Exchange Rates, edited by Jagdeep Bhandari and Jay Levin, MIT
Press, 1983 reprinted in de Macedo and Lempinen (2011, pp. 329-370).
Lucas, Robert (1978), Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy, Econometrica, 46,
pp. 1429-1445.
Lucas, Robert (1982), Interest Rates and Currency Prices in a Two-Country
World, Journal of Monetary Economics, 10, pp. 335-360.
Obstfeld, Maurice "International Currency Experience: New Lessons and Lessons
Relearned", Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1985 369-464
Obstfeld, Maurice "External Adjustment", ( Review of World Economics) 2004,
Vol. 140 (4), 541-568
Obstfeld, Maurice (2012), Does the Current Account Still Matter?, American Economic Review, Vol. 102 No. 3, May 2012, pp. 1-23.
Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoﬀ (1995), The Mirage of Fixed Exchange
Rates, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 9, pp 73-96.
Rey, Hélène (2005), Discussion of Blanchard, Giavazzi and Sa (2005), Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity 1. p. 58.
Rogoﬀ, Kenneth (2002), Dornbusch’s Overshooting Model After Twenty-Five Years,
IMF Staﬀ Papers, 49, Special Issue, pp. 1-34.
Sercu, Piet and Raman Uppal, ( Exchange Rate Volatility, Trade, and Capital
Flows Under Alternative Exchange Rate Regimes), Cambridge University Press, Dec
14, 2006
29

Woodford, Michael (2000), Monetary Policy in a World without Money, NBER
Working Paper 7853, August

30

Appendix 1: Derivation of Equation (20)
Recall Equation (19) in the text
(19)[(1 − )  ] − [(1 −  ∗ ) ∗ ] = − = (  − ∗ )
Substitute in (18) the explicit forms of  and  ∗ given by
(19) =  +  [ − ( ) −  ]
(19) ∗ = ∗ + ∗ [ − ( − ( )]
Use also the general notation for the stochastic rate of depreciation

= ( ) +   (  )

Then (19) can be written in the following form

( 

 {[1 −  −  [ − (  ) −  ]] }− {[1 − ∗ − ∗ [ − ( − ( )]]  ∗} =
− ∗ )
and, diﬀerentiating with respect to s:
  + (1 − )() + ∗  ∗  − (1 −  ∗ ) ∗ = (  − ∗ )
Calculate next () and  ∗

¶µ
¶¸
1
∗ 
∗
∗ ∗

− (1 −  ) 
() = 
 + ∗ − 1

¶∙
µ
¸
        1 2 
1
∗ 

+
−
−
−
+
+
−
=
 + ∗ − 1



 
 
 
2 2

¶
µ ∗

 ∗ ∗  ∗
∗
(1 −  )
∗  ∗
+ ∗ + ∗
∗
∗


 
∙µ

31

Let   ∗   ∗ also vary to include all factors driving 

∗

 = 

=

³

h³

1
+ ∗ −1

1
+ ∗ −1

´¡

∗

  − (1 −

´h ³ ∗
 
+
∗

+
(1 −  ∗ ) ( 


∗




 ∗
∗

−




∗  ∗
∗  ∗

+
−

 
 

) 

´

−

¢i

=

∗  ∗ −

 
 

+

 
 

+

1 2
2 2

i




Substitute () and  ∗ back into cash flow equation to get:

∗  ∗ ) 

³

1
+ ∗ −1

´

(  +
+
n
³



[(1 − ) ∗ + (1 −  ∗ ) (1 − )] 
+  − 
− 
− 
+ 
+


 
 
 
´
o
³ ∗
∗
∗
 ∗
∗  ∗
+ 
+ 
[(1 −  ∗ ) + (1 −  ∗ ) (1 − )] 
∗
∗
∗  ∗
= (  − ∗ )
Compile terms. In the form following equation (19) let
´
³
 

+
+
 =  

 
i
h

1
 
 =  − 2 (  +  ) 
³ ´
¡ ¢

+ 
  = 
−

−  




³ 2´
 2 =  
2
In   +   let:

 = 

³

∗
∗
∗
∗

+

´

∗
 ∗
 ∗
+ 
∗
∗  ∗
∗
∗
 
+ 
−
∗
∗

   =
−
Let also

=  +  


∗

 
∗

as there clearly is no state dependency of  and 
With these specifications the cash flow equation becomes
32

1 2
2 2

´


−


´
³
£
¤
(  + ∗  ∗ ) + +1∗ −1 (1−)   +   − 12    − ( − 2 )  +    
−

∗

(1 −  ) (  +   ) ∗  ∗ = (  − ∗ )
and moving them to the left hand side of the equation
Compiling terms involving 

we obtain the form following equation (20) in the text:
(1−) 
(1−) 
(1− ∗ )
] − (+
   = (+
∗  ∗ (  +   ) −
[  + ∗  ∗ − (+
∗
∗
∗
−1) 
−1) 
−1)
(1−) 
[( − 12   +  2 ) +   ] + (  − ∗ )
(+ ∗ −1) 
Equations (21)-(27) in the text follow from these steps.

Appendix 2: Negative acceleration coeﬃcient
The negative acceleration coeﬃcient in exchange rate adjustment is a real possibility,
as can be seen from e.g. Eq. (26). If the negative coeﬃcient is inserted as such in
the testing environment (28) and the same simulation experiments are run as in the
other cases, the following family of exchange rate adjustment paths result, reported
for convenience for only 5 years time horizon.

Diagram 2.1 Negative acceleration the unfeasible case
downwards

33

Diagram 2.2 Negative acceleration the unfeasible case upward

In the first case in which the new steady state value shifts upwards (home currency
depreciates) and exceeds the starting value of the market rate the simulated graphs
begin to dive rapidly downwards in a way, which clearly has no end. In the case in
which the new steady state value shifts downwards (home currency appreciates) and
undercuts the starting value of the market rate the simulated graphs begin to rise
upwards clearly without an end. Both these adjustment processes might be for some
time possible during temporary chaotic market panic periods, but they cannot be
credible and valid general equilibrium solutions for a market in which rational agents
are making decisions.
The unfeasible solution paths can be ruled out by specifying appropriate terminal conditions for the diﬀerential equation (28). If the equation is constrained with
following terminal conditions:
(28) = ∆ [0 − ] + ;
( + )  ∞  → ∞
( − )  0  → ∞
no such paths can result from the adjustment process, as the paths are monotonous.
Feasible solutions for the case of negative  can clearly only exist in cases in
34

which the coeﬃcient is positive. This results if we instead of using the value  use
its inverse value − . But then Eq. (28) does not hold any longer. The sign of the
mean term on the right hand side [0 − ] must also be reversed for the diﬀerential
equation to hold. The value of the temporary steady state exchange rate 0 is
determined by the structural parameters of the balance of payments. It is, therefore,
always given to the market, and is the rate towards which the actual exchange rate will
adjust. This being the case the sign of the right hand side of equation (28) can only
be reversed by adjusting the starting level of the actual exchange rate accordingly.
Let us denote by reference time t0 the moment when the market realizes that the
steady state value shifts to 1 either upwards or downwards. At that moment the
spot exchange rate has reached the level 0 and starts to adjust from there. In order
for the sign reversal of [0 − ] to occur the following immediate adjustments must
happen in the spot exchange rate:
(29)[1 − 0 ]  0 ≈ (0)  1
(29)[1 − 0 ]  0 ≈ (0)  1
With an immediate jump in the spot exchange rate such that an overshooting occurs in the respective direction in which the steady state value adjusts stable exchange
rate adjustment processes will result. Such adjustment processes always involve a
gradual appreciation of the exchange rate towards the new (home currency depreciated) steady state value, and a gradual depreciation of the exchange rate towards the
new (home currency appreciated) steady state value.
The terminal conditions are not suﬃcient to determine the size of the overshooting.
This could be determined by appropriate initial conditions of Eq. (28), but no obvious
guidelines for specifying such conditions can be stated. For the feasibility of exchange
rate adjustments it is suﬃcient that conditions (29a,b) are satisfied.

35

Appendix 3: Parameter values
The key parameter values used in determining the steady state value 0 are the
following:
 = ∗ = 0 7
 =  ∗ = 07
 =  ∗ = 003
0 = ∗0 = 1
0 = ∗0 = 3
0 = 0∗ = 1000
 = 0532
∗ = 034

36

Appendix 4: Diagrams

Diagram 1: 3 Month Rolling Volatilities for 1992‐09‐08 – 1998‐12‐31



6:

Diagram 2: 3 Month Rolling Volatilities for 1999‐01‐04 – 2013‐09‐30

38

Diagram 3: Averages of 3 Month Rolling Volatilities for 1992‐09‐08 – 1998‐12‐3 1

39

Diagram 4: Averages of 3 Month Rolling Volatilities for 1999‐01‐04 – 2013‐09‐30

40

Diagram 5: Exchange rate adjustment in Dornbusch case

41

Diagram 6: Exchange rate adjustment with Kouri acceleration,
case of steady state depreciation

42

Diagram 7: Exchange rate adjustment with Kouri acceleration,
case of steady state appreciation

43

Diagram 8: Exchange rate adjustment with General Equilibrium
acceleration, case of steady state depreciation

44

Diagram 9: Exchange rate adjustment with General Equilibrium
acceleration, case of steady state appreciation

45

Diagram 10: Exchange rate adjustment with upward shift and
overshooting

46

Diagram 11: Exchange rate adjustment with downward shift and
overshooting

47

