                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       TAKE THE SHORT ROUTE:
HOW TO REPAY AND RESTRUCTURE SOVEREIGN DEBT WITH MULTIPLE MATURITIES

                                             Mark Aguiar
                                            Manuel Amador

                                         Working Paper 19717
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19717


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2013




 We thank Fernando Alvarez, Cristina Arellano, Andy Atkeson, V.V. Chari, Doireann Fitzgerald and
 Chris Phelan for helpful comments. We thank seminar participants at several institutions. We are grateful
 to Georgios Stefanidis, who provided excellent research assistance. Manuel Amador acknowledges
 support from the Sloan Foundation and the NSF (award number 0952816). The views expressed herein
 are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the
 Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
 reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
 NBER publications.

 © 2013 by Mark Aguiar and Manuel Amador. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
 two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
 is given to the source.
Take the Short Route: How to Repay and Restructure Sovereign Debt with Multiple Maturities
Mark Aguiar and Manuel Amador
NBER Working Paper No. 19717
December 2013
JEL No. E62,F34,F41

                                             ABSTRACT

We address the question of whether and how a sovereign should reduce its external indebtedness when
default is a significant possibility, with a particular focus on whether a sovereign should buy back
or dilute existing long-term sovereign bonds. Our main finding is that when reduction of debt is optimal,
the sovereign should remain passive in the long-term bond market during the deleveraging process,
retiring long-term bonds as they mature but never actively issuing or buying back these bonds. The
only active margin is the short-term bond market, which involves partial roll over of such debt. Any
active maturity management, as will typically be required to address rollover crisis risk, will be delayed
until the end of the deleveraging process. We also show that there exist a set of Pareto improving
debt restructurings in which maturities are shortened; however, these cannot be implemented by trading
in competitive secondary markets.


Mark Aguiar
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Fisher Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
and NBER
mark@markaguiar.com

Manuel Amador
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
Research Department
90 Hennepin Avenue
Minneapolis, MN 55401
and NBER
amador.manuel@gmail.com
1       Introduction
Short-term debt is often cast as the villain in sovereign debt crises, exposing fiscal budgets to
sharp swings in interest rates and raising the vulnerability to a rollover crisis. Nevertheless,
when faced with increased spreads on their bonds, sovereigns tend to lower their debt issuances
while tilting the composition of new bonds toward shorter maturities.1 This favoritism towards
short-term debt during periods of crisis is somewhat puzzling, as there is wide agreement
that short-term debt, if anything, introduces more risk by leaving the country vulnerable to
rollover problems. Understanding debt dynamics – and associated equilibrium prices – in
a crisis environment is of particular importance given the sovereign debt crisis in Europe.
Many peripheral European countries are currently paying a significant premium over German
debt on large quantities of sovereign bonds. The respective governments are contemplating
fiscal paths that lead to lower debt-to-GDP ratios, and correspondingly a lower risk of default
and associated spread. However, in a world of limited commitment, fiscal trajectories must
be time consistent, and it is an open question whether the vulnerability to default provides
sufficient incentive to deleverage and what role – if any – maturity plays.
    In this paper, we introduce an environment which captures important elements of sovereign
debt markets. In particular, the environment features the risk of default; an incentive to
deleverage due to this risk of default; an inability to commit to fiscal trajectories; a dynamic
choice of maturity; and equilibrium bond prices that reflect and constrain the government’s
debt decisions. Given this framework, our goal is to clearly and completely analyze the
interaction of maturity choice, equilibrium prices, and the dynamic incentives to deleverage
under the threat of default.
    A primary contribution of the paper is to provide a transparent analysis of how a
sovereign’s lack of commitment – to repayment as well as to future debt trajectories – plays
out in equilibrium. We solve for the government’s equilibrium budget set and explore how
it responds to the maturity of sovereign bonds. A major result is that the government’s
equilibrium budget set is maximized by not actively issuing or repurchasing long-term bonds
while deleveraging; and any lengthening of maturity, which may be required to mitigate
rollover risk, will be postponed until the completion of the deleveraging process. In particular,
a strategy that relies on issuing or repurchasing long-term bonds during deleveraging shrinks
    1
     These facts have been documented for the emerging market debt crises of the 1990s and 2000s. Broner
et al. (2013) document that emerging markets reduce total debt issuances when spreads increase, but the
reduction is particularly pronounced for bonds with maturity greater than 3 years, sharply reducing the
average maturity of new issuances. Similarly, Arellano and Ramanarayanan (2012) document that during
crisis periods for four emerging market economies, the average maturity of new debt shortens. Perez (2013)
documents in a large sample of emerging markets that debt issuance drops when spreads are high, and the
maturity profile of debt shortens considerably.



                                                    2
the government budget set. In this precise sense, using long-term bonds is more expensive,
even though all bonds are priced in an actuarially fair manner.
    In the model, an infinitely-lived sovereign borrows in the form of non-contingent bonds of
di↵ering maturity from global financial markets. When the sovereign is highly indebted, a
risk of default arises from the sovereign’s inability to commit to future payments coupled
with the presence of shocks to the sovereign’s costs of default. The sovereign, however, can
mitigate the resulting default risk by reducing its outstanding stock of external debt.
    In equilibrium, bond prices reflect the probability of default through the life-time of the
bond. Short-term bond prices thus reflect the next period’s probability of default, while
long-term bond prices incorporate the equilibrium expectations of default in subsequent
periods as well. As a result, the price of the long-term bond depends on the equilibrium speed
at which the sovereign will reduce its debt. When auctioning long-term bonds, the sovereign
would like to promise bond holders a quick path to lower debt levels in order to generate
a high price for its bonds. However, as there is no mechanism to enforce such a promise, a
time-consistency problem arises. Short-term bond prices are not sensitive to expectations
of future fiscal trajectories, but rather reflect only the probability of default next period.
Because this probability depends on the amount of debt outstanding next period, which
is known at the time of issuance, the above time-consistency problem does not arise when
auctioning short-term bonds.
    Our first main result leverages this distinction to argue that, in equilibrium, a deleveraging
strategy that relies only on issuances of short-term bonds is optimal. That is, an optimal
deleveraging policy is one where the sovereign services interest payments of existing long-term
bonds, pays o↵ any maturing bonds, and all new issuances consist of short-term bonds only.
However, this result does not, by itself, rule out the possibility that an alternative strategy
that actively uses long-term bonds may be optimal as well. Our second main result establishes
the sub-optimality of auctioning or repurchasing long-term bonds. This implication relies
crucially on properties of equilibrium bond prices, and how they respond to maturity choice.
    In particular, we show that the maturity composition a↵ects equilibrium prices by altering
the speed of develeraging through a “price e↵ect.” To see this price e↵ect most transparently,
consider a sovereign that will repay unless a shock is realized, in which case it is almost
indi↵erent between repayment and default, but slightly prefers the latter. Before the shock is
realized, the sovereign must pay a premium on any new bonds it issues, as bond holders need
to be compensated for the possibility of default. However, the sovereign’s near indi↵erence
implies that there is no associated benefit in exchange for this premium. In fact, the sovereign
would strictly prefer to be able to commit to repay. In equilibrium, the only way to achieve
this commitment is through a reduction in debt levels. Hence, market prices induce the


                                                3
sovereign to save. Note that this price e↵ect is only relevant if the sovereign is issuing new
bonds as it deleverages. This is the case if a large amount of debt is short term and must be
rolled over at frequent intervals. The default premium in short-term bond prices is akin to a
variable cost that must paid each period until default risk is reduced or eliminated. Long-term
bonds also embed a default premium at the time of issuance, but from the perspective of
later periods, this premium is a sunk cost. This implies that the shorter the average maturity
of bonds, the faster the sovereign deleverages.
    The fact that maturity a↵ects the incentives to save raises the question of whether the
government has an incentive to actively adjust the maturity of its outstanding debt. From
the above discussion, any trade that attempts to lengthen the maturity of the outstanding
debt by issuing more long-term bonds reduces the incentive to save. Therefore, the sale of
long-term bonds drives down their price. An opposite trade, one that attempts to decrease the
maturity by buying back long-term bonds, increases the incentive to save. Thus repurchases
of long-term bonds drive up their price. We show that these adverse price movements of
active trading shrink the budget set of the government. This is our second main result.
    By slightly altering the benchmark model (which features a unique equilibrium), we show
that our results are robust to the presence of coordination failures and rollover crises. That
is, during the deleveraging process, it remains optimal to issue only short-term bonds even in
this richer model. Importantly, active maturity management, with the goal of reducing the
risk of coordination failures, should be delayed until the end of the deleveraging period.
    Finally, we show that the outcome of the competitive equilibrium is not efficient. If the
sovereign and its creditors could efficiently restructure debt, the outcome would be to shorten
the maturity of the outstanding debt in order to provide the best incentives to deleverage
quickly. However, this shortening of maturity cannot be implemented in equilibrium because
long-term bond holders have an incentive to hold out and reap a capital gain from the
increased speed of deleveraging associated with shorter maturities. Any lengthening of
maturity to mitigate rollover risk should occur at the end of the deleveraging process and
can be implemented at equilibrium prices.


Related Literature
In their seminal paper on optimal fiscal policy, Lucas and Stokey (1983) discussed at length how
maturity choice is a useful tool to provide incentives to a government that lacks commitment.
Our model emphasizes default risk, something absent from their work. Also related to our
analysis is the usefulness of short-term debt in monitoring and disciplining a debtor. In
particular, many principal-agent models feature the idea that the ability to recall short-term


                                               4
debt mitigates contracting frictions. In the international context, Jeanne (2009) notes that
the threat to withdraw liquid capital from an economy may provide a government with
incentives to respect property rights and enforce contracts. The role of liquid liabilities in
the optimal capital structure of a firm or bank prone to agency problems is the subject of
a large literature in corporate finance (see Tirole (2006) for an overview). There is also a
corporate finance literature on default building on the canonical model of Leland (1994b).
This literature typically focuses on the optimal default decision given a constant capital
structure (which, depending on the exercise, may or may not be chosen optimally in the initial
period). In contrast, our analysis emphasizes that the level and maturity of outstanding debt
is an endogenous variable that may vary over time. In fact, these dynamics are the main
focus.
    The incentive to dilute existing long-term bond holders is also highlighted in recent
quantitative models with long maturity debt (Hatchondo and Martinez, 2009, Chatterjee and
Eyigungor, 2012, Arellano and Ramanarayanan, 2012). The Arellano and Ramanarayanan
paper is particularly relevant, as it contains an active margin for maturity management
at each period of time. Their analysis highlights that maturity structure plays two roles.
The first is that in an environment of incomplete markets, maturity choice determines how
the available assets span shocks, a feature which arises in incomplete-market models with
perfect commitment (for example, Angeletos, 2002 and Buera and Nicolini, 2004). The
second involves enforcement. In particular, maturity structure and the costs associated with
default can be used to support a richer set of state-contingent repayments by increasing
repayment incentives in certain paths. A main result of their quantitative analysis is that
maturities shorten as the probability of default increases. A recent paper by Dovis (2012)
sheds some light on this. Dovis generates a similar shortening of maturity through the
spanning motive alone, relying on trigger strategies to handle enforcement. Another recent
paper, Niepelt (2012), makes significant progress in casting maturity choice in an analytically
tractable framework. It derives closed-form solutions that highlight the role of insurance
via a covariance term. It also highlights that long-term bond prices are relatively elastic, a
feature which plays an important role in our framework as well as the quantitative literature
cited above. Another revelant paper is Broner et al. (2013), which was the first to focus
attention on the shift to short-term debt during crisis in emerging markets. They proposed
an explanation that is based on time varying risk premia, something that we rule out by
construction by assuming risk neutral lenders.2
    Our analysis complements these papers by providing a transparent and tractable framework
   2
   See also the work of Perez (2013) for a more recent data analysis, covering a larger sample of emerging
markets; as well for an alternative explanation based on asymmetric information.



                                                    5
for analyzing maturity choice, by identifying the role of the maturity structure in the speed of
deleveraging, and by explaining why an active use of long-term bonds shrinks the budget set of
the sovereign. To do this, we consciously abstract from spanning by focusing on large shocks
with a constant hazard rate of arrival, rather than the small fluctuations associated with
business cycles. This simplification allows for a complete characterization of the equilibrium.
Moreover, within our framework, we can easily introduce rollover crises as well as perform
the analysis of Pareto efficient restructurings.
    The sub-optimality of repurchasing long-term bonds on secondary markets is reminiscent
of Bulow and Rogo↵ (1988, 1991). Their analysis turns on a finite amount of resources
available to pay bond holders. In such a situation, a bond buyback concentrates the remaining
bondholders’ claim on this payout, and so drives up the price of bonds. Indeed, in this
environment the sovereign would like to dilute existing bond holders by selling additional
claims to this fixed recovery amount. The money raised would come in part at the expense of
the previous bond holders, thus subsidizing the bond issue. The Bulow-Rogo↵ environment
contains no incentive for the sovereign to pay down its debt, whether via a buy back or not
reissuing short-term debt, and its three-period structure o↵ers little scope for debt dynamics.
In our environment, there is no liquidation value to debt which can be diluted; rather, the
behavior of bond prices is due solely to the incentive e↵ects of maturity choice.
    Our discussion of rollover crises is related to the work of Calvo (1988), Cole and Kehoe
(2000), and Aguiar et al. (2012). Our model allows the sovereign to actively manage the
maturity structure of its debt, allowing us to analyze the tradeo↵ between saving (which
is featured in Cole and Kehoe as well as Aguiar et al) and maturity management in the
presence of rollover risk.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the general
environment. Section 3 studies the benchmark model, which features a unique equilibrium,
and states the main results. Section 4 shows how the results extend to an environment with
coordination failures and the possibility of rollover crisis. Section 5 discusses the Pareto
inefficiency of market equilibrium and how a restructuring can improve upon the market
outcome. Section 6 discusses how the results generalize to a more general portfolio of
maturities. A final section concludes.


2     Environment
We are interested in studying equilibria in which the economy faces uninsurable risk that may
lead to endogenous default. In particular, our focus is on scenarios in which the risk of default
is a first-order concern for both consumption-saving decisions as well as maturity choice.

                                               6
During tranquil periods sovereigns issue a range of maturities to smooth tax distortions; to
provide a source of safe assets for savers; to facilitate payments systems; and to insure against
fluctuations in tax revenues, output or interest rates. However, in the midst of a sovereign
debt crisis these considerations are to a large extent dominated by a sovereign’s need to issue
new debt to skeptical investors, to roll over outstanding debt, and to reduce the outstanding
stock of debt in a credible (that is, time consistent) manner. We therefore build a model that
transparently isolates the role of maturity choice in determining whether and how a sovereign
deleverages under the threat of default.
    Consider a small open economy in a discrete time, infinite horizon environment, with time
indexed by t 2 {0, 1, ..., }. There is a single, freely tradable, numeraire consumption good, of
which the economy receives a constant endowment of y each period.3
    The sovereign makes economic decisions on behalf of the small open economy. The
sovereign’s preferences over consumption streams are characterized by the following utility
function:
                                                   1
                                                   X
                                                          t
                                             U=               u(ct ),                                     (1)
                                                   t=0


where 2 (0, 1) and u is bounded, strictly increasing, strictly concave, and satisfies the Inada
conditions.
    The sovereign trades financial claims with the rest of the world, which is populated by
competitive, risk-neutral agents who share the sovereign’s discount factor . We assume
that foreign agents (“creditors”) are willing to borrow and lend at an expected interest rate
R = 1 + r = 1 . Given the small open economy assumption, we assume that the rest of the
world’s resource constraint is irrelevant as long as the creditors break even in expectation.
    Available international assets consist of two types of non-contingent bonds. There exists
a short-term bond which calls for the sovereign to pay R units of a numeraire tradable good
in the next period. There is also a long-term bond, in this case a perpetuity. In Section 6
we show that the results extend directly to the case with a more general maturity structure,
which will be important when considering empirical implications for the average maturity of
outstanding debt versus that of new issuances. This bond calls for the sovereign to pay r
every period, and never matures. The choice of a coupon equal to r is a normalization that
   3
     Note that the endowment stream is not subject to fluctuations. It is well known that in models with
incomplete markets and shocks to output or government expenditure, maturity choice can be used to partially
or fully replicate a full set of state contingent assets (Angeletos, 2002, Buera and Nicolini, 2004). As noted
above, our focus is on the role of maturity in providing incentives to save and in exposing the economy to
rollover risk. To maintain a clear distinction between incentives versus spanning, we abstract from income
fluctuations.



                                                      7
implies that the equilibrium risk-free price of the long-term bond is 1. We assume that debt
positions are non-negative.
    There is limited enforcement of claims on the small open economy. The economy enters
period t with outstanding short- and long-term debt positions bS,t and bL,t , respectively. To
comply with the terms of the debt contract, the sovereign is obligated to pay in aggregate
(1 + r)bS,t + rbL,t . If the sovereign opts not to make this payment, the country is in default.
A fundamental issue in sovereign debt markets concerns the limited ability of creditors to
enforce contracts with a sovereign government. We assume that in case of the default, the
payo↵ to the sovereign is captured by the value V D , which we restrict to be such that
u(0)/(1      ) < V D < u(y)/(1        ).4 An important assumption is that V D does not depend
on the quantity of debt before default.5
    We capture an important feature of real-world sovereign bond markets by allowing
the consequences of default to vary stochastically over time. Shifts in political sentiment
regarding default as well as the willingness of foreign courts to enforce bond contracts imply
that movements in V D can be a source of risk for creditors. Recent examples of shifts
in enforcement include the pressure put on euro-zone banks by regulators to write down
claims against Greece in 2012 as well as a string of US court decisions regarding Argentina’s
restructured debt and hold-out creditors.
    We capture this risk by assuming that V D is a random variable with two possible outcomes,
               D             D                           D
V D 2 {V D , V }, with V > V D . The realization V is one in which default is relatively
attractive, which we shall refer to as the weak enforcement regime, while V D represents a
strong enforcement regime. We assume that the initial state is V D , and the regime switches
     D                                                           D                      D
to V with a constant probability each period. Once V is realized, V D = V with
probability one thereafter.6
    By slightly altering the timing of bond-issuances and default in this environment, we
can study equilibria with and without self-fulfilling debt crises. In the next section, we
characterize this environment with the Eaton and Gersovitz (1981) timing, a situation that
leads to a unique equilibrium (without rollover crises). With this benchmark in hand, in
Section 4 we consider self-fulfilling crisis equilibria by switching to the timing of Cole and
   4
     We could be more explicit and assume that the default is “punished” by financial autarky as well as an
output cost. There may also be (positive or negative) political consequences for the incumbent government
that chooses to default. In this way, we could write an explicit function for the value V D . However, the
default decision of the sovereign will be determined by comparing the value from repayment versus the
resulting value V D , and therefore the latter value is a sufficient statistic for the sovereign’s incentives prior to
default.
   5
     While partial default and renegotiation are important issues in sovereign defaults, for tractability reasons
we leave these aside.
   6                  D
     The fact that V is an absorbing state is not necessary for the results, but simplifies the exposition.



                                                          8
                                                            Auction
                                                         b0S , b0L bL ,
                                         No Default                         Consume
                                                           Payment
                                                          RbS + rbL

          Inherited            VD
           States:         realized, y
           (bS , bL )       received



                                          Default            VD


                    Figure 1: Timing within a Period in the Benchmark Model.


Kehoe (2000). We show that our results are robust to this extension, as well as generating a
stronger intuition for the role of the maturity structure in avoiding self-fulfilling runs.


3     The Benchmark Model
We consider Markov equilibria in which prices and policies are functions of outstanding debt
and the default value: (bS , bL , V D ), as well as whether the sovereign has defaulted in the past.
We shall use bold-face b ⌘ (bS , bL ) as short-hand for the outstanding portfolio of debt. The
timing of a period is depicted in Figure 1 and proceeds as follows. Unless otherwise noted,
we assume the sovereign has not defaulted in a previous period and omit the credit-history
state from the notation.
     The sovereign enters the period with outstanding short-term and long-term debt b =
(bS , bL ) 2 B ⌘ [0, 1) ⇥ [0, 1). At the start of the period, V D is realized and endowment y is
received. After observing V D , the sovereign decides whether it will default in the current
period or not. If it defaults, it receives V D . If it does not default, it auctions b0S short-term
and b0L bL long-term bonds, pays interest and principal as necessary on outstanding bonds,
and consumes. This timing is that of Eaton and Gersovitz (1981) and a large subsequent
literature, but it does embed an important assumption. In particular, at the time of issuing
new bonds the sovereign has committed not to default within the current period. This timing
contrasts with that of Cole and Kehoe (2000), in which new bonds are issued before the
current period’s default decision is made. We shall take up a version of the latter timing in
Section 4 when we consider rollover crises. As we shall see, the Eaton-Gersovitz timing rules
out some equilibria that can be supported under the alternative timing.


                                                    9
3.1     Equilibrium Definition
Recall that the sovereign enters a period with b and observes V D . If it does not default, it can
issue bonds at equilibrium bond prices qj (b, V D , b0 ), j = S, L, where b0 is the amount of debt
outstanding at the end of the period.7 Denote the value function of a sovereign which has not
previously defaulted nand doesonot default in the current period by V (b, V D ). In particular,
                              D
for b 2 B and V D 2 V D , V      , this value function satisfies the Bellman equation:

                                           ⇥                               ⇤
        V (b, V D ) = max          u(c) + E maxhV (b0 , V D0 ), V D0 i V D                             (P1)
                      {c 0,b2B}

                      subject to:
                      c + (1 + r)bS + rbL  y + qS (b, V D , b0 )b0S + qL (b, V D , b0 )(b0L   bL ).

where b0 = (b0S , b0L ). The expectation operator on the continuation value is over next period
realizations of V D0 , conditional on the current period’s V D , and the continuation value is the
maximum over the no-default and default values next period. Let C(b, V D ), BS (b, V D ) and
BL (b, V D ) denote the optimal policies for c, b0S and b0L , respectively. The default decision
depends on whether the above value is greater or less than V D . Let D(b, V D ) be the default
policy function. That is, D(b, V D ) = 1 if V D > V (b, V D ), and zero otherwise, where we
impose the tie-breaking assumption that the sovereign repays when indi↵erent. We will also
assume that the sovereign does not issue bonds at zero price, as that is never strictly optimal.8
The equilibrium value function at the beginning of the period is maxhV (b, V D ), V D i.
    To characterize the sovereign’s problem fully, we need to know more about the bond
price schedules. In particular, competition among the foreign creditors guarantee that that
creditors problem can be characterized by the break even (BE) conditions:
                                           
                       qS (b, V , b ) = E 1 D(b0 , V D0 ) V D
                               D    0
                                                                                                       (BE)
                                                           ✓         ◆
                                   0              0           r + qL0
                       qL (b, V , b ) = E 1 D(b , V )
                               D                      D0
                                                                        VD ,
                                                               1+r

where qL0 in the long-term bond price is shorthand for the long-term bond price next pe-
riod conditional on no default, b0 , and the equilibrium policy functions of the sovereign,
Bj (b0 , V D0 ), j = S, L, that determine debt positions at the end of next period. Note that
the timing from Figure 1 implies that bond purchasers are not vulnerable to default risk
   7
     Note that the sovereign is “large” in regard to its own sovereign debt and internalizes the fact that
equilibrium bond prices depend on the amount of bonds outstanding.
   8
     That is, we rule out b0 such that qS (b, V D , b0 ) = 0. This assumption resolves an indeterminacy that
arises when the government is indi↵erent between defaulting today and tomorrow.


                                                    10
in the period they purchase bonds and therefore the initial state b is not relevant for bond
prices, conditional on b0 and V D . We therefore can drop that state from the bond price
notation and simply write qj (V D , b0 ), j = S, L, where b0 is the end-of-period bond portfolio.
Interior positions on the part of creditors require that the break even conditions hold with
equality. We rule out the possibility of bubbles in the perpetuities by considering equilibria
with qL  1, where 1 is the price of a risk-free bond with coupon r. We also rule out Ponzi
schemes.
    We now proceed to define equilibrium in this environment:

Definition 1. A Markov Perfect Equilibrium consists of policy functions C, BS , BL , and D,
                                                                                                 D
and pricing schedules qS and qL , such that for all debt positions b 2 B and V D 2 {V D , V },
and absent a prior default: (i) the policy functions C, BS , and BL , solve the sovereign’s problem
(P1) conditional on qS and qL and the No-Ponzi condition; (ii) D is an indicator function that
takes one if V (b, V D ) < V D and zero otherwise; and (iii) the creditors’ break-even conditions
(BE) are satisfied with qi 2 [0, 1], i = S, L, given the sovereign’s policy functions.


3.2     Characterizing Equilibria
In characterizing equilibria, it is useful to divide the state space for debt into three regions.
For low levels of debt, the sovereign will not default regardless of the realization of V D . We
shall refer to that region as the “no-default” zone, and denote it by N D:

                              N D = {b 2 B V (b, V D )     V D , 8V D }.

Note that this region depends on the value function V and so is not independent of equilibrium
prices and policies. As we proceed, we shall explicitly define the equilibrium contents of N D.
    At intermediate levels of debt, the sovereign will default if the outside option is high (that
            D
is, V D = V ), but not if it is low. We shall refer to this region as the “crisis” region, given
that there is a positive probability of default, and denote it by C:
                          ⇢
                                                                   D       D
                    C=        b 2 B V (b, V D )   VD    & V (b, V ) < V        .

   Finally, at high enough levels of debt, the sovereign finds it optimal to default even if the
default payout is low. If the initial debt is in this “default” zone, the sovereign immediately
defaults. Denoting this region by D, we have:
                          ⇢
                                                                   D       D
                    D=        b 2 B V (b, V D ) < V D   & V (b, V ) < V        .


                                                  11
This region is of little interest as in equilibrium there is no feasible path that allows the
sovereign to accumulate so much debt. The interesting demarcation is between the no-default
and crisis zones, and how debt and maturity structure evolves in each region.
   Before proceeding to flesh out these regions, we first show that in any Markov equilibria,
the state space is partitioned into these three regions:

Proposition 1. In any Markov Perfect Equilibrium, the sets N D, C and D are non-empty,
disjoint, and N D [ C [ D = B.

Moreover, these regions have a natural ordering such that debt is increasing as we move from
N D to C to D. In particular, if (b0S , b0L ) 2 N D, then there exists b2S > b1S > b0S such that
(b1S , b0L ) 2 C and (b2S , b0L ) 2 D. Similarly, there exists b2L > b1L > b0L such that (b0S , b1L ) 2 C
and (b0S , b2L ) 2 D. This follows directly from the monotonicity and continuity of the value
function, which is proved in the appendix (Lemma A.1).

3.2.1    The No-Default Region

The no-default region is straightforward to characterize. If the sovereign begins the period
with b 2 N D it has no incentive to exit. In particular, to exit the region it must fully
compensate new bondholders for the increased risk of default. The capital loss su↵ered by
the existing long-term bond holders is of no benefit to the sovereign, a point we will discuss
in detail below. Therefore, for any realization of V D the sovereign will not default in a period
in which b 2 N D. This implies that qS (V D , b0 ) = 1 for all b0 2 N D. It can therefore simply
stay put by rolling over its short-term debt at risk-free prices and paying r on its perpetuities.
In fact, it cannot do better:
                                                                                            D
Proposition 2. No-Default Region: Define B by u(y                           rB) = (1     )V . In any Markov
Perfect Equilibrium the no-default region is defined as:

                                  N D = b 2 B bS + bL  B .
                                                            n       D
                                                                        o
                                                   D            D
Moreover, for all b = (bS , bL ) 2 N D and V           2 V ,V               , the equilibrium value function is

                                                   u(y      r(bS + bL ))
                                   V (b, V D ) =                         ;
                                                            1

equilibrium prices satisfy

                                     qS (V D , b) = qL (V D , b) = 1;


                                                       12
and equilibrium policy functions satisfy

                              BS (b, V D ) + BL (b, V D ) = bS + bL .

    This proposition contains a number of statements about equilibrium behavior in the
no-default region. In terms of pricing, the short-term bond price is one (the risk free price) by
definition: the no-default zone is defined as a region in which the sovereign will not default
the next period regardless of V D . The fact that long-term bonds are also risk free reflects
that the no-default zone is an absorbing region. Once there the sovereign will never exit, and
so long-term bonds issued in the no-default zone are never exposed to default risk over the
infinite life of the perpetuity. As both bonds are risk free, they are perfect substitutes, which
is reflected in the fact that the value function depends on the sum of short-term and long-term
debt. Moreover, this value is simply what the sovereign obtains by servicing interest payments
and keeping total debt stationary, which is reflected in the associated policy functions. The
optimality of this policy rests on the fact that = R 1 . The value function also pins down
the boundary of the no-default zone. Faced with risk-free pricing, the optimal policy is to
keep debt constant. The generated no-default value is u(y r(bS + bL ))/(1            ). Now note
                                           D                                 D     D
that if this value is strictly less than V , the sovereign will default if V = V and so this
                                                                                             D
cannot be part of the no-default region. Similarly, if u(y r(bS + bL ))/(1             )>V , a
continuity argument implies this cannot be the boundary of the no-default region.
    Note that long-term bond holders experience a capital loss if the sovereign exits N D, but
this does not provide an incentive for the sovereign to borrow. The capital loss su↵ered if the
government were to exit the no-default region does not benefit the sovereign. This highlights
that the risk of default is not a zero-sum game. For example, suppose that bS + bL = B̄, and
thus the sovereign is indi↵erent to defaulting or not. Consider a one-time deviation from the
government’s equilibrium strategy in which it flips a coin to decide whether to default or not.
This imposes a cost on bond holders, but provides no benefit to the government given the
indi↵erence between repaying and defaulting at B̄. This underlies why exiting N D at the
expense of existing bond holders is never optimal in equilibrium.

3.2.2   The Crisis Region

Having characterized the no-default region, we now turn to the crisis zone. Recall that the
crisis zone is defined as the region in which the sovereign defaults if the weak enforcement
                  D
regime, V D = V , is realized, but not otherwise. Characterizing the equilibrium in the crisis
                       D
region when V D = V is therefore straightforward, as by definition the country defaults if



                                                13
this state is realized. In particular, for b 2 B        N D (that is, the complement of N D in B),

                                        D                 D
                                  qS (V , b) = qL (V , b) = 0.

The more complex case is when V D = V D .In what follows, we focus on this case and suppress
the notation that the initial state is V D = V D when possible.
   The equilibrium price for short term bonds is straightforward to characterize:
                                         8
                                         >
                                         > 1              if b 2 N D
                                         >
                                         <
                                 qS (b) = 1               if b 2 C                            (2)
                                         >
                                         >
                                         >
                                         :0               if b 2 D

where as mentioned above we suppress V D = V D and the argument b is the end-of-period
bond position. If end-of-period bonds are in the crisis region, the sovereign defaults next
period with probability 1       . The other two regions pose no uncertainty, and so the prices
are 1 in N D and 0 in D.
     To characterize long-term bond prices in C, we will ignore the strategies whereby the
sovereign reaches the set D, as these can never be optimal, and thus restrict attention to
strategies that keep the debt portfolio in the set C or exit to N D. Let us consider then the
break-even condition for creditors given the sovereign’s equilibrium policy functions. Starting
                                                                                              D
from an initial b, we can iterate on the debt-issuance policies Bi , i = S, L, assuming V
has not been realized, to determine the number of periods until the sovereign’s portfolio
reaches the no-default zone (if ever). Denote this time until exit from C by T (b). That
is, if b 2 N D, then T (b) = 0; if b 2 C, and (BS (b, V D ), BL (b, V D )) 2 N D, then T = 1;
and so on. Let Bi⌧ (b), i = S, L, denote the bond positions reached by iterating on the policy
functions starting from b for ⌧ times, along a path such that V D = V D at each step. Then,

                     T (b) = min {⌧ 2 {0, 1, ...} |(BS⌧ (b), BL⌧ (b)) 2 N D } .

If no such minimum exists, then T (b) = 1.
    To obtain prices, we solve the creditors’ break even constraints forward starting from
b 2 C (that is, T 1) and, by Proposition 2, we can impose the boundary condition that




                                                   14
qL = 1 at the start of the T ’th period:
                                   ✓        ◆
                                    1
                          qL (b) =            (r + qL (BS (b), BL (b)))
                                     1+r
                                    T (b) ✓      ◆t ✓           ◆T (b)
                                    X       1            1
                                 =r                 +                  .                   (3)
                                    t=1
                                            1+r          1+r

Although the first line recursion assumes T (b) 1 (hence, the 1        in the discount factor),
nevertheless the final line correctly implies qL = 1 for T = 0.
    Note that all that is relevant for bond prices is the speed with which the sovereign
eliminates the possibility of default, not the particular path (or maturity structures) chosen.
When auctioning o↵ long-term debt, the sovereign would like to pledge a quick exit from the
crisis zone, so as to raise the value of the issuances. When buying debt back, the sovereign
would like to pledge the opposite, as to reduce the value of the outstanding bonds. However,
such a pledge must be credible in an environment of limited commitment. We will explore
below how the requirement of time consistency brings maturity choice back into the picture.

Why Save? The “Price E↵ect”

The first issue to establish is whether and why the sovereign would save at all from the Crisis
region to the No-Default region. In particular, suppose the sovereign is currently under the
strong enforcement regime (V D = V D ) and b 2 C. Would it be better o↵ waiting for the
weak regime and then defaulting, rather than saving its way out of the region? To see why
this may be a tempting option, recall that by definition, V (b, V D ) < V̄ D for b 2 C, and
so the sovereign’s value is higher if V̄ D is realized and it chooses to default. Is there any
incentive to save to remove this possibility?
    To explore this question, consider the value of a sovereign that remains at b 2 C. The
price of short-term bonds in the crisis zone is qS = 1     , and letting an infinity denote the
policy of remaining in C forever, the budget constraint implies consumption c1 is:

                            c1 = y     (1 + r)bS     rbL + (1     )bS
                                =y     r(bS + bL )     bS .

   To see whether the sovereign can improve on this policy, consider a policy in which the
sovereign pays down debt to reach the no-default zone next period. Let b0 = (b0S , b0L ) 2 N D
denote end-of-period debt such that b0S + b0L = B̄. Define ⌘ bS + bL B̄ as the amount of
debt that needs to be repaid this period to reach N D. Recall that qi (b0 ) = 1, i = S, L, for


                                               15
b0 2 N D. The consumption in the initial period for this one-step policy, c1 , is:

                               c1 = y     (1 + r)bS        rbL + b0S + b0L   bL
                                  =y      r(bS + bL )         .

       Taking di↵erences, we have:

                                          c1    c1 =          + bS .

As ! 0, we have c1 c1 > 0 as long as b̃S > 0. That is, if the sovereign has short-term
debt outstanding, it is clearly better o↵ paying down its debt. Initial consumption is greater
(c1 ! y rB̄ > c1 ) and the continuation value is greater.9 Therefore, saving is optimal in
the neighborhood just outside the no-crisis zone as long as short-term debt is not zero.10
    The fact that the sovereign saves in an environment in which default occurs with an
increase in welfare reflects a “price e↵ect.” In particular, in the crisis zone the sovereign
must compensate bond holders for the risk of default. The subtlety is that bond prices are
actuarially fair, so why does this matter? It is not risk aversion, as our analysis simply
compared the level of consumption under two alternative policies, and did not require
concavity. The answer is that the bond holders must be compensated for the loss of all (newly
issued) debt claims: bS . However, the gain for the sovereign in the event of default is not
                             D
this amount, but rather V        V (b, V D ), which is arbitrarily small at the boundary of the
                                         D
safe zone. Thus, the realization of V and default is a large loss for bond holders, but a
small utility gain for the sovereign.
    In the crisis zone, the sovereign is being forced to compensate short-term bond holders
for their potential loss, with no o↵setting benefit to itself. The bondholders’ risk is priced
into short-term bonds on a continuous basis, while it is built into long-term bond payments
at issuance. In this sense, short-term debt presents a variable cost for remaining in the
crisis zone, while long-term bonds represent a sunk cost. If bS = 0, the only liabilities are
perpetuities and the steady state policy requires no new bond issuance. In this case, the
sovereign has no incentive to save out of the crisis zone as it never issues new debt. The fact
that short-term bonds provide a greater incentive to save than long-term bonds will reappear
   9                                                                                                   D
      To see that the continuation value is greater, note that V (b, V D ) = u(y r(bS + bL ))/(1  ) = V is the
                                                                P1                          P1 t              D
continuation value for c1 . The continuation value for c1 is t=1 t (1           )t u(c1 ) +   t=1 (1   )t 1 V
        1
= 1 u(c(1 ) ) + 1 (1 ) V (b, V D ) < V (b, V D ), where the last inequality follows if c1 < y r(bS + bL ).
   10
      We have not established that exiting in one step is necessarily optimal, only that it dominates never
exiting in a neighborhood of the no-default zone. In what follows, we shall see that as we move further away
from the boundary of the no-default zone, the incentive to exit remains but the optimal number of steps to
exit increases.


                                                      16
throughout the analysis that follows.

Managing Maturity while Deleveraging

The preceding analysis established that the presence of short-term debt provides an incentive
to exit the crisis region. We now turn to the question of managing maturity structure during
the deleveraging process. The following is a major result of the analysis:

Theorem 1. In any Markov Perfect Equilibrium, never issuing or repurchasing long term
debt is part of a weakly optimal strategy. That is, a policy with b0L = bL achieves the maximum
of Problem (P1).

    We use the proof of the theorem to highlight the forces at work in debt deleveraging in
our environment. It is useful to consider an alternative maximization problem whereby the
sovereign commits to an exit time, but is restricted to trading only short-term bonds along
the transition path. We first show that the value from this program weakly dominates the
equilibrium value when the exit time is the equilibrium exit time. That is, conditional on
exit time, remaining passive in long-term bond markets is without loss. This is Lemma 1.
    Of course, commitment to an exit time is a strong assumption. The second lemma
shows that commitment to an exit time is superfluous when the sovereign does not issue or
repurchase long-term bonds. This is because only long-term bonds are sensitive to promises of
future actions, while short-term bond prices are pinned down by debt positions chosen within
the current period. If the sovereign does not trade long-term bonds, then the commitment
solution remains time consistent in the absence of commitment. This is Lemma 2.
    Before stating the lemmas, we introduce the sovereign’s problem conditional on exit time
T 1, imposing the constraint that bL,t is constant. In particular, let b = (bS , bL ), and let

  W (b, T ) =
                                 (T 1                                            ✓                                   ◆
                                  X                                                  u(y        r(bS,T + bL ))
                                        t         t           T            T 1
                max                         (1   ) u(ct ) +       (1   )
         {bS,T 2R,{ct }Tt=01 }    t=0
                                                                                                1
                                                                                 T 1
                                                                                                                     )
                                                                                 X                               D
                                                                                           t
                                                                            +                  (1   )t   1
                                                                                                             V           , (PW)
                                                                                 t=1




                                                        17
subject to:

                                        T 1✓        ◆t                       ✓         ◆T              !
                                        X    1                                   1
                                                                                            1
                                    1
                  bS  (1 + r)                           (y   ct   rbL ) +                      bS,T       ,
                                        t=0
                                              1+r                                1+r
                bS,t > B     bL for all t < T,
                bS,T  B     bL .

and ct 0 for all t where bS,t is defined recursively as bS,t+1 = (y ct rbL RbS,t )/(1        )
                11
with bS,0 = bS . Note that we allow short-term debt positions be negative in the W problem.
We also allow for T = 1 in the W problem by taking the limit as T ! 1, and replacing the
last constraint with a no-Ponzi condition.
    The objective function through period T is akin to a “perpetual youth” problem in which
the sovereign “dies” with constant hazard and receives V̄ D , and otherwise receives the
no-default-region value if it survives to period T . The budget constraint is the discounted
sum of the sequential constraints ct = y (1 + r)bS,t rbL + (1        )bS,t+1 for t < T 1, and
cT 1 = y (1 + r)bS,T 1 rbL + bS,T for t = T 1. If T is not feasible starting from (bS , bL ),
that is, requires negative consumption, then it suffices to set W (bS , bL , T ) = 1.
    The next lemma states that the solution to the above problem evaluated at the equilibrium
exit time weakly dominates the equilibrium value function.
Lemma 1. Suppose T (b) is an equilibrium time-until-exit. Then V (b, V D )  W (b, T (b)) for
any b 2 C.
    The proof of this lemma (see Appendix) uses the fact that the sovereign’s budget set
in both the W and V problems is determined by the initial discounted expected payments
to bond holders. Holding constant T and the initial debt position is the same as holding
constant expected discounted payments, and the precise path chosen is irrelevant for the
budget set conditional on T . Therefore, the sequence which keeps bL,t constant does just as
well as the candidate equilibrium sequence.
    However, the premise of the W value function is that the sovereign can commit to T .
This begs the question of whether the sequence of bond positions is time consistent absent
commitment. Before showing this, let us argue that the optimal solution to the W problem
does not feature non-negative debt positions:
Claim 1. For any (bS , bL ) 2 C such that bL > B, it follows that {1} = arg maxT W (bS , bL , T ).
  This result implies that, starting from any (bS , bL ) 2 C, in the solution to the problem
maxT W (bS , bL , T ), if the sovereign chooses to save, then it must be that bL < B and thus,
  11
       The constraint that bS,t > B     bL would not bind in a solution to the W problem.


                                                         18
the implied short-term debt positions from the W problem are reduced every period but will
always remain positive (that is, bS,t bS,T = B bL > 0).
    The next lemma uses the fact that allocation that solves the best W problem is feasible
in any equilibrium to state a converse of Lemma 1:

Lemma 2. In any equilibrium, V (b, V D )          supT   1   W (b, T ) for any b 2 C.

    There are two key elements to the proof of this lemma. The first is that an allocation that
solves problem W for a given T has the feature that the issuances of short term bonds are
strictly decreasing over time and hence the implied debt positions remains in region C until
exit. The second is that we know the equilibrium prices of the short term debt (they are
equal to 1       as long as we remain in C, and 1 when we exit). It follows then, that we can
compute the cost at equilibrium prices of an allocation that solves problem W and establish
that such an allocation is feasible for the equilibrium problem. Hence, the equilibrium value
function cannot be lower than W (b, T ). Note that we can ignore the prices of the long-term
bond in this argument, as the country does not issue them nor does it buy them back.
    It is interesting to highlight how the above simple arguments fail if we were to restrict
attention to strategies that use only long-term bonds. In this case, a version of Lemma
1 will still hold: if the sovereign commits to an exit time it is irrelevant for its welfare
whether it uses short-term or long-term bonds to achieve this goal. However, we do not know
the equilibrium prices of the long-term bonds, and so cannot establish that the resulting
W -problem allocation is feasible in equilibrium. That is, Lemma 2 fails. And for good reason,
as we discuss in Section 3.5, the optimal consumption allocation in general cannot be a↵orded
in equilibrium with strategies that rely on trading long-term bonds.
    Combining Lemmas 1 and 2, we have that in any equilibrium, V (b, V D ) can be achieved
by setting bL,t+1 = bL,t until exit from the crisis zone, which is the result of Theorem 1.


3.3     The Equilibrium Value Function
Theorem 1 allows us to pin down the crisis zone value function for any equilibrium. In
particular, V (b, V D ) = supT W (b, T ) for b 2 C, and we can therefore characterize the
equilibrium value function by analyzing the W problem (PW).
   The first thing to note is that at the time of exit, bS,T = B bL . That is, the sovereign
does not “over save” in exiting the crisis zone.12 Conditional on T , problem (PW) is a simple
  12
    To see this, suppose it did choose bS,T < B bL . It could increase consumption in period T         1
by a small amount. To satisfy its budget constraint, it increases bS,T by an equal amount. As long as
this increase is less than B bL bS,T > 0, the sovereign will exit the crisis zone on schedule. Note
that in the period of exit, the sovereign is saving. In particular, it faces risk free rates and chooses


                                                  19
consumption-savings problem with an e↵ective discount factor of (1           ) = 11+r , which
equals the e↵ective interest rate on short-term debt. Therefore, consumption will be constant
while in the crisis zone. In particular, define C T (b) as consumption conditional on exit in
T    1 periods starting from b 2 C. Holding consumption constant and evaluating the
summation in the budget constraint of problem (PW) we have:
                                    ✓                                ◆
          T                                 1         (1        )            T 1
       C (b) = y        rbL +                       T (1
                                                                                   (1        )T   1
                                                                                                      (B        bL )      (1 + r)bS .   (4)
                                        1                       )T

Substituting into the objective function in (PW), we have:
                            ✓           T
                                                            ◆                                                   ✓                ◆
                                1           (1         )T                T              T                 T 1       u(y    rB)
              W (b, T ) =                                       u C (b) +                   (1        )
                                1           (1         )                                                              1
                                ✓               T   1
                                                                     ◆
                                    1                 (1        )T 1    D
                       +                                               V .                                                              (5)
                                            1         (1        )

The value function V (b, V D ) = supT W (b, T ), which is a maximization over one argument.
The usefulness of Theorem 1 here is that determining the equilibrium value function does
not require solving the fixed point between equilibrium long-term bond prices and policy
functions.
    Moreover, if W (b, T ) has a strict maximizer, that is, if the sovereign is not indi↵erent be-
tween two exit horizons, then that maximizer characterizes equilibrium prices and consumption
policies. To see this, recall that in any equilibrium supT W (b, T ) = V (b, V D ) = W (b, T (b)),
where the last expression uses the equilibrium time-until-exit associated with an equilibrium
V . If the first expression has a unique maximizer, than there is a unique equilibrium time-
until-exit T (b). In what follows, we use the tie-breaking assumption that when indi↵erent, the
sovereign exits sooner rather than later, and in this way, we can pin down unique equilibrium
prices and consumption paths.
    Before proceeding, we can now let D = {b 2 B| supT W (b, T ) < V D }. This region defines
                                                                           D
the outer boundary of the equilibrium crisis zone. Note that V D < V and continuity of V
implies the N D and D regions are always separated by a non-empty crisis region. We have
now characterized the equilibrium value function over the entire state space:

Proposition 3. Equilibrium Value Functions: In any Markov Perfect Equilibrium, we
c = y rbL (1 + r)bS,T 1 + bS,T < y r(bL + bS,T ), where the last inequality follows from the requirement
that bS,T < bS,T 1 . The latter quantity is consumption while in the safe zone, which therefore has a lower
marginal utility of consumption. Thus, shifting consumption into the crisis zone while maintaining the same
time-until-exit improves welfare.




                                                                     20
have:
                                8
                                < u(y   r(bS +bL ))
                                                      if b 2 N D and all V D
                         D              1
                  V (b, V ) =
                                :sup          W (b, T ) if b 2 C and V D = V D .
                                        T 1


                                                                D           D
and where V (b, V D ) < V D for all b 2 D, and V (b, V ) < V                    for all b 2 C [ D.

    With equilibrium value functions in hand, we now turn our attention to equilibrium bond
prices.


3.4     Iso-T Regions and Iso-V Curves
Equilibrium bond prices can be characterized from the optimal time-until-exit. In Figure 2
we plot “iso-T” loci in the space of short- and long-term debt. That is, along each of the
iso-T curves, the sovereign is indi↵erent between exiting in T and T + 1 periods, while within
each region there is a unique optimal exit time. Closest to the no-default region, we have
T (b) = 1, and as we add debt the time-until-exit increases. As implied by Claim 1, if the
sovereign holds only long-term debt, T (0, bL ) = 1 is always optimal, as there is no incentive
to save. Thus the T = 1 locus originates from the horizontal edge of the no-default zone. If
bS = 0, then either T = 0 or T = 1.
    We can characterize the slope of the equilibrium iso-T curves using the fact that along the
(outer) boundaries of each region the sovereign is indi↵erent between exiting in T and T + 1
periods. That is, {T, T + 1} 2 argmaxT̃ W (b, T̃ ), and so W (b, T ) = W (b, T + 1). Using the
expression for C T from (4), the implicit function theorem, and some algebra, we have:

                                 dbS                                    qL (b)
                                                                    >          ,                     (6)
                                 dbL    W (b,T (b))=W (b,T (b)+1)       qS (b)

where T (b) is the optimal exit time. Recall that if the sovereign is indi↵erent between exiting
in T and T + 1, equilibrium prices assume that the sovereign exits in T periods. Therefore,
the right-hand-side of (6) is the relative price of a long-term bond conditional on exiting in
T periods.
    The implication of (6) for Figure 2, is that as we increase bS and decrease bL along a line of
constant market value (qS bS + qL bL ), the optimal exit time is weakly decreasing. The straight
lines in Figure 2 have slope qL /qS , and within an iso-T region depict lines of constant market
value. As we cross the boundary of an iso-T region moving in the “northwest” direction, the
exit time falls by one period, and the ratio of equilibrium prices qL /qS increases.
    We can use the ratio qL /qS to construct “iso-V” curves as well; that is, loci of (bS , bL )

                                                      21
                                    bS




                        T (b) = 3                    T (b) = 1



                        T (b) = 2



                                                            qL (b)
                                                            qS (b)
                        T (b) = 1




                                         ND


                                                                      bL

           Figure 2: Equilibrium Iso-T Regions. Lighter shaded areas represent
           regions of higher equilibrium exit times. The vertical arrows represent the
           infinity of di↵erent Iso-T regions that lie in that area until reaching the
           boundary of T (b) = 1 region. The white linear segments represent prices
           in the di↵erent regions, with regions with higher exit times having flatter
           lines (that is, lower perpertuity prices).


such that V (b) is constant. These are depicted in Figure 3. Because of the discreteness of a
period, in the interior of an iso-T region, small movements in b will not change the optimal
exit time, and hence do not change prices. Therefore W and V are di↵erentiable in bS and bL
in the interior of an iso-T region. Note that conditional on T , constant W implies a constant




                                               22
C T , and di↵erentiation of (4), and using the expression for qL from equation (3), delivers:

                                            dbS                         qL (b)
                                                                =              .
                                            dbL   V (b)=V               qS (b)

This slope reflects the fact that conditional on an equilibrium T , short-term and long-term
bonds can be traded at these relative prices, holding constant total market value. As such
(small) exchanges leave exit time unchanged, and market value represents expected payments
to bondholders, the sovereign is indi↵erent along this iso-market value lines. However, as
we shift the portfolio we eventually reach the boundary of the iso-T region. By definition,
the sovereign is indi↵erent between exiting in T and T + 1 periods at the boundary, and the
iso-V line is continuous but shifts slope to reflect the new region’s prices.

                    bS

                             B
                                                                    qL (b)
                                                      slope =       qS (b)




                                            A                         C
                                                                             V (b) = V (B) = V (C)
                         qLC (bC
                               L    bL )+
                                                                             V (b) = V (A)
                          qSC (bC
                                S    bS ) = 0

                                            qLB (bB
                                                  L     bL ) + qSB (bB
                                                                     S       bS ) = 0


                                                                                         bL
            Figure 3: Equilibrium Iso-V curves and Zero-Cost Trades. Solid
            lines represent two distinct equilibrium iso-V curves. Points B and C
            represent possible zero costs trades from A.

    Note that as we add debt, V decreases, and so the value function is quasi-convex in the
crisis region. That is, a line connecting two points on an iso-V curve passes through regions of
weakly lower values. This facet is somewhat masked in Figure 3 as the iso-V curves look like
“standard” indi↵erence curves from quasi-concave preferences. However, as debt is a “bad”
rather than a “good,” the iso-V lines are actually inverted relative to standard preferences. It
is important to note that the underlying preferences for the sovereign are standard, concave
preferences. The iso-V lines are equilibrium outcomes. As we move through the debt space,
the sovereign is facing di↵erent incentives to save (and hence di↵erent prices), which generates
the quasi-convexity of the value function in equilibrium. The iso-V curves also help clarify

                                                           23
that the sovereign is indi↵erent between transition paths that involve the same sequence of
iso-V curves; that is, there is a local indeterminacy regarding portfolio choice due to the
discreteness of time. The sovereign moves through the iso-T regions in consecutive fashion
(T , T 1, ...), but within each iso-T region there is a line segment of constant market value
of debt along which the sovereign is indi↵erent.

The Yield Curve

Before moving on, let us discuss the implications of the results so far for the yield curve. This
is of particular interest as the yield curve inverts in emerging markets when bond spreads are
high (Broner et al., 2013). In our model, such an inversion occurs naturally, reflecting that
deleveraging implies the long-run risk of default is less than the short-run risk.
    To see this formally, let rS and rL denote the e↵ective yields for the short and the long
term bond, respectively. The yields can be written as:

                                    R                             r
                             rS =         1,       and    rL =      .
                                    qS                           qL

Note that when b 2 N D, qS = qL = 1, and both yields are equal to r, as expected (that is,
the yield curve is flat at risk-free yields). When b 2 C, qS = 1 and

                                                  r+      r
                                     rS    rL =             .
                                                  1      qL

For T (b) = 1, qL = (1r+ )r and thus the above implies rS = rL . This reflects that if
the sovereign never exits C, long-run risks and short-run risks are equivalent. However, if
T (b) < 1, then there is a chance the government exits C in finite time, and therefore long-run
risk is lower than short-run risk. To see that this implies rS > rL , note that qL > (1r+ )r for
T (b) < 1. Substituting into the above expression implies that rS rL > 0.


3.5    Zero-Cost Trades and Optimal Portfolio Management
Theorem 1 stated that a policy of passive long-term debt and active short-term debt man-
agement is consistent with optimality. This allows us to characterize any equilibrium by
using Problem PW. However, while Theorem 1 states it suffices to use short-term bonds, it
does not necessarily rule out an equally optimal alternative that involves long-term bonds.
Under commitment, short-term and long-term bonds span each other in our environment,
and the portfolio would be indeterminate (as it is in the no-default region). However, this
indeterminacy does not survive the absence of commitment. We now explain why limited


                                                  24
commitment implies that the use of long-term bonds may be strictly sub-optimal in equilib-
rium. In particular, we show that debt dynamics that involve active long-term bond policies
shrink the budget set at equilibrium prices.
    We can use Figure 3 to discuss this. To do so, we first consider “zero-cost trades.” These
are portfolio shifts that require and generate no net payments. Specifically, suppose the state
at the end of a period is b, and the sovereign decides to engage in another round of trading,
moving to a new state b0 such that:

                                qL (b0 ) (b0L   bL ) + qS (b0 ) (b0S   bS ) = 0.                          (7)

Note that the prices are those of the new portfolio (b0 ), consistent with the equilibrium going
forward from b0 . We claim the following:

Lemma 3. Suppose that b and b0 satisfy the zero-cost trade equation (7). If T (b0 ) 2     /
argmaxT W (b, T ), then V (b0 ) < V (b). That is, if the equilibrium exit time at b0 is not
optimal for the sovereign at b, the zero-cost trade is strictly welfare reducing.

This lemma implies that any zero-cost trade that changes optimal exit time (and hence
long-term bond prices) is welfare reducing for the sovereign. Note that in a zero-cost trade,
the sovereign is actively trading long-term bonds. Importantly, the result is independent of
the sign of b0L bL ; that is, whether the sovereign is selling or buying its long-term bonds,
such trades are welfare reducing if they change the exit time.
    The formal proof is in the appendix (and follows straightforwardly from the fact that T (b)
is chosen optimally), but the result can be discussed intuitively using Figure 3. Let point
b = A represent an initial state. Now consider a zero cost trade that buys long-term bonds in
exchange for short-term bonds. Such a move will necessary move the economy to a point such
as b0 = B, at which the exit time is lower. The line connecting A to B contains the possible
zero-cost trades under point-B prices. By construction, this line has slope qL (B)/qS (B),
which makes it tangent to the iso-V line at B. Moreover, because B is in a lower exit-time
region, this slope is steeper than the indi↵erence curve at A. This implies that B is on a
lower iso-V curve than A. The intuition is that long-term bond prices are relatively high at
B, and buying back the long-term bonds involves a net transfer to bondholders via a capital
gain. The transfer arises from the greater incentives to exit quickly at point B.13
  13
     This is reminiscent of the buyback “boondoggle” of Bulow and Rogo↵ (1988), although the mechanism is
via incentives in this case, while it is through liquidation value in the Bulow-Rogo↵ environment. In fact, in
the Bulow-Rogo↵ environment, the sovereign would be better o↵ issuing long-term bonds to dilute exiting
bondholders’ liquidation claims. This is not the case in our environment, as trades to point C in Figure 3
demonstrate.



                                                       25
    Similarly, point C is a zero-cost trade from A in which the sovereign issues long-term bonds
and buys back short-term bonds. Again, the line connecting A to C has slope qL (C)/qS (C),
the equilibrium relative price at C. As C is in a region with longer time-until-exit than A, the
relative price of long-term bonds is lower at C. This implies the trading line is shallower than
the iso-V curve at A. This trade also leads to a lower iso-V line. In this case, the sovereign is
issuing long-term bonds at low prices. The existing bond holders do take a capital loss, but
the sovereign is no better o↵ as the low price on the newly issued bonds implies it can retire
very little of the short-bonds (hence the shallow slope of the zero-cost line to point C).
    Lemma 3 concerns zero-cost trades, but the result helps evaluate the benefits of any
portfolio shift, including those involving a reduction in total debt. In particular, any trade
from state b to another state b0 can conceptually be decomposed into trading only short-term
bonds and then shu✏ing the portfolio in a zero-cost trade.
    To see this, consider the original budget constraint in a period in which the sovereign
enters with b and exits with b0 , conditional on no change in V D :

                    c + (1 + r)bS + rbL = y + qS (b0 )b0S + qL (b0 )(b0L    bL ).            (8)

This situation is shown by the solid arrow in Figure 4.

                      bS

                                                          b




                                       b0                       only short-term


                               zero-cost trade
                                                          b00

                                                                           bL
            Figure 4: A Decomposition. A movement from b to b0 can be decom-
            posed as a trade from b to b00 using only short-term debt, and a zero-cost
            trade from b00 to b0 . The utility at b00 is strictly higher than at b0 .




                                                 26
       For our conceptual decomposition, let us define b00S as follows:

                                  qL (b0 )(b0L   bL ) + qS (b0 )(b0S   b00S ) = 0.                            (9)

That is, b00 ⌘ (b00S , bL ) is such that b0 represents a zero cost trade from b00 , at q(b0 ) prices. We
can then rewrite the budgetary impact of moving from b to b0 by conceptually breaking up
the movement into two trades within the period: (i) the sovereign moves to b00 = (b00S , bL )
by paying down (or issuing) short-term bonds and not trading long-term bonds, and then
immediately makes (ii) a zero-cost trade from b00 to b0 .
   Note that, using equations (8) and (9), the budget constraint can be rewritten as:

                                   c + (1 + r)bS + rbL = y + qS (b0 )b00S .                                  (10)

    Now consider an alternative policy of just trading to b00 , rather than to b0 . From Lemma
3, we know that the continuation value at b00 is weakly greater than b0 as the two points
are related by a zero-cost trade. Thus trading to b00 weakly dominates trading to b0 if it
does not require lower current-period consumption. The required consumption for the trade
to b00 is given by equation (10) with qS (b0 ) replaced by qS (b00 ). But note that the weakly
greater equilibrium value at b00 also implies that qS (b00 ) qS (b0 ), with strict inequality if
b00 2 N D. Relative to (10), this weakly relaxes the current-period budget constraint, and
thus the required consumption to trade to b00 is higher.14
    Hence, the sovereign is weakly worse o↵ trading to b0 than to simply trade to b00 and stay
put, and strictly better o↵ if moving to b0 involves di↵erent incentives to exit than b00 . Thus
an exit strategy that involves only short-term bonds weakly dominates alternative paths,
and strictly dominates those that involve changes in long-term bond prices. In a situation of
deleveraging under the risk of default, a sovereign will shy away from using the long-term
bond market: at equilibrium prices, it is too expensive to use it.
    We summarize the results of this subsection in the following theorem:15

Theorem 2. Let b 2 C and suppose the sovereign decides to exit the crisis region in T
periods. Relative to the short-term-bond-only strategy that solves problem W (b, T ), any
alternative portfolio strategy starting from b that involves active long-term bond management
is weakly sub-optimal, and generically strictly sub-optimal if the equilibrium bond prices along
the transition di↵er from those along the W trajectory.
  14
      More precisely, this relaxes the budget constraint as long as b00S 0. However, if the implied b00S < 0, then,
from Claim 1, it is optimal to just remain at b.
   15
      The term “generically” in the proposition refers to the possibility that the sovereign is indi↵erent between
exiting in T and T + 1 periods.


                                                        27
4      Maturity and Rollover Crises
In the preceding analysis, we were able to uniquely characterize equilibrium regions and
value functions. Moreover, bond prices were uniquely determined subject to the tie-breaking
assumption when the sovereign is indi↵erent over two exit times. Conditional on an exit
time, there is a local indeterminacy about portfolios, as small changes in maturity structure
may not induce a discrete change in exit time. This local indeterminacy aside, the fact that
the equilibrium is pinned down leaves no room for coordination failures and the resulting
self-fulfilling rollover crises. In this section we slightly modify the environment to allow for
such possibilities.
     Given our focus on the choice of the maturity structure, this modification is an important
one, as it has been pointed out (see, for example Cole and Kehoe, 2000) that a longer maturity
structure mitigates the vulnerability to a self-fulfilling rollover crisis. In this section, we
consider how this insight applies to a model with active maturity management. We show that
the main result of the preceding analysis goes through; that is, long-term bonds are not used
during deleveraging, save for an extension of the maturities at the end of the process. That
is, the desired lengthening of maturities is delayed as long as possible in order to minimize
the costs of deleveraging.
     As noted before, we need to alter the environment to allow coordination failures by the
lenders. To this end, we alter the timing within a period (see Figure 5). The start of the
period is the same as the benchmark. Specifically, assuming no default in a previous period,
the sovereign enters the period with b and draws V D . Before making a default decision,
the sovereign auctions newly issued bonds. The next step is bond-market settlement, which
involves the sovereign’s decision to repay outstanding claims or not. If the sovereign does not
default, it settles outstanding claims using a combination of endowment y and newly raised
money.16 In the no-default case, the environment is identical as in the benchmark.
     However, if the sovereign defaults during settlement, the money raised at auction is
distributed across all bond holders based on their respective positions. In particular, the
money raised from new bond holders is partially transferred to existing bond holders.17
Importantly, this exposes newly issued bonds to default risk within the period of issuance,
and, as we shall see, opens the door to rollover crisis.18
  16
     See Lorenzoni and Werning (2013) for an alternative source of multiplicity along the lines of Calvo (1988).
  17
     This is consistent with the fact that all bondholders have equal seniority in the event of default.
  18
     If money raised from newly issued bonds were instead returned in entirety to the new bond holders, the
environment would be equivalent to the benchmark. Note also that the environment is a slight departure
from that of Cole and Kehoe (2000). Cole and Kehoe di↵er from that of Figure 5 in that in the event of
default, the sovereign gets to keep the proceeds from the newly issued bonds. This requires keeping track
of o↵-equilibrium outcomes in which the sovereign issues a large amount of new bonds and consumes the
proceeds while defaulting, an unnecessary complication. The critical assumption is that new bond holders


                                                      28
                                                               No Default        Consume



       Inherited                 VD              Auction
        States:              realized, y                       Settlement
                                               b0S , b0L bL
        (bS , bL )            received



                                                                Default            VD


             Figure 5: Timing within a Period in the Model with Coordination Failures.
             Note the di↵erence with Figure 1.


   Given the new timing, we need to update the break-even conditions (BE) used to price
bonds in the benchmark environment. Specifically, the fact that contemporaneous default is
a possibility implies that:
                                                     
                     D   0
         qS (b, V , b ) = (1        D(b, V , b ))E 1 D(b0 , V D0 , b00 ) V D
                                           D   0
                                                                                               (BE0 )
                                                                          ✓         ◆
                                              0            0           00    r + qL0
         qL (b, V D , b0 ) = (1           D                    D0
                                    D(b, V , b ))E 1 D(b , V , b )                     VD ,
                                                                              1+r

where qL0 as before is the long-term bond price next period given the government’s policy
functions. The important di↵erence between (BE) and (BE0 ) is that the current period’s
b is a relevant state variable in the pricing equation. This reflects that the initial debt is
relevant for the sovereign’s current-period default decision, and this decision is relevant for
newly issued bonds.19
    We now consider equilibria in which a rollover crisis shrinks the area of no default, leaving
the country vulnerable to default in regions of the state space that would otherwise be risk
free.


4.1     Coordination Failures
The definition of equilibria in this Rollover Crisis Environment is the same as the benchmark
(Definition 1), with (BE0 ) replacing (BE) in condition (iii). With the new timing, we no
are immediately at risk, not who receives the money.
  19
     The break-even condition should allow for money raised in new bond issuances to be rebated to all
bondholders; since this is always zero in equilibrium, we omit it from the expressions.



                                                      29
                              bS

                                   N D boundary


                                                            C̃



                                           A

                                         N˜D                   B
                                                                              bL

               Figure 6: No-Default Region with Rollover Crises. Shaded area
               represents the C̃ region. In equilibrium, there would be an immediate
               trade from any point such as A to point B, at risk free prices. Note that
               point B lies in the boundary of N D, this is important for the equivalence
               result of Proposition 4.


longer have uniqueness in terms of equilibrium regions, values, or prices. However, it is
straightforward to verify that the benchmark equilibrium remains an equilibrium under the
new timing.20 We shall denote the benchmark equilibrium’s value function and prices as V ?
and qj? , j = S, L, respectively, and use them as references for the equilibrium with rollover
crises characterized in this section.
    As in the benchmark we divide the state space into three regions: a no-default region
N˜D, a crisis region C̃, and an immediate default region D̃, where throughout the section a
tilde indicates a departure from the benchmark. The benchmark N D is the largest possible
no-default region. We now construct an equilibrium with the smallest possible no-default
zone:                   (                                                     )
                                                           u(y    rb L )    D
                N˜D = b 2 B u(y (1 + r)bS rbL ) +                         V     .         (11)
                                                              1

    To see how this region arises in equilibrium, suppose that creditors refuse to roll over
maturing bonds as they anticipate a default. The condition in (11) states that even if creditors
                                                 D
refuse to roll over maturing bonds and V D = V , the sovereign would still prefer to repay
at all periods rather than to default. We contrast N˜D with the benchmark N D in Figure
 20
      We omit the details of this argument in order to focus on equilibria with coordination failures.


                                                      30
6. The region N˜D is asymmetric with respect to maturity, with the boundary favoring
long-term debt. This reflects that only short-term debt is vulnerable to a roll over crisis. The
boundary of the benchmark N D is the dashed line with slope 1, the ratio of risk-free prices.
Note that N˜D is a strict subset of the benchmark N D, with the boundaries overlapping
only at bS = 0 (at which point the N D region is tangent to N˜D).
    To clarify, we are constructing an alternative equilibrium with a smaller no-default region
N˜D. Within the equilibrium, there is no uncertainty about the strategies of bondholders.
In particular, we are not introducing a sunspot such that agents switch from one equilibrium
strategy to the other. The equilibrium features a coordination failure that generates a
no-default region that is strictly smaller than N D.
    Outside N˜D, the sovereign prefers to default when creditors are unwilling to roll over
maturing bonds. In particular, suppose the sovereign faces the following price schedules in
the weak enforcement regime:
                  8
                  >
                  > 1                                 if b 2 N˜D, b0 2 N˜D
                  >
                  <
          D   0
  qj (b, V , b ) = p(b, b0S + b0L ) 2 (0, 1)          if b 62 N˜D, b0 2 N˜D, and b0S + b0L < B p (b) (12)
                  >
                  >
                  >
                  :0                                  otherwise,

for j = S, L, b0 = (b0S , b0L ), and b, b0 2 B. The first line reflects that bonds can be rolled over
at risk free prices if the initial b 2 N˜D. The second line defines “o↵ equilibrium” prices
that rule out the government repurchasing long-term bonds at price zero and not defaulting,
which is inconsistent with equilibrium. The functions p and B p ensure prices are consistent
with equilibrium over the entire debt state space, even for outcomes (b, b0 ) never chosen
in equilibrium.21 The final line of (12) reflects that for b 2        / N˜D, the government is not
                                                                    D
a↵orded the opportunity to fully roll over its debt if V D = V , and thus must choose between
immediately paying down its debt or default.
    Faced with these prices, the sovereign’s value function in the weak enforcement state
  21
       In particular, suppose the government could repurchase bonds at price zero to a point B 0 = b0S + b0L , where
                                                                                                                    D
(b0S , b0L ) 2 N˜D. For this to be an equilibrium price, we require u(y RbS rbL ) + u(y rB 0 )/(1              )V .
The threshold B p (b) is the threshold for B 0 such that this holds with equality, and so zero is an equilibrium price
for any B 0 B p (b). For B 0 < B p (b), p(b, B 0 ) is constructed so that the sovereign is strictly indi↵erent between
default and not. That is p(b, B 0 ) = p̃, where p̃ 2 (0, 1) solves u(y RbS rbL +p̃(B 0 bL ))+ u(y rB 0 )/(1 ) =
   D
V , and so the government is indi↵erent to default and bringing total debt down to B 0 at price p(b, B 0 ).
This indi↵erence is then used to construct a mixing equilibrium, where the sovereign defaults with probability
1 p(b, B 0 ), justifying the price.




                                                         31
conditional on no-default this period is:

                                 D     u(y       r(bS + bL ))
                         V (b, V ) =                          if b 2 N˜D                   (13)
                                                 1
            D       D
and V (b, V )  V if b 62 N˜D.
   With prices and values determined for the weak enforcement regime, we now turn to
the strong enforcement regime. The main result of this section is that the prices and value
functions in the crisis equilibrium conditional on being in the strong enforcement regime are
the same as the benchmark without rollover crises:

Proposition 4. There exists a Markov Perfect Equilibrium of the Rollover Crisis Environment
that has the following characteristics: Let N˜D be defined by (11); D̃ = D be the default
zone as in the benchmark model; and C̃ the remaining region of B. The equilibrium value
                      D
function for V D = V is given by (13); and for V D = V D satisfies V (b, V D ) = V ? (b, V D )
for all b 2 B, where V ? is the value function from the benchmark equilibrium.

   This proposition states that the sovereign’s value is the same as in the no-rollover-crisis
benchmark, conditional on V D = V D . This is so despite the presence of rollover risk, which
is manifested in a strictly smaller no-default region and strictly larger crisis region. To
understand why the two environments are equivalent in the strong enforcement regime,
consider a point b 2 N D but not in N˜D. This is the region in which a “self-fulfilling crisis”
induces default in the current environment, but not in the benchmark. However, absent the
onset of the run this period (that is, if the current V D = V D ), the sovereign can still trade
sovereign bonds. In particular, it can trade into N˜D at risk-free prices. More generally:

Proposition 5. The prices associated with the equilibrium of Proposition 4 are given by (12)
           D
for V D = V and for V D = V D and b 2 / D are:
                                                8
                                                >
                                                > 1 if b0 2 N˜D
                                                >
                                                <
                             qS (b, V D , b0 ) = 1       if b0 2 C̃                        (14)
                                                >
                                                >
                                                >
                                                :0 otherwise;

and
                                          8
                                          >
                                          > 1 if b0 2 N˜D
                                          >
                                          <
                       qL (b, V D , b0 ) = 1       if b0 2 N D N˜D                         (15)
                                          >
                                          >
                                          >
                                          :q ? (V D , b0 ) otherwise,
                                             L



                                                  32
where qL? is the price function of the benchmark equilibrium.

   This proposition says that if the end-of-period debt places the sovereign in the no-default
region, bonds carry risk-free prices absent a run. Thus, in the strong enforcement regime,
the sovereign can always trade into the no-default region. More importantly, such trades are
zero-cost trades if b 2 N D. To see this, suppose that b = (bS , bL ) is such that bS + bL = B;
that is, b is on the boundary of the benchmark no-default region. This is depicted in Figure
6 by point as A. The cost to trade to point B = (0, B) 2 N˜D from A is:

                        qS (b, V D , B)(0     bS ) + qL (b, V D , B)(B   bL )
                         =    bS + B        bL = 0.

Note a key distinction between this zero-cost trade and those considered in the benchmark.
In the benchmark, the boundary of the no-default region had a slope of 1, which is the
ratio of risk-free prices. Thus it was never possible to trade into the no-default region at
these prices. However, in the current environment the no-default region is not a line of slope
  1, and thus it is possible that a zero-cost trade at risk-free prices can move the sovereign
into the no-default region. In fact, it is optimal for the sovereign to trade into the no-default
region N˜D as soon as it reaches the boundary of the benchmark no-default region. The value
at this boundary is therefore the same as in the benchmark. Moreover, the prices outside the
benchmark N D are the same as in the benchmark. This allows the sovereign to pursue the
same policies and achieve the same welfare as in the benchmark case without roll over crises.
    The main distinction between the benchmark and the current environment with crises
is what happens at the boundary of N D. In the benchmark, the sovereign could simply
remain at the boundary, regardless of its maturity structure. In the current environment, the
sovereign must lengthen maturities in order to reach the new no-default region N˜D. This
reflects the asymmetry of maturity choice in the presence of rollover risk. However, prior
to this reshu✏ing of maturity at the boundary, the sovereign’s incentives not to trade in
long-term debt markets remain the same as in the benchmark. The optimal sequencing is
therefore to remain passive in long-term debt markets while deleveraging, and then lengthen
maturity at the end of the process.
    From the preceding analysis, it is clear that the model easily extends to arbitrary no-
default regions. Whatever the shape of this region in equilibrium, the relevant boundary is at
what point in the debt space can a zero-cost trade reach into the no-default region. Absent a
contemporaneous default, the sovereign will find it optimal to exploit such a trade. In terms
of welfare and risk, therefore, this extended boundary is the relevant frontier of the no-default
region and this boundary by definition is symmetric with a slope of 1.

                                                  33
5      Efficient Restructuring
The analysis thus far has concerned equilibrium debt management. That is, faced with
competitive prices, the sovereign optimally chooses its maturity structure. We now turn to
the question of whether there is a potential Pareto improvement in a non-competitive setting.
That is, if creditors and the sovereign could bargain over a debt restructuring, what would
be an efficient outcome of that process? Specifically, we consider a one-shot restructuring,
after which the sovereign and creditors resume equilibrium behavior.22
    We can analyze this question using the iso-V curves introduced in Figure 3 and which we
reproduce in Figure 7. Given the equivalence result of the previous section, we focus on the
benchmark equilibrium in the strong enforcement regime. We also assume the initial state is
in the crisis region, as there is no incentive to restructure in the no-default region. We hold
o↵ on the default region until after discussing restructuring in the crisis region.

                          bS


                          C                        slope =   qL (A)
                                                             qS (A)


                         B


                                          A
                                                                      V (b) = V (A)

                                     qL (A)(bL    bA
                                                   L ) + qS (A)(bS       bA
                                                                          S) = 0


                                                                                   bL

             Figure 7: Equilibrium Iso-V Regions and Restructuring. The line
             segment from points B to C represents Pareto improvements over point A,
             that cannot be achieved as a market outcome.


    The initial state is depicted by point A = (bA     A
                                                  S , bL ) along with its associated iso-V curve.
The dashed line tangent to point A has a slope equal to the ratio prices evaluated at the
initial state: qL (A)/qS (A), where we suppress V D = V D in the price notation. Along the
dashed line, qS (A)(bS bA  S ) + qL (A)(bL bA
                                            L ) = 0, and so the total amount of debt evaluated
at point-A prices is constant. Of course, point-A prices are not equilibrium prices along the
  22
    Hatchondo et al. (2013) study the introduction of debt exchanges in a quantitative sovereign debt model
with a long-term bond. They show that there are situations where a write-down of the debt can generate a
Pareto improvement ex-post. Di↵erently from us, they abstract from maturity choice.


                                                    34
entire dashed line, as the equilibrium price of the long-term bond is sensitive to maturity
structure. However, at point B, where the dashed line intersects the vertical axis (bL = 0),
the equilibrium market value of debt is the same as at point A. This is because bL = 0 and
qS (A) = qS (B) = 1       . Therefore, creditors are indi↵erent between point A and point B at
equilibrium prices. However, point B is a strict welfare improvement for the sovereign.
     Similarly, we can follow the iso-V curve from point A until it also crosses the vertical axis
in Figure 7 at point C. By definition, the sovereign is indi↵erent between point A and C.
However, the market value of debt is greater at point C. This can be seen by recalling that
the market value of debt is the same at A and B, and noting that point C has more debt (at
the same short-term bond prices) as point B.
     Therefore, a restructuring to the interval BC is a constrained Pareto improvement from
point A. The intuition for why this improves on the equilibrium outcome is that it provides
greater incentives for the sovereign to exit the crisis region. This helps mitigate the lack of
commitment to pursue deleveraging in an expeditious manner. Moreover, this improvement
cannot be implemented without coordination across creditors. In particular, long-term
bondholders would like to hold out if bonds are restructured to shorter maturities. This
involves a capital gain for long-term bondholders given the greater incentives to exit the
crisis region after the restructuring. Note as well that there can be no improvement involving
lengthening the maturity, as this will involve a drop in the market value of debt. In particular,
lengthening maturity leads to a capital loss for bondholders after the restructuring, and so
points to the right of A along the dashed line are not sustainable in equilibrium. Given the
local indeterminacy, the constrained Pareto frontier extends from the vertical axis into the
region with positive long-term debt; in particular, the extended Pareto frontier is the set of
iso-T regions that contain the vertical axis.
     We can extend the preceding analysis into the default zone. In the default zone, the
sovereign’s payo↵ is V D (continuing to assume the strong-enforcement regime). The sovereign
is therefore indi↵erent between any point in the default zone and the boundary between
D and C. Bondholders get zero in the default zone, and therefore are strictly better o↵
moving to the boundary of the crisis zone. The above analysis then implies that the Pareto
efficient restructuring in the default zone, D, adjusts debt to where the boundary of the
                                                                                                D
default region intersects the vertical axis. A similar point applies when the state is V D = V .
The sovereign will default in the crisis region in the weak enforcement regime, and therefore
efficient restructuring will reach the boundary of the no-default region. Along this boundary,
maturity is irrelevant, and thus any point is an efficient outcome of restructuring.
     The analysis of this section implies that efficient restructuring will shorten maturity.
This provides the greatest incentives for the sovereign to deleverage and minimizes the


                                               35
length of time the sovereign and creditors are exposed to default risk. Lengthening of
maturities in empirical debt restructurings are often motivated by providing “breathing room”
for the sovereign. Within the context of the model with rollover crises, there is a point
where lengthening of maturities is efficient and does mitigate rollover risk, but it may be
better to delay such lengthening if another goal of the restructuring process is to induce the
sovereign to deleverage. Moreover, the lengthening of maturity to mitigate rollover risk can
be implemented at competitive equilibrium prices. Restructurings involving official lenders
(like the IMF) also involve conditions on fiscal policy going forward. There is an issue of how
enforceable such conditionality is, particularly as the official lender also lacks commitment
to punish the debtor. This issue does not arise in the competitive equilibrium we consider.
In particular, bond holders only demand to break even on average, which is always time
consistent. This provides the incentive for the sovereign to reduce short-term debt as quickly
as possible.


6      A More General Portfolio of Maturities
The previous results were obtained in a set up with just two assets: a one period bond and
a perpetuity. In this section we show that the results can be extended to a more general
portfolio of maturities.
    We use the benchmark timing stated in Section 3 and reuse the notation from that section.
We will now consider the case where we have N + 1 bonds: a one-period bond plus N bonds
of longer maturity. For tractability, we shall use the “random maturity” structure of Leland
(1994a) and Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2012), which is also equivalent to the geometrically
declining coupon formulation of Hatchondo and Martinez (2009).23 Specifically, each of the
bonds is indexed by n 2 {0, 1, 2..., N } and matures with iid probability n 2 [0, 1] each
period. The one-period bond (n = 0) has 0 = 1, and if there is a perpetuity it has = 0;
intermediate maturities set n 2 (0, 1), and have an expected maturity of 1/ n . To normalize
all bond prices to one in a risk-free environment, bonds of type n promise a coupon of r + n
each period up to and including the date of maturity. For each bond of type n, there is a
continuum of independent maturity realizations, and we appeal to the law of large numbers
to state that a constant fraction n of outstanding bonds bn matures each period.
  23
    While the random maturity formulation is tractable, our results hold for any bond portfolio with
non-contingent payment terms, as long as there exits a one-period bond.




                                                36
       Absent default this period, the budget constraint of the sovereign is:
                         X                                    X
               c+                    (r +   n )bn   y+                    qn (V D , b0 )(b0n     (1         n )bn )
                    n2{0,1,...,N }                        n2{0,1,...,N }


where b = (b0 , b1 , ..bN ), and qn represents the equilibrium price schedule of bond n. The term
on the right represents net new issuances of each type of bond n, adjusting for the fraction
 n that matures that period.

    Letting D denote the default policy, it follows that the break-even conditions for the
foreigners imply that:
                                             "                        ✓                                 ◆#
                                                                                                    0
                                                                          r+    n   + (1        n )qn
                        qn (V D , b0 ) = E (1        D(b0 , V D0 ))
                                                                                    1+r

where qn0 denotes the equilibrium price of bond n the following period.24 As before, we impose
that qn (b, V D , b0 ) 2 [0, 1] for all i and states to rule out bubbles. Also as before, we restrict
attention to bn 0 for all n 2 {0, 1, ..., N }, and redefine B ⌘ [0, 1)N +1 .
    Denoting by Bn the policy function for bond n, we can define a Markov Perfect Equilibrium
in the same manner we did in Section 3. We can divide the state space into no-default region,
crisis-region and default-region just as before. We can also show that the no-default region in
this case remains the same: before:
                                               (                    )
                                                        X
                                       ND = b 2 B           bn  B̄
                                                                   n


where B is defined as in Proposition 2. Similarly, prices are one in this region, that is
                                                                                     P
qn (V D , b) = 1 for all n and b 2 N D; and the value function is V (b, V D ) = u(y r n bn )/(1
 ) for all b 2 N D.
    With this in hand, we can now slightly redefine problem (PW) to account for the more
  24
       Where we input    n   for the expected probability that the bond matures next period.




                                                            37
general portfolio of maturities as follows:
                                      (T 1
                                       X
                                                 t
  W (b, T ) =          max                           (1          )t u(ct )
                {b0,T 2R,{ct }T  1
                              t=0 }        t=0
                                            2 ⇣                  ⇣      P                                               ⌘⌘ 3
                                                                                                                  T
                                              u y               r b0,T + n2{1,...,N } (1                       n ) bn
                        T                  14                                                                                   5
                   +        (1        )T
                                                                                     1
                                                                                                               T 1
                                                                                                                                                              )
                                                                                                               X                                          D
                                                                                                                       t
                                                                                                           +               (1             )t      1
                                                                                                                                                      V           ,
                                                                                                               t=1


subject to:
                                     "T 1✓                     ◆t ✓                                                                           ◆
                                      X 1                                                   X
                                 1                                                                                                   t
              b0  (1 + r)                                                y     ct                      (r +   n )(1            n)       bn
                                       t=0
                                             1+r
                                                                                         n2{1,...,N }
                                         ✓     ◆T                               #
                                                                      1
                                           1
                                       +                                  b0,T ,
                                           1+r
                                 X
                                                           T
           b0,T  B                         (1        n)       bn .
                             n2{1,...,N }


and ct 0 for all t. As in the benchmark, the solution to this problem will feature a constant
consumption, and where the last two constraints hold with equality.
   Note that solution for problem W imposes the same requirement as before: the sovereign
does not issue new long-term bonds of any n < 1, nor does it buy them back. For n such
that 0 < n < 1, the sovereign simply lets the long-term bonds mature, and for a perpetuity
  = 1, there is no change in the amount outstanding. We now state the extension of our
benchmark result to general portfolios:

Proposition 6. In any Markov Equilibrium with a general portfolio, for any b 2 C, we have
that V (b, V D ) = supT 1 W (b, T ) as long as a solution to supT 1 W (b, T ) features b0,T 0.

   The above Proposition says that versions of Lemmas 1 and 2 hold for the general maturity
case: that is, in any equilibrium, it is without loss of generality to restrict attention to
sovereign strategies that use only the one-period bond, and do not actively participate in
the long-term bond market. The last statement of the proposition just guarantees that the
optimal solution to the W is possible; that is, features non-negative debt positions.
   The above also highlights an important point: our result is about issuances, that is, during
the periods of deleveraging, the country will not issue new long-term bonds. This is consistent
with the fact that countries tend to switch their issuances towards the short-term end during

                                                                           38
periods where the interest rate spreads over risk free debt are high. However, whether or not
the maturity of the overall portfolio of outstanding debt shortens or not during deleveraging
depends on whether the pace at which long-term bonds come due is greater or less than the
pace of deleveraging.


7      Conclusion
In this paper we have shown that actively engaging in the long-term bond market during
periods of deleveraging entails costs for a sovereign. In particular, we have shown that shifts
in the maturity structure may a↵ect the incentives to develerage and hence imply changes
in the equilibrium prices of long-term bonds. Such changes are always moving against the
borrower; that is, the price of the long-term bond rises when the sovereign buys them, while
it falls when the sovereign issues more. Quite generally, these actions will tend to shrink the
budget set of the borrower, generating an incentive to use only short-term bonds during a
period of deleveraging.
    The model we have described however does not completely rule out the use of long-term
bonds, as there is a local indeterminacy in the optimal portfolio allocation in equilibrium due
to the discrete time environment. That is, generically, small changes in the portfolio do not
generate changes in the discrete exit times or prices, and hence, are also optimal. However, it
is important to highlight that this result is driven by the discrete time assumption. Although
we have refrained from presenting this formally, in the continuous-time limit the iso-T regions
collapse to lines, and the deleveraging portfolio is uniquely pinned-down. In particular, any
policy that involves long-term bonds is strictly suboptimal. Note however, that away from
the region of deleveraging, in the interior of the T (b) = 1 region, the portfolio remains
locally indeterminate, as small variations in the portfolio do not change the optimality of
never exiting.
    An important caveat in the above analysis is our focus on outside option shocks, with and
without rollover crises. The literature has primarily focused on income (or endowment) shocks
as the main source of uninsurable risk.25 We have made this choice to transparently highlight
how the incentives to deleverage, and the corresponding budgetary implications, are sensitive
to maturity choice along the transition. In particular, maturity choice is not used to hedge
risk in our environment. A hedging motive would arise if shocks a↵ected consumption absent
default, and if these changes in consumption had a non-zero covariance with bond prices.
  25
    There are important exceptions, see for example Cooley et al. (2004) and the more recent work of
Hopenhayn and Werning (2008). For a more detailed summary of the literature, see the discussion in Aguiar
and Amador (2013).



                                                   39
Our environment abstracts from this hedging motive as shocks do not change equilibrium
consumption in periods of no default. The bonds in our environment are therefore not useful
to hedge the risks we consider. In practice there are a richer set of assets to hedge risk beyond
non-contingent bonds, and we do not want the absence of these assets influencing the core
results. Finally, the desire to hedge is also operative in models of full commitment under
incomplete markets, while our results arise exclusively due to limited commitment involving
the speed of deleveraging and repayment. It is questionable how e↵ectively the cyclical shifts
in the slope of the yield curve can be exploited to insure the risks facing economies on the
brink of default. For example, in the context of full commitment, Buera and Nicolini (2004)
found the positions required to hedge are implausibly large (see also Faraglia et al., 2010,
for a more recent analysis showcasing several problems with this approach). That said, we
acknowledge that the desire to hedge may influence maturity choice, particularly in relatively
tranquil periods in which the normal business cycles is the primary source of risk. We view
our results as isolating an alternative force that also operates through equilibrium prices,
but involves how maturity choice a↵ects the incentives to deleverage and the corresponding
equilibrium prices.




                                               40
A      Appendix: Proofs
A.1      Auxiliary Results
Many of the results exploit the fact that the value function conditional on repayment in the
current period is continuous and monotonic in debt. Using standard arguments, we establish
this result in part (a) of the following lemma. Part (b) of the lemma is useful in proving
Proposition 2, which states that the no-default region is an absorbing region. The lemma uses
the lenders’ break-even conditions to establish an upper bound on the government’s value for
debt positions in this region. Moreover, the lemma establishes that any equilibrium strategy
starting from this region that leads to default with positive probability generates a strictly
lower utility. The proof uses the fact that the break-even conditions require that equilibrium
prices compensate lenders for the possibility of default, as well as that endogenous default
implies that V (b, V D ) < V D . The strict inequality statement in part (b) omits the case of
                           D
(bS , bL , V D ) = (0, B, V ), which is easier to handle directly in the proof of Proposition 2.

Lemma A.1 (Continuity, Monotonicity and an Upperbound). In any Markov Perfect
                                   D
Equilibrium, for any V D 2 {V D , V } we have:

  (a) For a given V D , the function (bS , bL ) 7! V (bS , bL , V D ) is strictly decreasing and contin-
      uous in each argument; and
                                                    D
 (b) Define B by u(y             rB) = (1        )V . For any (bS , bL ) such that bS + bL  B, we have

                                                                u(y   r(bS + bL ))
                                         V (bS , bL , V D )                       .
                                                                      1

      This last inequality is strict if there is a default along some equilibrium path starting from
      (bS , bL , V D ) and any of the following three conditions hold: (i) bS > 0, (ii) bS + bL < B,
      or (iii) default occurs at V D .

Proof. Part (a): For monotonicity, consider a point b0S , b0L , and let ✏S                0, ✏L   0 with one
and only one inequality strict. Then it follows that

       V (b0S   ✏S , b0L    ✏L , V D )
                           u(y    (1 + r)b0S     rb0L + qS b0S + qL (b0L    b0L ) + (1 + r)✏S + r✏L ) + EV
                     > u(y        (1 + r)b0S     rb0L + qS b0S + qL (b0L    b0L )) + EV
                     = V (b0S , b0L , V D ),

where b0S and b0L represent the equilibrium debt policy when the state is (b0S , b0L , V D ); qS and

                                                         41
qL , represent the associated equilibrium price schedules evaluated at the debt policy choices;
and EV is short-hand for the expected continuation value conditional on V D and (b0S , b0L ).
The first line uses the fact that choices made for (b0S , b0L ) are feasible (but not necessarily
optimal) for (b0S + ✏S , b0L + ✏). The feasibility uses the fact that prices depend on (b0S , b0L , V D )
but not on b0j , j = S, L, so the choices (b0S , b0L ) have the same budgetary consequences from
either initial debt state. The second line uses the fact that ✏j 0, j = S, L, with one strictly
greater than zero. The final line uses the fact that (b0S , b0L ) represent the optimal choices at
(b0S , b0L , V D ).
      Continuity follows from a similar argument. Let bA and bB be two points in the state
space. Let bA0 and bB0 be their respective optimal debt policies. Let q A and q B be the
equilibrium vector of prices at which the optimal debt policies are traded. Let C̃(b, b0 , q) ⌘
y (1 + r)bS rbL + qS b0S + qL (b0L bL ) denote the consumption implied by the initial debt
b and the new debt policy b0 issued at prices q. Note that |C̃(bA , b0 , q) C̃(bB , b0 , q)| 
(1 + r)|bA    S    bB                A
                    S | + (r + qL )|bL bB               A
                                        L |  (1 + r) |bS bB       A
                                                           S | + |bL bB
                                                                      L | . Then optimality implies:


     V (bA , V D ) = u(C̃(bA , bA0 , q A )) + V (bA0 , V D )     u(C̃(bA , bB0 , q B )) + V (bB0 , V D ).

Similarly:

     V (bB , V D ) = u(C̃(bB , bB0 , q B )) + V (bB0 , V D )     u(C̃(bB , bA0 , q A )) + V (bA0 , V D ).

Taking di↵erences we have that:

  u(C̃(bA , bA0 , q A ))   u(C̃(bB , bA0 , q A ))
                              V (bA , V D )    V (bB , V D )   u(C̃(bA , bB0 , q B ))   u(C̃(bB , bB0 , q B )).

Concavity implies that |u(c0 ) u(c)|  |c0 c| where  = u0 (min(c, c0 )). This implies that as
the distance between bA and bB goes to zero, so do the bounds above, implying the continuity
of the value function.

   Part (b): Starting from a b = (bS , bL ) that satisfies the hypothesis of part (b), we
can iterate forward on the equilibrium policy functions conditional on the path of V D . In
particular, denote histories of V D realizations by ht ⌘ (V0D , V1D , ..., VtD ), with V0D representing
the current period realization. Let ⇡(ht ) denote the probability ht is realized. Let c(ht ) and
d(ht ) represent equilibrium consumption and default decisions conditional on ht , where d(ht )
equals one if the sovereign defaults at history ht (but not before) and zero otherwise. It is
                                                          Q
convenient to define the “survival” indicator: s(ht ) ⌘ hs 2ht (1 d(hs )), which equals one if


                                                       42
there is no default along the path up to and including ht and zero otherwise. Starting from b,
let (b0S , b0L ) denotev the end-of-period equilibrium debt portfolio with associatedv equilibrium
prices (qS0 , qL0 ).
    Equilibrium pricing for new debt requires:
                                                 1
                                                 X                       X
                                       qL0 =                R        t
                                                                               ⇡(ht )s(ht )r,                         (16a)
                                                 t=1                      ht
                                                 X
                                       qS0   =              ⇡(h1 )s(h1 ).                                             (16b)
                                                   h1


   The value function can be written as:
                                             1
                                             X              X
           V (b, V D ) = u(c(h0 )) +                    t
                                                                         ⇡(ht ) s(ht )u(c(ht )) + d(ht )V D (ht ) .    (17)
                                             t=1                ht


The budget constraint, after using the equilibrium pricing at each history as well as the
no-ponzi condition, is:
                                       1
                                       X                X
                               0                    t
              y   rbL       c(h ) +           R                      ⇡(ht )s(ht )(y       rbL   c(ht )) = RbS .        (18)
                                       t=1                  ht


Equation (18) is a necessary condition in any equilibrium, and reflects the fact that new
bondholders break even in expectation. This condition allows us to compute an upper bound
for the value in (17). In particular, maximizing the right hand side of (17) over consumption
processes, subject to (18), one obtains an upper bound to the value function given by:


                                             1
                                             X                  X
                        D          ?                        t
               V (b, V )  u(c ) +                                       ⇡(ht )(s(ht )u(c? ) + d(ht )V D (ht ))        (19)
                                             t=1                 ht

                      r
where c? = y        r+qL0 RbS    rbL . Given that c?  y r(bS + bL ) as qL0  1 and that
V D (ht )  u(y r(bS + bL ))/(1         ) (for bS + bL  B), it follows then that V (b, V D ) 
u(y r(bS + bL ))/(1         ), generating the upperbound.
    Note that if there exists an ht such that d(ht ) = 1, then qL0 < 1, and c? < y r(bS + bL )
if bS > 0, implying that V (b, V D ) < u(y r(bS + bL ))/(1      ). Note that if bS + bL < B, or
                D
if V D (ht ) = V , the upperbound is also strict.




                                                                         43
Proof of Proposition 1
The following is the proof of Proposition 1, where in addition, we show that, in any Markov
equilibrium, N D = {b 2 B|bS + bL  B}:

Proof. First note that the sets are disjoint by definition. Note that N D is non-empty as
V (0, 0, V D ) u(y)/(1      ) > V D for any V D . Now, Lemma A.1 implies that N D ⇢ {b 2
                                                                  D      D
B|bS +bL  B}, as strict monotonicity implies that V (bS , bL , V ) < V for bS +bL > B. Now,
note that for any b 2 N D, qs (b) = 1, which implies that V (b, V D ) u(y r(bS +bL ))/(1          ),
as the sovereign could choose to roll over its short-term debt at a risk free price while
remaining in N D forever. Hence the bound of Lemma A.1 part (b) binds, and V (b, V D ) =
u(y r(bS + bL ))/(1       ) for all b 2 N D and all V D . Continuity and strict monotonicity of
the no-default value function (as established by Lemma A.1 part a), implies that the boundary
                                                 D
of the N D region is such that V (b, V D ) = V , which delivers N D = {b 2 B|bS + bL  B}.
                                                                                            D
On the complement of N D, strict monotonicity of V delivers that V (b, V D ) < V for
any V D , hence the complement of N D can be partitioned into C and D. Given that
          D
V D < V , by continuity, there exists a non-empty C region. Finally, the assumption that
u(0) < (1      )V D implies that for sufficiently high b, the no-default value will necessarily lie
below V D , establishing a non-empty D.


A.2     Proof of Propositions 2
                                                   D
We first consider the absorbing state V D = V , and prove the following Lemma.

Lemma A.2. In any Markov Perfect Equilibrium, for (bS , bL ) 2 N D we have

                                                   D        u(y   r(bS + bL ))
                                      V (bS , bL , V ) =                       ;
                                                                  1
                                                            8
                                                            <0    if (bS , bL ) 2
                                                                                / ND
                               D                   D
                  qS (bS , bL , V ) = qL (bS , bL , V ) =
                                                        :1        if (bS , bL ) 2 N D;
                                                        8
                                                        <1        if (bS , bL ) 2
                                                                                / ND
                                                   D
                                      D(bS , bL , V ) =
                                                        :0        if (bS , bL ) 2 N D;
                              D                    D
                 BS (bS , bL , V ) + BL (bS , bL , V ) = bS + bL ,

Proof. The first equality was established in the proof of Proposition 1. The definition
of the regions, imply the default policy above, as well as the prices of the short-term
bond. The default policy also implies that the price of the long-term bond, qL = 0 for
b 6 inN D. Our tie-breaking assumption in footnote 8 states that the government does not

                                                  44
issue bonds at zero prices, which implies that bond policy functions on b 2 N D satisfy
        D             D
BS (b, V ) + BL (b, V )  B. This implies that N D is an absorbing state, and thus qL = 1
on N D. Given the above, the only way to achieve the upper bound in N D is to maintain a
stationary level of total debt bS + bL . To see this, note that:

              D                                                                            u(y   r(b0S + b0L ))
  V (bS , bL , V ) =      max           u(y   r(bS    bL ) + b0S       bS + b0L   bL ) +                        .
                       (b0S ,bL )2N D
                          0                                                                      1

By strict concavity of u, the maximum is only achieved when bS + bL = b0S + b0L , establishing
the final claim in the lemma.

   We now turn to the case of V D = V D , and prove the following lemma:

Lemma A.3. In any Markov Perfect Equilibria, for (bS , bL ) 2 N D, we have that:

                                                                       u(y    r(bS + bL ))
                                                V (bS , bL , V D ) =                       ;
                                                                              1
                                               qS (bS , bL , V D ) = qL (bS , bL , V D ) = 1;
                                               D(bS , bL , V D ) = 0;
                       BS (bS , bL , V D ) + BL (bS , bL , V D ) = bS + bL .

Proof. The first equality was established in the proof of Proposition 1. The definition of the
regions, imply the default policy above, as well as the prices of the short-term bond.
    We now show that default does not occur along the equilibrium path starting from (b, V D )
for b 2 N D. Part (b) of Lemma A.1 establishes that if either bS + bL < B, or bS > 0, or
default occurs at V D , it follows that the upper bound cannot be achieved in equilibrium,
contradicting the result that V (b, V D ) achieves this upper bound on N D. For these cases,
the no-default region is absorbing and qL (bS , bL , V D ) = 1.
    This leaves one remaining case; namely, the case of (bS , bL ) = (0, B) and default occurs
                D
when V D = V . To show that default in this case is strictly dominated by the upper
bound, suppose that the government defaults at the start of period t + 1 at some history
       D
{ht , V } starting from the initial state (bS , bL , V D ) = (0, B, V D ). We can state a number
of facts about values and debt positions at the start of period t + 1. First, for default
                         D                                                        D        D
to be optimal at {ht , V }, the tie-breaking assumptions requires V ({ht , V }) < V . By
strict monotonicity of V , this implies that the debt position at the start of period t + 1 lies
outside N D. Moreover, we have that in the alternative strong-enforcement continuation
from ht , namely {ht , V D }, default would not have occurred in period t + 1. This follows
from the tie-breaking assumption that the sovereign will not borrow into a region where
it will default with probability one, as this will never be strictly optimal (see footnote

                                                         45
8). That is, the history {ht , V D } occurs with strictly positive probability starting from
the initial state and debt lies outside N D at this history. The fact that debt lies outside
                                                                                            D
N D at the end of period t plus strict monotonicity implies that V ({ht , V D ) < V . By
definition of B, this last inequality also implies that V ({ht , V D ) < u y rB /(1              ).
This implies that consumption is not always y rB for every continuation history starting
from {ht , V D }. More formally, let {c(hi )}1
                                             i=0 denote the sequence of consumption starting
                                D
from (bS , bL , V ) = (0, B, V ). Then there exists some history h⌧ , ⌧
                 D
                                                                                 t + 1, following
history {ht , V D }, such that c(h⌧ ) 6= y rB. Using strict concavity of u, together with (19),
this implies that the value function V (0, B, V D ) < u(y rB)/(1           ). This implies that
equilibrium default along any history starting from (bS , bL , V D ) = (0, B, V D ) yields a value
strictly less than the upper bound. The fact that the upper bound is feasible implies that
default will never occur in equilibrium starting from this initial state, and qj (0, B, V D ) = 1,
j = S, L, completing the characterization of the no-default region.
    Given that N D is an absorbing state (as default cannot occur in the equilibrium path),
we have that
                                           (
  V (bS , bL , V D ) =       max               u(y   r(bS   bL ) + b0S   bS + b0L   bL )
                         (b0S ,b0L )2N D
                                                                                                                )
                                                                                           u(y   r(b0S + b0L ))
                                                                                     +                            .
                                                                                                 1

The maximum is only achieved when bS + bL = b0S + b0L , establishing the final claim in the
lemma.


A.3      Proof of Lemma 1
Proof. Let’s do the case where T (b) < 1 (the case where T (b) = 1 works in a similar
fashion). Let {ct }Tt=01 denote the consumption stream associated with V (b, V ), with associated
sequence of debt positions {bS,t , bL,t }Tt=0 . By definition, (bS,0 , bL,0 ) = (bS , bL ) = b and define
BT ⌘ bS,T + bL,T as the bond position on entry to the safe zone. In the safe zone, maturity is
irrelevant and all that matters is the total stock of debt. Thus BT is a sufficient statistic for
welfare at the start of t = T . For t  T 1, utility depends on the risk of default and the
consumption stream absent default. Exit time T is sufficient to pin down the risk of default
regardless of the detailed allocation. We therefore focus on the consumption allocation absent
default while in the crisis zone.




                                                             46
   Letting qi,t+1 = qi (bt , V D , bt+1 ), i = S, L, the budget constraint for t is:

                 ct = y         (1 + r)bs,t       rbL,t + qS,t+1 bS,t+1 + qL,t+1 (bL,t+1                            bL,t ).

                                                                                          1+r
For t < T     1, (2) and (3) imply qS,t+1 = 1                           and r =           1
                                                                                                   qL,t        qL,t+1 . Substituting in,
we have
                     ✓          ◆
                         1+r
        ct = y                      (qS,t bS,t + qL,t bL,t ) + (qS,t+1 bS,t+1 + qL,t+1 bL,t+1 ), t < T                                1.
                         1

This is a di↵erence equation in the total market value of debt at the end of period t:
qS,t+1 bS,t+1 + qL,t+1 bL,t+1 . Solving forward to t = T 2 starting from t = 0, we have:

                            ✓           ◆X
                                         T 2✓                ◆t
                                1                  1
  qS,0 bS,0 + qL,0 bL,0 =                                          (y        ct )
                                1+r        t=0
                                                   1+r
                                                                        ✓            ◆T     1
                                                                            1
                                                                  +                             (qS,T      1 bS,T 1   + qL,T        1 bL,T 1 ) .
                                                                            1+r

The budget constraint at t = T 1 is cT 1 = y (1 + r) (bS,T 1 + bL,T 1 ) + BT , where
BT = bS,T + bL,T is the market value of debt on entry into the no-default zone. Using this
plus qi,T 1 = 1    , i = S, L, to replace qS,T 1 bS,T 1 + qL,T 1 bL,T 1 in the above, we have
                                          ✓            ◆X
                                                        T 1✓                    ◆t                         ✓          ◆T
                                              1                        1                                       1
             qS,0 bS,0 + qL,0 bL,0 =                                                 (y         ct ) +                     BT .
                                              1+r           t=0
                                                                       1+r                                     1+r

From (2) we have qS,0 = 1                . From (3) we have

                                                 T 1✓
                                                 X                     ◆t       ✓           ◆T     1
                                                      1                             1
                                    qL,1 = r                                +                          ,
                                                 t=1
                                                        1+r                         1+r

                                                                                                                              1
where qL,1 is the price of bonds issued at the end of period zero. Using qL,0 =                                               1+r
                                                                                                                                     (r + qL,1 ),
we have after re-arranging:
                 ✓          ◆ X
                              T 1✓                ◆t                                    ✓              ◆T                           !
                                                                                                               1
                      1            1                                                        1
        bS,0 =                                         (y         ct        rbL,0 ) +                              (BT        bL,0 ) .
                     1+r         t=0
                                          1+r                                               1+r

Thus the allocation {ct } satisfies the budget constraint for the W problem (PW). As W is
the maximum over all such feasible consumption streams, the result follows.




                                                                  47
A.4        Proof of Claim 1
                            D
Proof. Using that V             = u(y         rB)/(1                     ), together with equation (5), we have that:

  (1       (1    ))(W (b, 1)              W (b, T )) = u(y                      rbL       (r + )bS )
                                                    "
                                                                           T
                                                             (1                (1     )T )⇥
                   ✓                                                                                                            ◆
                                        (1       (1              ))(bS (1    ) + (bL                 B) T (1             )T )
                 u y         rbL                                                T (1
                                                                 (1      )(1                         )T )
                                                                                                                                                  #
                                                                                                                T
                                                                                                         +          (1         )T u(y        rB) .


Using concavity of u it follows that:

  (1       (1    ))(W (b, 1)              W (b, T ))             u(y            rbL       (r + )bS )
                                      
                   T                                         (1            (1   ))(bS (1    ) + (bL                      B) T (1         )T )
         u (1          (1        )T ) y       rbL                                              T (1
                                                                                (1      )(1                              )T )
                                                                                       !
                                                         T
                                                                             ⇥       ⇤
                                                 +           (1            )T y rB

                                                                                                                    T 1
        = u(y    rbL        (r + )bS )           u y             (r + )bS             rbL + (B           bL )             (1        )T   1
                                                                                                                                                  0,

where the last line follows from bL > B. So it follows then that T = 1 is an optimal solution
of Problem (PW) as long as bL > B and b 2 C.


A.5        Proof of Lemma 2
Proof. Consider the case where T < 1. Let {ĉt }Tt=01 and b̂S,T be the solution to Problem
(PW) for a given T and b = (bS , bL ) 2 C. Let {b̂S,t }Tt=11 be defined recursively as:

                                                     1        ⇣                                          ⌘
                                       b̂S,t =                       y     ct       rbL     Rb̂S,t   1
                                                 1

where b̂S,0 = bS . Note, as argued before, an optimal solution (b̂S,t , bL ) 2 C for t  T 1.
   The sovereign’s problem in any equilibrium satisfies the following Bellman equation:
                                                             ⇣                           ⌘                                                    D
       V ((bS , bL ), V D ) = max
                               0 0
                                   u(c) +                        1         1{b0S +b0L >B} V (b0 , V D ) +                1{b0S +b0L >B} V ,
                                {c,bS ,bL }




                                                                           48
subject to

                          cy            (1 + r)bS                 rbL + qS (b0 )b0S + qL (b0 )(b0L       bL ).                           (20)

Let c = ĉ0 , b0S = b̂S,1 and b0L = bL . Those choices satisfy the budget constraint, as long as
(b̂S,1 , bL ) 2 C, given that qS (b̂S,1 , bL ) = 1 , and it follows then that such choice provides a
lower bound on the utility from the Bellman equation:

                                                                                                                      D
                  V ((bS , bL ), V D )                    u(ĉ0 ) + (1         )V ((b̂S,1 , bL ), V D ) +         V

But now consider, the value function V (b̂S,1 , bL , V D ). It is the case that for that state, the
choice of ĉ1 and b0S = b̂S,2 and b0L = bL satisfies the budget constraint (as long as (b̂S,2 , bL ) 2 C),
and hence it follows that this provides a lower bound as well:

                                                                                                                      D
                 V ((b̂S,1 , bL ), V D )                   u(ĉ1 ) + (1         )V ((b̂S,2 , bL ), V D ) +        V

Keeping iterating, we have that in the last period before exiting, T                                       1, the value function is
bounded below by:

                                             D                                                                                D
              V ((b̂S,T   1 , bL ), V            )         u(ĉT   1)   + (1       )V ((b̂S,T , bL ), V D ) +             V

Now, note that V ((b̂S,T , bL ), V D ) = u(y                         r(b̂S,T + bL ))/(1         ), given that b̂S,T + bL  B. It
follows then that:

                          T 1
                          X
                 D                  t
  V ((bS , bL ), V )                    (1           )u(ĉt )+
                          t=0
                                                                                          T 1
                                T                        T 1 u(y        r(b̂S,T + bL )) X        t                        D
                          +         (1               )                                 +             (1      )t   1
                                                                                                                      V           = W (b, T )
                                                                        1                t=1


by putting all the inequalities above together.
    So we have that V (b, V D ) W (b, T ) for any finite T 1. A similar argument, together
with boundedness of V , shows that V (b, V D )      W (b, 1). And the result of the lemma
follows.


A.6      Proof of Theorem 1
Proof. The proof of Theorem 1 follows from Lemmas 1 and 2.



                                                                          49
A.7     Proof of Lemma 3
Proof. Consider a zero-cost trade from point b to b0 . Note that if b 2 C, then b0 2 C, as the
sovereign cannot enter the no-default zone through a zero-cost trade at risk-free prices. Thus
qS (A) = qS (B) = 1     . Define qL (T ) for a given T from equation (3) and substitute into
equation (4) to obtain:
           ✓                                       ◆                                         ✓                       ◆
                     1         (1       )                                                            1     (1   )
    T
  C =                               T (1
                                                       [qL (T )b0L   +   qS (T )b0S ]   +y                               B.
               (1        )(1                )T )                                                 1       T (1   )T

Note that a zero-cost trade implies qL (b0 )b0L + qS (b0 )b0S = qL (b0 )bL + qS (b0 )bS , thus we can
substitute b for b0 in the above bracketed expression if T = T (b0 ). This implies that it is
feasible for the sovereign to exit in T (b0 ) periods from b without changing consumption. Thus
W (b, T (b0 )) = W (b0 , T (b0 )) = V (b0 ). However, V (b) = maxT 0 W (b, T 0 ) W (b, T (b0 )), with
strict inequality if the sovereign has a unique optimal T (b) 6= T (b0 ).


A.8     Proof of Proposition 3
                                                                                                                D
Proof. Lemma A.2 obtains the value function for b 2 N D region, when V D = V . For the
rest of the domain in this case, we can use the strict monotocity obtained in Lemma A.1 to
                                               D
argue that the value function must be below V for b 2   / N D; given that at the boundary of
                                  D
N D, the value function equals V .
    Lemma A.3 obtains the value function for b 2 N D region, when V D = V D . Using
Proposition 1 allows to characterized the value function as equal to supT W (b, T ) for b 2 C
and when V D = V D . Finally, exploiting the strict monotonicity of the value function, as
given by Lemma A.1, it follows that the value function is strictly less than V for b 2 D and
V D = V D ; which completes the proof of the Proposition.


A.9     Proof of Propositions 4 and 5
                                                                              D
Proof. The proof for prices and values when V D = V is done in the main body of the
text. Let us now argue that the conjectured prices and value functions are an equilibrium as
well when V D = V D . To do this, note that the equilibrium value of reaching bS + bL = B̄
equals u(y rB̄)/(1        ). This follows because, as explained in the body of the text, for any
 0    0
bS + bL = B̄, there exist a zero cost trade that moves the country debt position to (0, B̄),
guaranteeing the maximum possible payo↵ in that region, u(y rB̄)/(1              ). Hence, the
arguments of Lemma 1 and 2 hold and we can pinned down the value function in the C
region by supT W (b̄, T ), just as before. Note that the same way that we defined D in the


                                                            50
previous equilibrium is consistent with an equilibrium in this environment as well.
    It remains to show that that when b 2 N D N˜D, the equilibrium value is the same
as in the previous case. To see this, just note that for such a b, there exists a zero cost
trade that at prices of 1 moves the debt position to the N˜D region, guaranteeing a payo↵ of
u(y r(bS + bL ))/(1        ), which is again, the maximum possible value in equilibrium in that
region.
    Finally, the price of the long term bond needs to be adjusted for the one period risk that
country has of defaulting when b 2 N D N˜D, which only lasts for one period, as the
country will immediately trade to the no default region N˜D.


A.10     Proof of Proposition 6
Proof. Equilibrium prices for a bond with “maturity”                                n   satisfies the di↵erence equation
(where qn = qn (V D , b0 )):

                                                                                        0
                                 qn = (1          ) (r +         n   + (1           n )qn ),


if b0 2 C, and qn = 1 if b0 2 N D. Solving forward from t = 0 to t = T                                             1, we have:

                                       T 1
                                       X
                                             t
         qn,0 = (1        )(r +   n)             (1        )t (1       n)
                                                                            t
                                                                                +       T
                                                                                            (1       )T (1          n)
                                                                                                                         T
                                                                                                                             qn,T .     (21)
                                       t=0


If T is the exit time, then qn,T = 1.
    The budget constraint for the equilibrium problem (where T = T (b)) satisfies (for
t  T 1):

                            N
                            X                             N
                                                          X
                 ct = y           (r +   n )bn,t      +         qn,t+1 (bn,t+1               (1        n )bn,t )
                            n=0                           n 0
                            N
                            X                                                           N
                                                                                        X
                     =y           (r +   n + (1             n )qn,t+1 ) bn,t +                    qn,t+1 bn,t+1 .
                                  |           {z                     }
                            n=0                   qn,t                                      n=0
                                                  (1   )



Rearranging:

                  N
                  X                                                                     N
                                                                                        X
                        qn,t bn,t = (1           )(y       ct ) + (1                )            qn,t+1 bn,t+1
                  n=0                                                                   n=0

                PN
Define M Vt ⌘    n=0 qn,t bn,t   to be the market value of debt at the end of period t                                                1. The


                                                           51
above expression becomes

                                 M Vt = (1                       )(y           ct ) + (1           )M Vt+1 .

Solve forward from t = 0 to t = T                       1:
                                                  T 1
                                                  X
                                                             t
                   M V0 = (1                  )                  (1            )t (y     ct ) +       T
                                                                                                          (1             )T M V T .                         (22)
                                                  t=0


Using the pricing equation (21), we also have:

               N
               X
      M V0 =         qn,0 bn,0
               n=0

           = (1         )b0,0 +
           N                                            T 1
                                                                                                                                                    !
           X                                            X
                                                                      t
                 bn,0       (1         )(r +       n)                     (1       )t (1         n)
                                                                                                      t
                                                                                                          +         T
                                                                                                                        (1    )T (1        n)
                                                                                                                                                T
                                                                                                                                                        .
           n=1                                          t=0


Substituting into (22) and rearranging, we have:
                             "T 1                                                      N
                                                                                                                                       !
                              X                                                        X
                                         t
                 b0,0 =                      (1         )t        y        ct                bn,0 (r +             n ) (1     n)
                                                                                                                                   t

                                 t=0                                                   n=1
                                                                                N
                                                                                                                   !#
                                                                                X
                            T 1
                        +         (1          )T   1
                                                             M VT                      bn,0 (1            n)
                                                                                                               T
                                                                                                                         .
                                                                                n=1

                                                          P
Note that by definition of T = T (b), we have M VT = N       n=0 bn,T  B̄. Thus, equilibrium
consumption satisfies the budget constraint for the W (b, T (b)) problem with b0,T = M VT
PN                          PN
   n=1 bn,0 (1
                   T
                n )  B̄       n=1 bn,0 (1
                                              T
                                           n ) . Thus, W (b, T (b))   V (b, V D ) for b 2 C.
    Going the other way, any consumption sequence and b0,T that satisfies the constraints
of the W (b, T ) problem for any T that is feasible also satisfies the sequence of budget
constraints for the V problem. Thus the W (b, T ) value is feasible in equilibrium, and so
V (b, V D ) W (b, T ) for all T .


References
Aguiar, Mark and Manuel Amador, “Sovereign Debt,” Chapter for the Handbook of
 International Economics, 2013.



                                                                           52
  ,   , Emmanuel Farhi, and Gita Gopinath, “Crisis and Commitment: Inflation
  Credibility and the Vulnerability to Sovereign Debt Crises,” NBER Working Paper 19516,
  2012.

Angeletos, George-Marios, “Fiscal Policy with Non-Contingent Debt and the Optimal
 Maturity Structure,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2002, 117.

Arellano, Cristina and Ananth Ramanarayanan, “Default and the Maturity Structure
 in Sovereign Bonds,” Journal of Political Economy, 2012, 120, 187–232.

Broner, Fernando, Guido Lorenzoni, and Sergio Schmukler, “Why Do Emerging
 Economies Borrow Short Term?,” Journal of the European Economics Association, 2013,
 11, 67–100.

Buera, Francisco and Juan Pablo Nicolini, “Optimal Maturity of Government Debt
 without State Contingent Bonds,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2004.

Bulow, Jeremy and Kenneth Rogo↵, “The Buyback Boondoggle,” Brookings Ppaers on
 Economic Activity, 1988, pp. 675–98.

   and , “Sovereign Debt Repurchases: No Cure for Overhang,” Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 1991, 106, 1219–35.

Calvo, Guillermo, “Servicing the Public Debt: The Role of Expectations,” American
 Economic Review, 1988, 78, 647–661.

Chatterjee, Satyajit and Burcu Eyigungor, “Maturity, Indebtedness, and Default Risk,”
 American Economic Review, 2012, 102, 2674–99.

Cole, Harold and Timothy Kehoe, “Self-Fulfilling Debt Crises,” The Review of Economic
 Studies, 2000, 67, 91–116.

Cooley, Thomas, Ramon Marimon, and Vincenzo Quadrini, “Aggregate Conse-
 quences of Limited Contract Enforceability,” Journal of Political Economy, 2004, 112,
 817–847.

Dovis, Alessandro, “Efficient Sovereign Default,” working paper, 2012.

Eaton, Jonathan and Mark Gersovitz, “Debt with Potential Repudiation: Theoretical
 and Empirical Analysis,” The Review of Economic Studies, 1981, 48 (2), 289–309.

Faraglia, Elisa, Albert Marcet, and Andrew Scott, “In search of a theory of debt
  management,” Journal of Monetary Economics, October 2010, 57 (7), 821–836.

                                          53
Hatchondo, Juan Carlos and Leonardo Martinez, “Long-Duration Bonds and
 Sovereign Defaults,” Journal of International Economics, 2009, 79, 117–125.

  , , and Cesar Sosa Padilla, “Voluntary Sovereign Debt Exchanges,” Department of
  Economics Working Papers 2013-13, McMaster University August 2013.

Hopenhayn, Hugo and Ivan Werning, “Equilibrium Default,” MIT Working Paper,
 2008.

Jeanne, Olivier, “Debt Maturity and the International Financial Architecture,” America,
  2009, 99, 2135–2148.

Leland, Hayne, “Bond Prices, Yield Spreads, and Optimal Capital Structure with Default
  Risk,” IBER Finance Working Paper 240, 1994.

  , “Corporate Debt Value, Bond Convenants, and Optimal Capital Structure,” Journal of
  Finance, 1994, 49, 1213–52.

Lorenzoni, Guido and Ivan Werning, “Slow Moving Debt Crises,” NBER Working
 Paper 19228, July 2013.

Lucas, Robert E. Jr. and Nancy L. Stokey, “Optimal Monetary and Fiscal Policy in
 an Economy without Capital,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 1983, 12, 55–94.

Niepelt, Dirk, “Debt Maturity without Commitment,” working paper, 2012.

Perez, Diego, “Sovereign Debt Maturity Structure Under Asymmetric Information,” working
 paper, 2013.

Tirole, Jeanne, The Theory of Corporate Finance, Princeton: Princeton University Press,
  2006.




                                          54
