                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             REAL-TIME FORECASTING WITH A MIXED-FREQUENCY VAR

                                         Frank Schorfheide
                                           Dongho Song

                                        Working Paper 19712
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19712


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2013




We thank two anonymous referees and an associate editor, Frank Diebold, Jonathan Wright, Kei-Mu
Yi, and seminar participants at the 2012 AEA Meetings and the University of Pennsylvania for helpful
comments and discussions. We greatly benefited from a MATLAB program written by Marco Del
Negro and Dan Herbst to compile real-time data sets for˛the recursive estimation of forecasting models.
Financial support from the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis is gratefully acknowledged. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank
of Minneapolis or the Federal Reserve System. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Frank Schorfheide and Dongho Song. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Real-Time Forecasting with a Mixed-Frequency VAR
Frank Schorfheide and Dongho Song
NBER Working Paper No. 19712
December 2013
JEL No. C11,C32,C53

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper develops a vector autoregression (VAR) for time series which are observed at mixed
frequencies - quarterly and monthly. The model is cast in state-space form and estimated with Bayesian
methods under a Minnesota-style prior. We show how to evaluate the marginal data density to
implement a data-driven hyperparameter selection. Using a real-time data set, we evaluate forecasts
from the mixed-frequency VAR and compare them to standard quarterly-frequency VAR and to
forecasts from MIDAS regressions. We document the extent to which information that becomes
available within the quarter improves the forecasts in real time.


Frank Schorfheide
University of Pennsylvania
Department of Economics
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6297
and NBER
schorf@ssc.upenn.edu

Dongho Song
University of Pennsylvania
Department of Economics
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
donghos@sas.upenn.edu
                                                                                           1


1      Introduction

In macroeconomic applications, vector autoregressions (VARs) are typically estimated either
exclusively based on quarterly observations or exclusively based on monthly observations.
In a forecasting setting, the advantage of using quarterly observations is that the set of
macroeconomic series that could potentially be included in the VAR is larger. Gross domestic
product (GDP), as well as many other series that are published as part of the national income
and product accounts (NIPA), are only available at quarterly frequency. The advantage of
using monthly information, on the other hand, is that the VAR is able to track the economy
more closely in real time.

    To exploit the respective advantages of both monthly and quarterly VARs, this paper de-
velops a mixed-frequency VAR (MF-VAR) that allows some series to be observed at monthly
and others at quarterly frequency. The MF-VAR can be conveniently represented as a state-
space model, in which the state-transition equations are given by a VAR at monthly frequency
and the measurement equations relate the observed series to the underlying, potentially un-
observed, monthly variables that are stacked in the state vector. The MF-VAR is meant
to be an attractive alternative to a standard VAR in which all series are time-aggregated
to quarterly frequency (QF-VAR). To cope with the high dimensionality of the parameter
space, the MF-VAR is equipped with a Minnesota prior and estimated using Bayesian meth-
ods. The Minnesota prior is indexed by a vector of hyperparameters that determine the
relative weight of a priori and sample information.

    This paper makes contributions in two areas. On the methodological front we show how to
numerically approximate the marginal data density (MDD) of a linear Gaussian MF-VAR.
The MDD can be used for a data-based selection of hyperparameters, which is essential
to achieve a good forecasting performance with a densely parameterized VAR. The second
set of contributions is empirical. We compile a real-time data set for an eleven-variable
VAR that includes observations on real aggregate activity, prices, and financial variables,
including GDP, unemployment, inflation, and the federal funds rate. Using this data set, we
recursively estimate the MF-VAR and assess its forecasting performance. The comparison
to a QF-VAR is the main focus of the empirical analysis.

    First, we ask the following very basic question: what is the gain, if any, from utilizing
within-quarter monthly information in a VAR framework? To answer this question, we
group our end-of-month forecast origins in three bins. Given the release schedule of macroe-
conomic data in the U.S., at the end of the first month of the quarter, no additional monthly
                                                                                             2


observations of non-financial variables for the current quarter are available. At the end of
the second and third month either one or two within-quarter monthly observations are avail-
able. We find that during the third month of the quarter the switch from a QF-VAR to a
MF-VAR improves the one-step-ahead forecast (nowcast) accuracy on average by 60% for
nonfinancial variables observed at the monthly frequency and by 11% for variables observed
at quarterly frequency. In the first month of the quarter the improvements are about 6%.
The improvement in forecast accuracy is most pronounced for short-horizon forecasts and
tempers off in the medium and long run. Thus, if the goal is to generate VAR nowcasts or
forecasts of one- or two-quarters ahead, it is well worth switching to from a QF-VAR to a
MF-VAR. If the focus is on a one- to two-year horizon, the QF-VAR is likely to suffice.

  Second, we generate real-time forecasts of macroeconomic aggregates for the 2008-09
(Great) recession period. This episode is of great interest to macroeconomists, because
the large drop in aggregate real activity poses a challenge for existing structural and non-
structural models. We document that the monthly information helped the MF-VAR track
the economic downturn more closely in real time than the QF-VAR supporting the view that
the MF-VAR is an attractive alternative to a standard QF-VAR. Third, as a by-product of
the MF-VAR estimation, we generate an estimate of monthly GDP growth rates, which may
be of independent interest to business cycle researchers. Finally, we also provide a compari-
son of bivariate MF-VARs to mixed data sampling (MIDAS) regressions. We find for GDP
forecasts that the percentage differential in forecast accuracy is the same, regardless whether
the forecast is made at the end of the first, second, or third month of the quarter. We are in-
terpreting this finding as both approaches being able to exploit the information differentials
between the three months of the quarter in relative terms equally well. In absolute terms,
the MF-VARs tend to outperform the MIDAS regressions in our particular implementation.

  This paper focuses on VARs which are time series models that generate multivariate predic-
tive distributions. VARs have been an important forecasting tool in practice (see Litterman
(1986) for an early assessment and Giannone, Lenza, and Primiceri (2012) for a recent assess-
ment) and there is strong evidence that they perform well in high-dimensional environments
if estimated with shrinkage estimation techniques (see, e.g., De Mol, Giannone, and Reichlin
(2008) and Banbura, Giannone, and Reichlin (2010)). Moreover, in addition to generating
unconditional forecasts, they are widely used to produce conditional forecasts, e.g., condi-
tional on an interest rate path (see Doan, Litterman, and Sims (1984) and Waggoner and
Zha (1999)), which do require a multivariate framework. In our comparison between MF-
VARs and QF-VARs we mostly study univariate root-mean-squared errors (RMSEs), though
                                                                                            3


we also consider log determinants of (multivariate) forecast error covariance matrices. To
the extent that we are considering univariate RMSEs one could conduct comparisons with
univariate predictive regressions. However, comparisons of VAR forecasts to forecasts from
other classes of time series models are not the focus of this paper and can be found elsewhere
in the literature (see, e.g., Chauvet and Potter (2013) for forecasting output and Faust and
Wright (2013) for forecasting inflation).

  To cope with the high dimensionality of the parameter space, the MF-VAR is equipped with
a Minnesota prior and estimated with Bayesian methods. Our version of the Minnesota prior
is based on Sims and Zha (1998). This prior is also used, for instance, in Banbura, Giannone,
and Reichlin (2010) and Giannone, Lenza, and Primiceri (2012) and the authors document
that the forecasting performance of the Bayesian VAR dominates that of an unrestricted
VAR by a large margin. Alternative prior specifications for Bayesian VARs are surveyed
in Karlsson (2013) and the effect of specification choice on forecast accuracy is studied
in Carriero, Clark, and Marcellino (2011). In order to generate accurate forecasts it is
important that the prior covariance matrix is properly configured. A set of hyperparameters
controls the degree of shrinkage toward the prior mean and we choose the hyperparameter
to maximize the log MDD. MDD-based hyperparameter selection has been discussed, for
instance, in Phillips (1996), used in Del Negro and Schorfheide (2004) and, most recently,
studied in Giannone, Lenza, and Primiceri (2012).

  We are building on existing approaches of treating missing observations in state-space
models (see, for instance, the books by Harvey (1989) and Durbin and Koopman (2001)).
We are employing modern Bayesian computational tools, in particular the method of data
augmentation. We construct a Gibbs sampler along the lines of Carter and Kohn (1994) that
alternates between the conditional distribution of the VAR parameters given the unobserved
monthly series, and the conditional distribution of the missing monthly observations given
the VAR parameters. Draws from the former distribution are generated by direct sampling
from a Normal-Inverted Wishart distribution, whereas draws from the latter are obtained
by applying a simulation smoother to the state-space representation of the MF-VAR. Our
numerical approximation of the log MDD is based on the modified harmonic mean estimator
proposed by Geweke (1999).

  An alternative Gibbs sampling approach for the coefficients in an MF-VAR is explored in
Chiu, Foerster, Kim, and Seoane (2012). Their algorithm also iterates over the conditional
posterior distributions of the VAR parameters and the missing monthly observations, but
utilizes a different procedure to draw the missing observations. The focus of their paper is
                                                                                           4


on parameter estimation rather than forecasting. The authors link the coefficients of the
MF-VAR to the coefficients of a QF-VAR via a transformation. Chiu, Foerster, Kim, and
Seoane (2012) then compare the posterior distributions of parameters and impulse response
functions obtained from the estimation of the two models to document the value of the
monthly observations.

 Mixed-frequency observations have also been utilized in the estimation of dynamic factor
models (DFMs). Mariano and Murasawa (2003) apply maximum-likelihood factor analysis
to a mixed-frequency series of quarterly real GDP and monthly business cycle indicators
to construct an index that is related to monthly real GDP. Aruoba, Diebold, and Scotti
(2009) develop a DFM to construct a broad index of economic activity in real time using a
variety of data observed at different frequencies. Giannone, Reichlin, and Small (2008) use
a mixed-frequency DFM to evaluate the marginal impact that intra-monthly data releases
have on current-quarter forecasts (nowcasts) of real GDP growth.

 When using our MF-VAR to forecast quarterly GDP growth, we are essentially predict-
ing a quarterly variable based on a mixture of quarterly and monthly regressors. Ghysels,
Sinko, and Valkanov (2007) propose a simple univariate regression model, called a mixed
data sampling (MIDAS) regression, to exploit high-frequency information without having
to estimate a state-space model. To cope with potentially large numbers of regressors, the
coefficients for the high-frequency regressors are tightly restricted through distributed lag
polynomials that are indexed by a small number of hyperparameters. Bayesian versions of
the MIDAS approach are developed in Rodriguez and Puggioni (2010) and Carriero, Clark,
and Marcellino (2012).

 Ghysels (2012) generalizes the MIDAS approach to a VAR setting. Unlike our MF-VAR,
his MIDAS VAR is an observation-driven model that does not require numerical techniques
to integrate out unobserved monthly variables. As in Chiu, Foerster, Kim, and Seoane
(2012), the empirical analysis focuses on impulse responses but not on real-time forecasting.
In our view, the state-space setup pursued in this paper is more transparent and flexible
and the computational advances of the last decade make it feasible to estimate Bayesian
state-space models with code written in high-level languages such as MATLAB in a short
amount of time.

 Bai, Ghysels, and Wright (2013) examine the relationship between MIDAS regressions and
state-space models applied to mixed-frequency data. They consider dynamic factor models
and characterize conditions under which the MIDAS regression exactly replicates the steady
                                                                                               5


state Kalman filter weights on lagged observables. They conclude that Kalman filter forecasts
are typically a little better, but MIDAS regressions can be more accurate if the state-space
model is misspecified or over-parameterized. Kuzin, Marcellino, and Schumacher (2011)
compare the accuracy of Euro Area GDP growth forecasts from MIDAS regressions and MF-
VARs estimated by maximum likelihood. The authors find that the relative performances
of MIDAS and MF-VAR forecasts differ depending on the predictors and forecast horizons.
Overall, the authors do not find a clear winner in terms of forecasting performance.

    The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the state-space
representation of the MF-VAR and discusses Bayesian inference and forecasting. The real-
time data sets used for the forecast comparison of MF-VAR and QF-VAR, as well as the
timing of within-quarter monthly information, are discussed in Section 3. The empirical
results are presented in Section 4. Finally, Section 5 concludes. The Online Appendix
provides detailed information about the Bayesian computations, the construction of the
data set, as well as additional empirical results.



2      A Mixed-Frequency Vector Autoregression

The MF-VAR considered in this paper is based on a standard constant-parameter VAR in
which the length of the time period is one month. Since some macroeconomic time series, e.g.,
GDP, are measured only at quarterly frequency, we treat the corresponding monthly values
as unobserved. To cope with the missing observations, the MF-VAR is represented as a state-
space model in Section 2.1. In order to ease the exposition, we use a representation with a
state vector that includes even those variables that are observable at monthly frequency, e.g.,
the aggregate price level, the unemployment rate, and the interest rate. A computationally
more efficient representation in which variables observed at monthly frequency are dropped
from the state vector is presented in the Online Appendix. Bayesian inference and forecasting
are discussed in Section 2.2.

    Throughout this paper, we use Yt0 :t1 to denote the sequence of observations or random
variables {yt0 , . . . , yt1 }. If no ambiguity arises, we sometimes drop the time subscripts and
abbreviate Y1:T by Y . If θ is the parameter vector, then we use p(θ) to denote the prior
density, p(Y |θ) is the likelihood function, and p(θ|Y ) the posterior density. We use iid
to abbreviate independently and identically distributed, and N (µ, Σ) denotes a multivari-
ate normal distribution with mean µ and covariance matrix Σ. Let ⊗ be the Kronecker
                                                                                                        6


product. If X|Σ ∼ M Np×q (M, Σ ⊗ P ) is matricvariate Normal and Σ ∼ IWq (S, ν) has an In-
verted Wishart distribution, we say that (X, Σ) has a Normal-Inverted Wishart distribution:
(X, Σ) ∼ M N IW (M, P, S, ν).


2.1     State-Transitions and Measurement

We assume that the economy evolves at monthly frequency according to the following VAR(p)
dynamics:
                                                                                   
                    xt = Φ1 xt−1 + . . . + Φp xt−p + Φc + ut ,       ut ∼ iidN 0, Σ .                 (1)

The n × 1 vector of macroeconomic variables xt can be composed into xt = [x0m,t , x0q,t ]0 , where
the nm × 1 vector xm,t collects variables that are observed at monthly frequency, e.g., the
consumer price index and the unemployment rate, and the nq × 1 vector xq,t comprises the
unobserved monthly variables that are only published at quarterly frequency, e.g., GDP.
Define zt = [x0t , . . . , x0t−p+1 ]0 and Φ = [Φ1 , . . . , Φp , Φc ]0 . Write the VAR in (1) in companion
form as
                                                                             
                       zt = F1 (Φ)zt−1 + Fc (Φ) + vt ,      vt ∼ iidN 0, Ω(Σ) ,                       (2)

where the first n rows of F1 (Φ), Fc (Φ), and vt are defined to reproduce (1) and the remaining
rows are defined to deliver the identities xq,t−l = xq,t−l for l = 1, . . . , p−1. The n×n upper-left
submatrix of Ω equals Σ and all other elements are zero. Equation (2) is the state-transition
equation of the MF-VAR.

  We proceed by describing the measurement equation. One can handle the unobserved
variables in several ways: by imputing zeros and modifying the measurement equation by
setting the loadings on the state variables to zero (e.g., Mariano and Murasawa (2003));
by setting the measurement error variance to infinity (e.g., Giannone, Reichlin, and Small
(2008)); or by varying the dimension of the vector of observables as a function of time t (e.g.,
Durbin and Koopman (2001)). We employ the latter approach. To do so, some additional
notation is useful. Let T denote the forecast origin and let Tb ≤ T be the last period that
corresponds to the last month of the quarter for which all quarterly observations are available.
The subscript b stands for balanced sample. Up until period Tb the vector of monthly series
xm,t is observed every month. We denote the actual observations by ym,t and write

                                     ym,t = xm,t ,   t = 1, . . . , Tb .                              (3)
                                                                                             7


Assuming that the underlying monthly VAR has at least three lags, that is, p ≥ 3, we express
the three-month average of xq,t as
                                  1
                           ỹq,t = (xq,t + xq,t−1 + xq,t−2 ) = Λqz zt .                    (4)
                                  3
For variables measured in logs, e.g., ln GDP , the formula can be interpreted as a log-linear
approximation to an arithmetic average of GDP that preserves the linear structure of the
state-space model. For flow variables such as GDP, we adopt the NIPA convention and
annualize high-frequency flows. As a consequence, quarterly flows are the average and not
the sum of monthly flows. This three-month average, however, is only observed for every
third month, which is why we use a tilde superscript. Let Mq,t be a selection matrix that
equals the identity matrix if t corresponds to the last month of a quarter and is empty
otherwise. Adopting the convention that the dimension of the vector yq,t is nq in periods in
which quarterly averages are observed and zero otherwise, we write

                         yq,t = Mq,t ỹq,t = Mq,t Λqz zt ,   t = 1, . . . , Tb .           (5)

  For periods t = Tb + 1, . . . , T no additional observations of the quarterly time series are
available. Thus, for these periods the dimension of yq,t is zero and the selection matrix Mq,t
in (5) is empty. However, the forecaster might observe additional monthly variables. Let
ym,t denote the subset of monthly variables for which period t observations are reported by
the statistical agency after period T , and let Mm,t be a deterministic sequence of selection
matrices such that (3) can be extended to

                            ym,t = Mm,t xm,t ,      t = Tb + 1, . . . , T.                 (6)

Notice that the dimension of the vector ym,t is potentially time varying and less than nm .
The measurement equations (3) to (6) can be written more compactly as

                                 yt = Mt Λz zt ,     t = 1, . . . , T.                     (7)

Here, Mt is a sequence of selection matrices that selects the time t variables that have been
observed by period T and are part of the forecaster’s information set. In sum, the state-space
representation of the MF-VAR is given by (2) and (7).


2.2    Bayesian Inference

The starting point of Bayesian inference for the MF-VAR is a joint distribution of observ-
ables Y1:T , latent states Z0:T , and parameters (Φ, Σ), conditional on a pre-sample Y−p+1:0 to
                                                                                              8


initialize lags. Using a Gibbs sampler, we generate draws from the posterior distributions of
(Φ, Σ)|(Z0:T , Y−p+1:T ) and Z0:T |(Φ, Σ, Y−p+1:T ). Based on these draws, we are able to simu-
late future trajectories of yt to characterize the predictive distribution associated with the
MF-VAR and to calculate point and density forecasts.

Prior Distribution. An important challenge in practical work with VARs is to cope with
the dimensionality of the coefficient matrix Φ. Informative prior distributions can often
mitigate the curse of dimensionality. A widely used prior in the VAR literature is the so-
called Minnesota prior. This prior dates back to Litterman (1980) and Doan, Litterman,
and Sims (1984). We use the version of the Minnesota prior described in Del Negro and
Schorfheide (2011)’s handbook chapter, which in turn is based on Sims and Zha (1998).
The main idea of the Minnesota prior is to center the distribution of Φ at a value that
implies a random-walk behavior for each of the components of xt in (1). Our version of
the Minnesota prior for (Φ, Σ) is proper and belongs to the family of MNIW distributions.
We implement the Minnesota prior by mixing artificial (or dummy) observations into the
estimation sample. The artificial observations are computationally convenient and allow us
to generate plausible a priori correlations between VAR parameters. The variance of the
prior distribution is controlled by a low-dimensional vector of hyperparameters λ. Details
of the prior are relegated to the Online Appendix, and the choice of hyperparameters is
discussed below.

Posterior Inference. The joint distribution of data, latent variables, and parameters
conditional on some observations to initialize lags can be factorized as follows:

                   p(Y1:T , Z0:T , Φ, Σ|Y−p+1:0 , λ)                                        (8)
                     = p(Y1:T |Z0:T )p(Z1:T |z0 , Φ, Σ)p(z0 |Y−p+1:0 )p(Φ, Σ|λ).

The distribution of Y1:T |Z1:T is given by a point mass at the value of Y1:T that satisfies (7).
The density p(Z1:T |z0 , Φ, Σ) is obtained from the linear Gaussian regression (2). The condi-
tional density p(z0 |Y−p+1:0 ) is chosen to be Gaussian and specified in the Online Appendix.
Finally, p(Φ, Σ|λ) represents the prior density of the VAR parameters. The factorization (8)
implies that the conditional posterior densities of the VAR parameters and the latent states
of the MF-VAR take the form

              p(Φ, Σ|Z0:T , Y−p+1:T ) ∝ p(Z1:T |z0 , Φ, Σ)p(Φ, Σ|λ)                         (9)
              p(Z0:T |Φ, Σ, Y−p+1:T ) ∝ p(Y1:T |Z1:T )p(Z1:T |z0 , Φ, Σ)p(z0 |Y−p+1 ).
                                                                                                   9


We follow Carter and Kohn (1994) and use a Gibbs sampler that iterates over the two
conditional posterior distributions in (9). Conditional on Z0:T , the companion-form state
transition (2) is a multivariate linear Gaussian regression. Since our prior for (Φ, Σ) belongs
to the MNIW family, so does the posterior and draws from this posterior can be obtained
by direct Monte Carlo sampling. Likewise, since the MF-VAR is set up as a linear Gaussian
state-space model, a standard simulation smoother can be used to draw the sequence Z0:T
conditional on the VAR parameters. The distribution p(z0 |Y−p+1 ) provides the initialization
for the Kalman-filtering step of the simulation smoother. A detailed discussion of these
computations can be found in textbook treatments of the Bayesian analysis of state-space
models, e.g., the handbook chapters by Del Negro and Schorfheide (2011) and Giordani,
Pitt, and Kohn (2011).

Computational Considerations. For expositional purposes, it has been convenient to
define the vector of state variables as zt = [x0t , . . . , xt−p+1 ]0 , which includes the variables
observed at monthly frequency. From a computational perspective, this definition is ineffi-
cient because it enlarges the state space of the model unnecessarily. We show in the Online
Appendix how to rewrite the state-space representation of the MF-VAR in terms of a lower-
dimensional state vector st = [x0q,t , . . . , xq,t−p ]0 that only includes the variables (and their
lags) observed at quarterly frequency. Our simulation smoother uses the small state vector
st for t = 1, . . . , Tb and then switches to the larger state vector zt for t = Tb + 1, . . . , T to
accommodate missing monthly observations toward the end of the sample.

Forecasting. For each draw (Φ, Σ, Z0:T ) from the posterior distribution we simulate a tra-
jectory ZT +1:T +H based on the state-transition equation (2). Since we evaluate forecasts of
quarterly averages in our empirical analysis, we time-aggregate the simulated trajectories ac-
cordingly. Based on the simulated trajectories (approximate) point forecasts can be obtained
by computing means or medians. Interval forecasts and probability integral transformations
(see Section C.3) can be computed from the empirical distribution of the simulated trajec-
tories.


2.3       Marginal Likelihood Function and Hyperparameter Selection

The empirical performance of the MF-VAR is sensitive to the choice of hyperparameters. The
prior is parameterized such that λ = 0 corresponds to a flat (and therefore improper) prior
for (Φ, Σ). As λ −→ ∞, the MF-VAR is estimated subject to the random-walk restriction
implied by the Minnesota prior. The best forecasting performance of the MF-VAR is likely
                                                                                                        10


to be achieved for values of λ that are in between the two extremes. In a Bayesian framework
the hyperparameter, λ can be interpreted as a model index (since a Bayesian model is the
product of likelihood function and prior distribution). We consider a grid λ ∈ Λ and assign
equal prior probability to each value on the grid. Thus, the posterior probability of λ is
proportional to the MDD
                                            Z
                p(Y1:T |Y−p+1:0 , λ) =           p(Y1:T , Z0:T , Φ, Σ|Y−p+1:0 , λ)d(Z0:T , Φ, Σ).      (10)

The log MDD can be interpreted as the sum of one-step-ahead predictive scores:
                                 T
                                 X          Z
     ln p(Y1:T |Y−p+1:0 , λ) =         ln       p(yt |Y−p+1:t−1 , Φ, Σ)p(Φ, Σ|Y−p+1:t−1 , λ)d(Φ, Σ).   (11)
                                 t=1

The terms on the right-hand side of (11) provide a decomposition of the one-step-ahead
predictive densities p(yt |Y1−p:t−1 , λ). This decomposition highlights the fact that inference
about the parameter is based on time t − 1 information, when making a one-step-ahead
prediction for yt .

Hyperparameter Selection. To generate the MF-VAR forecasts, for each forecast origin
we condition on the value λ̂T that maximizes the log MDD. This procedure can be viewed
as an approximation to a model averaging procedure that integrates out λ based on the
posterior p(λ|Y−p+1:T ). The MDD-based selection of VAR hyperparameters has a fairly long
history and tends to work well for forecasting purposes (see Giannone, Lenza, and Primiceri
(2012) for a recent study).

Marginal Data Density Approximation. From (10) we see that the computation of the
MDD involves integrating out the latent states. In the remainder of this section we describe
how we compute the integral. To simplify the exposition we consider the special case of
n = 2, p = 1, and T = 3. We assume that one of the variables is observed at monthly
frequency and the other as a quarterly average. Thus, we can write zt = [xm,t , xq,t ]0 . The
observations Y1:3 are related to the states Z1:3 as follows:
                                                   "                                           #
                                                                              xm,3
                      y1 = xm,1 ,      y2 = xm,2 ,      y3 =       1
                                                                                                   .   (12)
                                                                   3
                                                                     (xq,1   + xq,2 + xq,3 )

Using a change of variable of the form
                                                            "          #
                                                                Y1:3
                                                 Z1:3 = J                                              (13)
                                                                W1:3
                                                                                                             11


where Z1:3 = [z10 , z20 , z3 ]0 , Y1:3 = [y1 , y2 , y30 ]0 , W1:3 = [xq,1 , xq,2 ]0 (note that despite the 1 : 3
subscript, W1:3 is a 2 × 1 vector in this example), and J is a 6 × 6 non-singular matrix of
constants. Thus, we can replace p(Z1:3 |λ) by p(Y1:3 , W1:3 |λ) = p(Y1:3 |W1:3 )p(W1:3 |λ). Using
Bayes Theorem, we can write (abstracting from the initialization of the VAR)

                                            1           p(W1:3 |Y1:3 , λ)
                                                    =                     .                                (14)
                                       p(Y1:3 |λ)       p(Y1:3 , W1:3 |λ)
                                                          R                                    (i)
  Suppose that f (W1:3 ) has the property that                f (W1:3 )dW1:3 = 1, and let {W1:3 }N
                                                                                                 i=1 denote
a sequence of draws from the posterior distribution of W1:3 |(Y1:3 , λ). Then the MDD can be
approximated using Geweke (1999)’s harmonic mean estimator, which is widely used in the
DSGE model literature to approximate MDDs in high-dimensional settings:
                                       "    N
                                                                   #−1
                                                         (i)
                                         1 X      f (W1:3 )
                         p̂(Y1:3 |λ) =                     (i)
                                                                       .                                   (15)
                                         N i=1 p(Y1:3 , W1:3   |λ)

The draws from the distribution of W1:3 |(Y1:3 , λ) can be obtained by transforming the draws
from Z1:3 |(Y1:3 , λ), which are generated as a by-product of the posterior sampler described in
Section 2.2. Using the properties of the MNIW distribution, it is straightforward to compute
                                      Z
                         p(Z1:3 |λ) = p(Z1:3 |Φ, Σ)p(Φ, Σ|λ)d(Φ, Σ)                     (16)

analytically. A straightforward change of variables based on (13) leads from p(Z1:3 |λ) to
           (i)
p(Y1:3 , W1:3 |λ). Note that the Jacobian of this transformation is simply a constant term.
Generalization. Taking the initialization of the VAR into account, the identity provided
in (14) can be generalized as follows:

                                    1             p(W1:T , w0 |Y1:T , Y−p+1:0 , λ)
                                                =                                  ,                       (17)
                           p(Y1:T |Y−p+1:0 , λ)   p(W1:T , Y1:T , w0 |Y−p+1:0 , λ)

with the understanding that W1:T stacks the unobserved values of xq,t for the first and second
month of each quarter of the estimation sample and w0 contains the corresponding values
for the initialization period t = −p + 1, . . . , 0. The approximation of the MDD becomes:
                                          "    N
                                                                                    #−1
                                                               (i)       (i)
                                            1 X           f0 (w0 )f (W1:T )
                p̂(Y1:T |Y−p+1:0 , λ) = c            (i)   (i)       (i)
                                                                                        , (18)
                                            N i=1 p(Z1:T |z0 , λ)p(z0 |Y−p+1:0 , λ)

The constant c in (18) captures the Jacobian term associated with the change-of-variables
from (w0 , W1:T , Y1:T ) to (z0 , Z1:T ). For the function f (·) we follow Geweke (1999) and use
                                                                                 (i)
a trimmed multivariate normal distribution with mean µ̂W1:T = N1 N
                                                                          P
                                                                            i=1 W1:T and variance
                                                                                                   12

               PN       (i)   (i)0
Σ̂W1:T =   1
           N    i=1   W1:T W1:T −µ̂W1:T µ̂0W1:T . This normal distribution approximates p(W1:T |Y−p+1:T )
                                                   (i)       (i)
and stabilizes the ratio in (18). We set f0 (w0 ) = p(z0 |Y−p+1:0 , λ) such that the two terms
                                                                                    (i)   (i)
cancel. To evaluate the denominator, we use the analytical expression for p(Z1:T |z0 , Y−p+1:0 , λ),
which is obtained from the the normalization constants for the MNIW distribution and is
provided, for instance, in Section 2 of Del Negro and Schorfheide (2011).



3     Real-Time Data Sets and Information Structure

We subsequently conduct a pseudo-out-of-sample forecast experiment with real-time data
to study the extent to which the incorporation of monthly observations via an MF-VAR
model improves upon forecasts generated with a VAR that is based on time-aggregated
quarterly data (QF-VAR). We consider VARs for eleven macroeconomic variables, which are
summarized in Section 3.1. The construction of the real-time data sets and the classification
of forecast origins based on within-quarter monthly information are described in Section 3.2.
Section 3.3 explains our choice of actual values that are used to compute forecast errors.


3.1    Macroeconomic Variables

We consider VARs for eleven macroeconomic variables, of which three are observed at quar-
terly frequency and eight are observed at monthly frequency. The quarterly series are GDP,
Fixed Investment (INVFIX), and Government Expenditures (GOV). The monthly series are
the Unemployment Rate (UNR), Hours Worked (HRS), Consumer Price Index (CPI), In-
dustrial Production Index (IP), Personal Consumption Expenditure (PCE), Federal Funds
Rate (FF), Treasury Bond Yield (TB), and S&P 500 Index (SP500). Precise data definitions
are provided in the Online Appendix. Series that are observed at a higher than monthly
frequency are time-aggregated to monthly frequency. The variables enter the VARs in log
levels with the exception of UNR, FF, and TB, which are divided by 100 in order to make
them commensurable in scale to the other log-transformed variables.


3.2    Real-Time Data for End-of-Month Forecasts

We consider an increasing sequence of estimation samples Y−p+1:T , T = Tmin , . . . , Tmax , and
generate forecasts for periods T + 1, . . . , T + H. The maximum forecast horizon H is chosen
to be 24 months. The period t = 1 corresponds to 1968:M1, Tmin is 1997:M7, and Tmax
                                                                                                  13


is 2010:M1, which yields 151 estimation samples. We eliminated four of the 151 samples
because the real-time data for PCE and INVFIX were incomplete. The estimation samples
are constructed from real-time data sets, assuming that the forecasts are generated on the
last day of each month. Due to data revisions by statistical agencies, observations of Y1:T −1
published in period T are potentially different from the observations that had been published
in period T −1. For this reason, real-time data are often indexed by a superscript, say τ ≥ T ,
which indicates the vintage or data release date. Using this notation, a forecaster at time
                                                        1         2                 T
T potentially has access to a triangular array of data Y−p+1:1 , Y−p+1:2 , . . . , Y−p+1:T . Rather
than using the entire triangular array and trying to exploit the information content in data
revisions, we estimate the MF-VAR and QF-VAR for each forecast origin T based on the
                 T          T
information set Y−p+1:T = {y−p+1 , . . . , yTT }. As in Section 2, we are using the convention
that the vector ytT contains only the subset of the eleven variables listed above for which
observations are available at the end of month T .

  In order to assess the usefulness of within-quarter information from monthly variables, we
sort the forecast origins Tmin , . . . , Tmax into three groups that reflect different within-quarter
information sets. Forecast error statistics will be computed for each group separately. The
grouping of forecast origins is best explained in a concrete example. Consider the January
31, 1998 forecast origin. By the end of January, the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) has
just published an advance estimate of 1997:Q4 GDP. In addition, the forecaster has access
to nonfinancial monthly indicators from December 1997 and earlier. A similar situation
arises at the end of April, July, and October. We refer to this group of forecast origins as
“+0 months,” because the current-quarter forecasts do not use any additional nonfinancial
monthly variables.

  At the end of February 1998, the forecaster has access to an preliminary estimate of
1997:Q4 GDP and to observations for unemployment, industrial production, and so forth,
for January 1998. Thus, we group February, May, August, and November forecasts and refer
to them as “+1 month.” Following the same logic, the last subgroup of forecast origins
has two additional monthly indicators (“+2 months”) and the final release of GDP for
1997:Q4 in the information set. Unlike the non-financial variables, which are released with
a lag, financial variables are essentially available instantaneously. In particular, at the end
of each month, the forecaster has access to average interest rates (FF and TB) and stock
prices (SP500). The typical information sets for the three subgroups of forecast origins are
summarized in Table 1.

  Unfortunately, due to variation in release dates, not all 151 estimation samples mimic
                                                                                                   14


                             Table 1: Illustration of Information Sets

                                      January (+0 Months)
               UNR     HRS     CPI    IP   PCE     FF    TB    SP500     GDP     INVFIX      GOV

  Q4    M12      X       X       X    X      X      X     X       X      QAv       QAv       QAv
  Q1    M1       ∅       ∅       ∅     ∅     ∅      X     X       X        ∅         ∅         ∅


                                      February (+1 Month)

               UNR     HRS     CPI    IP   PCE     FF    TB    SP500     GDP     INVFIX      GOV

  Q4    M12      X       X       X    X      X      X     X       X      QAv       QAv       QAv
  Q1    M1       X       X       X    X      X      X     X       X        ∅         ∅         ∅
  Q1    M2       ∅       ∅       ∅     ∅     ∅      X     X       X        ∅         ∅         ∅


                                       March (+2 Month)

               UNR     HRS     CPI    IP   PCE     FF    TB    SP500     GDP     INVFIX      GOV

  Q4    M12      X       X       X    X      X      X     X       X      QAv       QAv       QAv
  Q1    M1       X       X       X    X      X      X     X       X        ∅         ∅         ∅
  Q1    M2       X       X       X    X      X      X     X       X        ∅         ∅         ∅
  Q1    M3       ∅       ∅       ∅     ∅     ∅      X     X       X        ∅         ∅         ∅

Notes: ∅ indicates that the observation is missing. X denotes monthly observation and QAv denotes
quarterly average. “+0 Months” group: January, April, July, October; “+1 Month” group: February, May,
August, November; “+2 Month” group: March, June, September, December.


the information structure in Table 1. For 47 samples the last PCE figure is released with
a two-period (approximately five weeks) instead of one-period (approximately four weeks)
lag. This exception occurs for 28 samples of the “+0 months” group. For these samples a
late release of PCE implies the quarterly consumption for the last completed quarter is not
available. In turn, the QF-VAR could only be estimated based on information up to T − 4
instead of T −1 and would be at a severe disadvantage compared to the MF-VAR. Since PCE
is released only a few days after the period T forecasts are made, we pre-date its release.
Thus, for the 28 samples of the “+0 months” group that are subject to the irregular timing,
we use P CET −1 in the estimation of both the QF-VAR and MF-VAR. No adjustments are
made for the “+1 month” and “+2 months” groups. Further details about these exceptions
                                                                                            15


are provided in the Online Appendix.


3.3     Actuals for Forecast Evaluation

The real-time-forecasting literature is divided as to whether forecast errors should be com-
puted based on the first release following the forecast date, say yTT +h
                                                                      +h
                                                                         , or based on the most
                     T∗
recent vintage, say yt+h . The former might do a better job of capturing the forecaster’s loss,
whereas the latter is presumably closer to the underlying “true” value of the time series. We
decided to follow the second approach and evaluate the forecasts based on actual values from
the T∗ = 2012:M1 data vintage. While the MF-VAR in principle generates predictions at
the monthly frequency, we focus on the forecasts of quarterly averages, which can be easily
compared to forecasts from the QF-VAR.



4      Empirical Results

The empirical analysis proceeds in four parts. The hyperparameter selection is discussed
in Section 4.1. Section 4.2 compares root mean squared error (RMSE) statistics from the
MF-VAR to a QF-VAR and a set of MIDAS regressions. Section 4.3 contrasts MF-VAR
density forecasts during the 2008-9 (Great) recession with QF-VAR forecasts. Finally, in
Section 4.4 we present a monthly GDP series that arises as a by-product of the MF-VAR
estimation. Based on some preliminary exploration of the MDDs, we set the number of lags
in the (monthly) state transition of the MF-VAR to p(m) = 6 and the number of lags in the
QF-VAR to p(q) = 2.

    Unless otherwise noted, for each estimation sample we generate 20,000 draws from the
posterior distribution of the VAR parameters using the MCMC algorithm described in Sec-
tion 2.2. We discard the first 10,000 draws and use the remaining 10,000 to calculate Monte
Carlo approximations of posterior moments. The Online Appendix provides some informa-
tion on the accuracy of the MCMC. The Monte Carlo standard deviation of the posterior
mean forecasts (output, inflation, interest rates, and unemployment), computed across in-
dependent runs of the MCMC, is generally less than 0.5 basis points. For comparison, the
RMSE associated with these forecasts ranges from 10 to 200 basis points.
                                                                                               16


4.1    Hyperparameter Selection

We will subsequently compare MF-VAR and QF-VAR forecasts. Both VARs are equipped
with a Minnesota prior that is represented in terms of dummy observations and indexed by
a vector of hyperparameters λ. We use the same set of dummy observations for both types
of VAR. However, the hyperparameters are chosen for each type of VAR separately. The
careful choice of this hyperparameter vector is crucial for obtaining accurate forecasts. As
explained in Section 2.3, we determine the hyperparameters by maximizing the log MDD. For
the QF-VAR the MDD can be computed analytically (see, e.g., Del Negro and Schorfheide
(2011)) and the maximization is straightforward. Thus, we will focus on the hyperparameter
selection for the MF-VAR.

  The hyperparameter vector consists of five element, controlling: the overall tightness of
the prior (λ1 ); the rate at which the prior variance on higher-order lag coefficients decays
(λ2 ); the dispersion of the prior on the innovation covariance matrix (λ3 ); the extent to
which the sum-of-coefficient on the lags of a variable xi,t is tilted toward unity (λ4 ); and
the extent to which co-persistence restrictions are imposed on the VAR coefficients (λ5 ).
In general, the larger λi the smaller the prior variance and the more informative the prior.
From a preliminary analysis based on the QF-VAR, we conclude that λ3 is not particularly
important for the forecasting performance and fix it as λ̂3 = 1. Based on a preliminary
search over a grid Λ(1) we determine suitable values for λ4 and λ5 for the first recursive
sample, which ranges from 1968:M1 to 1997:M7. These values are λ̂4 = 2.7 and λ̂5 = 4.3.
Conditioning on λ̂3 to λ̂5 , we use a second grid, Λ̂(2) to refine the choice of λ1 and λ2 .

  The log MDD surface is depicted in the left panel of Figure 1 as function of λ1 and λ2 ,
holding the remaining three hyperparameters fixed at λ3 = 1, λ4 = λ̂4 , and λ5 = λ̂5 . The
surface has a convex shape and is maximized at λ̂1 = 0.09 and λ̂2 = 4.3. At its peak the
value of the log MDD is approximately 11,460. While the surface is fairly flat near the peak,
e.g. for λ1 ∈ [0.05, 0.15] and λ2 ∈ [4, 4.5], the MDD values drop substantially for values of λ
outside of these intervals. To assess the accuracy of the MDD evaluation, which involves the
numerical evaluation of a high-dimensional integral, we display a hairplot of a slice of the
MDD surface in the right panel of Figure 1, fixing λ2 at 4.3. Each hairline corresponds to
a separate run of the MCMC algorithm. We focus on the interval λ1 ∈ [0.05, 0.15]. While
there is some noticeable Monte Carlo variation with respect to the absolute magnitude of the
log MDD, this variation does not affect inference with respect to the optimal value of λ on the
grid. For each simulation, the log MDD peaks at 0.09. The accuracy of the approximation
                                                                                                              17


                   Figure 1: Log Marginal Data Density for 11-Variable MF-VAR

                      Log MDD Surface                                      Multiple MDD Evaluations

                                                                       4
                                                                    x 10
               4                                            1.147
            x 10
     1.14

     1.12

      1.1                                                   1.146

     1.08

     1.06
     0.13
         0.11                                               1.145
             0.09                                     5.3
                 0.07                           4.3
            λ1       0.05                 3.3
                         0.03
                             0.01   2.3         λ2             0.05                   0.09             0.15
                                                                                       λ1

Notes: The two plots depict ln p̂(Y1:T |Y−p+1:0,λ ). In the left panel, we condition on λ3 = 1, λ4 = 2.7, and
λ5 = 4.3. In the right panel we condition on λ2 = 4.3, λ3 = 1, λ4 = 2.7, and λ5 = 4.3. Each “hair”
corresponds to a separate run of the MCMC algorithm.


can be improved by increasing the number of MCMC draws.

  The re-optimization of the hyperparameters for the MF-VAR is computationally costly.
Because we expect the optimal hyperparameter choices to evolve smoothly over time, we are
reoptimizing with respect to λ approximately every three years, namely for the 40th, the
75th, the 110th, and the 151th recursive sample. During this reoptimization we keep λ̂3 , λ̂4 ,
and λ̂5 fixed. The reoptimization essentially left the choice of hyperparameters unchanged.
We obtained a similar result for the QF-VAR and decided to keep the MF-VAR and the
QF-VAR hyperparameters constant for all recursive sample.

  The hyperparameter estimates for the MF-VAR and the QF-VAR are summarized in Ta-
ble 2. While the overall tightness of the prior, controlled by λ1 , is larger for the QF-VAR
than the MF-VAR, the MF-VAR strongly shrinks the coefficients on higher-order lags to
zero. The QF-VAR only uses two lags which are associated with 22 regression coefficients
for each endogenous variable. The MF-VAR, on the other hand, uses six lags which are
associated with 66 regression coefficients. Roughly 30% of these coefficients are associated
with regressors that are only observed a quarterly frequency. The hyperparameters for the
QF-VAR are broadly in line with the results in Giannone, Lenza, and Primiceri (2012).
                                                                                         18


                                Table 2: Hyperparameters

                                        λ1    λ2     λ3    λ4     λ5

                       MF-VAR(11)      0.09   4.30   1.0   2.70   4.30
                       QF-VAR(11)      3.08   0.01   1.0   1.12   1.62



4.2    MF-VAR Point Forecasts

MF-VAR versus QF-VAR. We begin by comparing RMSEs for MF-VAR and QF-VAR
forecasts of quarterly averages to assess the usefulness of monthly information. The RMSEs
are computed separately for the “+0 months,” “+1 month,” and “+2 months” forecast
origins defined in the previous section. Results for GDP growth (GDP), unemployment
(UNR), inflation (INF), and the federal funds rate (FF) are reported in Figure 2. The figure
depicts relative RMSEs defined as
                                          RM SE(i|h) − RM SEBenchmark (i|h)
            Relative RMSE(i|h) = 100 ×                                      ,          (19)
                                               RM SEBenchmark (i|h)

where i denotes the variable and we adopt the convention (in slight abuse of notation) that
the forecast horizon h is measured in quarters. The QF-VAR serves as a benchmark model
and h = 1 corresponds to the quarter in which the forecast is generated. The h = 1 forecast
is often called a nowcast. Absolute RMSEs for the 11-variable MF-VAR are tabulated in the
Online Appendix.
 For all four series, the use of monthly information via the MF-VAR leads to a substantial
RMSE reduction in the short run. Consider the GDP growth forecasts. The “+2” nowcasts
have a 27% lower RMSE than the QF-VAR nowcasts. For the “+1 month” group and the
“+0 months” group, the reductions are both 15%. While the “+2 months” group forecasts
clearly dominate at the nowcast horizon h = 1, the relative ranking among the three sets
of MF-VAR forecasts becomes ambiguous for h ≥ 2. As the forecast horizon increases to
h = 4, the QF-VAR catches up with the MF-VAR. For horizons h ≥ 4, the RMSE differentials
between QF-VAR and MF-VAR GDP growth forecasts are negligible.
 For the monthly unemployment, inflation, and federal funds rate series, the short-run
RMSE reductions attained by the MF-VAR for the monthly series are even stronger than for
GDP growth, which is observed at quarterly frequency. This is, of course, not surprising. At
the nowcast horizon, the MF-VAR is able to improve over the precision of the QF-VAR for
                                                                                                                                                       19


                           Figure 2: Relative RMSEs of 11-Variable MF-VAR versus QF-VAR

                                  GDP Growth                                                                          Unemployment Rate
                  5
                                                                                                    0
                  0
Relative RMSE




                                                                                  Relative RMSE
                 −5
                                                                                                  −20
                −10
                −15                                                                               −40
                −20
                                                        +0 Months                                                                              +0 Months
                −25                                     +1 Months                                 −60                                          +1 Months
                                                        +2 Months                                                                              +2 Months
                −30
                   1   2     3      4       5       6      7        8                               1         2   3       4       5        6     7         8
                                 Forecast Horizon                                                                      Forecast Horizon

                                     Inﬂation                                                                         Federal Funds Rate
                  0                                                                                 0

                                                                                                  −20
Relative RMSE




                                                                           Relative RMSE
                −20
                                                                                                  −40

                −40                                                                               −60

                                                        +0 Months                                 −80                                          +0 Months
                −60                                     +1 Months                                                                              +1 Months
                                                        +2 Months                                                                              +2 Months
                                                                                           −100
                  1    2     3      4       5       6      7        8                          1              2   3       4       5        6     7         8
                                 Forecast Horizon                                                                      Forecast Horizon




the “+2 months” forecasts by 65% for unemployment, 70% for inflation, and 100% for the
federal funds rate. Recall that “+2 months” corresponds to the last month of the quarter,
which means that at the end of the last month, the average quarterly interest rate is known.
Thus, by construction the RMSE reduction for the federal funds rate is 100%. The RMSE
reductions for the “+1 month” group range from 40% (unemployment) to 80% (federal
funds rate). For the “+0 months” group the improvement of the nowcast from using the
MF-VAR is about 10% for inflation and the unemployment rate and 60% for the federal funds
rate. While the gains from using monthly information tend to persist for unemployment and
interest rates as the forecast horizon h increases, for inflation, monthly observations generate
no improvements of forecast performance beyond the nowcast horizon.
                To summarize the multivariate forecast performance of the VARs and aggregate the uni-
variate RMSE differentials across quarterly and monthly nonfinancial variables we consider
the log-determinant of the forecast error covariance matrix, proposed by Doan, Litterman,
and Sims (1984):
                                                                             TX
                                                                              max
                                                                     1
                                                f (ˆt ) = ln(|                   ˆt ˆ0t ) |),                                                     (20)
                                                                Tmax − Tmin t=T
                                                                                                        min

where ˆt is a vector of forecast errors. Log-determinant differentials of MF-VAR versus
                                                                                                                                                                            20


                                             Figure 3: Log Determinant of MF-VAR versus QF-VAR

                                             Quarterly Variables                                                        Monthly (Non-Fin) Variables
                                        5
                                                                                                                         0


                                                                                                                       −10




                                                                                            Relative Log Determinant
                                        0
           Relative Log Determinant




                                                                                                                       −20


                                       −5                                                                              −30


                                                                                                                       −40

                                      −10
                                                                                                                       −50

                                                                            +0 Months                                                                       +0 Months
                                                                            +1 Months                                  −60                                  +1 Months
                                                                            +2 Months                                                                       +2 Months
                                      −15
                                         1   2   3      4       5       6     7         8                                1   2   3      4       5       6     7         8
                                                     Forecast Horizon                                                                Forecast Horizon



Notes: The relative log determinant is defined as Relative Log Determinant = (100 · 0.5/nvar )[f (ˆ
                                                                                                  t,M F ) −
f (ˆ
   t,QF )], where f (·) is given in (20) and nvar = 3 for quarterly variables and nvar = 5 for monthly
nonfinancial variables. The forecast horizon h is measured in quarters and h = 1 corresponds to the quarter
in which the forecast is generated.


QF-VAR forecasts are depicted in Figure 3. We scale the log-determinant differentials by
100 · 0.5/nvar . The factor 0.5 converts mean-squared errors into RMSEs, the division by
nvar yields an average across the variables included in ˆt , and the factor 100 converts the
differential into percentages. This scaling makes the log-determinant differentials comparable
to the RMSE differentials depicted in Figure 2. The results are qualitatively consistent
with the comparison of univariate RMSEs. Not surprisingly, for the group of quarterly
variables (GDP, INVFIX, GOV) the gain from including within-quarter monthly information
is smaller than for the group of monthly nonfinancial variables (UNR, HRS, CPI, IP, PCE).
For quarterly variables the forecast accuracy gains relative to the QF-VAR range from 11%
(“+2 months” group) to 6% (“+0 months” group). For monthly variables the gains for the
three forecast origin groups are 60%, 30% and 6% respectively. For h ≥ 3 the QF-VAR
catches up with the MF-VAR and the benefit from using monthly information vanishes. The
only exception are the “+2” months forecasts of the monthly variables. Here the within-
quarter monthly information remains even for forecast horizons exceeding one year. We
exclude the financial variables (FF, TB, SP500) from the group of monthly variables because
the financial variables are essentially known at the end of each quarter (“+2 months” group)
which creates a near-singularity in forecast error covariance matrices that include one or
more financial variables.
                                                                                                      21


MF-VAR versus MIDAS. A popular alternative to the multivariate state-space framework
used in this paper are MIDAS regressions. While there exist generalizations of the MIDAS
approach to VAR settings, in most applications MIDAS regressions are used as univariate
forecasting models. For a comparison of the two approaches we will focus on output growth.
Our VAR models use 11 macroeconomic variables. If all of these variables are included in a
MIDAS regression without any further restrictions, the MIDAS regression will perform very
poorly. The distributed-lag restrictions on high-frequency regressors are designed to deal
with many (high-frequency) observations of a single regressor but they are not designed to
impose parsimony on a specification with many different right-hand-side variables. Thus,
instead of comparing the 11-variable MF-VAR with MIDAS regressions, we will provide
comparisons between bivariate MF-VARs and MIDAS regressions, estimated using the same
set of variables.

  Foroni, Marcellino, and Schumacher (2013) propose an unrestricted version of the MI-
DAS model (U-MIDAS) and show that when the mismatch of the frequency is low, like
in macroeconomic applications that typically involve monthly and quarterly data only, this
unrestricted version performs better in Monte Carlo experiments and provides a better GDP
nowcasting performance than a MIDAS regression with distributed-lag restrictions on the
coefficients of the high-frequency variables. Thus, we consider U-MIDAS (instead of MIDAS)
regressions in our comparison. The key aspect of our empirical analysis is the distinction
between three groups of forecast origins, denoted by “+0,” “+1,” and “+2” (months). Each
of these groups uses different within-quarter monthly information. Accordingly, we use three
separate U-MIDAS regressions, which, using the notation of Section 2, can be written as
                                                 6
                                                 X
“+0” : ỹq,t+3h = β0 + β1 ỹq,t + β2 ỹq,t−3 +         γs xm,t−s+1 + residt+3h                      (21)
                                                 s=1
                                                 X6
“+1” : ỹq,t+3h = β0 + β1 ỹq,t + β2 ỹq,t−3 +         γs xm,t−s+1 + δ1 xm,t+1 + residt+3h
                                                 s=1
                                                 X6
“+2” : ỹq,t+3h = β0 + β1 ỹq,t + β2 ỹq,t−3 +         γs xm,t−s+1 + δ1 xm,t+1 + δ2 xm,t+2 + residt+3h ,
                                                 s=1

where t = 0, 3, 6, 9, . . .. The quarterly variable ỹq,t+3h was defined as average of unobserved
monthly variables in (4) and corresponds to log GDP. The monthly variable xm,t is assumed to
be scalar and we consider all eight of our monthly variables individually. The regression (21)
is estimated by OLS for each group of forecast origins and for each forecast horizon separately.
Thus, as in Foroni, Marcellino, and Schumacher (2013) we use direct estimation, i.e., the
                                                                                                                                                       22


                              Figure 4: Relative RMSEs of Bivariate MF-VAR versus MIDAS

                           MF-VAR (UNR) versus MIDAS (UNR)                                                    MF-VAR (IP) versus MIDAS (IP)
                  5                                                                              10

                  0                                                                               0
Relative RMSE




                                                                                Relative RMSE
                 −5                                                                             −10

                −10                                                                             −20

                −15                                         +0 Months                           −30                                           +0 Months
                                                            +1 Months                                                                         +1 Months
                                                            +2 Months                                                                         +2 Months
                −20                                                                             −40
                   1   2       3       4       5       6       7        8                          1   2         3      4       5       6          7        8
                                    Forecast Horizon                                                                 Forecast Horizon

                           MF-VAR (PCE) versus MIDAS (PCE)                                                 MF-VAR (SP500) versus MIDAS (SP500)
                  5                                                                              10
                  0
                                                                                                  0
Relative RMSE




                                                                                Relative RMSE
                 −5
                −10
                                                                                                −10
                −15
                −20                                                                             −20
                                                            +0 Months                                                                         +0 Months
                −25                                         +1 Months                                                                         +1 Months
                                                            +2 Months                                                                         +2 Months
                −30                                                                             −30
                   1   2       3       4       5       6       7        8                          1   2         3      4       5       6          7        8
                                    Forecast Horizon                                                                 Forecast Horizon
                           MF-VAR (HRS) versus MIDAS (HRS)                                                  MF-VAR (CPI) versus MIDAS (CPI)
                                                                                                10
                                                            +0 Months
                  0                                         +1 Months
                                                            +2 Months                            0
Relative RMSE




                                                                            Relative RMSE




                −10                                                                         −10

                −20                                                                         −20

                                                                                            −30                                             +0 Months
                −30                                                                                                                         +1 Months
                                                                                                                                            +2 Months
                                                                                            −40
                  1    2       3      4       5        6      7         8                      1       2        3       4       5       6      7        8
                                   Forecast Horizon                                                                  Forecast Horizon

                            MF-VAR (FF) versus MIDAS (FF)                                                   MF-VAR (TB) versus MIDAS (TB)
                 10                                                                             10

                  5
                                                                                                 0
Relative RMSE




                                                                            Relative RMSE




                  0

                 −5                                                                         −10

                −10
                                                            +0 Months                       −20                                             +0 Months
                −15                                         +1 Months                                                                       +1 Months
                                                            +2 Months                                                                       +2 Months
                −20                                                                         −30
                   1   2       3      4       5        6      7         8                      1       2        3       4       5       6      7        8
                                   Forecast Horizon                                                                  Forecast Horizon




projection of ỹq,t+3h on the predictors available at the forecast origin, to determine the
coefficients for the multi-step forecasting equation. Recall that under the Bayesian approach
employed for the analysis of the MF-VAR multi-step forecasts are generated by iterating the
                                                                                          23


VAR forward and using the posterior distribution to integrate out the unknown parameters.

 Figure 4 illustrates the log GDP forecast performance of the bivariate MF-VARs relative to
the MIDAS regressions. Each panel corresponds to a different monthly variable. Two results
stand out. First, by and large, both the MF-VAR and MIDAS utilize the within-quarter
monthly information equally well. The RMSE differentials are essentially the same for each
of the three informational groups. For six out of the eight monthly variables the MF-VAR
forecasts are more accurate than the MIDAS forecasts at some horizons, and no worse at
the other horizons. For the unemployment rate, the gain from using the MF-VAR is highest
for horizons of 2-5 quarters. For industrial production, the stock market index, hours, and
the treasury bond rate the largest gain is realized at the long-horizon whereas for PCE the
improvement if fairly uniform for one- to eight-quarter ahead forecasts. Only for the federal
funds rate and CPI inflation MIDAS forecasts appear to be marginally more accurate than
the MF-VAR forecasts.

Other Comparisons. In the Online Appendix we also provide RMSE comparisons between
the 11-variable MF-VAR and univariate QF-AR(2) models; and between a 4-variable MF-
VAR (GDP, CPI, UNR, FF) and a 4-variable QF-VAR. The results are qualitatively very
similar: there is a substantial gain from using the within-quarter-monthly information for
nowcasting and short-horizon forecasting. This gain vanishes over one- to two-year horizons.
Finally, the Online Appendix contains a careful comparison between MF-VAR forecasts and
Greenbook (now Tealbook) forecasts, prepared by the staff of the Board of Governors for
the meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee. At the nowcast horizon the unem-
ployment forecasts of the MF-VAR are at par with the Greenbook forecasts, whereas the
GDP growth and inflation forecasts are less accurate than the Greenbook forecasts. Over a
four- to five-quarter horizon the MF-VAR generates more accurate GDP forecasts, whereas
the Greenbook contains more precise inflation and unemployment rate forecasts.


4.3    Forecasting During the Great Recession

The pseudo-out-of-sample forecast performance of the previous section documented that
the use of within-quarter monthly observations increases the precision of short-run forecast.
We now examine how the use of monthly real-time information sharpened the VAR forecasts
during the recent recession. We focus on the period from October to December 2008. Figure 5
depicts real-time interval forecasts from the MF-VAR and the QF-VAR. Moreover, we plot
actual values using the 2011:M7 data vintage. We focus on real GDP growth and CPI
                                                                                             24


inflation. The figure is divided into subpanels that correspond to particular estimation
samples and forecast horizons. The first column of panels depicts October 2008 forecasts
(“+0 months” group), and the second and third columns show November (“+1 month”)
and December (“+2 months”) forecasts, respectively. A comparison between the first and
second (third and forth) row of panels shows how monthly within-quarter information alters
the density forecast for GDP (inflation).

  The most striking feature of the top panels of Figure 5 is the -2% quarter-on-quarter
growth rate of GDP in 2008:Q4. The magnitude of the drop in output growth in late 2008 is
unexpected by the VAR models. It is, for all forecast origins, outside of the 90% predictive in-
terval. The drop in GDP growth is equally unexpected by state-of-the-art dynamic stochastic
general equilibrium (DSGE) models and the Blue Chip survey of professional forecasters as
documented in Del Negro and Schorfheide (2013). A comparison of the MF-VAR and QF-
VAR forecasts highlights how monthly information alters the within-quarter predictions.
Notice that the QF-VAR forecasts do not stay constant within the quarter. The variation
is caused by data revisions. As discussed in Section 3, each month new data releases for the
previous quarter become available and change the lagged observations that determine the
initial conditions for the VAR at the forecast origin. However, the within-quarter variation
of the QF-VAR forecasts is fairly small.

  By December 2008 the QF-VAR nowcasts and forecasts show still no evidence of a severe
downturn, because the latest information that is used to generate the predictions stems from
2008:Q3. The MF-VAR forecasts, on the other hand, do get revised more substantially
during each quarter. In addition to the presence of data revisions, the forecasts are updated
based on the information that is available at monthly frequency. Compared to the QF-VAR
forecasts, the MF-VAR nowcasts during the fourth quarter of 2008 are a lot more pessimistic,
which is in line with the actual realization of output growth. Over a one-year horizon the
discrepancy between the MF-VAR and QF-VAR forecasts vanishes, which is consistent with
the forecast error statistics presented in the previous section. According to both VARs the
GDP growth forecasts are mean reverting. The models predict a GDP growth rate of about
1% for the second half of 2009. This prediction turned out to be accurate.

  The bottom panels of Figure 5 depict the evolution of inflation forecasts in the last quarter
of 2008. Since the CPI is published at a monthly frequency, the differences between within-
quarter inflation forecasts from the MF-VAR and QF-VAR are much more pronounced than
for GDP. Throughout 2008:Q4 the inflation forecasts from the QF-VAR stay essentially
constant and miss the -2% deflation rate in 2008:Q4. The MF-VAR, on the other hand,
                                                                                                         25


                   Figure 5: Real-Time Forecasts During the Great Recession

                                 GDP-Growth Forecasts: MF-VAR




                                 GDP-Growth Forecasts: QF-VAR




                                    Inflation Forecasts: MF-VAR




                                    Inflation Forecasts: QF-VAR




Notes: Actual values are from the T∗ = 2012 : M 1 data vintage and are denoted as the black line with
triangles. The title in each subplot indicates the forecast origin and the data vintage that are used in the
estimation. We show the median, 60% bands, and 90% bands constructed from the predictive distribution.


detects the deflation by November 2008 as it is unfolding. At the longer horizon, the MF-
                                                                                                          26


                   Figure 6: Monthly GDP Growth (Scaled to a Quarterly Rate)




VAR correctly predicts that the deflation episode is short-lived and that inflation rate will,
with about 50% probability, be positive by the end of 2009. To summarize, these real-time
forecasts during the Great Recession illustrate that the MF-VAR can transform within-
quarter monthly information into more accurate nowcasts and forecasts of quarterly averages.


4.4        Monthly GDP

The estimation of the MF-VAR generates a monthly GDP series as a by-product. This series
is implicitly extracted during the smoothing step of the Gibbs sampler (see Section 2.2) from
the eleven macroeconomic time series that enter the MF-VAR. A time series plot of monthly
GDP growth is depicted in Figure 6. For each trajectory of log GDP generated with the Gibbs
sampler, we compute month-on-month growth rates (scaled by a factor of 3 to make them
comparable to quarter-on-quarter rates). For each month we then plot the median growth
rate across the simulated trajectories. We overlay monthly GDP growth rates published
by Stock and Watson (2010), who combine monthly information about GDP components
to distribute quarterly GDP across the three months of the quarter.1 Moreover, we plot
growth rates computed from NIPA’s quarterly GDP, implicitly assuming that GDP growth
is constant within a quarter. Two observations stand out. First, at a monthly frequency GDP
growth is much more volatile than at a quarterly level. Second, the monthly GDP growth
series obtained from the MF-VAR estimation is somewhat smoother than the Stock-Watson
   1
       Frale, Marcellino, Mazzi, and Proietti (2011) use a similar approach to construct a monthly GDP series
for the Euro Area.
                                                                                         27


series. While the two monthly measures are positively correlated, they are not perfectly
synchronized, which is consistent with these measures being constructed from very different
source data.



5      Conclusion

We have specified a VAR for observations that are observed at different frequencies, namely,
monthly and quarterly. A Gibbs sampler was utilized to conduct Bayesian inference for
model parameters and unobserved monthly variables. To cope with the dimensionality of
the MF-VAR, we used a Minnesota prior that shrinks the VAR coefficients toward univariate
random-walk representations. The degree of shrinkage is determined in a data-driven way,
by maximizing the log MDD with respect to a low-dimensional vector of hyperparameters
and we show how to approximate the MDD of a MF-VAR. Finally, we used the model to
generate forecasts. The main finding is that within-quarter monthly information leads to
drastic improvements in the short-horizon forecasting performance. These improvements are
increasing in the time that has passed since the beginning of the quarter. Over a one- to
two-year horizon there are, however, no noticeable gains from using the monthly information.



References
Aruoba, S. B., F. X. Diebold, and C. Scotti (2009): “Real-Time Measurement of
    Business Conditions,” Journal of Business & Economics Statistics, 27(4), 417–427.

Bai, J., E. Ghysels, and Wright (2013): “State Space Models and MIDAS Regressions,”
    Econometric Reviews, 32(7), 779–813.

Banbura, M., D. Giannone, and L. Reichlin (2010): “Large Bayesian VARs,” Journal
    of Applied Econometrics, 25(1), 71–92.

Carriero, A., T. E. Clark, and M. Marcellino (2011): “Bayesian VARs: Specifica-
    tion Choices and Forecast Accuracy,” FRB Cleveland Working Paper 11-12.

           (2012): “Real-Time Nowcasting with a Bayesian Mixed Frequency Model with
    Stochastic Volatility,” FRB Cleveland Working Paper 12-27.
                                                                                         28


Carter, C. K., and R. Kohn (1994): “On Gibbs Sampling for State Space Models,”
  Biometrika, 81(3), 541–553.

Chauvet, M., and S. Potter (2013): “Forecasting Output,” in Handbook of Economic
  Forecasting, ed. by G. Elliott, and A. Timmermann, vol. 2. Elsevier.

Chiu, C. W. Eraker, B., A. Foerster, T. B. Kim, and H. Seoane (2012): “Esti-
  mating VAR’s Sampled at Mixed or Irregular Spaced Frequencies: A Bayesian Approach,”
  FRB Kansas City RWP 11-11.

De Mol, C., D. Giannone, and L. Reichlin (2008): “Forecasting Using a Large Num-
  ber of Predictors: Is Bayesian Shrinkage a Valid Alternative to Principal Components?,”
  Journal of Econometrics, 146(2), 318–328.

Del Negro, M., and F. Schorfheide (2004): “Priors from General Equilibrium Models
  for VARs,” International Economic Review, 45(2), 643 – 673.

Del Negro, M., and F. Schorfheide (2011): “Bayesian Macroeconometrics,” in The
  Oxford Handbook of Bayesian Econometrics, ed. by J. Geweke, G. Koop, and H. van Dijk,
  pp. 293–389. Oxford University Press.

Del Negro, M., and F. Schorfheide (2013): “DSGE Model-Based Forecasting,” in
  Handbook of Economic Forecasting, ed. by G. Elliott, and A. Timmermann, vol. 2. Elsevier.

Doan, T., R. Litterman, and C. A. Sims (1984): “Forecasting and Conditional Pro-
  jection Using Realistic Prior Distributions,” Econometric Reviews, 3(1), 1–100.

Durbin, J., and S. J. Koopman (2001): Time Series Analysis by State Space Methods.
  Oxford University Press.

Faust, J., and J. Wright (2013): “Forecasting Inflation,” in Handbook of Economic
  Forecasting, ed. by G. Elliott, and A. Timmermann, vol. 2. Elsevier.

Foroni, C., M. Marcellino, and C. Schumacher (2013): “U-MIDAS: MIDAS Regres-
  sions with Unrestricted Lag Polynomials,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series
  A, Forthcoming.

Frale, C., M. Marcellino, G. L. Mazzi, and T. Proietti (2011): “EUROMIND: A
  Monthly Indicator of the Euro Area Economic Conditions,” Journal of the Royal Statistical
  Society, Series A, 174(2), 439–470.
                                                                                     29


Geweke, J. (1999): “Using Simulation Methods for Bayesian Econometric Models: Infer-
  ence, Development, and Communication,” Econometric Reviews, 18(1), 1–126.

Ghysels, E. (2012): “Macroeconomics and the Reality of Mixed Frequency Data,”
  Manuscript, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.

Ghysels, E., A. Sinko, and R. Valkanov (2007): “MIDAS Regressions: Further Results
  and New Directions,” Econometric Reviews, 26(1), 53–90.

Giannone, D., M. Lenza, and G. Primiceri (2012): “Prior Selection for Vector Au-
  toregressions,” NBER Working Paper w18467.

Giannone, D., L. Reichlin, and D. Small (2008): “Nowcasting: The Real-Time In-
  formational Content of Macroeconomic Data,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 55(4),
  665–676.

Giordani, P., M. K. Pitt, and R. Kohn (2011): “Bayesian Inference for Time Se-
  ries State Space Models,” in The Oxford Handbook of Bayesian Econometrics, ed. by
  J. Geweke, G. Koop, and H. K. van Dijk, pp. 61–124. Oxford University Press.

Harvey, A. C. (1989): Forecasting, Structural Time Series Models, and the Kalman Filter.
  Cambridge University Press.

Karlsson, S. (2013): “Forecasting with Bayesian Vector Autoregressions,” in Handbook of
  Economic Forecasting, ed. by G. Elliott, and A. Timmermann, vol. 2. Elsevier.

Kuzin, V., M. Marcellino, and C. Schumacher (2011): “MIDAS vs. Mixed-Frequency
  VAR: Nowcasting GDP in the Euro Area,” International Journal of Forecasting, 27(2),
  529–542.

Litterman, R. (1986): “Forecasting with Bayesian Vector Autoregressions - Five Years of
  Experience,” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 4(1), 25–38.

Litterman, R. B. (1980): “Techniques for Forecasting with Vector Autoregressions,”
  Ph.D. thesis, University of Minnesota.

Mariano, R. S., and Y. Murasawa (2003): “A New Coincident Index of Business Cycles
  Based on Monthly and Quarterly Series,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 18(4), 427–
  443.
                                                                                     30


Phillips, P. C. B. (1996): “Econometric Model Determination,” Econometrica, 64(4),
  763–812.

Rodriguez, A., and G. Puggioni (2010): “Mixed Frequency Models: Bayesian Ap-
  proaches to Estimation and Prediction,” International Journal of Forecasting, 26, 293–
  311.

Sims, C. A., and T. Zha (1998): “Bayesian Methods for Dynamic Multivariate Models,”
  International Economic Review, 39(4), 949–968.

Stock, J. H., and M. W. Watson (2010): “Monthly Estimates of Real GDP/GDI:
  Research Memorandum,” Manuscript, Harvard University and Princeton University.

Waggoner, D. F., and T. Zha (1999): “Conditional Forecasts in Dynamic Multivariate
  Models,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 81(4), 639–651.
Online Appendix                                                                                A-1


                Online Appendix for
 Real-Time Forecasting with a Mixed-Frequency VAR
                        Frank Schorfheide and Dongho Song

Section A of this appendix provides details of the implementation of the Bayesian computa-
tions for the MF-VAR presented in the main text. Section B discusses the construction of
the real-time data set. Finally, Section C of this appendix provides tables and figures with
additional empirical results. References to equations, tables, and figures without an A, B,
or C prefix refer to equations, tables, and figures in the main text.



A       Implementation Details

Recall from the exposition in the main text (see equation (9)) that the Bayesian computations
are implemented with a Gibbs sampler that iterates over the conditional distributions

                         p(Φ, Σ|Z0:T , Y−p+1:T ) and p(Z0:T |Φ, Σ, Y−p+1:T ).

Conditional on Z0:T the MF-VAR reduces to a standard linear Gaussian VAR with a conju-
gate prior. The reader is referred to Section 2 of the handbook chapter by Del Negro and
Schorfheide (2011) for a detailed discussion of posterior inference for such a VAR.
  We limit the exposition in this appendix to a brief presentation of the Minnesota prior and
the hyperparameter selection (Section A.1). The sampling from the conditional posterior
of Z0:T |(Φ, Σ, Y−p+1:T ) is implemented with a standard simulation smoother, discussed in
detail, for instance, in Carter and Kohn (1994), the state-space model textbook of Durbin
and Koopman (2001), or the handbook chapter by Giordani, Pitt, and Kohn (2011). The
only two aspects of our implementation that deserve further discussion are the initialization
(Section A.2) and the use of the more compact state-space representation for periods t =
1, . . . , Tb (Section A.3).


A.1      Minnesota Prior and Its Hyperparameters

To simplify the exposition, suppose that n = 2 and p = 2. A transposed version of (1) can
be written as

                     x0t = [x0t−1 , x0t−2 , 1]0 Φ + u0t = wt0 Φ + u0t ,   ut ∼ iidN (0, Σ).   (A-1)
Online Appendix                                                                                 A-2


We generate the Minnesota prior by dummy observations (x∗ , w∗ ) that are indexed by a 5×1
vector of hyperparameters λ with elements λi . Using a pre-sample, let x and s be n × 1
vectors of means and standard deviations. For time series that are observed at monthly
frequency, the computation of pre-sample moments is straightforward. In order to obtain
pre-sample means and standard deviations for those series that are observed at quarterly
frequency, we simply equate xq with the pre-sample mean of the observed quarterly values
and set s equal to the pre-sample standard deviation of the observed quarterly series.

Dummy Observations for Φ1 .
         "              # "                   #    "         #
            λ1 s1  0        λ1 s1  0    0 0 0        u11 u12
                         =                      Φ+             .                              (A-2)
             0    λ1 s2      0    λ1 s2 0 0 0        u21 u22

We can rewrite the first row of (A-2) as

                           λ1 s1 = λ1 s1 φ11 + u11 ,       0 = λ1 s1 φ21 + u12 .

Since, according to (A-1) the ut ’s are normally distributed, we can interpret the relationships
as
                      φ11 ∼ N (1, Σ11 /(λ21 s21 )),      φ21 ∼ N (0, Σ22 /(λ21 , s21 )).

where φij denotes the element i, j of the matrix Φ, and Σij corresponds to element i, j of Σ.
The hyperparameter λ1 controls the tightness of the prior.

Dummy Observations for Φ2 .
               "      # "                             #
                 0 0        0 0 λ1 s1 2λ2     0     0
                       =                                Φ + U,                                (A-3)
                 0 0        0 0     0     λ1 s2 2λ2 0

where the hyperparameter λ2 is used to scale the prior standard deviations for coefficients
associated with xt−l according to l−λ2 .

Dummy Observations for Σ. A prior for the covariance matrix Σ, centered at a matrix
that is diagonal with elements equal to the pre-sample variance of xt , is obtained by stacking
the observations             "             #       "                  #
                                 s1   0                0 0 0 0 0
                                               =                          Φ+U                 (A-4)
                                 0    s2               0 0 0 0 0
λ3 times.

Sums-of-Coefficients Dummy Observations. When lagged values of a variable xi,t are
at the level xi , the same value xi is a priori likely to be a good forecast of xi,t , regardless of
Online Appendix                                                                                               A-3


the value of other variables:
                 "                    #       "                                                 #
                    λ4 x1    0                      λ4 x1       0         λ4 x1       0     0
                                          =                                                         Φ + U.   (A-5)
                        0     λ4 x2                  0         λ4 x2       0         λ4 x2 0

Co-persistence Dummy Observations. When all lagged xt ’s are at the level x, a priori
xt tends to persist at that level:
                  h              i h                        i
                    λ5 x1 λ5 x2 = λ5 x1 λ5 x2 λ5 x1 λ5 x2 λ5 Φ + U.                                          (A-6)


Prior Distribution. After collecting the T ∗ dummy observations in matrices X ∗ and W ∗ ,
the likelihood function associated with (A-1) can be used to relate the dummy observa-
tions to the parameters Φ and Σ. If we combine the likelihood function with the improper
prior p(Φ, Σ) ∝ |Σ|−(n+1)/2 , we can deduce that the product p(X ∗ |Φ, Σ) · |Σ|−(n+1)/2 can be
interpreted as
                                                                    0
                            (Φ, Σ) ∼ M N IW (Φ, (W ∗ W ∗ )−1 , S, T ∗ − k),                                  (A-7)

where Φ and S are

                  Φ = (W ∗0 W ∗ )−1 W ∗0 W ∗ ,              S = (X ∗ − W ∗ Φ)0 (X ∗ − W ∗ Φ).
                                          0
Provided that T ∗ > k + n and W ∗ W ∗ is invertible, the prior distribution is proper.

Hyperparameter Grid Search for MF-VAR: For the first recursive sample the grid
search proceeds in three steps. Define:

                  (1)        
                 Λ1     =        0.01, 1.12, 2.23, 3.34, 4.45, 5.56, 6.67, 7.78, 8.89, 10
                  (1)        
                 Λ2     =   0.01, 1.12, 2.23, 3.34, 4.45, 5.56, 6.67, 7.78, 8.89, 10
                  (1)     
                 Λ3     = 1
                  (1)     
                 Λ4     = 2.23, 2, 7, 3.34, 4.3, 4.45, 5.56
                  (1)     
                 Λ5     = 2.23, 2, 7, 3.34, 4.3, 4.45, 5.56

The first grid is given by

                                              (1)        (1)        (1)        (1)        (1)
                                 Λ(1) = Λ1 ⊗ Λ2 ⊗ Λ3 ⊗ Λ4 ⊗ Λ5 ,

where ⊗ denote the Cartesian product. Thus, we are fixing λ3 = 1 throughout. We maximize
ln p̂(Y1:T |Y−p+1:0,λ ) with respect to λ ∈ Λ(1) . By construction λ̂3 = 1. We retain the argmax
values λ̂4 = 2.7 and λ̂5 = 4.3.
Online Appendix                                                                             A-4


  In the second step we refine the grids for λ1 and λ2 as follows:

                       (2)        
                     Λ1      =        0.01, 0.03, 0.05, 0.07, 0.09, 0.11, 0.13, 0.15
                       (2)        
                     Λ2      =        0.8, 1.3, 2.1, 2.8, 3.5, 4.3, 4.8, 5.2 .

                                                                (2)     (2)
Maximization of the MDD with respect to Λ(2) = Λ1 ⊗ Λ2 ⊗ {1.0} ⊗ {2.70} ⊗ {4.30} yields
λ̂ for the first recursive sample.

  In the third step we reoptimize the choice of λ1 and λ2 for recursive samples 40, 75, 110,
and 151. In this step we use the following grids for λ1 and λ2 :

                                  (3)        
                                 Λ1      =       0.05, 0.07, 0.09, 0.11, 0.13
                                  (3)        
                                 Λ2      =       2.1, 2.8, 3.5, 4.3, 4.8 .


  Hyperparameter Grid Search for QF-VAR: For the QF-VAR we are also fixing
λ3 = 1. The grids for λ1 and λ2 are given by the 40 equally-spaced points on the interval
[0.01, 10]. The grids for λ4 and λ5 are given by the 40 equally-spaced points on the interval
[0.1, 10].


A.2      Initial Distribution p(z0 |Y−p+1:0 )

Recall that t = 1 corresponds to 1968:M1. Let T− = −11 such that t = T− corresponds
to 1967:M1. We then initialize zT− using actual observations. This is straightforward for
xm,T− , xm,T− −1 , xm,T− −p because they are observed. We set xq,T− , xq,T− −1 , xq,T− −p equal
to the observed quarterly values, assuming that during these periods the monthly within-
quarter values simply equal the observed averages during the quarter. This provides us
with a distribution for p(zT− ) that is simply a point mass. We then set Φ and Σ equal to
their respective prior means and apply the Kalman filter for t = T− + 1, . . . , 0 to the state-
space system described in (2) and (7), updating the beliefs about the latent state zt with
pre-sample observations YT− :0 . In slight abuse of notation, we denote the distribution of zt
obtained after the period 0 updating by p(z0 |Y−p+1 ). Note that this distribution does not
depend on the “unknown” parameters Φ and Σ, because the Kalman filter iterations were
implemented based on the prior means of these matrices.
Online Appendix                                                                                A-5


A.3     Compact State-Space Representation

As discussed in the main text, the computational efficiency of the simulation-smoother step
in the Gibbs sampler can be improved by eliminating, for t = 1, . . . , Tb , the monthly ob-
servations xm,t from the state vector zt that appears in the measurement equation (7). We
begin by re-ordering the lags of xt and the VAR coefficients in (1) to separate lags of xm,t
from lags of xq,t . Define the pnm × 1 vector zm,t and pnq × 1 vector zq,t as

                    0
                        = x0m,t , . . . , x0m,t−p+1 ,    0
                                                             = x0q,t , . . . , x0q,t−p+1 .
                                                                                     
                   zm,t                                 zq,t

In a similar manner, define the nm ×pnm matrix Φmm , the nm ×pnq matrix Φmq , the nq ×pnm
matrix Φqm , and the nq × pnq matrix Φqq such that (1) can be rewritten as
              "      # "               #"          # "        # "          #
                xm,t        Φmm Φmq         zm,t−1       Φmc         um,t
                       =                             +          +            .                (A-8)
                xq,t        Φqm Φqq         zq,t−1       Φqc         uq,t

Recall that for t ≤ Tb , all the monthly series are observed. Thus, ym,t = xm,t and, in slight
                                                                   0
abuse of notation, zm,t−1 = ym,t−p:t−1 . Now define st = [x0q,t , zq,t−1 ]0 and notice that based
on the second equation in (A-8), one can define matrices Γs , Γzm , Γc , and Γu such that we
obtain a state-transition equation in companion form

                           st = Γs st−1 + Γzm ym,t−p:t−1 + Γc + Γu uq,t .                     (A-9)

The measurement equation for the monthly series takes the form

                          ym,t = Λms st + Φmm ym,t−p:t−1 + Φmc + um,t .                      (A-10)

Finally, the measurement equation for the quarterly series can be expressed as

                                           yq,t = Mq,t Λqs st ,                              (A-11)

where the matrix Λqs st averages xq,t , xq,t−1 , and xq,t−2 and Mq,t is a time-varying selection
matrix that selects the elements of Λqs st that are observed in period t. In sum, (A-9),
(A-10), and (A-11) provide an alternative state-space representation of the MF-VAR that
reduces the dimension of the state vector from np to nq (p + 1). In this alternative repre-
sentation, the “measurement errors” um,t in (A-10) are correlated with the innovations uq,t
in the state-transition equation (A-9). Moreover, the lagged observables ym,t−p:t−1 directly
enter the state-transition and measurement equations. Since these observables are part of
the t − 1 information, the modification of the Kalman filter and simulation smoother is
straightforward.
Online Appendix                                                                                                       A-6


   At the end of period t = Tb , we switch from the state-space representation in terms of st =
[x0q,t , . . . , x0q,t−p ]0   to a state-space representation in terms of z̃t = [zt0 , x0t−p ] = [x0t , . . . , x0t−p ]0 .2
                                                                            s
In the forward pass of the Kalman filter, let ŝt|t = E[st |Y−p+1:t ] and Pt|t = V[st |Y−p+1:t ]
(omitting (Φ, Σ) from the conditioning set). Since xm,t , . . . , xm,t−p+1 is known conditional on
the Y−p+1:t , we can easily obtain z̃ˆt|t = E[z̃t |Y−p+1:t ] by augmenting ŝt|t with ym,t , . . . , ym,t−p .
            z̃                                                    s
Moreover, Pt|t = V[z̃t |Y−p+1:t ] can be obtained by augmenting Pt|t by zeros, to reflect that
xm,t , . . . , xm,t−p are known with certainty. In the backward pass of the simulation smoother
we start out with a sequence of draws from z̃T |Y−p+1:T and z̃t |(Z̃t+1:T , Y−p+1:T ) for t = T −
1, . . . , Tb +1. Let z̃ˆt|T and P z̃ denote the mean and variance associated with this distribution.
                                          t|T
At t = Tb we convert the conditional mean and variance of z̃Tb into a conditional mean and
variance for sTb . This is done by eliminating all elements associated with xm,t , . . . , xm,t−p .



B          Construction of Real-Time Data Set

The eleven real-time macroeconomic data series are obtained from the ALFRED database
maintained by the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. Table B-1 summarizes how the series
used in this paper are linked to the series provided by ALFRED.

   We construct two sequences of dates that contain the set of forecast origins (Tmin , . . . , Tmax ).
One sequence contains the last day of each month, and the other sequence will comprise the
Greenbook forecast dates. ALFRED provides a publication date for each data vintage. We
wrote a computer program that selects for every forecast origin, the most recent ALFRED
vintage for each of the eleven variables and combines the series into a single data set. This
leaves us with a real-time data set for each forecast origin. Based on the missing values in
each real-time data set, we construct the selection matrices Mt , t = Tb + 1, . . . , T , that ap-
pear in (7). The patterns of missing values are summarized in Tables 1 and B-2. Greenbook
forecasts are also obtained from the ALFRED database.

   Some of the vintages of PCE and INVFIX extracted from ALFRED were incomplete. The
recent vintages of PCE and INVFIX from ALFRED do not include data prior to 1990 or
1995 (depending on the vintages). However, the most recent data for PCE and INVFIX can
be obtained from BEA or NIPA, say, from 1/1/1967 to 1/1/2012. Let us consider PCE for
    2
        We augment the state vector zt in (2) and (7) by an additional lag of xt to ensure that st is a sub-
vector of the resulting z̃t . This augmentation requires a straightforward modification of the state-transition
equation (2) and the measurement equations (7).
Online Appendix                                                                          A-7


                       Table B-1: ALFRED Series Used in Analysis

               Time Series                                   ALFRED Name

               Gross Domestic Product (GDP)                  GDPC1
               Fixed Investment (INVFIX)                     FPIC1
               Government Expenditures (GOV)                 GCEC1
               Unemployment Rate (UNR)                       UNRATE
               Hours Worked (HRS)                            AWHI
               Consumer Price Index (CPI)                    CPIAUCSL
               Industrial Production Index (IP)              INDPRO
               Personal Consumption Expenditure (PCE)        PCEC96
               Federal Fund Rate (FF)                        FEDFUNDS
               Treasury Bond Yield (TB)                      GS10
               S&P 500 (SP500)                               SP500



illustration. For the vintages between 12/10/2003 and 6/25/2009, data start from 1/1/1990,
and for the vintages between 7/31/2009 and the present, data start from 1/1/1995. First, we
compute the growth rates from the most recent data. Based on the computed growth rates,
we can backcast historical series up to 1/1/1967 using the 1/1/1990 (1/1/1995) data points
as initializations. We think this is a reasonable way to construct the missing points. We
eliminated 4 of the 151 samples (28, 29, 33, 145) because the vintages for PCE and INVFIX
were incomplete. In principle, we could backcast as for the other vintages, but we took a
shortcut.

  Table B-2 lists exceptions for the classification of information sets for specific forecast
origins.
Online Appendix                                                                                             A-8




                       Table B-2: Illustration of Information Sets: Exceptions

                                Exceptions E0 : January (+0 Months)
                UNR       HRS     CPI     IP   PCE      FF     TB    SP500      GDP      INVFIX       GOV

  Q4    M10        X       X       X      X      X       X      X       X       QAv        QAv        QAv
  Q4    M11        X       X       X      X      X       X      X       X       QAv        QAv        QAv
  Q4    M12        X       X       X      X       ∅      X      X       X       QAv        QAv        QAv
  Q1    M1         ∅        ∅       ∅     ∅       ∅      X      X       X         ∅          ∅          ∅


                                Exceptions E1 : February (+1 Month)

                UNR       HRS     CPI     IP   PCE      FF     TB    SP500      GDP      INVFIX       GOV

  Q4    M11        X       X       X      X      X       X      X       X       QAv        QAv        QAv
  Q4    M12        X       X       X      X      X       X      X       X       QAv        QAv        QAv
  Q1    M1         X       X       X      X       ∅      X      X       X         ∅          ∅          ∅
  Q1    M2         ∅        ∅       ∅     ∅       ∅      X      X       X         ∅          ∅          ∅


                                 Exceptions E2 : March (+2 Months)

                UNR       HRS     CPI     IP   PCE      FF     TB    SP500      GDP      INVFIX       GOV
  Q4    M12        X       X       X      X      X       X      X       X       QAv        QAv        QAv
  Q1    M1         X       X       X      X      X       X      X       X         ∅          ∅          ∅
  Q1    M2         X       X       X      X       ∅      X      X       X         ∅          ∅          ∅
  Q1    M3         ∅        ∅       ∅     ∅       ∅      X      X       X         ∅          ∅          ∅

Notes: ∅ indicates that the variable is missing. X denotes monthly observation and QAv denotes quarterly
average. “+0 months” group: January, April, July, October; “+1 month” group: February, May, August,
November; “+2 month” group: March, June, September, December. The table illustrates exceptions that
arise due to an occasional two-month publication lag for PCE. Exception E0 occurs for 28 out of 151 recursive
samples (1, 4, 7, 10, 13, 16, 19, 22, 28, 37, 43, 52, 61, 64, 73, 79, 85, 88, 97, 106, 109, 115, 124, 130, 133,
139, 145, 151). Exception E1 occurs for 14 out of 151 recursive samples (8, 20, 44, 53, 56, 68, 80, 89, 98,
101, 104, 116, 119, 140). Exception E2 occurs for 5 out of 151 recursive samples (21, 27, 48, 51, 78).
Online Appendix                                                                           A-9


C        Additional Empirical Results

C.1      11-Variable VAR, End-of-Month Forecasts

Table C-1 provides numerical values for the RMSEs attained by the eleven-variable MF-VAR.

Figure C-1 compares the 11-variable MF-VAR forecasts to quarterly-frequency AR(2) fore-
casts.

Figure C-2 depicts recursive means of h = 1 and h = 8 step-ahead mean forecasts (setting
future shocks equal to zero). Each hairline corresponds to a separate run of our MCMC
algorithm. In each run, we generate 20,000 draws and discard the first 10,000 draws. We
plot Monte Carlo averages based on the subsequent 500, 1,000, 1,500, . . ., 10,000 draws.
The units on the y-axis are percentages. With the exception of the eight-quarter-ahead
federal funds rate forecast, the Monte Carlo variation is below one basis point and negligible
compare to the overall forecast error.
Online Appendix                                                                                   A-10




                         Table C-1: RMSEs for 11-Variable MF-VAR

      Horizon   UNR    HRS    CPI    IP     PCE    FF       TB     SP500   GDP    INVFIX   GOV
                                             +0 Months
      1         0.21   0.50   0.57   0.99   0.55   0.21     0.17   3.05    0.57    1.73    0.80
      2         0.47   0.80   0.61   1.45   0.69   0.69     0.43   7.93    0.79    2.45    0.75
      3         0.80   0.98   0.64   1.71   0.74   1.10     0.61   8.04    0.86    2.86    0.74
      4         1.12   1.01   0.62   1.72   0.72   1.45     0.70   7.97    0.88    2.85    0.77
      5         1.40   0.96   0.64   1.66   0.69   1.78     0.79   7.72    0.86    2.77    0.78
      6         1.63   0.91   0.64   1.59   0.68   2.08     0.86   7.72    0.83    2.66    0.74
      7         1.84   0.87   0.63   1.56   0.65   2.31     0.89   7.98    0.79    2.54    0.69
      8         2.00   0.85   0.63   1.54   0.64   2.50     0.94   7.82    0.79    2.59    0.79
                                             +1 Month
      1         0.15   0.39   0.33   0.98   0.49   0.07     0.08   1.24    0.57    1.53    0.81
      2         0.44   0.79   0.62   1.44   0.71   0.55     0.34   7.97    0.79    2.39    0.75
      3         0.75   0.97   0.64   1.71   0.75   0.93     0.53   7.98    0.86    2.86    0.75
      4         1.07   1.01   0.62   1.72   0.73   1.29     0.63   7.98    0.88    2.87    0.75
      5         1.36   0.98   0.63   1.69   0.70   1.64     0.74   7.77    0.86    2.79    0.72
      6         1.61   0.93   0.62   1.61   0.67   1.95     0.80   7.75    0.83    2.70    0.75
      7         1.81   0.88   0.64   1.59   0.66   2.20     0.82   7.84    0.82    2.59    0.74
      8         1.98   0.86   0.63   1.56   0.66   2.40     0.86   7.84    0.80    2.59    0.77
                                             +2 Months
      1         0.08   0.30   0.20   0.73   0.38   0.00     0.00   0.00    0.50    1.41    0.81
      2         0.30   0.60   0.60   1.15   0.67   0.39     0.38   7.05    0.68    2.06    0.77
      3         0.59   0.90   0.62   1.63   0.75   0.76     0.61   8.02    0.84    2.77    0.76
      4         0.92   1.01   0.62   1.72   0.74   1.12     0.72   7.84    0.89    2.89    0.76
      5         1.23   0.99   0.62   1.67   0.70   1.50     0.81   7.79    0.86    2.82    0.71
      6         1.50   0.93   0.63   1.60   0.68   1.81     0.90   7.84    0.85    2.72    0.74
      7         1.72   0.89   0.64   1.58   0.66   2.08     0.87   7.74    0.82    2.63    0.77
      8         1.90   0.86   0.62   1.58   0.65   2.27     0.87   7.94    0.81    2.57    0.76
                                            All Forecasts
      1         0.16   0.40   0.40   0.91   0.48   0.13     0.11   1.90    0.55    1.56    0.81
      2         0.41   0.74   0.61   1.35   0.69   0.56     0.39   7.67    0.75    2.31    0.76
      3         0.72   0.95   0.63   1.68   0.75   0.94     0.59   8.01    0.85    2.83    0.75
      4         1.04   1.01   0.62   1.72   0.73   1.30     0.68   7.93    0.88    2.87    0.76
      5         1.33   0.98   0.63   1.67   0.70   1.65     0.78   7.76    0.86    2.79    0.74
      6         1.58   0.92   0.63   1.60   0.68   1.95     0.86   7.77    0.84    2.69    0.74
      7         1.79   0.88   0.64   1.57   0.66   2.20     0.86   7.85    0.81    2.59    0.73
      8         1.96   0.86   0.63   1.56   0.65   2.39     0.89   7.87    0.80    2.58    0.77

Notes: RMSEs for UNR (%), FF (annualized %), and TB (annualized %) refer to forecasts of levels. The
remaining RMSEs refer to forecasts of quarter-on-quarter growth rates in percentages.
Online Appendix                                                                                                                            A-11




                               Figure C-1: Relative RMSEs of MF-VAR versus QF-AR2

                                GDP Growth                                                                  Unemployment Rate
                                                                                              20
                 10
                                                                                               0
Relative RMSE




                                                                             Relative RMSE
                  0
                                                                                             −20
                −10
                                                                                             −40
                −20
                                                      +0 Months                              −60                                     +0 Months
                                                      +1 Months                                                                      +1 Months
                −30                                   +2 Months                                                                      +2 Months
                                                                                             −80
                  1    2   3      4       5       6     7         8                             1   2   3       4       5        6     7         8
                               Forecast Horizon                                                              Forecast Horizon

                                   Inﬂation                                                                 Federal Funds Rate
                  0                                                                            0
                −10
                                                                                             −20
Relative RMSE




                                                                      Relative RMSE




                −20
                −30                                                                          −40
                −40
                                                                                             −60
                −50
                                                      +0 Months                              −80                                     +0 Months
                −60                                   +1 Months                                                                      +1 Months
                −70                                   +2 Months                                                                      +2 Months
                                                                                      −100
                   1   2   3      4       5       6     7         8                       1         2   3       4       5        6     7         8
                               Forecast Horizon                                                              Forecast Horizon
Online Appendix                                                                                      A-12


                                        Figure C-2: Convergence

                                               Horizon 1
                    GDP Growth                                           Unemployment Rate
 0.05                                                   0.05




    0                                                       0




−0.05                                                  −0.05
    0.5k    2.5k       5k        7.5k         10k          0.5k   2.5k         5k             7.5k     10k


                      Inﬂation                                           Federal Funds Rate
 0.05                                                   0.05




    0                                                       0




−0.05                                                  −0.05
    0.5k    2.5k       5k        7.5k         10k          0.5k   2.5k         5k             7.5k     10k


                                               Horizon 8
                    GDP Growth                                           Unemployment Rate
 0.05                                                   0.05




    0                                                       0




−0.05                                                  −0.05
    0.5k    2.5k       5k        7.5k         10k          0.5k   2.5k         5k             7.5k     10k


                      Inﬂation                                           Federal Funds Rate
 0.05                                                      0.1


                                                        0.05


    0                                                       0


                                                       −0.05


−0.05                                                   −0.1
    0.5k    2.5k       5k        7.5k         10k         0.5k    2.5k         5k             7.5k     10k



Notes: The figure depicts recursive means of h = 1 and h = 8 step-ahead mean forecasts (setting future
shocks equal to zero). Each hairline corresponds to a separate run of our MCMC algorithm. In each run,
we generate 20,000 draws and discard the first 10,000 draws. We plot Monte Carlo averages based on the
subsequent 500, 1,000, 1,500, . . ., 10,000 draws. The units on the y-axis are percentages.
Online Appendix                                                                                                                         A-13


                            Figure C-3: Relative RMSEs of 4-Variable MF-VAR versus QF-VAR

                                    GDP Growth                                                           Unemployment Rate
                                                                                            0
                   0                                                                      −10
 Relative RMSE




                                                                          Relative RMSE
                                                                                          −20
                                                                                          −30
                 −5
                                                                                          −40
                                                                                          −50
                                                          +0 Months                                                               +0 Months
                 −10                                      +1 Months                       −60                                     +1 Months
                                                          +2 Months                                                               +2 Months
                                                                                          −70
                   1    2      3      4       5       6     7         8                      1   2   3       4       5        6     7         8
                                   Forecast Horizon                                                       Forecast Horizon

                                       Inﬂation                                                          Federal Funds Rate
                                                                                            0

                   0
                                                                                          −20




                                                                          Relative RMSE
 Relative RMSE




                 −20                                                                      −40

                                                                                          −60
                 −40
                                                          +0 Months                       −80                                     +0 Months
                 −60                                      +1 Months                                                               +1 Months
                                                          +2 Months                                                               +2 Months
                   1    2      3      4       5       6     7         8                     1    2   3       4       5        6     7         8
                                   Forecast Horizon                                                       Forecast Horizon




C.2                    RMSEs for 4-Variable MF VAR

We also consider a four-variable MF-VAR based on one quarterly series and three monthly
series. The three monthly series are the Consumer Price Index (CPI), Unemployment Rate
(UNR), and Federal Funds Rate (FF). The quarterly series is Real GDP. Real GDP and CPI
enter the MF-VAR in log levels, whereas UNR and FF are simply divided by 100 to make
their scale comparable to the scale of the two other variables. As for the eleven-variable
VAR, the number of lags is set to six.

         Figure C-3 reports RMSE ratios for the four-variable MF-VAR versus a four-variable QF-
VAR using the end-of-month sample. The results are qualitatively similar to the ones re-
ported in Figure 2. In general, the within-quarter monthly information of the MF-VAR
increases the forecast accuracy compared to the QF-VAR. However, for GDP growth and
the federal funds rate, these improvements are not as long-lived as in the eleven-variable
setting.
Online Appendix                                                                           A-14


C.3     11-Variable MF-VAR End-of-Month Density Forecasts

The MF-VAR generates an entire predictive distribution for the future trajectories of the
eleven macroeconomic variables.     While, strictly speaking, predictive distributions in a
Bayesian framework are subjective, it is desirable that predicted probabilities are consis-
tent with observed frequencies if the forecast procedure is applied in a sequential setting.
To assess the MF-VAR density forecasts, we construct probability integral transformations
(PITs) from (univariate) marginal predictive densities. The probability integral transforma-
tion of an h-step ahead forecast of yi,t+h based on time t information is defined as
                                      Z yi,t+h
                             zi,h,t =            yi,t+h |Y1:t )de
                                               p(e              yi,t+h .                (A-12)
                                       −∞

PITs, sometimes known as generalized residuals, are relatively easy to compute and facili-
tate comparisons among elements of a sequence of predictive distributions, each of which is
distinct in that it conditions on the information available at the time of the prediction. For
h = 1 the zi,h,t ’s are independent across time and uniformly distributed: zi,h,t ∼ iidU[0, 1].
For h > 1 the PITs remain uniformly distributed but are no longer independently distributed.

  Figure C-4 displays histograms for the PITs based on density forecasts from the MF-
VAR and the QF-VAR using the end-of-month sample. The PITs are computed from the
empirical distribution of the simulated trajectories YT +1:T +H . To generate the histogram
plots, the unit interval is divided into J = 5 equally sized subintervals, and we depict the
fraction of PITs (measured in percent) that fall in each bin. Since, under the predictive
distribution, the PITs are uniformly distributed on the unit interval, we also plot the 20%
line. For h = 1 (nowcast) and h = 2 (forecast for next quarter) the frequency of MF-VAR
PITs falling in each of the five bins is close to 20% for inflation, unemployment, and output
growth, indicating that the predictive densities are well calibrated. The federal funds rate
density forecasts, on the other hand, appear to be too diffuse, because of the small number
of PITs falling into the 0-0.2 and 0.8-1 bins. Over longer horizons, specifically for h = 4 and
h = 8, the deviations from uniformity become more pronounced for all the series. The federal
funds rate density forecasts remain too diffuse, and the MF-VAR tends to overpredict GDP
growth and underpredict unemployment. For the QF-VAR the deviations from uniformity
generally tend to be larger than for the MF-VAR forecasts.
Online Appendix                                                                                                                                                                                                     A-15




                                                       Figure C-4: PIT Histograms for 11-Variable VARs
                                                                                                               MF-VAR
         100                                                            100                                                         100                                                 100
1-step




                                                               1-step




                                                                                                                         1-step




                                                                                                                                                                               1-step
             50                                                            50                                                        50                                                  50



              0                                                             0                                                         0                                                   0
                  0       0.2    0.4     0.6    0.8    1                        0       0.2    0.4     0.6    0.8    1                    0   0.2   0.4        0.6   0.8   1                  0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1
                                   INF                                                           UNR                                                      FF                                              GDP
         100                                                            100                                                         100                                                 100
2-step




                                                               2-step




                                                                                                                         2-step




                                                                                                                                                                               2-step
             50                                                            50                                                        50                                                  50



              0                                                             0                                                         0                                                   0
                  0       0.2    0.4     0.6    0.8    1                        0       0.2    0.4     0.6    0.8    1                    0   0.2   0.4        0.6   0.8   1                  0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1
                                   INF                                                           UNR                                                      FF                                              GDP
         100                                                            100                                                         100                                                 100
4-step




                                                               4-step




                                                                                                                         4-step




                                                                                                                                                                               4-step
             50                                                            50                                                        50                                                  50



              0                                                             0                                                         0                                                   0
                  0       0.2    0.4     0.6    0.8    1                        0       0.2    0.4     0.6    0.8    1                    0   0.2   0.4        0.6   0.8   1                  0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1
                                   INF                                                           UNR                                                      FF                                              GDP
         100                                                            100                                                         100                                                 100
8-step




                                                               8-step




                                                                                                                         8-step




                                                                                                                                                                               8-step
             50                                                            50                                                        50                                                  50



              0                                                             0                                                         0                                                   0
                  0       0.2    0.4     0.6    0.8    1                        0       0.2    0.4     0.6    0.8    1                    0   0.2   0.4        0.6   0.8   1                  0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1
                                   INF                                                           UNR                                                      FF                                              GDP

                                                                                                                QF-VAR
             100                                                           100                                                      100                                                 100
    1-step




                                                                  1-step




                                                                                                                           1-step




                                                                                                                                                                               1-step
              50                                                            50                                                       50                                                  50



                  0                                                             0                                                     0                                                   0
                      0    0.2    0.4     0.6    0.8       1                        0    0.2    0.4     0.6    0.8   1                    0   0.2   0.4        0.6   0.8   1                  0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1
                                       INF                                                           UNR                                                  FF                                              GDP
             100                                                           100                                                      100                                                 100
    2-step




                                                                  2-step




                                                                                                                           2-step




                                                                                                                                                                               2-step




              50                                                            50                                                       50                                                  50



                  0                                                             0                                                     0                                                   0
                      0    0.2    0.4     0.6    0.8       1                        0    0.2    0.4     0.6    0.8   1                    0   0.2   0.4        0.6   0.8   1                  0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1
                                       INF                                                           UNR                                                  FF                                              GDP
             100                                                           100                                                      100                                                 100
    4-step




                                                                  4-step




                                                                                                                           4-step




                                                                                                                                                                               4-step




              50                                                            50                                                       50                                                  50



                  0                                                             0                                                     0                                                   0
                      0    0.2    0.4     0.6    0.8       1                        0    0.2    0.4     0.6    0.8   1                    0   0.2   0.4        0.6   0.8   1                  0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1
                                       INF                                                           UNR                                                  FF                                              GDP
             100                                                           100                                                      100                                                 100
    8-step




                                                                  8-step




                                                                                                                           8-step




                                                                                                                                                                               8-step




              50                                                            50                                                       50                                                  50



                  0                                                             0                                                     0                                                   0
                      0    0.2    0.4     0.6    0.8       1                        0    0.2    0.4     0.6    0.8   1                    0   0.2   0.4        0.6   0.8   1                  0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1
                                       INF                                                           UNR                                                  FF                                              GDP


Notes: Probability integral transformations for forecasts of inflation (INF), unemployment rate (UNR),
federal funds rate (FF), and GDP growth (GDP). The bars represent the frequency of PITs falling in each
bin. The solid line marks 20%.
Online Appendix                                                                            A-16


C.4     11-Variable MF-VAR Forecasts: Comparison with Green-
        book Forecasts

Data Set. We compare the MF-VAR forecasts to Greenbook forecasts, prepared by the
staff of the Board of Governors for the FOMC meetings. Greenbook forecasts are publicly
available with a five-year delay. The FOMC holds eight regularly scheduled meetings during
the year and additional meetings as needed. Our comparison involves 63 Greenbook forecast
dates from March 19, 1997, to December 8, 2004. Period t = 1 corresponds to 1968:M1. We
construct the real-time data set for the Greenbook comparison as in Section 3.2 with one
important exception. Financial variables are available in daily frequency, but typically their
monthly averages are not yet available at the Greenbook publication dates. Since up-to-date
information from the financial sector is potentially very important for short-run forecasting,
we compute estimates for these variables based on weighted within-month averages of daily
data up to the forecast origin. More specifically, we proceed as follows. Assume that there
are four days in a month and denote the daily interest rate as rτ . Imagine that at the
forecast origin, only r1 and r2 are available. We replace the missing monthly interest rate by
the expected monthly average (r1 + 3r2 )/4 and include a measurement error with variance
5σ̂r2 /16, where σ̂r2 is the sample variance of past rτ − rτ −1 ’s. We do not group the Greenbook
publication dates based on the availability of within-quarter monthly observations when
computing forecast error statistics.

MF-VAR versus Greenbook Forecasts. We proceed by comparing the VAR forecasts to
Greenbook forecasts. Results are plotted in Figure C-5, which depicts absolute RMSEs for
quarter-on-quarter GDP growth (annualized), CPI inflation (annualized), and the unemploy-
ment rate. We are pooling the forecast errors from all estimation samples. At the nowcast
horizon h = 1, the Greenbook forecasts and the MF-VAR forecasts for GDP growth and
the unemployment rate attain roughly the same RMSE. For horizons h ≥ 3, the MF-VAR
produces more accurate output growth forecasts, while the Greenbook contains more precise
unemployment rate predictions. In regard to inflation, the Greenbook forecasts dominate
the MF-VAR forecasts at all horizons. As in the case of the end-of-month samples, the
short-run forecasts from the MF-VAR attain a smaller RMSE than the QF-VAR forecasts.
While the QF-VAR inflation forecasts slightly dominate the MF-VAR forecasts for horizons
h = 4 and h = 5, the MF-VAR GDP growth and unemployment rate forecasts are more
accurate than the QF-VAR forecasts at all horizons. A similar pattern also holds true for the
remaining seven variables (not depicted in the figure). The MF-VAR forecasts are as good
Online Appendix                                                                                                                         A-17


                         Figure C-5: RMSEs of 11-Variable MF-VAR versus Greenbook

                     GDP Growth                                       Inﬂation                                Unemployment Rate
                                                         1.8                                           0.7
       2.7

                                                         1.6                                           0.6
       2.6


       2.5                                               1.4
                                                                                                       0.5

       2.4

                                                  RMSE




                                                                                                RMSE
RMSE




                                                         1.2
                                                                                                       0.4
       2.3
                                                          1
                                                                                                       0.3
       2.2

                                                         0.8
       2.1                                                                                             0.2
                                Greenbook                                     Greenbook                                       Greenbook
                                MF-VAR(11)                                    MF-VAR(11)                                      MF-VAR(11)
        2                       QF-VAR(11)+              0.6                  QF-VAR(11)+                                     QF-VAR(11)+
                                QF-VAR(11)                                    QF-VAR(11)                                      QF-VAR(11)
                                                                                                       0.1
           1     2           3        4       5            1   2           3        4       5             1    2           3        4       5
                     Forecast Horizon                              Forecast Horizon                                Forecast Horizon


Notes: 22nd and 38th samples are eliminated because the vintages for PCE were incomplete.


as the QF-VAR forecasts in the long run and substantially more accurate for short horizons.

   As a low-brow alternative to the MF-VAR analysis, a forecaster with access to external
nowcasts could simply condition the QF-VAR forecasts on these nowcasts to improve the
short-horizon forecast performance of the QF-VAR. In the following experiment, we assume
that the forecaster is able to utilize the Greenbook nowcasts for quarterly GDP growth,
inflation, and unemployment.3 We refer to the resulting empirical model as QF-VAR+ and
it is implemented as follows: when simulating T + 1 draws from the predictive distribution
of the QF-VAR, the forecaster uses one iteration of the Kalman filter to condition the
simulated trajectories treating the nowcasts as actual observations. A detailed discussion
of this procedure in the context of dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) model
forecasts is provided in Del Negro and Schorfheide (2013). The RMSEs for the QF-VAR+
are also plotted in Figure C-5. With respect to GDP growth and inflation, the benefit of
including the external nowcast into the QF-VAR is short-lived. While for h = 1 the QF-
VAR+ attains the Greenbook RMSE, for horizons > 1 the performance resembles that of
the QF-VAR. For the unemployment forecasts, the improvement in forecast performance
       3
           We thank Jonathan Wright for suggesting this experiment to us. We do not update the posterior
distribution of the QF-VAR parameters in view of the additional information.
Online Appendix                                                                                                                                                               18


                   Figure C-6: RMSEs of 11-Variable MF-VAR, QF-VAR, and QF-VAR+

                 GDP Growth                                  INVFIX Growth                                GOV Growth                                   HRS Growth
       2.8                                                                                      3.6
                                                   7.5
       2.6                                                                                                                                  2.5
                                                    7                                           3.4
RMSE




                                                                                         RMSE
                                            RMSE




                                                                                                                                     RMSE
       2.4                                         6.5
                                                                                                3.2                                          2
       2.2                                          6
                                                   5.5                                                                                      1.5
                                                                                                 3
        2
             2       4              6   8                2        4              6   8                2       4              6   8                2        4              6   8
                 Forecast Horizon                             Forecast Horizon                            Forecast Horizon                             Forecast Horizon
                  CPI Growth                                   IP Growth                                  PCE Growth                                  SP500 Growth
       1.8                                                                                      2.6
                                                                                                                                             25
       1.6                                         4.5                                          2.4
       1.4                                                                                                                                   20
                                                                                                2.2
                                            RMSE




                                                                                                                                      RMSE
RMSE




                                                                                         RMSE
                                                    4
       1.2
                                                                                                 2                                           15
        1                                          3.5
       0.8                                                                                      1.8                                          10
                                                    3
       0.6                                                                                      1.6
             2       4              6   8                2        4              6   8                2       4              6   8                2        4              6   8
                 Forecast Horizon                             Forecast Horizon                            Forecast Horizon                             Forecast Horizon
                 Unemployment                                         FF                                          TB

                                                    2                                           0.8
       0.8
                                                                                                                                                      MF-VAR(11)
                                                   1.5
RMSE




                                            RMSE




       0.6                                                                               RMSE   0.6
                                                                                                                                                      QF-VAR(11)+
                                                    1                                           0.4
       0.4
                                                                                                                                                      QF-VAR(11)
                                                   0.5                                          0.2
       0.2

             2       4              6   8                2        4              6   8                2       4              6   8
                 Forecast Horizon                             Forecast Horizon                            Forecast Horizon




Notes: The MF-VAR aligns the information that was available to the staff of the Board of Governors.
The recursive estimation of the MF-VAR is repeated 62 times. The 22nd sample is eliminated because the
vintages for PCE were incomplete.


extends to horizons h > 1. In fact, the RMSEs for the MF-VAR and the QF-VAR+ are
quite similar. On balance, the MF-VAR compares well against a QF-VAR augmented by
current-quarter nowcasts. A comparison for all 11 variables is provided in Figure C-6.
