                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       AN EVALUATION OF RECENT EVIOENCE
                           ON STOCK MARKET BUBBLES




                              Robert P. Flood

                             Robert 3. Hocjrick

                                Paul Kaplan




                           Working Paper No. 1971




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                             Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 July 1986




    The research reported here is
                                  part of the NBER's research
    in Financial Markets                                      program
                         and Monetary Economics. Any opinions
    expressed are those of the authors
    Bureau of Economic Research.       and not those of the National




a
                                                 Working Paper #2971
                                                 July 1986




          An Evaluation of Recent Evidence on Stock Market Bubbles



                                    ABSTRACT



      Several recent studies have attributed
                                               a large part of asset price
volatility to self-fulfilling expectations.    Such an explanation is
unattractive to many since it allows allocations that need bear no

particular relation to those implied
                                       by the economist's standard kit of
market fundamentals. We examine the
                                       evidence presented in some of these
studies and find (i) that all of the
                                       bubble evidence can equally well be
interpreted as evidence of model
                                   misspecification and (ii) that a slight
extension of standard econometric
                                    methods points very strongly toward model
misspecification as the actual
                                 reason for the failure of simple models of
market fundamentals to explain asset price volatility.




Robert P. Flood           Robert J. Hodrick
Department of Economics                               Paul Kaplan
                          Kellogg Graduate School     Department of Economics
Northwesten University       of Management
Evanston, XL 60201                                    Northwestern University
                          Northwestern University     Evanston, IL 60201
                          Evanston, IL 60201
                                              1

   I. Introduction

        The topic of asset-price bubbles has
                                              recently received a large amount
   of professional attention. The theoretical
                                                work is exemplified by that of
  Obstfe].d and Rogoff
                       (1983), Tirole (1985), Diba
                                                    and Grossman (l985a), and
  Hamilton and Whiteman
                         (1985), while the empirical
                                                      work is exemplified by
  that of Burmejster and Wall
                               (1982), Flood, Garber and Scott
                                                                (1984), Quah
  (1985), Meese (1986), West
                              (1984, l9SSa, l985b), Diba and Grossman(l985b)
  Woo (1984), Scott (1985b), and Okina (1985).

       The asset-price bubbles we discuss are the asset market
                                                                  counterparts of
 the price-level bubbles
                           studied by Flood and Garber (1980). The definition
 of a bubble depends
                       on the model at hand, so
                                                  precise definitions will have
 to wait until precise models have been
                                          presented Without being very
 precise, though, we can say that in what follows we
                                                        decompose an asset price
 into two components
                        The first is due to
                                              current and expected future market
 fundament&, in which we list the typical set of
                                                 exogenous and
 predetermined variables
                         usually thought important for market price. The
second is the ktil*le, which
                             is defined to be what is left after market
fundamentals have been
                        removed from price. Bubbles
                                                     may be thought of as the
part of price due to
                      self-fulfilling prophecy.
      Two general types of empirical work have been
                                                     interpreted as being
 useful in addressing the
                          question of whether bubbles
                                                       are important for asset
price determination. The first follows the bubbles
                                                      test of Flood and Garber
 (1980) and the variance bounds
                                work of Leroy and Porter (1981) in attempting
to forecast the indefinite
                            future of market fundamentals. The second
follows some of the variance
                              bounds work of SMiler (1982) and Grossman and
Shiller (1981) by examining market fundamentais
                                                 only up to a fixed terminal
                                       2


market price. In the Section III of this paper we argue that the latter

method, which was not designed explicitly for bubble research, gives no

information about bubbles. The results of such tests do, however, provide

pertinent information regarding model specificationJ

     In the remaining sections of the paper we discuss and extend some of

the recent empirical work that is theoretically well-designed to give

information about asset-price bubbles in aggregate stock markets. This

includes some recent work by West (1984, 1985a), Diba and Grossman (l985b),

and Quah (1985).

     The data sets used by Quah (1985) and by Diba and Grossman (l985b) are

either identical to or are subsets of the data used by West (1984, 1885a),
                                                               all of these
which is the same as that used by Shiller (1981a). Further,

studies use an equilibrium condition to price assets that is based on the
                                                           results address the
Euler equations of a risk-neutral agent. Our empirical

 adequacy of the risk-neutral specification in empirical bubble tests, and,

 therefore, our results reflect on all of the studies.

      After duplicating West's work, we extended it in two directions.

 First, because of our concern about the time series stationarity of his

 data, we performed his estimation using returns on stock portfolios. West

 used the levels of real stock prices and dividends or their first

 differences in his study. We found that the differences in inference

 between using our specification and West's were actually quite minor. This

 was puzzling for two reasons. West's specification requires the expected

 real rate of return on the stock market to be constant.    Since variance

 bounds tests based on that specification seem to us to indicate some form of
                                                             Also, there is a
 model misspeclfication, this representation was suspect.
                                             3

  large and growing body of evidence
                                       indicating that expected rates of return
  on a variety of assets move
                                through time.2 Why, then, was West's
  specification indicating such a different result?

       One difference between the
                                    variance bounds tests and West's Euler
  equation tests involves the fact that the Euler equation methods
                                                                   consider
 only temporally adjacent periods, while the variance bounds
                                                             tests consider
 widely separated periods. If the Euler equation is incorrect, it
                                                                   may be
 that its specification
                        error is swamped in estimation by the rational

 expectations prediction error.
                                    Although the one-period specification error
 does not imply
                  strong rejection of the Euler equation, it is possible that
 the compounded
                one-period specificato errors that appear in variance
 bounds tests could lead to a rejection of the model.

      In order to investigate this
                                     issue we iterated the Euler equation
 to equate margins across
                          two nonadjacent periods, and we used West's data
and his methods to estimate the iterated Euler
                                                equatiQn. The iterated Euler
equation was resoundingly
                           rejected by the data calling into question West's
interpretation of his results
                                as indicating evidence of stock market
bubbles.

     An obvious potential
                            problem with West's model was his use of a risk-
neutral utility function that induces his linear
                                                   estimating equations. In
response to our misgivings about the
                                       assumption of risk neutrality, we
estimated Euler equations for all of the utility functions
                                                           in the HARA
class. Our results are similar
                                  to the results we find for risk neutrality -
the models seem to work
                          marginally well only when margins for adjacent
periods are explicitly
                         equated. There is more substantial
                                                              evidence against
the models when the iterated
                               Euler equations equating margins for
                                        4

nonadjacent periods are employed.3

     We investigated the data in two additional ways. First, because the

theory deals with after-tax returns while the data we use contain only

before-tax returns, we tried to allow the estimation to tell us if

differential tax treatment of dividends and capital gains might be

responsible for the model's failure. The results of this part of the

investigation are inconclusive. There is some evidence that agents treat

dividends and capital gains differently. We also looked explicitly at

return forecasting equations. The risk neutral model implies that

forecasted one-period returns should be a constant equal to the inverse of

the subjective discount rate. We find that past (time-varying) dividend-

asset price ratios almost surely forecast returns, which we interpret as

strong evidence that the risk-neutral model is inappropriate.

     Our research is reported in the following five sections. In Section II

we present a theoretical discussion of asset pricing in a utility-

maximizing framework. In this section we are explicit about our definition

of asset-price bubbles.    In Section III we show why studies of stock-price

variance bounds, which use a terminal stock market price in the way

suggested in much of the variance bounds literature, give information about

the adequacy of the underlying specification, but they do not give

information about asset-price bubbles. In Section IV we discuss potential

problems with interpretations of bubbles tests, and we lay out West's

proposed methodology. In Section V we report results concerning the

 usefulness of the risk neutral utility function in developing bubbles test.

 We also report some additional results on nonlinear utility functions, on

 specifications that allow differential tax-treatment of dividends and
                                                         5

      capital gains, and on the
                                        ability of past data to forecast future stock
      market returns. In Section vi we
                                                  present a summary of our views of current
      empirical work on bubbles
                                        in stock prices, the
                                                                  relation of that work to the
      variance bounds studies, and some
                                                  suggestions about directions for future
      research. •




  II.       Utility Maximizing Models of Asset Prices

             The purpose of this section is to set forth
                                                                    a simple representative
  agent model that is the
                                     foundation of our
                                                             asset pricing discussion.
  Consider a representative
                                       agent who maximizes an
                                                                   intertemporal utility
  function subject to a sequence of budget
                                                        constraints. The formal problem is

      (1)
            {c
                  Max E[ P'U(C.)]                 0< p <1,
                 t+i.   i—U   1—0

 subject to the sequence
                                    of budget constraints

 (2)
                 c÷. + Pt÷kt+. — y +
                                                  + dk                 i — U, 1, 2,

 where
      c is consumption in period t, U(.) is the period
is the subjective                                       utility function, p
                  discount factor
                                   y is exogenous real
                                                       endowment, k is the
number of units of the
                       asset purchased at time t, and the mathematical
expectation operator is given by

        The first order
                                conditions for this problem can be written
                                                                           as
(3)          Et(z) —          PE(z.      + a.p,               i — U, 1, 2,

where       z a     U'(c)p,     the marginal
                                               utility of a unit of the asset at time t
and    a s       U'(c)d       the marginal utility of the dividend
                                                                   on a unit of the
asset at time t.
                                          6

                                                   in the example is a linear
        Notice that the Euler equation generated
                                                    The equation may be
difference equation in the variable E(z÷i).
                                                           and having a root of the
interpreted as having the forcing process E(a÷i)
                                                             and one, (3)
equation equal to p. Since p is by assumption between zero
                                  unstable equation. The work of Sargent
is. in the conventional sense, an
                                    of this issue, which arises in many
and Wallace (1973) made us aware

rational expectations models. Sargent and Wallace proposed that researchers
                                                            stable time path
generally adopt a solution to models like (3) that allows a
                                                    variables are stable. In the
for the endogenous variable when the exogenous
                                                                  of current
present model this is the solution that sets the marginal utility
                                                                        We denote
price equal to the present value of expected future dividends.
                                             of asset price which depends only on
 this solution f to represent the part
                                                   solution to (3) is
 market fundamentals. Formally, the proposed


                     f
 (4)                       p'E(a)
                                              solution given in (4) would be only
         If (3) were the entire model, the
                                 solutions. Other solutions can be obtained by
 one of an infinite number of
                                     that is the solution to the homogenous part
 adding an arbitrary term to (4)

 of (3). We denote the arbitrary element at time t by b. Equation (3)

 requires that such arbitrary elements obey


  (5)        E(bt+1) —
                                         i —   1,2,3,...
                                                                    ..
          In the model at hand the elements of the sequence, bb+1 .
                                                                 k. If the
  denoted (bt}I are elements of a bubble in the market for asset
                                                            it follows that
  innovation in the bubble at time t is denoted
                                              7



  (6)       bT —   p(Tt)b     +


         The actual observation of
                                     z may therefore consist oE two elements, the
  market fundamentals part,
                                   plu the bubble, b, so thai

  (7)
           zt_ft+b.
 A bubble in
                z produces a related bubble in market price of the asset since
 zt —
        PtU'(c),and TJ'(c) need not be related to the asset market
                                                                   bubble.
 In this model, the
                    agent's maximization problem helps the researcher
 formulate the hypothesis
                              that bubbles are absent
                                                        from market prices. This
 point was stated clearly
                              by Obstfeld and Rogoff
                                                       (1983). Their argument is
 as follows.

        The single period Euler
                                  equation given in (3) may be iterated to equate
margins for any two
                    nonadjacent periods. For instance, the margin of
substitution for period t and period ti-n
                                          can by equated by substituting n-l
future Euler equations into the current
                                        period Euler equation and
                                                                   appealing
to the Law of Iterated
                       Expectatj05    The n-period Euler equation is


(8)       z — nE(           + 'E()
and it ensures that
                      a maximizing agent cannot increase his expected
                                                                         utility
by rearranging his
                   consumption between periods t and t+n. When n is driven
to infinity in (8), the
                        agent's optimization implies


(9)       z —   A {nE(            + PiE]
      The first term on-the
                              right-hand side of (9) gives the agent's current
                                          8

                                              attached to the sale of a unit
evaluation of the expected marginal utility

of asset k indefinitely far in the future.    The second term on the right-

                                                 attached to the strategy of
hand side of (9) is the expected utility gain

holding a unit of the asset indefinitely and consuming only the stream of

dividends accruing to ownership of the asset. T1e current utility cost of
                                         Therefore, an agent can be at a
purchasing the asset is given by z.
                                                       if the first term on the
maximum with a buy-and-hold (forever) strategy only

right-hand side of (9) is zero.

     This example of an infinitely lived representative agent provides a

special case in which bubbles are not possible in equilibrium. The agent

knows that he will live forever, and he knows that everyone in the economy

is identical to him. In equilibrium the asset must be priced to be held by

the infinitely lived representative agent who must follow the buy-and-hold

 strategy. The agent can be t an equilibrium only when the marginal utility
                                              is equal to the expected value of
 of what he gives up to buy the asset,
                                                         Therefore, in this
 what he gets from holding the asset, E_1p1E(a+).

 model, the combination of the agent's maximization and market equilibrium

 give the implication that the first term in (9) must be zero. This

 transversality condition arises as a necessary condition of the model, and

 one way to test this model is to test the transversality condition.

      The bubble process defined by (5) and (6) is consistent with the

 model's Euler equation, but it is not consistent with the transversality

 condition. The present value of the future marginal utility of the asset

 price must go to zero as the discounting period goes to infinity as long as

 the utility value of the asset payoffs is bounded above. The present value

 of the expected future bubble, however, will not go to zero, since the
                                              9
  bubble is expected to
                        grow at the inverse of the discount factor.
       Some models imply a
                           transversality condition that is inconsistent with
  the presence of bubbles in asset prices. In
                                               contrast, the theoretical
  analysis of Tirole (1985) indicates
                                      that other models
                                                        incorporating rational
  expectations can be perfectly
                                consistent with asset price bubbles in some
  circumstances.4 In our view, bubble tests
                                                  are analogous to tests for
  downward Sloping demand curves -   not   all models imply downward
                                                                       sloping
  demand curves, but
                    some do. Many economists like to think that asset prices
 are determined strictly
                         by market fundamentals, and
                                                     empirical research is
 necessary to verify or refute this idea,



 III. Bubbles and Variance Bounds Tests

       The purpose of this section is to show that failure
                                                             of an asset pricing
 model in certain variance
                            bounds tests gives no information about bubbles.
 Such results are
                   correctly interpreted as
                                             providing information about the
 adequacy of the underlying model.
                                      We conduct the argument using the model
 developed in the previous
                            section. For this part of the argument we adopt
 the Euler equation, (3), and the pricing function,
                                                      (7), which allows asset
price bubbles. The bubble,
                              if present, must follow the time series process
described in (5). In the rest of this section, for
                                                       brevity, we refer to the
marginal utility of the asset
                                price, z, simply as the asset price, and we
refer to the marginal
                       utility derived from the dividend paid to owners of
the asset,      as the dividend on. the
                                        asset. This convention is not invoked
in later sections

     The basic insights of the variance bounds literature
                                                          are that the
variance of an actual variable
                               must be greater than or equal to the variance
                                           10

of its conditional expectation and that this latter variance must be greater

than or equal to the variance of a forecast based on a subset of the

information used by agents. To see how the existence of bubbles could lead

in theory to a violation of variance bounds, consider the ex post rational

price, which is defined to be the price that would prevail if agents knew

future market fundamentals with certainty and there were no bubbles.        The ex

post rational price is



(10)
                —
                    pa
Notice that ex post rational price is a theoretical construct, and although

it is subscripted with a t, it is neither in an agent's information set nor

is it in an econometrician's information set.

         The theoretical relation that is the foundation of many variance bounds

tests is obtained by subtracting (7) from (10) and rearranging terms:


  (11)        z_z+u -
where     u a   f°pt[a     -
                               E(a÷)]   is the deviation of the present value of

dividends from its expected value based on time t information. Zy

 construction, u is uncorrelated with           and bt but   and b may be

 correlated with each other.

         The innovation in x from time t - n is Ext -    E(x)].    Then, the

 innovation variance and covariance operators are defined by


                V(x)      E{[x -   E(xt)]2}
 and
                                                        11

                 C(x,         —           -

                                                                      E(y)J}
                                                                  -
                                  E{[x             (x)]{y
  where E(.) denotes the Unconditional mathematical
                                                    expectation. In what
  follows we treat n as a finite
                                 positive integer.
         Applying the innovation variance
                                                      operator to both sides of (11) yields

  (12)        v(Z:) —     V(z)    +
                                      Vn(Ut) + Vn(bt)         -
                                                                  2C(Z,      bt).

 which follows from the
                              conditional orthogonality of                u to        and b.
         Suppose that somehow a researcher
                                                      could develop very good measurements
 of the variance of the
                              ex post rational price, z', and of the variance of
 market price,
                   z. Suppose further that it was found that
                                                                                   ex post rational
 price had a smaller variance than
                                              market price. Since the variance of both
 Ut and b must be non-negative, such a finding could only be rationalized,
 within the framework of the
                                      model, by a positive conditional covariance
between the bubble and
                       z. Therefore, as long as the model is correct, and
as long as the variance of
                           ex post rational price and the variance of market
price are measured
                   appropriately, a finding of V(Z) > V(z') can be
interpreted as evidence of bubbles.

       The difference between the
                                         theoretical exercise described above and its
practical implementation arises in the construction of an observable

counterpart to z. Because it is
                                              impossible to measure ex post rational
price since it depends on the
                                       infinite future, researchers typically measure
a related variable which
                              we call z. Since actual price and dividend data
are available for a sample of
                                      observations on t —             0,1,.. .T,    researchers use
                   T-t
(13)         z e         pa    + pTtz,            t     0,1           T-l,
                   i—i
                                                           12

in place of z. Notice from (10) and (13) that


(14)
              A
                    . Tt*ZT+P
                        -
                            p
                                                T-t



which   implies from (11) that

              A     *           T-t
(15)          z—z+p                   (bT
                                            -
                                                UT).

Since UT is the innovation in the present value of dividends between time T

and the infinite future, it is uncorrelated with all elements of the time T

information set, which includes the time t information set. Since bT

depends on the evolution of the stochastic bubble between t and T from (6),

it is not orthogonal to time t information.

        Notice what happens when (15) is solved for z, and the result is

substituted into (11). After slight rearrangement, one obtains


(16)


where


(17)              w (u -          T-t) ÷              (Ttb - be).

Equation (16) is the empirical counterpart of (11) and forms the basis of

the usual variance bounds tests. The only important difference between our

version of (16) and that of previous researchers is that we have allowed

explicitly for rational stochastic bubbles in our derivation.

        Application of the innovation variance operator to (16) gives


 (18)        V(z) —     V(Z)          +   V(w)         +   2C(Z,   we).


 The important point concerning (18) is that the innovation covariance
                                                          13
    between
              z and w is zero. To understand
                                                               why, Consider the nature of the
   Composite disturbance
                               w. First, as noted above, both
                                                                u and UT are
   uncorrelated withz since
                                     z is in the time t information
                                                                               set, which is a
   subset of the T
                        information set.      Second, and most
                                                                       important, the combined
   term pTtb - b         is uncorrelated with the time t
                                                                     information set, even
   though each term
                         separately is not orthogonal •to
                                                                     time t information.
                                                                                           This
   follows from (6) because p      (T-t)

  all time t information
                                           bT -   b   —    T-t -i
                                                          E1p      v•, which is orthogonal to
                               including          Hence,
                                                                Cn(Zt w) a
          Therefore,    (18) takes the form

  (19)        V(z) a
                         Vn(Zt)   + Vn(wt),

  from which it follows that


  (20)
             V(z) Vn(Zt),

 by the
           non-negativity of V(w). Recall
                                                       that (20) is derived in the
 presence of rational
                            stochastic bubbles.
         In a study of actual data some
                                     assuniption must be made about the form
 of the marginal
                utility agents attach to the conswnption
                                                           foregone when
Purchasing that asset and the
                              marginal Utility realized when consuming the
Proceeds from the dividends
                            paid by the asset and the
                                                       proceeds from the sale
of the asset. A
                       popular assliPiption in some applied work is that
                                                                         the
marginal utility of COnsption is a Positive
                                                               constant whose value is
inunaterial to
                 agents' decisions. A
                                              finding, in applied work, that an asset
Pricing model violates
                            inequality (20) is evidence of model
misspecification   Many mistakes can arise in the choice of
                                                            Utility
function, the choice of
                        observation period the treatment of taxes, or
                                                                      some
                                       14

other misspecification. but the violation of (20) cannot be due to rational

asset price bubbles since (20) was derived in a model that allowed bubbles.

     Research that does not use the terminal price as above in variance

bounds tests of stock price volatility, such as Leroy and Porter (1981),

could, in principle, find variance bounds violations attributable to

rational stock price bubbles. Of course, these models could also violate

variance bounds if misspecified in any of the ways mentioned above.



IV. Testinz for Bubbles

     In the previous section we demonstrated that some volatility tests,

that were not originally proposed as bubble tests, are not well-designed

tests of bubbles. In this section we discuss some tests that were

conceived explicitly to test for bubbles. We also provide a warning about

 the interpretation of such tests.



 IV.A. A WarninR About &ibble Tests

      In virtually all modern economic models, expectations of agents about

 the future play an important role in decision making.    Empirical

 implementation of these models is complicated by the fact that expectations

 are not observable directly. The investigator must model agents'

 expectations in terms of observable variables: he substitutes his model of

 expectations for the unobservable true expectations.    Once the final model

 of actual data is estimated, with the restrictions from expectations

 imposed, inference can be carried out conditionally on having modeled

 expectations correctly. If the model of expectations is flawed, incorrect
                                                        serious in bubble
 inference can result. This problem is particularly
                                                 15
    tests, but It is not
                           just in these tests
                                                  that the problem arises.
        The typical rational
                                expectations econometric
                                                               methodology involves
   using the assumption of
                              rational expectations and an assumed time
                                                                        series
   model for the
                   exogenous driving processes
                                                  These assumptions allow the
   researcher to use historical
                                   data to substitute
                                                      for the unobserved
   expectations variables
                              Suppose that the assumed
                                                             time series model is
   incàrrect and that
                        historical time series data on market
                                                                    fundamentals are a
  poor reflection of
                        agents' beliefs about the
                                                        future evolution of data. For
  example, if in order to
                             finance expansion
                                                  a profitable firm has been paying
  no dividends and
                      retaining all profits
                                              throughout its finite
                                                                       history, the
  fin's nonexistent
                    dividend history gives no information about
                                                                 the
 dividends that the firm
                          is capable of paying in the future.
 the dividend                                                  Consequently,
              history provides no
                                   information about the value of a share in
 that firm to an investor

      If the market knows
                             that the firm will
                                                      not be paying dividends for
 some time, market
                      equilibrj requires that the expected real
                                                                value of the
 firm rise at a
                  rate equal to the
                                      expected real rate of interest
 for the riskiness                                                       appropriate
                     of that firm. This
                                            circumstance creates a debilitating
problem for a researcher
                            interested in
                                       testing for bubbles. If the
investigator assumes that it is appropriate
                                            to infer the market
fundamentals price from
                        historical dividends, he would infer that the
fundamental value of the firm is zero.
                                              He would also ascribe all movements
in the firm's value
                      to a bubble, since
                                            bubbles, in the type of model
presented above, are characterized by
                                          arbitrary price movements whose
expected rate of change is
                             equal to the real rate of interest.
    This is an obvious;
                           simple example of a problem in testing for
                                                                      bubbles
                                         16

                                                                 the issue
that may assume a much more complex form. Stated more generally.
                                     disentangle bubbles from the possibility
is that it seems very difficult to
                                   with some finite probability, some
that agents may be anticipating,
                                     economic environment. Flood and Garber
eventual change in the underlying
                                   their original bubble tests, and Hamilton
(1980) discussed this problem in
                                          addressed the problem. In later
and Whiteman (1985) have recently also

work, Flood and Carber (1983) referred to agents' beliefs in possible

future alterations of the economic environment as process switching. We

adopt that terminology here.

     Since dividend policy is arbitrary in simple models of the firm, the

problem of process switching seems particularly devastating here. By

working with over one hundred years of data from the Standard and Poor's

 data set, Shiller and West tried to circumvent the problem in two ways.

 First, they used a data set with a long intertemporal dimension. Second,
                                              firms rather than for an
 the data set is for a large aggregate of
                                                  of the data seem useful in
 individual firm. Intuitively, both features
                                          in interpreting the data, but at a
 avoiding the process switching pitfall

 formal level neither seems to help very much. Having a long intertemporal
                                                  includes either a large sample
 dimension does not guarantee that the sample
                                                        governing such switches
 of process switches or that the stochastic process
                                        if dividend policy for one firm is
 is modeled appropriately. Further,
                                                 aggregate of firms will
 arbitrary, then dividend policy for a large
                                         aggregation of dividends does not
  generally also be arbitrary. Hence,
                                                                  induced by
  provide much formal help in avoiding problems of interpretation

  process switching.

       For these reasons, we interpret tests of the no bubbles hypothesis as
                                               17

   actually being tests of the
                                  hypothesis of no bubbles         no process
   switching. Of course, conditional on no
                                                process switching, the tests may
   be interpreted as tests of the no bubbles
                                                    hypothesis


   IV.B. Tests Under the
                           Alternative Hvpothe5j5 of Bubbles
       Early tests for bubbles
                                  were conducted on data from
                                                                  European
  hyperjnf1aj05 following World War I.
                                               Flood and Garber
                                                                  (1980), Burmeister
  and Wall (1984) and
                        Flood, Gather and Scott
                                                     (1984) estimate an equation of
  money market equilibrj while
                                    simultaneously estimating a money-supply
  forcing process.

       There is a close
                           relation between these
                                                     early price-level models,
 which allow bubbles     and the asset
                                         pricing models discussed above.       In the
 early models the log of the
                                price level played the
                                                           role currently being
 played by the marginal
                           utility value of the
                                                asset, the log of the money
 supply played the role
                           currently taken by the utility value of dividend
 payments and a transformation
                                   of the
                                            semi-elasticity of money demand with
 respect to expected inflation
                                  played the role
                                                      currently taken by the
 constant discount rate, p.

     There are some important
                                 differences among the early studies in
empirical implementation
                            of bubble tests. Flood
                                                        and Garber (1980) did a
time series estimation of a nonstochastic
                                               bubble; Burmeister and Wall
(1984) did a time series
                            estimation of a specific
                                                         stochastic bubble while
relaxing some strong
                        identifying restrictions Flood and Garber made about
the nature of the
                  forcing process; and Flood, Garber and Scott
                                                               (1984)
combined time series and
                         cross section data to test for a nonstochastic
bubble simultaneously
                        inhabiting a number of post-WI hyperinflai05
                                          18

                                                these studies. In each case
    There is also an important similarity in
                                                  that bubbles are absent from
the researchers desired to test the hypothesis
                                                  hypothesis that bubbles are
the data while estimating under the alternative

present. The Flood and Carber and the Buneiter and Wall studies both

attempt time series asymptotic tests of the null hypothesis that bubbles

are absent from the data. They desired to test the statistical

significance of the parameters associated with the bubble against the null

hypothesis that these parameters are zero.
                                               The difficulty with such tests

is that the statistics used to test for bubbles must be derived under the

alternative hypothesis that allows for bubbles. It is well known that the

asymptotic distribution of test statistics in situations such as the
                                               is difficult to derive and that
presence of bubbles (exploding regressors)

standard tests are almost certainly not applicable.5

     Flood, Carber and Scott (1984) try to avoid the time series problem by

 estimating with panel data. The conceptual experiment yielding the

 asymptotic distributions involves letting the size of the cross section in

 the panel become very large. and this would produce well-behaved asymptotic

 parameter distributions in large samples if the cross-sectional errors
                                          conditions. The problem in applying
 satisfy the appropriate orthogonali-ty

 this methodology is that the number of simultaneous hyperinflations
                                                                        was not

 actually very large. The size of the cross section in Flood, Garber and

 Scott was only three.



 IV.C. West's Bubble Tests

      Prompted by some ideas presented in Blanchard and Watson (1982), West

  (1984, l985a, 1985b) developed bubble tests that circumvent the problems
                                                 19
    associated with obtaining
                                limiting distributions
                                                         described above. West's
    insight was to conduct
                            all estimation under the null hypothesis
                                                                      of no
    bubbles. Under the null, standard
                                        asymptotic distribution
                                                                theory applies
    for all parameter
                      estimates, and tests of the
                                                   no-bubbles hypothesis may be
   conducted in large
                       samples using these distributions. The
   of bubbles affects                                           nonstationarity
                       West's tests only
                                         because asymptotic distributions of
   the parameter
                 estimates are not
                                    well-behaved under the alternative
   hypothesis
                Consequently, the power of his tests is unkno This
                                                                           problem,
  though, appears in all
                            econometric work that allotqs
                                                            for a variety of
  unspecified alternative
                             hypotheses and is
                                              not specific to West's tests.
       West's first
                     application of his bubble
                                                test was to annual
                                                                   aggregate
  stock prices, and he
                        interpreted his results
                                                 as Providing
                                                              overwhelming
  evidence of the presence of
                               economically important stochastic bubbles in
  the stocks
             comprising Shiller's (1981)
                                          modified Dow-Jenes data and the
  Standard and Poor's Index

       Since a large
                       portion of our empirical
                                                work involves extensions and
  modifications of West's
                           work, we now present
                                                 a stylized version of his
  methods. Also, since our research as well
                                               as West's involves data from the
  stock market, we discuss
                            the issues in the context of the example
                                                                      examined
 above. The goal of
                      West's research is to test the hypothesis
                                                                  that every
 element in the series
                        (br) is zero, where the series
                                                         Ib) contains the
 bubble elements from
                       a specific model of
                                            an asset price series.
      The first step in
                         West's methodology is to estimate and test the
specification given in (3), the Euler
                                        equation for adjacent periods.
West's methods require the investigator
                                          to specify the agent's utility
function, and in most of
                          his work, he assumed a risk-neutral
                                                                representative
                                          20

                                                                       is
agent. With risk neutrality an agent's marginal utility of consumption

constant across time and is known to all agents. Hence, the marginal

utility terms divide out of each side of (3) to yield

                              +
 (3a)       Pt —   PEt(Pt+t       dt÷i)

where        is the real price of the asset at time t+i and d÷ is the real

dividend paid by the asset at time t+i to purchasers of the asset at t+i-l.

The model provides no guidance to the researcher in determining the

appropriate deflator to convert nominal asset prices and nominal dividends

into real terms. West followed Shiller (1981) and deflated nominal stock

prices and nominal dividends by a producer price index.6

        Wst examines four aspects of (3a) to determine its consistency with

the data. The first involves a specification test of the overidentifying

restrictions. West estimAted (3a) using Hansen's (1982) Generalized Method

of Moments (0MM), which is an instrumental variable technique that delivers

overidentifying restrictions when the number of instrumental variables

 exceeds the number of parameters to be estimated.   The specification test

                                                examination of a chi-square
 of the overidentifying restrictions involves

 statistic. The second specification test involves examining serial

 correlflion of the residuals using the procedures described in Pagan and

 Hall (1983). The third test checks the stability of estimated coefficients

 by testing for mid-sample shifts in the coefficients. The fourth way the

 specification was examined involved checking the quality and reasonableness
                                                         relatively small and
 of the estimated parameters. Are the standard errors
                                                   economic values? Do the
 do the point estimates correspond to reasonable

 estimates change with changes in the instruments?

         Step two of the methodology involves estimating a prediction equation
                                            21
   for real dividends
                        as a function of past dividends
                                                          and possibly a linear
   trend. One of the nice
                             aspects of West's work is that he is able to test
  for bubbles without
                        taking a stand on the
                                                 econometric exogeneity of any
  variables   He is able to
                              carry out the tests as long as he has
                                                                       correctly
  identified the order of the
                                lagged dividends required to fQrecast future
  dividends with a white
                           noise error. Real dividends
                                                           may depend on many
  contemporaneous and lagged variables
                                         not explicitly included in the
  forecasting equation. The
                            methodology simply requires that the dividend
 forecasting equation be taken to be the projection of
                                                       current dividends
 onto lagged dividends which are assumed to be contained
                                                          in the information
 set used by agents in
                       making their predictions of future
                                                               dividends. Other
 variables that might have entered a more primitive
                                                        dividend equation have
 implicitly been solved out in the
                                     projection process.
      The dividend
                   forecasting equation is also subjected to a battery of
 tests. These include
                        testing for mid-sample coefficient
                                                            shifts, testing
 for first order serial
                         correlation following the Pagan and Hall procedures
and calculating the Box-Pierce Q statisj.
                                             testing simultaneously for first
and higher order serial
                          correlation. If process
                                                   switching is important, it
could be manifest in the
                           stability of the coefficients of
                                                            the forecasting
equation.

     The third step in the
                             methodology involves modeling the asset price in
two ways. The two should
                            be equivalent if there are no asset price
bubbles. The first
                     asset price model involves
                                                   parameters estimated in the
first two steps. From the work of Hansen and
                                                  Sargent (1980, 1982), a
closed-fo expression for the market fundamentals
                                                       portion of asset price
is available once the
                        econometrician takes a stand on the information set
                                         22

                                                                       the
conditioning the expectation operator in (3a), the parameters entering
                                dividends, and the discount parameter in
forecasting equation for future
                                  West's method these parameters and their
the agent's utility function. In
distributions are obtained in the first two steps. The second asset price
                                  unconstrained regression of asset price on
equation involves estimating an
                                    dividend forecasts. As long as there are
the information used to form the
                             constructed from (3a) and the dividend
no bubbles, the parameters
                                        significantly different from the
forecasting equation ought not to. be
                              unconstrained regression. If a bubble is
parameters estimated in the
                                    and as long as the bubble has a non-zero
present in asset price, however,
                                                                     in the
mean or is correlated with past dividends, the parameters calculated

unconstrained regression will not be unbiased estimates of the parameters
                                                   is appropriate to test the
 constructed from (3a). A Hausman (1978) test

 significance of the measured differences between the two asset price

 models.

      The steps in West's methodology contain an important sequential

 aspect. Only if the first two steps deliver correct equations does the
                                              the bubbles test is conditional on
 third step test for bubbles. Formally,
                                      the Euler equation and the dividend
 having correct specifications for

 forecasting equation. If either the Euler equation or the dividend

 forecasting equation is incorrect, there is no reason to expect an asset
                                from incorrect elements to be close to the
 pricing function constructed

  unconstrained pricing function.
                                                      l985a) to a stock market
       This methodology is applied by West (1984,
                                                stock prices and dividends. His
  model of a long data series of aggregated

  finding is that there is strong evidence of bubbles in aggregate stock
                                            23

  prices. These findings
                          intrigued us for several reasons. First, if the
  findings held up under additional
                                    scrutiny they would be strong evidence of
  either expected process switching or of asset-price bubbles,
                                                               and neither
  Possibility is particularly attractive.
                                              Second, we suspected that his
  linear Euler equation
                           featuring a constant rate of return is not

 appropriate. Although West works with a long time series of
                                                              annual data,
 which are considerably different
                                  from the quarterly or monthly post-World
 War II data in Hansen and
                           Singleton (1982, 1983), the strength of the
 evidence against the constant real rate of return model
                                                         in post-war data
 seems overwhelming. Third, we suspected that his data do
                                                           not satisfy the
 assumption of time series
                           stationarity necessary to conduct inference in
 the manner he proposed.

      In the next section of
                                this paper we use data provided to us by West
 to demonstrate that his
                           interpretation of his results is almost surely
 incorrect7 We show that the data indicate it
                                                  is very likely that his
basic model is misspecifjed
                                 His test for no bubbles is
                                                              actually a test of
a joint hypothesis which includes
                                     correct model specificai0 and absence
of bubbles. Since it is likely that the model is
                                                  misspecified, failure of
a test of this joint hypothesis
                                does not give much evidence that bubbles
are present. Of course, failure
                                    of the test is not inconsistent with
bubbles, it simply does not give much information about bubbles.



V. New Empirical Analyses

     The data we use consist of
                                  annual real stock price indices and
associated real dividend
                         payments for two time series. The first set of
series is for the Standard
                           and Poor's data for the years 1871 -
                                                                1980, and
                                           24
                                                                  1978.
the second is for a modified Dow-Jones Index for the years 1928 -

Nominal magnitudes are deflated by the Bureau of Labor Statistics wholesale

price index. The stock price data are the daily averages for each January

and the dividends are those that accrue during a year.8
                                                              Since we were
        We first replicated the results in West's Table IA.

concerned that first differencing the levels of the data would not be
                                            series process, we estimated the
sufficient to provide a stationary time

Euler equation in return form using a set of instruments that ought to be

stationary in a growing real economy.      The first equation estimated was


            1 —
 (21)             pE(Rt+i)
                                    the return at time t+l.
where R1               +
                           d1)/Pt
        We also employed a 0MM estimation using a constant and three lags of
                                                       The results are reported
 the dividend-price ratio, dt/Pt as instruments.

 in Table I. The usefulness of the instrument set, as measured by its

 ability to predict the returns, is discussed later in this section.

 Equations I and 5 in Table I report the results of estimating the Euler

 equation of the risk neutral utility function. Our results are very
                                                          are different and we
 similar to those of West even though our instruments

 estimated the Euler equation in return form while he estimated either in

 levels or in first differences.

         The discount rate, p, is very precisely and very plausibly estimated.

 The estimated value using the standard and Poor's data (specification 5)
                                                       is 0.9155 with a standard
 with lagged dividend-price ratios as instruments

  error of 0.0138. The estimate using the modified Dow-Jones data

  (specification 1) is 0.9171 with a standard error of 0.0268. As West

  mentions, the discount rate estimates are quite close to the inverse of the
                                                25
    average return on the stock
                                   market over the
                                                     estimation period. That the
    discount rate is
                        Precisely and Plausibly
                                                  estimated, however, is only part
   of the story.
                    The chi-square
                                     statistic that tests the
                                                                 overidentifying
   restrictions indicates mixed evidence
                                          concerning the model. The test
    statistic is x2(3) — 8.8499
                                with an associated
                                                   marginal level of
   Signifjca of 0.034 for the Standard
                                           and Poor's data and x2(3) —
   with an associated                                                  6.6461
                      marginal level of significance
                                                      of 0.084 for the modified
   Dow-Jones data.

        These results
                        are not very different from those
                                                            reported by West in
  his Table IA, when he estimated his
                                      model in levels. He found that the
  model performed
                  poorly in levels for the
                                           Standard and Poor's
                                                               data, and he
  attributed this to Possible
                              nonstationarity in prices and dividends.
  Consequently, he re-estimated the model
                                              with some of the
                                                                 equations in first
 differenced form and other equations
                                            remaining in levels. The
                                                                       chi-square
 statistics in this
                        instance are much
                                        more favorable to the model. We
 simply do not follow the
                           logic of West's procedure
                                                        Prices and dividends
 were differenced to allow for Possible
                                          nonstationarity in levels due to
 linear growth. The Euler equation,
                                      however, is estimated in level form.
 If prices and dividends are indeed
                                     nonstationary, the Euler
also to be estimated                                           equation ought
                      in a form that takes
                                            satisfactory account of this
nonstationarity    This is a problem
                                      that has been
                                                    confronted in the
literature
            Previously, e.g. Hansen and
                                         Singleton (1982, 1983), and we have
adopted the typical solution -
                                estimation of the Euler equation in return
form.

     We see no reason to difference
                                       our instruments or to difference the
returns on the stock
                        market. Even in an exponentially
                                                            growing economy,
                                        26

                                                    stationary.
stock market returns and dividend price ratios are
                                  of the data indicates that the risk
ConsequentlY our interpretation
                            not work at all well for the Standard and Poor's
neutral specification does
                                                        Dow-Jones data. On
                                better for the modified
data and works only marginally
                            and the tests in West's paper, there are grounds
the basis of these results
                           with bubble tests based on the linear Euler
 for proceeding cautiously

equation.



V.A. Nonlinear Euler Equations
                                                          Euler equation5
      A number of recent studies have estimated nonlinear
                                 well do some popular nonlinear period utility
 and a natural question is how
                                 data. In Table I we report our results for
 functions explain the current
                                                             (logarithmic
 three nonlinear period utility functions: iJ(c)    ln(c)
                                  - C)
                    (1 - a)
                            ctU        (constant relative risk aversion) and
 i4tility), lJ(c) —
                              (constant absolute risk
                                                      aversion). Since we
 U(c) — 1 - (l/a)exp(czct)
                                                                      the
                                  of these utility functions against
 want to compare the performance
                                                          linear alternative
  performance of the linear alternative, while giving the
                                                             the Modified Dow-
  the benefit of the doubt, we conduct the comparison using

  Jones data in which the riskneutral model performed best.
                                             are presented in Table I
       The results of this investigation
                                                          Dow-Jones data 1931-
  specifications 2 - 4.   The data set is the Modified

                                    consumption figures for the U.S.9
  1978 along with real per capita
                                              noteworthy. First, the discount
        Three points about the results are
                                                       reasonably in all three
   rate is estimated approximately as precisely and
                                                       the case of the linear
   specifications of nonlinear utility functions as in
                                                           rate are within two
   utility function. All of the estimates of the discount
                                                  27
   standard errors of the
                               estimate for the
                                                Constant relative risk aversion
   utility function
                           Second, the tests of the
                                                    overidentifying restrictions
   for the nonlinear
                          utility functions are all above the chi-square
                                                                              statistic
   for the linear
                  utility function. In fact, for the nonlinear
                                                                utility
  functions the Euler
                        equation model would be rejected at standard
  confidence levels. Third, for the nonlinear
                                                utility functions of the
  constant relative risk aversion and constant
                                                absolute risk aversion
                                                                        types
  the free parameter
                     in the utility function
                                              is very imprecisely estimated.


  V.3.   Iterated Euler   Equation Estimati
         These results seem to us to point in
                                                   the direction of the linear
 utility function as
                          Providing the most nearly
                                                        adequate description of the
 data in this class
                       of utility functions.
                                                  Of course, the utility function
 could be complicated in a wide
                                     variety of ways, but an
                                                                 investigation of
 such complications is
                       beyond the scope defined for this study.
       While the results thus
                              far, on the Dow-Jones
                                                    data set, point in the
 direction of not
                  rejecting the linear
                                       utility function at traditional
 levels of signifjca
                             there remains one
                                                  problem: even if the linear Euler
equation f fairly Close to the true Euler
                                                  equation, is it close enough to
the true Euler
                 equation to use in bubble
                                               tests? The potential problem
arises because bubble tests do not simply
                                                 use the Euler equation
                                                                           once; they
use the Euler equation
                            iterated an indefinite
                                                       number of times.
                                                                          Suppose,
for example, that using the linear
                                    utility function in place of the true
utility function induces a small specification
                                                error into the Euler
equation that is difficult
                           to detect. Bubble
                                               tests require iteration of
the Euler equation
                   over and over with future
                                             Euler equations projected onto
                                         28

                                It might be that this minor specification
the current information set.
                                                             a quite
error, when summed over indefinitely many periods, becomes
                                     have no formal proof of such a
formidable mistake. Certainly, we
                                                     the summation of the
proposition in mind, for it may also be, true that
                               cancellation such that the sum over lots of
speciication errors causes
                                                        errot.1°
specification errors is less formidable than any single
                                                                       of this
                                       to investigate the importance
     One way to proceed empirically
                                 equation a second period as in the derFvatiOn
issue is to iterate the Euler
                                        was subjected to the same type of
of (8). The iterated Euler equation
                                                         Since the modified
 testing procedure used for the noniterated equation.
                                     the most favorable environment for the
 Dow-Jones data set previously was
                                     started our investigation using the Dow-
 risk neutral utility function, we
                                                        the Euler equation
 Jones data. Table II reports the results. We estimated
                                functions used above. In all cases the
 for the four period utility
                                                                and in all cases
 statistic rose as compared with the noniterated equation,
                                       dramatic rejection of the equation.
 the chi-square statistic indicates
                                                             statistic for the
 Most interesting is the large increase in the chi-square
                                                                   these data,
                                    Recall that previously, with
  risk-neutral utility function.
                                                                provide the best
                                 utility function appeared to
  the noniterated risk-neutral
                                     investigated. Now, with one iteration of
  explanation of the functions we
                                        statistic with three degrees of freedom
  the Euler equation, the chi-square
                            6.6461 to 35.5453 indicating almost sure rejection
  jumps dramatically from

  of the risk-neutral model in these data.



                                   for Dividends and Capital Gains
  V.C. Different Discount Rates
                                           to the way we have used the data is
        One possibly important objection
                                               29
    that we, like most other
                               investigators, have used pre-tax returns to
    estimate behavior
                       which depends on after-tax returns.
                                                             If dividends and
    capital gains were taxed
                              at equal constant
                                                 uniform rates, the estimated
    discount rates could
                          simply be interpreted
                                                 as after-tax discount
   equal to the,                                                       rates,
                 primitive discount rate
                                          times one minus the tax rate. There
   are three problems
                       though. First, tax rates are not
                                                          constant; second,
   dividends are not
                      subject to a flat tax
                                             rate; and third, dividends and
   capital gains are not taxed in the same
                                              way.
       We do not treat
                          the first two
                                          problems. We tried,
                                                                however, to make a
  crude correction for the unequal
                                      taxation of dividends
  Our idea was                                                  and capital gains.
                 simply to split the return into its
  its dividend                                       capital gain component and
               yield component and to estimate
                                                 separate discount rates for
  the two elements of the return.
                                    We estimated only the Euler
  the risk-neutral                                               equation for
                   utility function1 and
                                          we estimated only in the Standard
 and Poor's data set.
                         Table III gives the
                                              results for both the
 and the iterated                                                   noniterated
                   versions of the Euler
                                          equation. The discount rates are
 now not very
              precisely estimated for
                                       discounting the dividend
                                                                 yield, but
they continue to be
                      quite precisely estimated for the capital
                                                                 gain
component of the return.
                            The hypothesis that the two discount
                                                                  rates are
equal is not
              strongly supported for either estimation.
                                                           In fact, the point
estimate of the
                 discount rate attached to the dividend
                                                         yield is negative.

V.0. Return
              Forecasting Equations

     Underlying all of our
                             empirical work is the first stage
equation for returns.                                          forecasting
                         If the risk-neutral
                                             utility function describes the
data, then expected
                      returns should be a constant equal
                                                         to the inverse of
                                         30


the discount factor. Our estimation procedure requires that past
                                       returns. No element of that past
information is useful in forecasting

information set, other than a constant, should be helpful in predicting
                              model is correct. In Table IV we present
returns if the risk-neutral
                                       of stock market returns on some
estimates of some linear regressions

predetermined variables and constants.    The GMM estimates we reported above

implicitly used forecasting equations based .on lagged dividend-price

ratios, and here we present both those forecasting equations and some
                                         dividend-price ratios and on lagged
forecasting equations based on lagged
                                              for both the Standard and Poor's
returns. These regressions are reported

 and modified Dow-Jones data sets.

     The interesting statistic obtained in all of these regressions is the

       statistic that tests the hypothesis that the estimated coefficients

 on all of the time-varying regressors are zero. These chi-square
                                                           ranging from the
 statistics have small marginal levels of significance

 largest of 0.032 for Standard and Poor's data with a lagged return included
                                                    return included. In our
 to 0.0005 for the Dow-Jones data with a lagged
                                               overwhelming evidence that the
 view these simple linear regressions give

 risk neutral model does not adequately describe the data.
                                                               the strongest
      Since the iterated Euler equation specification gave
                                         of constant expected real returns, we
 evidence against the null hypothesis

  investigated whether the same instruments used in the specification tests
                                          the compound return across several
  in Table IV were useful in predicting

  periods into the future. Table V reports regressions of the compound

  return Rt+11+1 for j        1,2,3, on a constant and the lagged dividend price

                                                     indicates that they are the
  ratios. The notation for the compound returns
                                                  31
     product of the j4-1
                           one-period returns from time t to time
     the value of the                                                 t+j. Notice that
                      chi-square statistic with three'
                                                        degrees of freedom
    the hypothesis of a constant                                             testing
                                   expected two-period
    which is larger than its                            compound return is 13.462
                              analogue in Table
                                                  IV, equation (1).
    the chi-square                                                    Similarly,
                    statistic testing the same
                                                hypothesis for the compound
    three-period return has value of 24.568
                                              which is even
                                                             larger.
         Unfortunately, the algorithm fox
                                            computing the optimal
   matrix needed in the calculation                                weighting
                                      of the estimated
                                                        GMN covariance matrix of
   the parameters does not constrain
                                       the estimated
   of the estimated                                   variance-covariance matrix
                     coefficients to be
                                         positive definite, and
                                                                 in computing the
  four-period compound return, the matrix
                                             was not positive
  the effective                                                definite. Since
                 degrees of freedom in 107 observatiOns
                                                          with an overlap of
  four is quite.
                 small,, we did'not
                                    choose to use one of the proposed
  procedures that does
                           impose a positive
                                               definite construction.
  the estimation relies on                                               Since all of
                              asymptotic distribution
                                                        theory, the results may be
 sensitive to sample size.



 VI. Summary and Conclusions

      Some researchers
                           have concluded
                                            that aggregate
U.S. are too                                                 stock prices in the
               volatile to be
                             explained rationally by movements in market
fundamentals. Some have also concluded
                                         that stack
rational bubbles.
                                                    prices may contain
                   In Section III of the
                                         paper we show that failure of
certain variance
                 bounds tests
                              conveys no information
                                                             about rational
bubbles. An
               incorrectly specified
                                       model, however, will
                                                                generally fail a
typical variance bounds
                           test. In Section V of the
                                                        paper we examine the
specification of the
                       model usually used in variance bounds
                                                                  tests and in
                                         32
                                                          studies is
bubble tests. We find that the model used in the previous
                                   As noted in Section IV the formal tests
inadequate to explain the data.
                                                            of the joint
that have been carried out on these data are actually tests
                                                             switching and
hypothesis of (i) the adequacy of the model, (ii) no process
                                                        strongly, and
(iii) no bubbles. The joint hypothesis is rejected very
                                                                  the
conditional on having the correct model and no process switching,
                                                              find the
rejection has been taken to be evidence of bubbles. Since we
                                    that the bubble tests do not give much
model to be inadequate, we conclude
                                                               null
information about bubbles - since the model is inadequate, the

hypothesis should be rejected even if bubbles are not present.
                                                                     that
      Testing for bubbles requires an unrejected asset pricing model
                                       Our results, as well as other empirical
 explains expected rates of return.
                                                                   what we
 analyses such as Hansen and singleton (1983) for example, present
                                   conditional expected returns on stock
 think is a convincing case that
                                   The profession is now attempting to
 prices fluctuate through time.
                                    with theory and is searching in a number
 reconcile such empirical results
                                         model. Eichenbaunt and Hansen (1985)
 of different directions for the right
                                               the representative agent Euler
 and Dunn and singleton (1985) try to save
                                   flow from durable goods to the utility
 equation by adding the service
                                              that preference shocks may be
  functionS Garber and King (1984) argue
                                                         model. Grossman,
  necessary before we will be able to have an unrejected
                                                              Christiano
  Melino and Shiller (1985) incorporate taxes and, along with
                                 of continuous-time models with discrete-time
  (1984), explore the estimation
                                                              the
  data. Others, such as Mehra and Prescott (1985), argue that
                                       be abandoned in favor of models with
  representative agent paradigm must

  differential information sets across agents in order to explain the
                                             33
 expected return premium
                           that equity commands over bills.
      To this list of
                        research areas and
                                          problems we must add the standard
caveat that the data
                      may not be generated
                                            by ergodic processes which
 renders invalid
                 standard asymptotic
                                      inference. In such an environment
 learning, possibly about
                          government policies, may be an important
contributing factor to time
                             variation in expected
                                                    returns. Whatever the
eventual resolution of the problem,
                                     it is worth
                                                  remembering that tests for
bubbles are joint
                  tests of no bubbles and no process
                                                       switching and that
bubble tests require an unrejected
                                    asset pricing model.
                                        34
                                   Footnotes

                              National Science Foundation for its support of
Flood and Hodrick thank the
                                                      research assistance.
their research. We thank Vinaya Swaroop for efficient
                                   John Cochrane, Lan Hansen, John Huizinga
We also thank Olivier Blanchard,
                                    University, Duke University, the
and seminar participants at Brown
                                         University, the University of
International Monetary Fund, Princeton
                                 University for some useful suggestions.
Chicago, and Washington State
                                       mention this point in their derivation
1. Mankiw, Romer and Shapiro (1985)
                                    Some of Section 2 incorporates material
of an unbiased volatility test.
                                 which discusses the issue in depth.
from Flood and Hodrick (1986)

 2. Huizinga and Mishkin (1984) is just one example that investigates
                                                of risky asset over various time
 movement in expected returns on a variety

 periods.
                                         of other redearchers such as Hansen
 3. Our results match well with those
                                            and Hansen (1985) and Scott (l985a)
 and Singleton (1982, 1983), Eichenbaulfl

 who report difficulty in finding an adequate representative-agent utility

 function to use in asset pricing.
                                               of speculative bubbles in an
 4. Tirole (1985) explores the existence
                                    which is an alternative dynamic model to
 overlapping generations economy
                                      discussed in this paper.
  the representative agent paradigm

  5. Domowitz and Muus (1985) have some new results concerning asymptotic

  distribution theory for exploding regressors which may prove useful in

  future work on this subject.
                                     results when deflating by the consumption
  6. Shiller (1984) finds similar

  deflator for services and nondurables.
                                                              Shiller. The
  7. West provided us with the data that he had obtained from
                                               35
 data were
             Partially constructed
                                     by Shiller, and they are described in
 Shiller (1981a).

 8. The data are
                    described in more detail
                                                in the Data Appendix
                                                                       Estimatioa
was done with a CNN
                    program Supplied by Kenneth
                                                Singleton. The standard
errors of the statistics
                         are calculated as in Hansen and Singleton
                                                                   (1982,
pp. 1276-1277), and they allow or conditional
9. The                                         heteroscedasticity
       consuaption data were
                             obtained from the
                                               Economic Report of the
President 1984 and
                   are described in the Data Appendix.
10. Without
              specifying the true
                                 Utility function we could make no formal
progress on this issue,
                        and if we knew the
                                           true utility function, we would
have used it in the first place.
                                          36

                                 Data Appendix
                                                         who obtained the
1. stock market data were provided to us by Kenneth West
                                 data series were used:
data from Robert shiller. Two,
                                                                 defined to be
      (a) The standard and Poor's data for 1871-1981 with Pt
                                     the wholesale price index for January.
      the January price divided by
                                           assumed to accrue to the January
      Dividends paid during the year are
                                                                     is
      holder of the"stock. The sum of dividends paid during the year
                                                 wholesale price index and was
      deflated by the average of that year's

      available from 1871 to 1980.
                                   Dow-Jones index 1928-1979 with prices and
      (b) The (Shiller) Modified
      dividends constructed and dated as in (a) above.

                              discussed in more detail in Shiller (l981a).
Both of these data sets are
                                         for returns labelled standard and
      In our Tables we report results
                                               1931-1978. The year of a return is
 Poor's 1874-1980 and Modified Dow-Jones
                                        construction. Estimation begins three.
 denoted by the dividend used in its
                             of the data sets since we used three lags of the
 years after the beginning

 dividend price ratio as instruments.
                                         all required a real per capita
 2.    The nonlinear utility functions
                                                                     of
 consumption measure. We used U.S. real per capita consumption
                                         consumption of nondurables and services
 nondurables and services. Aggregate
                                                              and were put
 were obtained from the Economic Report of the President 1984
                                          u.s. population taken from the same
  into per capita terms by dividing by
                                                               by the
  source. These data were then put into real terms by dividing
                                                                                 of
  Wholesale Price Index (1967 —    100), which was taken from various issues

  the Handbook of Cyclical Indicators.
                                                  37

                                        References
   Blanchard, 0., 1979,
                           "Speculative Bubbles, Crashes and Rational
        Expectations." Economics
                                   Letters 3,387-89.
   Blanchard, O. and M.
                          Watson, 1982, "Bubbles,
                                                       Rational Expectations and
        Financial Markets" in Paul Wachte].
                                                  (ed.) Crisis in the
        Economic and Financial
                                 System, Lexington
                                                        Books, Lexington, NA.
  Burmeister, B. and K.
                          Wall, 1982, "Kalman
                                                   Filtering Estimation of
       Unobserved Rational
                              Expectations with an
                                                       Application to the German
       Hyperinflation," Journal of
                                        Econometrics 20, 255-84.
  Christiano, L., 1984, "The Effects of
                                         Aggregation Over Time on Tests of
        the Representative
                           Agent Model of
                                           Consumption,i manuscript,
        University of Chicago, December.
 Council of Economic
                     Advisors, 1984, Economic Report of the
                                                            President, U.S.
      Government Printing
                          Office, Washington, D.C.
 Mba, B. and H.
                  Grossman, 1985a, "The
                                            Impossibility of Rational
                                                                        Bubbles,"
      manuscript, Brown
                          University,   August.
 ________________________    198Th, "Rational Bubbles in
                                                         Stock Prices,"
      manuscript, Brown
                          University, November.
Domowitz, I. and L.
                     Muus, 1985, "Inference in the First Order
                                                                Explosive
      Linear Regression
                        Model," manuscript, Northwestern
                                                         University.
Dunn, K. and K.
                 Singleton, 1985, "Modeling the Term Structure
                                                               of Interest
     Rates Under
                  Ronseparable Utility and Durable Goods,"
                                                           manuscript,
     Carnegie-Mellon University,
                                  forthcoming Journal of Financial
     Economics.

Eichenbaum, N. and L.
                        Hansen, 1985, "Estimating
                                                       Models with Intertemporal
    Substitution Using Aggregate Time Series
                                                    Data," Carnegie-Mellon
                                          38


    University, manuscript.
                                                         Versus Price Level
Flood, R. and P. Garber, 1980, "Market Fundamentals
                                                                              745-
                                  Journal of political EconolilY, August,
     Bubbles: The First Tests,"

     70.
                                                                 Switching,"
______________________      1983, "A Model of Stochastic Process

     Econometrica, May.
                                               "Multi-country Tests for Price
Flood, K. ,   P. Garber and L. Scott, 1984,
                                               Dynamics and control 8,
     Level Bubbles," Journal of Economic

     December, 329-40.
                                                         Bubbles and
Flood, R. and R. Hodrick, 1986, "Asset Price Volatility,

      Process switching", Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
                                       structural Excavation? A critique of
 Garber, P. and K. King1 1983, "Deep
                                            Technical Paper No. 31.
      Euler Equation Methods," N.B.E.R.
                                                               Continuous
 Grossman, S., A. Melino and K. Shiller, 1985, "Estimating the

      Time consumption Based Asset Pricing Model," N.B.E.R. Working Paper

      No. 1643.
                                       "The Determinants of the Variability of
 Grossman, S. and R. Shiller, 1981,

       Stock Market Prices," American Economic Review, May, 222-27.
                                                                  of Self-
 Hamilton, J. and C. Whiteman, 1985, "The Observable Implications
                                        of Monetary Economics 16, November,
      fulfilling Expectations," Journal

       353-74.
                                                  of Generalized Method of
  Hansen, L. ,   1982, "Large sample Properties

       Moments Estimators," Econometrica, July, 1029-54.
                                                               Variables
  Hansen, L. and K. singleton, 1982, "Generalized Instrumental

        Estimation of Nonlinear Rational Expectations Models,"
                                              and "Errata", January 1984, 267-268.
        Ecortometrica, september, 1269-86
                                                 39

                                    1983, "Stochastic
                                                          Consmption Risk
         Aversion, and the Temporai
                                       Behavior of Asset
                                                             Returns," jpurnalof
        ].itical Econnm 88, October, 829-53•
   }Iausman J., 1978,
                         "Specification Tests in
                                                      Econometrics.. £cnornetrica 46,
        November, 1251-71

   Huizinga, J. and R.
                       Mishkin, 1984, "The Measurement of Ex-Ante
                                                                  Real
        Interest Rates on Assets with Different
                                                Risk Characteristics,.
        manuscript, University. of Chicago, June.

  Kleidon A., l986a, "Variance Bounds Tests
                                            and Stock Price Valuation
       Models," fla1of        Political Economy,
                                                      forthcoming.
                 1986b, "Bias in Small
                                         Sample Tests of Stock Price
       Rationality,.. igj4xnai of
                                    Business, April, 237-62.
 Leroy, S. and N.
                      Porter, 1981, "The Present
                                                      Value Relation: Tests Based on
       Implied Variance
                           Bounds," Monometrj May, 555-74•
 Mankiw, C., D. Romer and N. Shapiro,
                                          1985, "An Unbiased
                                                                 Reexamination of
      Stock Market
                      Volatility, "The Journal
                                                 of Finance, July, 677-89.
 Marsh, T., and R.
                      Merton, 1984, "Dividend
                                                Variability and Variance Bounds
      Tests," manuscript, Sloan School of
                                              Management, Massachusetts
      Institute of
                      Technology.
Meese, R. ,   1986, "Testing for Bubbles in
                                         Exchange Markets: The Case of
     Sparkling Rates," Journal of Political
                                            Econoi, April, 345-73•
Mehra, R. and E.
                 Prescott, 1985, "The
                                      Equity Puzzle," Journal of
                                                                 Monet1y
     £c.nomics, March, 145-62.

Obstfeld, N. and K.
                       Rogoff, 1983, "Speculative
                                                       Hyperinf1j05 in
    Maximizing Models: Can We Rule Them Out?"
                                              Journal of Politjj
    &onoipy, August, 675-87
•
                                              40

                                  Tests of Bubbles in the Foreign Exchange
Okina, K., 1985, "Empirical

        Market," Bank of Japan Monetary
                                           and Economic Studi 3, May, 1-45.

                                                         Model for Stock Price and
Quah, D. ,    1985, "Estimation of a Nonfundafflentals
                                            MIT.
         Dividend Dynamics" manuscript,
                                                         and the Dynamics
Sargent, T. and N. Wallace, 1973, "Rational Expectations
                                              Economic Revi?i, June, 328-50.
         of Hyperinf1ation" International
                                                     Stock Prices: Regression
    Scott, L. ,   1985a, "The Present Value Model of
                                                                   Illinois,
         Tests and Monte Carlo Results," manuscript, University of

         Review of Economics and statistics, forthcoming.
                                                                   Bubbles: The Case
    _________     1985b, "Market Fundamentals Versus Speculative
          of Stock Prices in the United States," University of Illinois,

          manuscript.
                                                        Much to be justified by
    Shiller, R. ,   1981a, "Do Stock Prices Move By Too
                                               American Economic Review, june,
          Subsequent Changes in Dividends?"

          421-36.
                                                            in Assessing Stock
    ___________      l981b, "The Use of Volatility Measures
          Market Efficiency," journal of Finance, June, 291-304.
                                                           Macroeconomic
     ___________     1982, "Consumption, Asset Markets and
                                               Conference Series on Public Policy
           Fluctuations," Carnegie Rochester

           17,203-250.
                                                                Brookifles Payers on
     ___________     1984, "Stock Price and Social Dynamics,"

           Economic Activity, 2, 457-510.
                                                         Economic Agents
      Singleton, K. ,   1985, "Testing Specifications of
                                             Non-Nested Alternatives," manuscript,
           Intertemporal Problms Against
                                          Journal of Econometrics, forthcoming.
            Carnegie-Mellon University,
        -

                                                  41
  Tirole, 3.., 1985,
                       "Asset Bubbles and
                                            Overlapping Generations,"
       Econometrica, 53 ,November,
                                     1499-1528.
 U.S. Department of
                       Commerce, Bureau of
                                           Economic Analysis, Various Issues,
      Handbook of Cyclical
                             Indicators; A Supplement
                                                       to Business Conditions
      Digest, U.S. Department
                                of Commerce,
                                             Washington D.C.
 West, K., 1984,
                  "Speculative Bubbles and Stock Price
                                                         Volatility," Financial
      Research Memorandum,
                            No.54, Princeton
                                                   Universiy, December.
_______     1985a, "A Specification
                                    Test for Speculative
                                                              Bubbles," Financial
     Research Memorandum,
                             No. 58, Princeton
                                              University, revised July.
________    198Th, "A Standard
                             Monetary Model and the
                                                      Variability of the
     Deutschemark-Dollar
                         Exchange Rate,"
                                          manuscript, Woodrow Wilson
                                                                      School,
     Princeton University, Revised Deceniber.

Woo, W., 1984, "Some Evidence of
                                      Speculative Bubbles in the
                                                                   Foreign
    Exchange Markets,"
                          manuscript, Brookings Institution.
                                        TABLE I

                        GMM ESTIMATION OF EULER EQUATION


                                                         ÷
              1 —
                     Ep{[Ut(c÷l)'(ct)][(Pt+1

InstrumentS: (1, d/PtP di/Pti.              d2/Ptz)
                               Modified Dow-JoneS (1931-1978)
Data Set (Equations 1-4)



1. Utility Function           U(ct) —   c      (Risk Neutral)
                                                              —   6.6461; M.L.S. — 0.084
   — 0.9171; S.E. 0.0268; M.LS. — 0.000; 2R3



2. Utility Function            U(c) =   ln(c)         (Log Utility)

                                                                  8.8779; M.L.S. — 0.031
   — 0.9446; S.E.= 0.0278; M.L.S. — 0.000; x2()



 3. Utility Function            U(c) —      1/(la)1ct1
                                                                      S.E. — 2.0173
        0.8622; S.E. — 0.0470; M.L.S. —           0.000; & — -1.8663;

                               6.7852       M.L.S. — 0.034
 M.L.S. —   0.355;   x2(2)



                                                                        (CARA)
 4. Utility Function             U(c) — 1     -
                                                  (l/a)exp&aCt)
                                                                                  0.4791;
                             M.L.S. — 0.000; & — -0.5064;                  S.E.
    — 0.8639; S.E. — 0.0423;
                                  M.L.S. — 0.040
  M.L.S. — 0.291; x2(2) — 6.4260;



                               standard and Poor's (1874-1980)
  Data Set (Equation 5):

  5. Utility Function             U(c) —          c      (Risk Neutral)
                                                                         M.L.S. — 0.034
         0.9155; S.E.        0.0138; M.L.S. —      0.000; x2() — 8.8499;


                                                                      under the null
                      Standard errors are calculated
  are denoted M.L.S.                                                            as in Hansen
  hypothesis with allowance for conditional
  and singleton (1982).
                                                    TABLE II
                         GMM ESTIMATION OF
                                                 ONCE ITERATED EULER
                                                                           EQUATION

    1—
                                                 +
            EP{P[iP(c+2)/U'(c)][(P÷2                 d+2)/P] ÷
   Instruments: (1,
                           d/pi di/pi d2/p2)
   Data Set (Equations
                                1-4): Modified Dow-Jones
                                                                 (1931-1978)


   1. Utility Function
        — 0.8429; S.E. —
                                 U(c) —               c
                                                 (Risk Neutral)
                         0.0102; M.L.S. — 0.000; x2(3) —
                                                         35.5453; M.L.S. — 0.000

  2, Utility Function
                                         U(c) —
        —                                             ln(c)      (Log Utility)
            0.9460; S.E. — 0.0235; M.L.S. —
                                            0.000;             x2(3)    13.7362; M.L.S. —   0.003

  3. Utility     Function
                          U(c) —
    — 0.8743; S.E. —                         [l/(1a)}c°
                                                     (CRRA)
                     0.0811; M.L.S. — 0.000; & —
                                                 -0.8023; S.E. — 3.4361;
 M.L.S. —      0.815;           —
                        x2(2)       8.2965; M.L.S. — 0.016


 4. Utility Function
                                    U(ct) — 1   -

    a                                                (1/a)exp(ac)         (CARA)
        0.8691; S.E. — 0.0716;         t{.L.S. a    0.000; & — -0.0195 ; S.E. —
M.L.S. —                                                                        0.7640;
              0.980; x2(2) a 9.3902; M.L.S. —
                                              0           .009


Data Set (Equation
                          5) Standard and
                                                Poor's (1874-1980)
5. Utility Function
   —
        0.9361; S.E. — 0.0115; M.L.S. —
                                          U(c) —      c           (Risk Neutral)
                                        0.000; x2(3)               —
                                                                       10.787; M.L.S.   0.013


Note: See Table I.
                                                  TABLE III
                                                                   RATES EULER EQUATION
              CNN ESTIMATION OF UNEQUAL DISCOUNT


Noniterated. Euler Equation

                  1 —                         +
                                                  p2(+i/Pt)] [u'         (c+i)PJ'   (ct)]}
                        E{{Pl(d+l/P)
                                                                    )
Instruments             (1, d/Pt dti/Pti d/Pt2
Data   Set :         Standard   and Poor's (1874-1980)


1. Utility Function                        U(c) —         c                (Risk   Neutral)

                                         M.L.S. — 0.187
       p1 —      -1.9597; S.E. — 1.4844;
                                         M.L.S. — 0.000
       p2
             —    1.0565; S.E. — 0.0745;

       x2(2)           3.4813; M.L.S. — 0.175

                                                    vs.       •H1: p1      p2
 Hypothesis Test: Ho: p1                 p2
                                 M.L.S. — 0.053
        Wald Statistic — 3.7512;



 Once Iterated Euler Equation Risk Neutrality

       1 —                         + P1P2@÷2/P) +
             E{Pl(d+l/P)

  (106 observationS)
                                             M.L.S. — 0.134
        p1 —         -2.4349; S.E. — 1.6234;
                                             M.L.S. — 0.000
                 —    1.1047; S.E. — 0.0846;
        x2(2) — 2.2313; M.L.S. — 0.328

  Hypothesis Test: H0:                p1 — p2
                                                     vs.       H1: p1     ' p2
                                     M.L.S. — 0.038
            Wald Statistic — 4.3002;


                                                                                        — x2(1)
                                (;f                    +            -
  *Wald Statistic —                   ;2)2,[V;1            V(;2)        2C(;1,   p2fl

   Note: See Table I.
                                                   TABLE IV
                           ESTIMATION OF RETURN
                                                          FORECASTING EQUATIONS



   Equatjo        R —            +
                            a0        a1d1/p            t a2d2/p             +
                                                                                 a3d3/p            +
      COEFFICIENT               ESTIMATE           S.E.
           a0                    0.9428                                                 M.L.S.
                                                 0.0606          15.5654
           a1                   -0.2746                                                 0.0000
                                                 1.3626          -0.2015
           a2                    3.2704                                                 0.8403
                                                 1.6222           2.0160
           a3                   -0.2943                                                 0.0438
                                                 1.5804          -0.1862                0.8523
   H0: a1—a2aaao; x2(3)               9.418; M.L.S — 0.024; a2
                                                                                 0.032; D.W. — 1.953
  Equation 2.          —         +          +
                           b0        b1R1       b2d1/            +
                                                                     b3d2/p             +
                                                                                            e2
     COEFFICIENT             ESTIMATE             S.E.               z
        b0                    0.9030            0.1936
                                                                                     M.L.5
                                                                 4.6633              0.0000
                              0.0292            0.1538           0.1903              0.8491
        b2                    0.0725            1.9222           0.0377              0.9699
        b3                    2.7903            1.7239           1.6187              0.1055
   H0: b1b2b_o x2(3) — 9.263;M,L.S — 0.026
                                           R2                                    0.032; D.W.           1.987
  Data Set: Modified
                            Dow-Jones (1931-1978)
 Equation 3.    at — a0         ÷ cidi/p           +                     +
                                                        C2d2/p               c3d3/p           +
                                                                                                   e3
     COEFFICIENT            ESTIMATE             S.E.            z
        a0                   0.8171                                                  M.L.S.
        c                                   0.1133             7.214
                             0.7896                                                  0.0000
                                            1.9022             0.4151
                             5.0456         2.0796
                                                                                     0.6800
                                                               2.4260                0.0094
        a3                  -0.6237         2.0388            -0.2986                0.7667
  H0: c1ac2—c3_o; x2(3)              11.917; MLS — 0.003 R2 — 0.076
                                                                                            D.W.       2.153
 Equatjo 4.        —
                       f0   +
                                 fR1    +
                                            f2d1/p           +
                                                                 f3d2/p             +
                                                                                        e4
    COEFFICIENT            ESTIMATE             S.E.             z
                            1.1142          0.2908
       f                   -0.2636                            3.8316                0.0004
                                                .2222        -1.1861
       4                   -2.3591          2.9354           -0.8036
                                                                                    0.2419
                                                                                    0.4259
                            7.2999          2.3440            3.1142                0.0032
H0: 1—f2—f3—o; x2(3) — 17.578; H.L.S —
                                       0.0005 R2 — 0.1023; D.W. —
                                                                  1.942
White correction for
ratio of an estimatedConditional heteroscedasticity  The z statistic the
                      coefficient to its
a standard normal in                     sandard error, is distributed as
freedom.             large samples. The R is adjusted for
                                                           degrees of
                                                 TABLE V

                  ESTIMATION OF COMPOUND RETURN FORECASTING EQUATIONS


Data   Set: Standard and Poor's (1874-1980)
                                                                                +                +
Equation 1. R41 — a0 +                  aldt1tPtJ        +
                                                             a2d..2/Pt..2           a3d..3/Pt3
                                                 S.E.                   z            M.L.S.
   COEFFICIENT            ESTIMATE          -


                                                0.1116                6.9144         0.0000
                           0.7716
        a0                                      2.2468                1.4430         0.1489
        a                  3.2430
                                                                     -0.2497          0.8028
                          -0.5367               2.1492
        4                     5,0880            1.9O29                2.6739,         0.0075
        a3
                       x2() — 13.462 M.L.S. — 0.004; R2 — 0.101;
 H: a1—a2—a3—O;
                                                                                                 +
Equation 2. Rt+2 3 — a0
                                    ÷ a1di/Ptj. + a2d..2/Pt..2 +                    a3d3/P3
   COEFFICIENT                ESTIMATE            S.E.                  z             M.L.S.
                                                0.1513                4.1587          0.0000
                               0.6295
         a0                                     2.5997                0.5101          0.6100
                               1.3261
         a1                                     1.7869                3.7417          0.0002
                               6.6862
         a2                                     2.8192                1.5365          0.1244
                               4.3317-
         a3
                        x2() — 24.568 M.L.S. — 0.000; R2 — 0.186;
  H0: a1=a2=a3O
                                                                      +
 Equation        3.       —
                               a0
                                    +
                                        aidi/Pti + a2d2/P2 + a3d3/Pt3
                              ESTIMATE             S.E.                  z            M.L.S.
       COEFFICIENT                                                                     0.0718
                               0.4433            0.2436                1.8198
         a0                    7.5549            3.2868                2.2985          0.0236
            a1                                   0.8026                8.6072          0.0000
                               6.9082
            a2                                   3.4461                1.0385          0.3015
                               3.5789
            a3
                        x2() —          *        M.L.S.      —   *      ; a2 — 0.232;
  H: a1—a2—a3O;
 Note: A *        indicates    that the matrix was not positive definite.
