                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 GOING INTO THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT:
           MEASURING THE SIZE, STRUCTURE AND PERFORMANCE
  OF THE INDIVIDUAL AND SMALL GROUP MARKETS FOR HEALTH INSURANCE

                                        Pinar Karaca-Mandic
                                          Jean M. Abraham
                                            Kosali Simon
                                           Roger Feldman

                                        Working Paper 19719
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19719


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2013




This work was supported by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation’s State Health Reform Assistance
Network (State Network) grant to the State Health Access Data Assistance Center (SHADAC). The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Pinar Karaca-Mandic, Jean M. Abraham, Kosali Simon, and Roger Feldman. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Going into the Affordable Care Act: Measuring the Size, Structure and Performance of the
Individual and Small Group Markets for Health Insurance
Pinar Karaca-Mandic, Jean M. Abraham, Kosali Simon, and Roger Feldman
NBER Working Paper No. 19719
December 2013
JEL No. I1,I13,I28

                                              ABSTRACT

The Affordable Care Act (ACA) will dramatically alter health insurance markets and the sources through
which individuals obtain coverage. As the ACA is implemented, it is essential to monitor the intended
and the unintended consequences of these regulations. To evaluate the changes in health insurance
markets linked to the ACA, it is critical to consistently measure the size and structure of health insurance
markets, as well as the performance of participating health insurers, prior to and post-ACA. In this
paper we discuss challenges of describing the size, structure, and performance of the individual and
small group markets. Next, we discuss improvements in data availability starting in 2010 to address
some of these concerns. Finally, using data from the National Association of Insurance Commissioners
(NAIC), we evaluate insurance market structure and performance during 2010-2012, focusing on enrollment,
the number of participating insurers, premiums, claims spending, MLR, and administrative expenses.


Pinar Karaca-Mandic                                       Kosali Simon
Division of Health Policy and Management                  School of Public and Environmental Affairs
University of Minnesota                                   Indiana University
420 Delaware Street SE, MMC 729                           Rm 359
Minneapolis, MN 55455                                     1315 East Tenth Street
and NBER                                                  Bloomington, IN 47405-1701
pkmandic@umn.edu                                          and NBER
                                                          simonkos@indiana.edu
Jean M. Abraham
Department of Health Policy and Management                Roger Feldman
University of Minnesota                                   Health Policy and Management
20 Delaware St SE                                         School of Public Health
MMC 729                                                   University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN 55455                                     Mayo Mail Code 729
abrah042@umn.edu                                          420 Delware Street S.E.
                                                          Minneapolis, MN 55455-0392
                                                          feldm002@umn.edu
Going into the Affordable Care Act: Measuring the Size, Structure and Performance of the

Individual and Small Group Markets for Health Insurance



                             Pinar Karaca-Mandic, University of Minnesota and NBER

                                      Jean M. Abraham, University of Minnesota

                                     Kosali Simon, Indiana University and NBER

                                       Roger Feldman, University of Minnesota



Acknowledgements This work was supported by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation’s State Health
Reform Assistance Network (State Network) grant to the State Health Access Data Assistance Center
(SHADAC).


I.         Introduction

           The Affordable Care Act (ACA) will dramatically alter health insurance markets and the sources

through which individuals obtain coverage. All low-income Americans above the poverty line who lack

access to affordable employer-sponsored insurance will be eligible for subsidies to purchase individual

insurance in state-based Exchanges (or “Marketplaces”). This provision of the ACA will greatly expand

the size and importance of the individual market. The Congressional Budget Office projects that

approximately 17% of the non-elderly population will obtain coverage in the individual market by 2016

(Congressional Budget Office, 2012); today that number stands at only 5%.

           Only 35.2% of private-sector establishments with fewer than 50 employees offered health

insurance to their employees in 2012. In contrast, 95.9% of those with 50 or more employees did so.1

Establishment of Small Business Health Options Program (SHOP) exchanges in 2014 will simplify the

health insurance shopping experience for small employers (50 or fewer full-time equivalent employees) as


1
    http://meps.ahrq.gov/mepsweb/data_stats/summ_tables/insr/national/series_1/2012/tia1a.htm (accessed September 23, 2013)
                                                              1
well as allow their employees to choose from among options in an ‘exchange like’ setting, although

without access to exchange tax credits.2

         The ACA also increases regulation of health insurers and health insurance markets, for example,

by controlling premium increases through rate review regulation and by regulating insurers’ medical loss

ratios (MLRs), which broadly represents the proportion of health insurance premium revenues that is paid

out in medical claims. Additional ACA provisions require policies to include essential benefits and limit

price variance through modified community rating.

         The MLR regulations were among the first ACA provisions to be implemented. Beginning in

January 2011, insurers in the individual and small group markets must spend at least 80 percent of their

premium revenue on medical care and quality improvement activities while insurers in the large group

market must have MLRs of at least 85 percent. Insurers must provide annual information on their MLRs

to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Those that fail to meet the 80% and 85%

minimum MLR thresholds for the individual/small group and large group segments must provide

equivalent rebates to their policyholders beginning in 2012.

         While the MLR regulation monitors the ratio of spending on medical benefits to premiums,

another ACA provision, rate review regulation, complements it by controlling premium increases. Under

rate review regulation, insurers must document and publicly justify “unreasonable premium increases”

when they file advance notice of rates starting with the 2011 plan year. Before the ACA, states had

substantial variation in their authority to review rates (Kaiser Family Foundation, 2010). Almost half of

the states had “prior approval” rate regulation in which regulators could review the rates3 and approve or

disapprove proposed changes. In contrast, other states had “file and use” regulations in which insurers had

to provide actuarial justification for rate increases, but could proceed with rate increases without state

2
  SHOP exchanges will administer the small business health care tax credits, but these are much more limited than the
individual subsidies provided through the Exchange. More details on the small business tax credits can be found at
http://www.irs.gov/uac/Small-Business-Health-Care-Tax-Credit-for-Small-Employers and
http://www.taxpayeradvocate.irs.gov/calculator/SBHCTC.htm
3
  The “rate” is distinct from the “premium”. While the premium is the total cost of the policy paid by an individual or group
(i.e. family), rate is the “unit cost” of the policy. Rates may vary by number of dependents in a policy, benefit design of the
policy, age, gender, previous claims experience, and geographic location.
                                                                2
approval. However, the state reserved the right to intervene if the rates were later found to be

“unreasonable.” Only a few states lacked any regulatory authority over rates. States also had different

criteria for deeming rates to be reasonable.4 States differed in levels of enforcement of their regulations as

well as in the strength of their regulatory oversight. While the ACA does not require any changes to the

states’ existing rate review regulation authority, various states have amended their laws to align them

better with the federal law.

         As the ACA is implemented, it is essential to monitor the intended and the unintended

consequences of these regulations. To evaluate the changes in health insurance markets linked to the

ACA, it is critical to consistently measure the size and structure of health insurance markets, as well as the

performance of participating health insurers, prior to and post-ACA.

        In this paper we discuss challenges of describing the size, structure, and performance of the

individual and small group markets. Next, we discuss improvements in data availability starting in 2010

to address some of these concerns. Finally, using data from the National Association of Insurance

Commissioners (NAIC), we evaluate insurance market structure and performance during 2010-2012,

focusing on enrollment, the number of participating insurers, premiums, claims spending, MLR, and

administrative expenses.


II.     The Size of the Individual and Small Group Markets for Health Insurance

        Individual Market

        Estimates based on the Current Population Survey (CPS) suggest that approximately 5% of the

U.S. population has individually-purchased coverage (Kaiser Family Foundation, 2011,

http://kff.org/other/state-indicator/total-population/). However, estimates vary widely across different

federal surveys. Abraham, Karaca-Mandic and Boudreaux (2013) estimated the size of the individual

market for health insurance during the period just before passage of the ACA. The authors also


4
 While most states used medical trends, rate history and MLR in determining whether the rates were “unreasonable”, they used
different thresholds.
                                                             3
documented strengths and limitations of particular federal surveys and administrative data sources for

addressing questions about the individual market. They considered four prominent federal surveys: the

National Health Interview Survey (NHIS); the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey Household Component

(MEPS-HC); the Annual Social and Economic Supplement to the Current Population Survey (CPS); and

the American Community Survey (ACS). They also considered an administrative data source from the

National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC).

        Abraham et al. (2013) found that federal survey estimates of the individual market vary widely –

from 9.5 million non-elderly in MEPS to 25 million in the ACS (Table1). Their study suggests three

important measurement issues outlined in Table 1. First, surveys differ in how they elicit coverage in the

individual market. Rather than asking respondents directly if they are covered by individual health

insurance, they ask about “directly purchased” coverage with different purchasing arrangements (e.g.

from an insurance company or a group such as a school).Second, surveys vary in differentiating the types

of individual policies (e.g. comprehensive coverage, limited benefit, disease-specific, or short-term). In

fact, none of the surveys ask whether the health plan includes comprehensive medical and hospital

coverage. Even if the surveys asked such questions, individuals may not be aware of the

comprehensiveness of their plans unless they are frequent health care users. This is important, because

some ACA regulations, such as the MLR regulation and the expansion of the individual market under

Exchanges, apply only to comprehensive coverage.5

        Abraham et al. (2013) highlighted a third point: surveys differ in the reference period of the

insurance questions (e.g. coverage at the interview date versus coverage any time during the previous

calendar year). While “point-in-time” surveys that ask about coverage at the interview date avoid recall

bias, they miss individuals who held coverage during the year but dropped it prior to the interview date.

For example, the CPS asks if a respondent had individual coverage at any time during the previous


5
 https://www.federalregister.gov/articles/2012/05/16/2012-11753/medical-loss-ratio-requirements-under-the-patient-
protection-and-affordable-care-act. Also see Congressional Research Service (September 18,2012)
http://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/R42735.pdf
                                                             4
calendar year. This framing has the greatest potential for recall bias (Klerman et al. 2009). Moreover, it is

not possible to know whether a respondent held individual coverage at the time of the interview, part of

the year, or throughout the entire year. These are important measurement issues, especially because

enrollment patterns in the individual market are typically dynamic throughout the year. Many who buy

individual policies use it to bridge short-term coverage gaps (e.g. transitions from job-to-job or school-to-

job and retirement-to-Medicare eligibility).

       To partially reconcile large differences across the surveys, Cantor et al. (2007) and Mach and

O’Hara (2011) defined a coverage hierarchy, whereby individuals who report multiple coverage types are

assigned to only one category. The hierarchy prioritizes coverage types in the following order: public,

employer-sponsored coverage, direct purchase, and uninsured. Their basic premise is that a substantial

portion of people who report both individual market and another coverage types on these surveys really

have one comprehensive policy. For example, an individual could be covered primarily through an

employer-sponsored policy, but also have a single-service dental plan and thus report both employer

sponsored insurance and the direct purchase option. This adjustment (also presented in Table 1) to

redefine coverage types into just one main type by using a hierarchy results in a smaller estimate of the

size of individual market and a tighter alignment across different federal surveys (8,215,358 in MEPS and

16,635,033 in ACS).

Small Group Market

       In contrast to the individual market, not all household surveys discussed above can measure

coverage obtained through the small employer group market because most household surveys do not ask

working individuals about the size of their employer. Several studies have used the size of the worker’s

establishment in conjunction with whether the establishment has more than one location as a proxy for

firm size (Abraham, DeLeire and Royalty, 2009; Monheit and Schone, 2004). However, this approach

would classify a large-firm employee working in an establishment with few employees as a small-firm

employee. Even if the survey asks respondents for firm size, it is unclear whether workers can accurately

                                                      5
assess this, especially when the firm has multiple locations. Nationally representative employer surveys

such as the MEPS-Insurance Component (MEPS-IC), in contrast, can estimate the size of the small group

market more accurately than household surveys.

        The MEPS-IC samples public and private-sector establishments, collecting information on their

health insurance offerings and characteristics of the workers and workplace. A firm could have one or

more establishments, but each surveyed establishment provides information on the total number of

employees across all establishments, which allows an inference of firm size; firm size is also checked

against administrative sources. National and state-level estimates of insurance coverage by year are

publicly available from the MEPS-IC.6


        Using several statistics reported in these tables, we estimated the number of employees with health

insurance in firms with fewer than 50 employees (Table 2). In 2009, approximately 10,587,185 small-firm

employees had employer-sponsored health insurance (9,359,072 through fully-insured plans and

1,228,113 through self-insured plans). These numbers do not include dependents of the primary insurance

holders. Previous research estimated an average of one dependent per employee in small firms (Karaca-

Mandic, Abraham, and Phelps, 2011), which suggests a total of 21,174,370 enrollees in the small group

market and 18,718,144 in fully-insured plans. Estimates of small group insurance also come from Kaiser

HRET/surveys, although their sample size of small employers is typically limited and the micro-data are

not easily accessed by researchers.

        Thus, prior estimates of the size of the individual market have relied on household surveys and

provide a range of sizes due to the inherently difficult nature of discerning individual level coverage. In

contrast, estimates of the small group market come from employer surveys linked to administrative data

and are more reliable. The challenges in estimating the size of these markets spill over to difficulties in

defining the target populations of ACA insurance market policies. Having discussed these challenges, we

6
 Summary statistics at http://meps.ahrq.gov/mepsweb/data_stats/quick_tables.jsp#insurance contain publicly released data.
Researchers wishing to use the MEPS-IC must obtain approval from the Census Bureau and the Internal Revenue Service and
must access the data at a Census Research Data Center.
                                                            6
turn our attention to measures of the structure of these markets, including the number of participating

insurers, market shares, and concentration.



III.   The Structure of the Individual and Small Group Markets for Health Insurance

       Assessing the structure of the individual and small group markets has been hampered by lack of

data on these insurers. Until 2011, the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) was the

only national administrative data source available to identify insurers operating in the individual and

group markets. NAIC is the organization of insurance regulators from the 50 states, the District of

Columbia, and the five U.S. territories. The NAIC data represent a compilation of health insurer filings of

Annual Statements to the Insurance Department of each state in which they sell their products. Prior to

2010, NAIC data on detailed state-level insurer level/aggregated information on premiums earned and

written, amounts paid and incurred for provision of health care services, and member months of coverage

by “line of business” came from the Exhibit of Premiums, Enrollment, and Utilization, also known as the

“State Page.” Lines of business include comprehensive individual coverage, comprehensive group

coverage, Medicare supplements, vision, dental, FEHBP, Medicare, and Medicaid. However, the NAIC

data have several major limitations. First, the vast majority of insurers operating in California are

regulated by the California Department of Managed Health Care and do not file with the NAIC.

       Second, as already alluded to, one cannot easily use pre-2010 NAIC data to study health insurance

industry structure. One difficulty in using the NAIC data prior to 2010 relates to the classification of

insurers into categories based on their primary business. Insurers with more than 95% of their business in

health insurance were required to file as health insurers, and they filled out “exhibits” (essentially

questionnaires) in the Health Blanks (including the “State Page”). However, life, fraternal, and

property/casualty insurers that also write health insurance policies (but for whom health insurance is 95%

or less of their business) did not file the same Health Blanks. As a result, until 2010, such organizations

were not required to file information on enrollment, premiums, or claims specific to comprehensive

                                                       7
(hospital and medical) coverage in individual and group market segments under the State Page.7 Lack of

such information made it impossible to assess the number of insurers selling comprehensive medical

insurance in the individual market and the group market using the NAIC data. Major life insurers could

potentially have a large market share in these market segments, yet it was not possible to gauge the extent

of their presence and their share of total premiums in any state and year. While each insurance regulator’s

website typically lists the insurers operating in that state, one cannot easily obtain detailed information

about their market shares.

        Another problem with the NAIC data prior to 2010 is that insurer filings did not distinguish

whether the insurer operated in the small group versus the large group market. Similarly, enrollment,

premiums, claims and other financial information was filed under the “group market” business line

segment rather than distinguishing between the small and large group markets.

        Following passage of the ACA, NAIC has actively collaborated with the U.S. Department of

Health and Human Services (HHS) to design standard measures, definitions and methodologies related to

the regulatory targets such as the MLR.8 Starting in the 2010 filing year, insurers file new supplementary

information with the NAIC. Karaca-Mandic and Abraham (2013) summarized the features of NAIC’s

new reporting exhibit titled the Supplemental Health Care Exhibit (SHCE).This exhibit is similar to the

earlier State Pages, but it is also filed by life, fraternal, and property/casualty insurers (starting with filing

year of 2010) that sell health insurance policies in the individual, small, and large group (fully-insured)

markets. SHCE includes detailed information on the number of covered lives, number of policies,

member months, health premiums earned, federal taxes, state insurance, premium and other taxes,

incurred claims, incurred expenses for improving health care quality as well as detailed information on

claims adjustment expenses, general and administrative expenses. In the SHCE, insurers separately report




7
  See Abraham and Karaca-Mandic (2011) and Karaca-Mandic and Abraham (2013) and Karaca-Mandic, Abraham and Simon
(2013) for more detail on the comprehensiveness of the NAIC data. Dafny, Dranove et al (2011) also discuss the NAIC data.
8
  For example, see the list of NAIC responsibilities as of April 2010 at:
http://www.naic.org/documents/index_health_reform_naic_tasks.pdf
                                                            8
on comprehensive medical coverage in the individual, small group and large group markets, as well as on

mini-med plans (with annual limits of $250,000 per person per year), for each state in which they operate.

       A new independent source of data on insurers is the MLR regulatory filings collected by the U.S.

Department of Health and Human Services’ Center for Consumer Information and Oversight (CCIIO)

starting in 2011. There is some uncertainty regarding what fraction of insurers report data. A recent Kaiser

study (see below) used the 2011 CCIIO regulatory filings and found estimates of individual and small

group market size very similar to the NAIC. Since these data start in 2011, it is not possible to use them

for pre-post comparisons.

Insurance Market Structure Prior to 2010

       Although it is not possible to distinguish small and large group insurers prior to 2010, the NAIC

State Pages can be used to study individual market insurers (subject to the caveat that the State Pages do

not include data on life insurers that also sold health insurance). Using these data, Abraham and Karaca-

Mandic (2011) presented snapshots of the number of active health insurers and estimated enrollment in

the individual market from 2002-2009 by state. In 2009, five states (Florida, New York, Michigan,

Pennsylvania, and Ohio) each had at least 15 insurers. Ten states (Alabama, Mississippi, Vermont,

Alaska, Delaware, Hawaii, North Dakota, New Hampshire, Rhode Island, and Wyoming) had three or

fewer health insurers. Most states experienced an increase in the number of health insurers and modest

enrollment growth from 2002 to 2009. However, the authors acknowledged their estimates do not include

life insurers also selling health insurance, nor do they include insurers in California.

       Karaca-Mandic, Abraham and Simon (2013) also used the NAIC data to evaluate health insurance

market structure and its relation to medical loss ratios in the individual market from to 2001 to 2009. In

the 2011 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services’ interim final rule, insurers with less than 1,000

member years in a state are deemed to have “non-credible” MLRs for regulatory enforcement and are

exempt from the minimum MLR requirements. The authors identified 11 states in 2009 with only one

credible health insurer serving the individual market. Because “life insurers” do not file data with the

                                                       9
NAIC, additional work is necessary to confirm that this really indicates these states had monopoly-like

markets. In additional analysis of these 11 states using data from the state commissioners’ web pages as

well as the NAIC data from SHCE in 2010 and 2011, they confirmed that the credible health insurer

identified was in fact the dominant insurer in the state (in terms of market share). However, the authors

found that “life insurers” in all these states also sold health insurance to individuals. The largest life

insurer had only 4 to-8% of the total premium revenue in most of these markets, but there were a few

states in which the largest life insurer accounted for 10 to 16% of individual health insurance premiums.

Insurance Market Structure in 2010 and After

        Starting with the 2010 filing year, the SHCE provides a unique opportunity to construct a

complete picture of both the individual and the small group health insurance markets. Because the exhibit

is filed by life, fraternal, and property/casualty insurers in addition to health insurers, it is now possible to

construct counts of all insurance carriers selling comprehensive health insurance. The reported number of

policies, covered lives, member months and premiums earned can be used to conduct a more complete

market share analysis because it is now possible to include the market shares of the non-health insurers.

Similarly, given that information is now available on all market participants, one can construct measures

of market structure (e.g. the Herfindahl index) by states. In addition, the fully-insured small and large

group markets can be separately identified, and thus the SHCE presents the first opportunity to examine

the small group market.

        In this paper, we used the 2010-2012 SHCE to examine the numbers of insurers in the individual

and small group markets by state, lines of business (health insurance or life insurance)9, and whether they

are credible or not. In 2010 and 2011, credible firms were defined as those having at least 1,000 member

years. Credible firms with fewer than 75,000 member years were considered “partially credible” by

DHSS, while those with at least 75,000 member years were considered “fully credible”. Starting in 2012,


9
 Property/Casualty and Fraternal insurers are extremely small players in health insurance markets. For example,
they account for less than one percent of premium revenues for individual market comprehensive major medical
policies (Abraham and Karaca-Mandic, 2011).
                                                        10
“credible experience” is defined in a cumulative manner. If an insurer has fewer than 75,000 member

years in 2012 in a given state and segment (e.g. individual, small group), its MLR is calculated using data

reported for both the 2011 and 2012 MLR reporting years (Department of Health and Human Services,

December 1, 2010, MLR Interim Rule). Therefore, even though an insurer may be “non-credible” (fewer

than 1,000 member years) for the 2012 reporting year alone, it is not necessarily exempt from MLR

regulation if it has at least 1,000 combined member years for 2011 and 2012. For 2012, we thus define

credible insurers as those with at least 1,000 member years combined for 2011 and 2012.

       Table 3 presents the numbers of credible and non-credible insurers in 2010 and 2012 by state in

the individual market, distinguishing health and life insurers. Table 4 presents the breakdown of

enrollment by credible versus non-credible and by health and life insurers in the state in 2010 and 2012.

Tables 5 and 6 repeat the same exercises for the small group market.

       Table 3 shows that life insurers participate actively in the individual market. In 2010, states had,

on average, four credible health insurers, three non-credible health insurers, seven credible life insurers,

and 31 non-credible life insurers. The 2012 data reveal similar patterns, although slightly smaller numbers

of credible and non-credible life insurers (eight and 19 on average, respectively). States with only one

credible health insurer in 2010 (AK, DE, MS, MD, NH, RI, WY) had at least 2 to 4 credible life insurers,

except for RI and ND (only one credible life insurer). The majority of states with only two credible health

insurers in 2010 (AL, ID, IA, IN, KS, NC, NE, NV, OK, TN) had at least five credible life insurers.

Credible life insurers were largely absent from the remaining states with only two credible health insurers

in 2010 (two in KY, one in ME, and none in HI and VT). Table 4 shows that credible health insurers

comprised 70% of the individual market in 2010, on average, followed by credible life insurers (26%) and

non-credible life insurers (4%). Overall, non-credible health insurers had a negligible market share

(average of 0.01%). These figures remained stable in 2012.

       Relative to the individual market, the small group market had more credible health insurers in

2012 (on average seven per state), slightly fewer non-credible health insurers (on average two) and

                                                      11
substantially fewer credible and non-credible life insurers (on average four and five, respectively) (Table

5). Credible health insurers comprised about 80% of the small group market by market share. Credible life

insurers comprised the remaining fraction of the market (about 20%), leaving non-credible health and life

insures with a negligible market share (Table 6).

       In Table 7, we describe entry and exit of insurers as well as transitions from credible to non-

credible status and vice-versa between 2010 and 2012. Of the 534 credible life and health insurers in the

individual market in 2010, 455 remained credible in 2011, of which 437 remained credible also in 2012.

Fifty-seven were not credible in 2011, and 22 exited the market in 2011.

       Transition from non-credible to credible status was uncommon. Among 1,727 non-credible

insurers in 2010, 34 became credible and 1,157 remained non-credible in 2011. Of these 1,157 non-

credible insurers, 51 became credible, 815 remained non-credible, and 219 exited the market in 2012.The

exit rate of these non-credible insurers was high, with 536 of the 1,727 non-credible insurers from 2010

exiting in 2011.

       In the small group market, most credible insurers in 2010 were credible also in 2011 and 2012

(470 of 585). Many non-credible insurers in 2010 remained non-credible in 2011 and 2012 (274 out of

500). As in the individual market, a large fraction of the non-credible insurers from 2010 exited in 2011

(100 of 500).

       To investigate market structure further, we computed the Herfindahl-Hirschman index (HHI) for

the individual market (Figure 1 for 2010, Figure 2 for 2012) and the small group market (Figure 3 for

2010, Figure 4 for 2012). We present a 4-category breakdown of HHI by state using the DOJ/FTC

Horizontal Merger Guidelines: <1,500 (unconcentrated); 1,500-2,499 (moderately concentrated); 2,500-

4,999 (highly concentrated); 5,000 and above (highly concentrated). Fourteen states had an individual

market HHI less than 2,500 in both years. Similarly, in the small group market, the number of states with

HHI less than 2,500 remained stable (18 in 2010, and 20 in 2012). Several states had HHIs exceeding

5,000 in 2012 (individual market: AL, AR, IA, KY, NC, ND, NE, NH, NM, RI, SD, VA, VT; small group

                                                     12
market: AK, AL, KY, MS, ND, RI) suggesting that the individual market is highly concentrated in many

states. The average HHI in the individual market across all states increased from 2010 to 2012 (3,680 and

3,920 respectively). The corresponding median and the 90th percentiles of the HHI also increased during

this time period (median: from 3,300 to 3,266; 90th percentile: from 6,368 to 6,958).

       These NAIC data describing market structure are consistent with findings from the CCIIO

Medical Loss Ratio Annual Reporting Data (available only after 2011) prepared by the Centers for

Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). In an analysis of the 2011 data, researchers from the Kaiser

Family Foundation reported market shares of the dominant, second-largest and third-largest insurers by

state (Kaiser State Health Facts, available online10). For example, in our analysis of the NAIC data, AL is

one of the most concentrated individual markets (HHI of 8,313 in 2012). Kaiser’s analysis shows that the

dominant insurer in the individual market of AL (Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Alabama) had 90%

market share. In another high HHI state in our analysis, NC (HHI of 7,312 in 2012), Blue Cross Blue

Shield of NC was the dominant insurer with 83% market share in Kaiser’s analysis. Similarly, in RI (HHI

of 9,072 in 2012), Blue Cross & Blue Shield of Rhode Island had 95% market share. Kaiser’s analysis of

the small group market is also comparable with our analysis based on NAIC data. In our analysis, the

states with highest small-group market HHI were AL (9,429 in 2012) and MS (7,639 in 2012). Kaiser’s

analysis shows that the largest insurer in AL (Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Alabama) had 97% market

share. In MS, Mississippi Insurance Group was the dominant carrier in MS with 73% market share.

Overall, the small group market was less concentrated relative to the individual market. Average HHI

across all states were 3,252 in 2010 and 3,353 in 2012.

IV.    The Performance of Insurers in the Individual and Small Group Markets for Health
       Insurance




       10
            http://kff.org/other/state-indicator/individual-insurance-market-competition/ (accessed 9/23/ 2013)

       and http://kff.org/other/state-indicator/small-group-insurance-market-competition/ (accessed 9/23/2013)

                                                               13
       Many empirical studies have investigated factors – primarily market structure and regulations –

that explain variation in health insurance premiums. A smaller body of recent research has focused on

estimating the size of insurers’ loading fees and/or medical loss ratios. The ACA medical loss ratio

regulations implemented in 2011 have created heightened awareness of the latter. Other measures of

insurer performance less commonly examined include insurer administrative expenses and operating

margins.

Evaluating Insurer Performance Prior to 2010

       Abraham and Karaca-Mandic (2011) analyzed the potential impact of the ACA’s regulation of

insurers’ medical loss ratios (MLR, the percentage of premium that goes to clinical services). Using the

NAIC State Pages data from 2002, 2005 and 2009, they documented large variation in individual market

MLRs by state, with enrollment-weighted average MLRs ranging from 0.629 in New Hampshire to more

than 1.0 in Alabama, Massachusetts, Michigan, and North Dakota in 2009. Additionally, they estimated

that 29% of insurer-state observations with 32% of individual market enrollment would have MLRs

(based on the historical definition) below the 80% minimum threshold imposed by the ACA regulations.

       Karaca-Mandic, Abraham and Simon (2013) also used NAIC data from 2001 through 2009 to

compare the MLR and the percentage of premiums spent on administrative expenses in more and less

competitive markets, measured by the number of insurers. They found that markets with only one

credible insurer (least 1,000 member-years of enrollment) have lower MLRs, controlling for insurer

characteristics, health care provider market structure and other market attributes, and population-level

demographics and health status.

       A concern with viewing MLR regulations as limiting insurer market power is that the MLR is only

one component of the price-cost margin; the other component is the share of premiums spent on

administrative costs. Therefore, insurers could respond to the MLR regulation by altering administrative

costs in ways that leave the price-cost margin unchanged. For example, insurers could reduce their efforts

to manage utilization, leading to lower administrative expenses, higher claims payments, and higher

                                                     14
MLRs. While some reduction in utilization management may be desirable for improving access to

efficient health care (e.g., through lower levels of denials or pre-approvals), this reduction could also lead

to increased claims for low-value medical care. Karaca-Mandic, Abraham and Simon (2013) found no

evidence that insurers’ administrative expenses as a percentage of premiums are related to insurance

market structure. Thus, their results are largely consistent with the suggestion that health insurance

regulators can use MLRs to measure market power in the individual health insurance market, but with

notable caveats relating to measurement issues, limited ability to capture product and firm heterogeneity

that can influence differences in price-cost margins, and other potential unintended consequences of the

regulation.

       Most studies of the small group market focus on state regulations in the 1990s and their effect on

premiums (Buchmueller and DiNardo, 2002; Marquis and Long, 2002; Monheit and Schone, 2004,

Davidoff, Blumberg, and Nichols, 2005; Simon, 2005). Karaca-Mandic, Feldman, and Graven (2013)

recently investigated the effects of competition in the market for insurance agents and brokers on

premiums for small employers (50 or fewer employees). Using the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey –

Insurance Component and data from the National Association of Health Underwriters, they found that

premiums of policies offered by small employers are lower in markets with stronger competition among

insurance agents and brokers.

       A less examined performance measure is the health insurance loading fee (L) that represents the

portion of a premium not related to medical care – largely administrative costs. The loading fee typically

is modeled as a multiplier to expected claims:

                                                 prem  (1  L )claims

For example, if premium is $125, and expected claims are $100, the loading fee is 0.25 or 25%. The

loading fee is closely rated to the MLR. Prior to passage of federal health reform, the MLR was defined

as the ratio of expected claims paid by the insurer to the premium. Expressing the loading fee as a

multiplier of expected claims, the MLR can be written as:

                                                      15
                                       MLR  1 /(1  L )



In this framework, the loading fee captures an insurer’s costs for general administration, underwriting,

marketing, broker commissions, medical management and claims adjudication, as well as any profits or

net income for a non-profit insurer.

       The most commonly reported loading fee estimates by firm size date back more than two decades,

when the Hay/ Huggins Company prepared an actuarial study for the U.S. Congress House Committee on

Education and Labor in 1988. These estimates reflected the underwriting practices of major insurers and

suggested loading fees of about 40% for the smallest firms (1-4 employees), 25% for those slightly larger

(20-49 employees), and 18% for those with 50-99 employees. Hay/Huggins also reported that loading

fees decline to 16% for employers with 100-499 employees and 12% for those with up to 2,500

employees. These estimates from the 1980s are still cited frequently in the literature, including current

health economics and health insurance texts (Phelps, 2010).

       Using data from the confidential MEPS Household Component–Insurance Component Linked

File, Karaca-Mandic, Abraham, and Phelps (2011) recently generated new estimates of loading fees and

how they differ across the firm size distribution. They found that firms of up to 100 employees face

similar loading fees of approximately 34%. Loads decline with firm size and are estimated to be 15% for

firms with between 101 and 10,000 employees and 4% for firms with more than 10,000 workers.

Insurer Performance in 2010 and After

       Starting in the 2010 filing year, the SHCE includes line items for insurers to compute each

component of the MLR as defined by the regulation. The SHCE also has a line item for the MLR. In

comparison with the period before 2010, the ACA regulations made several changes to the historical

definition of the MLR (the ratio of claims to premiums). First, the ACA classifies insurers’ expenses for

certain quality improvement activities as “clinical benefits” that can be counted similarly as medical

claims. Certain activities for fraud and abuse detection and recovery can be included in the numerator of

                                                      16
the MLR. Second, federal and state taxes, licensing and regulatory fees are deducted from premiums

earned in the denominator.

       Using data from the SHCE, several studies have examined insurer filings for reporting years of

2010 (considered as a pre-MLR regulation year) and 2011. The General Accounting Office (2011)

analyzed insurers’ MLRs in the individual and group markets. Using 2010 data and the new ACA

standards described above, GAO found wide variation in MLRs in the individual market, with only 43%

of credible insurers and 48% of covered lives at or above the 2011 standard. These percentages were

notably higher for the small and large group markets. Hall and McCue (2012), examining the NAIC’s

2010 data, estimated that rebates paid to consumers would have reached almost $2 billion ($1 billion in

the individual market, $0.5 billion in the small group, and $0.5 billion in the large group market) if the

MLR regulation had been implemented in 2010.

       However, it is important to note that measurement of MLR in the SHCE does not exactly match

the MLR used by the HHS to determine rebates. In fact, the MLR reported in the SHCE is labeled as the

“preliminary MLR.” Several adjustments are needed to properly calculate MLR rebates. The first is a

“credibility” adjustment to reflect that insurers with smaller enrollment face more variable claims and

premiums, and thus should be given additional room to meet the MLR threshold. Under formulae

published in the Interim Final Rule of the regulation, insurers with more than 1,000 but fewer than 75,000

member-years (known as partially-credible insurers) receive a credibility adjustment of up to 8.3% to

their preliminary MLR on a sliding scale. Insurers with 75,000 or more member-years (fully credible) do

not receive any credibility adjustment. Using the member-years reported in the SHCE, it is possible to

calculate the credibility adjustment.

       A second adjustment allows insurers that sell high deductible policies to increase the MLR. The

rationale for this adjustment is that administrative cost is generally a disproportionately higher share of

the premiums in high deductible policies because the deductible reduces claims costs and premiums but



                                                      17
not administrative costs. Because the SHCE does not include benefit design information, it is not possible

to calculate this adjustment with only the SHCE data.

        Third, HHS’s rebate calculations allow claims paid through March of the following year to be

included in the numerator of the MLR. Because the SHCE is for the reporting year only, it is not possible

to make this adjustment.11

        Finally, starting with the 2012 filing year, the SHCE calculation of the MLR becomes more

complex because the rebate calculation requires the MLR experience of partially credible insurers to be

aggregated across several years. For the 2012 reporting year, MLR for these insurers has to be calculated

combining 2011 and 2012 data (which we detail below).12 Similarly, the credibility adjustment for 2012 is

calculated by aggregating member years over 2011 and 2012.

        Several recent studies have used 2010 and 2011 SHCE filings to evaluate the early impact of the

medical loss ratio regulation. McCue and Hall (December 2012) examined changes in administrative costs

and profit margins. They found reductions of about $209 million in administrative costs in the individual

market and $190 million in the small group market. The authors also documented reductions in profits in

the individual market of about $351 million, but increases in profits in the small group market of about

$226 million. While the average MLR increased from 80.8% to 84.1% in the individual market, it stayed

about the same (83.6%) in the small group market.

        In a follow-up study, McCue, Hall and Liu (2013) distinguished between for-profit and non-profit

insurers and found that reductions in administrative costs and operating margins were primarily driven by

for-profit insurers in the individual market. Non-profit insurers already had high MLRs in 2010 relative to

for-profit insurers (88.1% vs. 71.8%). In the small group market, the percentage of premiums spent on

administrative costs declined more among for-profit firms (from 19.4% in 2010 to 18.7% among for-

profits, from 12$ to 11.9% among non-profits). Surprisingly, however, operating margins (defined as the


11
   http://www.naic.org/documents/committees_e_health_reform_solvency_impact_exposure_related_doc_shce_preliminary_ml
r_cautionary_statement.pdf
12
   Beginning in the 2013 reporting year, information from two years prior to the MLR reporting year will be used
                                                        18
percentage of premiums not spent on clinical services or administrative costs) increased slightly from

1.6% to 2.8% among non-profits with no significant change among for-profits.

       Abraham, Karaca-Mandic and Simon (2013) also examined the 2010 and 2011 SHCE filings to

analyze the early responses of individual and small group market insurers to the MLR regulation.

Controlling for various factors – insurers’ ownership type and HMO status, insurance market competition,

and existing state laws – they expected to find heterogeneous responses by insurers’ baseline

characteristics. They found that several factors were significantly related to insurers’ MLRs. Individual

market insurers with more enrollments in other market segments have lower MLRs, on average, as do for-

profit organizations (2.25 percentage points lower). In contrast, HMOs have MLRs that are 4.58

percentage points higher on average, which may reflect higher actuarial value plans. In the small group

market, an insurer’s overall enrollment across all states and segments is inversely related to its MLR, but

the magnitude is small. Additionally, small group insurers that operate in more concentrated markets,

measured by the Herfindahl Hirschman index, have significantly lower MLRs. In contrast, insurers that

operate in states with existing MLR regulations have higher MLRs.

       In terms of early responses to the MLR regulation, the authors found that individual market

insurers with 2010 MLRs that are more than 10 percentage points under the 80% threshold experienced a

10.94 percentage point increase in MLR from 2010 to 2011 (controlling for the influence of other factors),

while those within five points under the threshold experienced only a 2.91 percentage point increase in

MLR. Individual market insurers with MLRs more than 10 points above the threshold in 2010 reported a

decrease, on average, relative to insurers that were only slightly above the 80% threshold. A similar

pattern of changes in insurers’ MLRs occurred in the small group market.

       The Kaiser Family Foundation (April 2012) used data from SHCE filings for 2011 to project

rebates of $426 million, $377 million and $541 million in the individual, small group and large group

markets respectively. In 2012 consumers actually received about $1.1 billion in rebates for the 2011

reporting year ($394 million in the individual market, $321 million in the small group market, and $386

                                                     19
million in the large group market).13 The similarity in projected rebates using the 2011 SHCE filings and

actual rebates reported by CMS is encouraging in terms of the ability to use NAIC data to study insurance

market performance.

        Cox, Claxton and Levitt (2013) used the SHCE data for 2010-2012 filings of “preliminary MLRs”

and projected that rebates for the 2012 reporting year would be about half the $1.1 billion received for the

previous year. The CMS reported in August 2013 that rebates for the 2012 reporting year were $193

million in the individual market, $203 million in the small group market, and $109 million in the large

group market, again verifying the credibility of MLRs reported in the SHCE.14

        In this paper, we present the first estimates in key insurer performance measures from the 2012

SCHE filings. In Figures 5 and 6, we estimate changes in premiums earned and claims incurred per

member year in the individual and small group markets in 2010 and 2012. These amounts are inflated to

reflect 2012 dollars. On average, premiums per member year increased from $2,786 in 2010 to $3,124 in

2012, and claims per member year increased from $2,154 in 2010 to $2,735 in 2012 in the individual

market. Both premiums are claims per member year were remarkably stable in the small group market.

        In Figures 7 and 8, we decompose the premiums spent for clinical services (i.e. the preliminary

MLR), administrative costs and the operating margin (residual from clinical services and administrative

costs) in the individual and small group markets. While the operating margin declined steadily over the

time period in the individual market (from 6% in 2010 to 1% in 2012), it was stable in the small group

market (around 5-6%). Administrative costs as a percentage of the premiums also declined steadily in the

individual market (19% in 2010, 16% in 2011, and 14% in 2012), and declined slightly in the small group

market (13% in 2010, 12% in 2011, and 11% in 2012).

        Next, we present estimates of MLRs in the two markets from 2010 through 2012. As discussed

above, calculation of rebates using the preliminary MLR reported in SCHE is complicated. To calculate

13
   http://www.hhs.gov/news/press/2012pres/09/20120911a.html (accessed October 1, 2013). McCue and Hall (December
2012) also report the rebates that CMS announced.
14
   http://www.cms.gov/CCIIO/Resources/Data-Resources/Downloads/2012-mlr-rebates-by-state-and-market.pdf (accessed
October 1, 2013)
                                                         20
rebates, HHS adjusts the MLRs based on credibility, plan design (i.e. deductibles), and claims paid

through March of the following year. Moreover, for the 2012 reporting year, insurer experience was

aggregated over 2011 and 2012 reporting years if the insurer had fewer than 75,000 member years

(partially credible) in the state and the segment (individual, small group or large group market) in 2012.15

This means that both the numerator and the denominator of the MLR formula must be aggregated over the

two years before taking their ratio. Moreover, insurers can include rebates paid in the previous year in the

numerator to avoid double counting (MLR Interim Final Rule). An insurer’s credibility and the

subsequent credibility adjustment to MLR are also based on its aggregated member years in 2011 and

2012.

         We were able to conduct the aggregation exercise for the 2012 reporting year. We also made the

credibility adjustment for the size of the insurer from member years reported in the SCHE. However, we

could not adjust for benefit design or claims payments up to the first quarter of the following year.

         Table 8 presents our estimates of MLR for fully credible insurers with at least 75,000 member

years in the state-segment. The unique number of such insurers and the number of insurer-state

observations are very similar, suggesting that such insurers are typically local, operating in just one state.

The average MLR increased from 80.39% (95% CI 76.76%-84.03%) in 2010 to 85.38% (95% CI

83.21%-87.54%) in 2012 in the individual market, with 89% of the insurers meeting the MLR threshold

of 80%. Changes in MLRs in the small group market are smaller (83.56% in 2010, and 84.88% in 2012).

Median MLRs in 2012 are 83.55% and 83.7% in the individual and small group markets respectively.

         Table 9 reports summary statistics based on preliminary MLRs (with no adjustment), as well as

MLRs adjusted for aggregation and credibility for the partially credible insurers. The number of partially

credible insurers in either the individual or the small group market is noticeably higher than the number

fully credible insurers reported in Table 8. In 2012, 169 unique insurers represented 409 insurer-state


         15
          Starting 2013, the experience for partially credible insurers is aggregated over three years (for example over 2011,
2012 and 2013 for the reporting year of 2013).

                                                              21
observations in the individual market, and 244 unique insurers represented 437 insurer-state observations

in the small group market. Not surprisingly, the percentage of insurers meeting the 80% MLR threshold

increased over time in both markets. Based on preliminary MLRs reported in SHCE (with no adjustment)

for 2012, 60% of the insurers in the individual market, and 68% of those in the small group meet the

MLR threshold. However, when adjusted for the aggregation of 2012 reporting year with the 2011

reporting year, these numbers decline to 51% and 67% respectively suggesting that aggregation rule

penalizes insurers if they have low MLRs in 2011. After incorporating the credibility adjustment to the

aggregation adjustment, the percentage of insurers meeting the MLR threshold in 2012 increases (61% in

the individual market, 76% in the small group market). In terms of the average MLR in 2012, the

aggregation adjustment moved the average MLR from 85.39% (preliminary) to 83.82%, but the additional

credibility adjustment moved it up about three percentage points to 87% in the individual market. The

adjustments moved the average MLR similarly in the small group market in 2012 from 84.14%

(preliminary) to 83.24% (aggregation adjustment) and to 85.58% (aggregation and credibility

adjustments).

   V.      Other Measurement Issues

        The SHCE was developed with the primary purpose of measuring relevant components of

insurers’ MLRs (claims, premiums, quality improvement, and expenses for detection of fraud and abuse)

as well as tracking their administrative expenses (e.g., claims adjudication, total general and

administrative expenses including sales and brokers fees), and other financial aspects of the health

insurers. Because the MLR regulation currently applies to individual and group markets only, the SCHE

lacks information on other business segments represented in the State Pages (Medicare supplement,

Dental, Vision, Federal Employees Health Benefit Plan, Title XVIII Medicare and Title XIX Medicaid).

        Another limitation of the SHCE is that it lacks information on health services utilization

encounters such as physician and non-physician ambulatory encounters and hospital inpatient days

incurred, which is included in the Health State Pages. While one could use the SHCE together with the

                                                     22
Health State Pages to obtain a more complete picture, life insurers and other non-health insurers selling

health insurance still do not file the Health State Pages.

         Finally, the figures reported in the SHCE do not allow for calculating exact rebates as discussed

above. While it is possible to make credibility adjustments for partially credible insurers, neither the

SHCE nor the State Pages includes information on the share of high-deductible plans or premiums. As

another adjustment we did not discuss earlier, an insurer with 50% or more of earned premiums attributed

to newly issued policies can be excluded from the MLR reports because they are likely to have lower

claims. The SCHE and the State Pages do not include information on the share of newly issued policies.

         As the ACA changes of 2014 begin to be implemented, it would of course be valuable for

researchers to track consumers’ and insurers’ participation in health insurance exchanges. For example,

Federal household surveys could include questions on the scope of the insurance policy (e.g.

comprehensive or limited benefit), premiums and subsidies for the policy, as well as whether the policy

was purchased in the exchange. Similarly, employer-based surveys such as MEPS-IC could incorporate

additional questions to measure small employers’ participation in SHOP exchanges (for example, whether

they participated, the metal levels, and the premiums of the policies). NAIC could also request

information that separates each insurer’s business separately in and out of the exchange in each state both

for the individual and small group markets.

   VI.      Conclusion

   We provided a synthesis of the research available to measure and evaluate the size, structure and

performance of the individual and small group markets. We discussed the availability and use of different

data sets in measuring these concepts and we highlighted important measurement problems and possible

solutions to consider when assessing the performance of health insurance markets as the ACA is fully

implemented. Finally, we presented new estimates from 2012 using the NAIC SCHE filings.

   Even after coverage hierarchies are imposed, Federal household surveys give widely different

estimates of how many individuals were covered in the individual market prior to the ACA. While it is

                                                      23
premature to know precisely how the individual market will evolve given the introduction of Exchanges

and additional regulatory structures created by ACA, we will presumably have better information on

enrollment starting in 2014. Nevertheless, it may be difficult to track changes in enrollment and to

conduct studies based on a pre/post-ACA design using the Federal household surveys because of the

limitations in properly estimating the size of the individual market at the baseline. Unlike in the individual

market, we have better estimates of the small group market enrollment from the MEPS-IC.

   The NAIC was the only source available to identify insurers operating in the individual and group

markets until 2011. However, the NAIC data were quite limited until 2010, when major improvements

occurred through the introduction of the SHCE. This new exhibit filed by all insurers allows for

estimating participation of non-health insurers (e.g., life insurers) in health insurance markets and

provides a break-down of the group market into small and large groups. We used the NAIC data from

2010-2012 to estimate the share of life insurers as well as changes in market structure (counts of insurers

and HHI) during this period.

   The SHCE provides a unique opportunity to construct a complete picture of both the individual and

small group health insurance markets starting with the 2010 filing year. Although we only have one “pre-

ACA” year (2010) for early implemented ACA provisions such as the MLR regulation, we can make

some assessments of ACA effects. Despite the fact that MLR measurement from the SHCE does not

exactly match CMS’s measurement of MLR for rebates, the SHCE seems to perform well in predicting

rebates.




                                                     24
Table 1: Individual Market Coverage Information and Estimates by Survey, 2009



                                                 MEPS                    NHIS                      CPS              ACS
Survey Question(s)                        Was anyone in the     Which kind of health        At any time        Is this person
                                          family covered by     insurance or health care    during 2009,       currently
                                          health insurance      coverage do you have?       (was/were)         covered by
                                          from any source       Include those that pay      (you/ anyone in    any of the
                                          listed on the card?   for only one type of        this household)    following
                                                                service (nursing home       covered by a       types of
                                                                care, accidents or dental   health insurance   health
                                                                care). Exclude private      plan that          insurance or
                                                                plans that provide extra    (you/they)         coverage
                                                                cash while                  PURCHASED          plans?
                                                                hospitalized). Which        DIRECTLY
                                                                one of these categories     FROM AN
                                                                best describes how this     INSURANCE
                                                                plan was obtained?          COMPANY,
                                                                                            that is, not
                                                                                            related to
                                                                                            current or past
                                                                                            employment?
Response Option Indicating Directly       (1) Directly from     (1)Through workplace             (1) Yes       "Insurance
Purchased or Individual Market            an insurance agent;   (self-employed or                              purchased
Coverage                                  (2) Directly from a   professional                                   directly from
                                          company; (3)          association)                                   an insurance
                                          Directly from an      (2)                                            company."
                                          HMO                   Purchased directly
                                                                (3) Through school2

                                          Point-in-Time and                                 Any time           Point-In-
Reference Period                          Monthly               Point-In-Time               during year        Time
Recall Period of Item                     None-6 months         None                        4-16 months        None
                                                   Any
Estimate of the Non-Elderly               Point-   Time
Population, U.S. reporting Directly       In-      During                                   Any Time           Point-In-
Purchased insurance                       Time     Year         Point-In-Time               During Year        Time
                                          9,550,4 11,240,4
                                          14       06           14,030,479                  18,454,383         25,319,985
Estimate of the Non-Elderly
Population, U.S. reporting Directly
Purchased insurance adjusted for          8,215,3
Coverage Hierarchy1                       58                    13,379,765                  10,812,180         16,635,033

 Source: Abraham J., Karaca-Mandic, P., Boudreaux M. “Sizing Up the Individual Market for Health Insurance: A
     Comparison of Survey and Administrative Data Sources”, Medical Care Research and Review, 2013, Aug; 70(4): 418-33:
     Tables 1, 2, and 3 (reproduced with authors’ permission).
1. Hierarchical assigns a maximum of one type of coverage to a respondent. Prioritization of coverage types is public,
employer sponsored, and directly purchased




                                                           25
Table 2: Estimates of employees with health insurance coverage in firms with less than 50
employees
                                                      2009                2010              2011              2012
(1)    Total number of employees1                 29,804,923          29,792,468        29,717,915        30,615,432

(2)    % of Employees in firms that offer         59.6                57.8              54.7              52.9
       health insurance2
(3)    % of Employees enrolled in health          59.6                59.2              58.6              57.7
       insurance in firms that offer health
       insurance3
(4)    % of Enrollees that are enrolled in        11.6                12.5              10.8              12.5
       self‐insured plans in firms that
       offer insurance4

(5)    Total estimated number of                  10,587,185          10,194,268        9,525,840         9,344,840
       employees with health insurance
       coverage (1)*(2)*(3)/10000

(6)             Covered under self‐insured        1,228,113           1,274,284         1,028,791         1,168,105
                plans

(7)             Covered under non‐self‐           9,359,072           8,919,984         8,497,049         8,176,735
                insured plans


1.    Table I.B.1(2009) Number of private-sector employees by firm size and selected characteristics: United States, 2009
      http://meps.ahrq.gov/mepsweb/data_stats/summ_tables/insr/national/series_1/2009/tib1.htm

2.    Table I.B.2(2009) Percent of private-sector employees in establishments that offer health insurance by firm size and
      selected characteristics: United States, 2009
      http://meps.ahrq.gov/mepsweb/data_stats/summ_tables/insr/national/series_1/2009/tib2.htm

3.    Table I.B.2.b(2009) Percent of private-sector employees that are enrolled in health insurance at establishments that offer
      health insurance by firm size and selected characteristics: United States, 2009establishments that offer health insurance by
      firm size and selected characteristics: United States, 2009
      http://meps.ahrq.gov/mepsweb/data_stats/summ_tables/insr/national/series_1/2009/tib2b.htm

4.    Table I.B.2.b.(1)(2009) Percent of private-sector enrollees that are enrolled in self-insured plans at establishments that
      offer health insurance by firm size and selected characteristics: United States, 2009
      http://meps.ahrq.gov/mepsweb/data_stats/summ_tables/insr/national/series_1/2009/tib2b1.htm




                                                                 26
Table 3: Number of insurers selling comprehensive health insurance in the individual market
                               2010                                               2012
              Health Insurer          Life Insurer               Health Insurer          Life Insurer
                      Non‐              Non‐                             Non‐              Non‐
State       Credible Credible Credible Credible                Credible Credible Credible Credible

AK                1         1            4            9              2         0           4             8
AL                2         0            5           39              1         0           4            30
AR                3         2            4           38              2         3           4            28
AZ                4         4           14           29              3         2          18            16
CA                1         0           10           39              1         1          11            24
CO                3         7           15           33              3         6          16            18
CT                3         3            4           25              3         4           7            14
DC                3         2            1           19              3         4           2            18
DE                1         3            2           22              2         2           3            15
FL                9         6           17           48             12         3          19            22
GA                5         4           15           40              6         4          16            22
HI                2         0            0           12              2         0           0             9
IA                2         3            5           32              2         3           6            23
ID                3         0            5           23              3         2           3            15
IL                4         6           18           34              3         9          19            19
IN                2         5           14           34              3         4          16            18
KS                2         4            7           30              2         4           9            23
KY                2         4            2           31              2         3           3            23
LA                5         1            8           33              5         1           7            24
MA                6         6            1           32              7         5           2            21
MD                6         3            5           32              5         5           5            18
ME                2         3            1           21              2         2           1            13
MI                4         6           13           33              9         8          12            17
MN                4         2            4           35              5         3           3            23
MO                5         8           11           36              4         6          14            23
MS                1         1            6           35              1         2           7            27
MT                3         1            5           22              2         1           6            15
NC                2         5           14           35              2         4          16            16
ND                1         2            1           18              2         2           4            14
NE                2         1            7           31              3         0           8            24
NH                1         2            3           21              1         1           3            14
NJ                7         2            0           29              7         2           2            18
NM                3         0            3           37              2         0           5            24
NV                2         5            8           31              3         3           8            19
NY               14         4            2           34             12         3           5            16
OH                5        11           10           39              5        11          13            25
OK                2         3            8           34              1         4          10            23
OR                7         3            2           30              7         2           2            20
PA               14         4           11           36             18         7          12            20
                                                          27
RI                  1         2          1         16              1          2          0       8
SC                  3         2          9         42              4          1         10      24
SD                  3         2          2         30              5          1          2      18
TN                  2         4          9         39              3          4         12      26
TX                  3        10         25         42              2         10         23      23
UT                  3         1          7         30              3          1          5      17
VA                  5         5          6         43              5          6          7      26
VT                  2         1          0         10              2          1          0      12
WA                  9         3          3         25              9          3          3      17
WI                  9         6         10         30              9          6         13      21
WV                  1         2          3         38              1          2          3      25
WY                  1         2          4         24              1          2          7      17

U.S.
Average             4          3          7       31               4       3          8        19
"Data Source: National Association of Insurance Commissioners, by permission. The NAIC does not
endorse any analysis or conclusions based upon the use of its data."
Data from California is incomplete
Credible firms have at least 1,000 member‐years. In 2012, "credible" status is defined by the
aggregated member‐years over 2011 and 2012 for insurers with < 75,000 member‐years




                                                        28
Table 4: Enrollment and market share by type of insurer in the individual market
                                      2010                                                      2012
                     Health Insurer          Life Insurer                      Health Insurer          Life Insurer

         Total
         Member                                                 Total
         Years,                 Non‐                  Non‐      Member                    Non‐                  Non‐
State    2010       Credible   Credible   Credible   Credible   Years, 2012   Credible   Credible   Credible   Credible


AK          16072      0.59       0.04       0.32       0.06       15004         0.67          0       0.27       0.05
AL         176526      0.87          0        0.1       0.02      167361         0.91          0       0.08       0.01
AR         118450      0.84          0       0.12       0.04      113218         0.85          0       0.12       0.02
AZ         255356      0.51          0       0.47       0.01      261828         0.51          0       0.48          0
CA         986547      0.52          0       0.48          0     1095684         0.59          0       0.41          0
CO         299793      0.46          0       0.53       0.01      268419         0.49          0        0.5       0.01
CT         107938       0.6          0       0.37       0.03      111942         0.55       0.01       0.44       0.01
DC          19524       0.8          0       0.09       0.11       18274         0.79          0       0.16       0.05
DE          18496       0.5       0.01       0.33       0.16       17209         0.56          0       0.37       0.07
FL         847542      0.71          0       0.28          0      835051         0.69          0       0.31          0
GA         353740      0.69          0       0.29       0.01      382239         0.67          0       0.32          0
HI          30913      0.99          0          0       0.01       28359            1          0          0          0
IA         177363      0.86          0       0.11       0.03      177532         0.89       0.01       0.09       0.01
ID         127000      0.77          0       0.22       0.01       99469         0.95          0       0.05          0
IL         457366       0.7          0       0.29          0      145949         0.18          0       0.82          0
IN         179663      0.62          0       0.35       0.03      174907         0.65          0       0.34          0
KS         126792      0.28          0       0.69       0.04      120897         0.37          0       0.61       0.02
KY         148638      0.94          0       0.04       0.02      133826         0.96          0       0.03       0.01
LA         179178      0.86          0       0.12       0.02      170759         0.91          0       0.08       0.01
MA         105980      0.95          0       0.02       0.03       81084         0.98          0          0       0.01
MD         188040      0.78          0       0.22       0.01      179917         0.72          0       0.27       0.01
ME          37236      0.63          0       0.34       0.02       33239         0.62          0       0.37       0.01
MI         332637       0.6          0       0.37       0.02      323341         0.62          0       0.37          0
MN         245068      0.87          0       0.12       0.01      247707         0.92          0       0.07       0.01
MO         239103      0.62          0       0.35       0.02      245707         0.65          0       0.34       0.01
MS          79547      0.54          0       0.38       0.08       79251         0.59          0       0.36       0.04
MT          52903      0.58          0        0.4       0.02       50626         0.68          0        0.3       0.03
NC         417102      0.85          0       0.14       0.01      430755          0.9          0        0.1          0
ND          42441      0.81       0.03       0.12       0.05       43590         0.84       0.02       0.13       0.02
NE         108392      0.67          0       0.29       0.04      121894         0.73          0       0.25       0.02
NH          34484      0.67          0       0.27       0.06       35450         0.81          0       0.16       0.02
NJ         122853      0.99          0          0       0.01      147306         0.98          0       0.01          0
NM          61800       0.9          0       0.06       0.04       29822         0.84          0       0.11       0.05
NV          87327      0.44       0.02       0.51       0.03       90886         0.46          0       0.53       0.01
NY         129440      0.92       0.01       0.04       0.03      139101         0.93       0.01       0.05       0.01
OH         202135      0.53       0.01       0.44       0.03      323139         0.75          0       0.24          0
OK         120415      0.63          0       0.31       0.06       43093         0.11       0.02       0.83       0.04
OR         185768      0.89       0.01       0.09       0.01      169248         0.92          0       0.07       0.01
                                                        29
PA            471105       0.77          0      0.22    0.01         444163       0.79         0       0.2         0
RI              30949      0.47       0.01      0.52       0          16495       0.95      0.01         0     0.04
SC             133799      0.58       0.01      0.35    0.06         126116       0.66         0      0.32     0.02
SD              59021      0.89       0.01      0.07    0.03          62808       0.96         0      0.02     0.02
TN            235107       0.68          0      0.28    0.03         238119       0.74         0      0.25     0.01
TX            734307       0.57          0      0.42    0.01         290110       0.02         0      0.97         0
UT            141189       0.68          0      0.31    0.01         136231       0.65         0      0.35     0.01
VA            317279       0.84          0      0.14    0.02         315664       0.87         0      0.12     0.01
VT              17516      0.99          0         0    0.01          18470       0.99         0         0     0.01
WA            315470       0.93          0      0.07       0         284273       0.98         0      0.02         0
WI            176491       0.55          0      0.42    0.03         172402       0.63      0.01      0.36         0
WV              22109      0.41       0.01      0.38     0.2          24017       0.62      0.01      0.29     0.08
WY              24423      0.42       0.01      0.37     0.2          22177       0.39      0.03      0.51     0.07
U.S.
Total      10098333                                                9304128
U.S. Average                0.7          0      0.26    0.04                      0.72         0      0.26     0.02
"Data Source: National Association of Insurance Commissioners, by permission. The NAIC does not endorse any analysis
or conclusions based upon the use of its data."
Data from California is incomplete
Credible firms have at least 1,000 member‐years. In 2012, "credible" status is defined by the aggregated member‐years
over 2011 and 2012 for insurers with < 75,000 member‐years




                                                         30
Table 5: Number of insurers selling comprehensive health insurance in the small group

market

                               2010                                               2012
              Health Insurer          Life Insurer               Health Insurer          Life Insurer
                      Non‐              Non‐                             Non‐              Non‐
State       Credible Credible Credible Credible                Credible Credible Credible Credible

AK                2            0         2            5              2            0         4            1
AL                2            1         1            8              2            1         1            7
AR                5            2         2           11              7            0         1            9
AZ                8            3         9           12              6            1         8            9
CA                2            0         7            9              2            0         6            7
CO                8            3         3            9              7            1         3            6
CT                8            0         4            6              6            0         2            6
DC                6            4         3            5              6            5         3            2
DE                4            5         1            6              4            5         1            5
FL               13            1         3            8             13            4         4            3
GA               12            0        11           10             13            1        11            7
HI                5            0         0            1              5            0         0            1
IA                7            4         2            9              8            2         1            7
ID                4            1         0            7              4            1         1            5
IL               12            6        12           13             10            4         9           11
IN                6            5        12           12              7            4        14            7
KS                4            3         7            9              4            4         7            6
KY                4            4         1            9              6            1         1            7
LA                5            2         2            7              6            1         3            6
MA               12            2         3            6             12            2         3            7
MD               11            2         2            2             12            1         2            4
ME                4            0         2            4              4            0         2            2
MI                8            2        13           11             17            0        11            4
MN                7            1         0            5              8            1         0            4
MO               10            5         7           12              7            5         7            7
MS                1            2         4            7              3            0         4            5
MT                3            0         2            7              3            0         3            5
NC                6            1         4           11              6            1         5            7
ND                3            2         1            3              3            2         1            2
NE                3            0         6           10              3            1         4            9
NH                5            2         2            4              5            0         0            4
NJ                9            1         3            3              8            1         3            2
NM                5            1         3            8              4            1         1            3
NV               10            2         6           11              8            2         6            7
NY               22            2         2            5             19            1         4            2
OH               17            4         6           18             16            2         9           13
OK                6            1         8            8              4            2         6            7
                                                          31
OR                  7          3         1          1              7           2         1      0
PA                 20          4         5         10             20           2         5      7
RI                  2          2         1          2              2           2         1      2
SC                  5          1         5         11              4           3         3      8
SD                  5          0         0          6              6           0         0      5
TN                  7          4         5         12              5           2         6      6
TX                 10          3        14         15             10           3        13      8
UT                  4          1         4          8              3           1         8      4
VA                 15          5         4         11             17           1         4      6
VT                  4          0         1          1              3           1         1      0
WA                  8          4         2          5             11           1         4      3
WI                 20          2         8          7             21           0         8      5
WV                  5          2         3         10              5           1         3      9
WY                  2          1         3          4              2           1         4      1

U.S.
Average             7          2          4        8                7       2         4         5
"Data Source: National Association of Insurance Commissioners, by permission. The NAIC does not
endorse any analysis or conclusions based upon the use of its data."
Data from California is incomplete
Credible firms have at least 1,000 member‐years. In 2012, "credible" status is defined by the
aggregated member‐years over 2011 and 2012 for insurers with < 75,000 member‐years




                                                        32
Table 6: Enrollment and market share by type of insurer in the small group market

                                2010                                               2012
                   Health Insurer    Life Insurer                    Health Insurer     Life Insurer
        Total                                              Total
        Member                                             Member
        Years,                                Non‐         Years,             Non‐                Non‐
State   2010      Cred.   Non‐Cred.   Cred.   Cred.        2012      Cred.    Cred.       Cred.   Cred.


AK        27193    0.81          0    0.13    0.06           32982    0.75        0        0.25       0
AL       333464    0.96          0    0.03    0.01          300824    0.98        0        0.02       0
AR       128104    0.73          0    0.25    0.02          135260    0.83        0        0.16    0.01
AZ       310048    0.41          0    0.58    0.01          224005    0.35        0        0.64    0.01
CA       737370    0.39          0    0.61       0          714052    0.38        0        0.62       0
CO       296943    0.59          0     0.4       0          234853     0.6        0        0.39    0.01
CT       303407    0.96          0    0.04    0.01          246543    0.98        0        0.01       0
DC       125154    0.89       0.01    0.09       0           97986    0.88     0.01         0.1       0
DE        55031    0.91       0.03    0.04    0.02           54266    0.97     0.01        0.01    0.01
FL       873558    0.66          0    0.34       0          823504    0.74        0        0.25       0
GA       529174    0.77          0    0.23       0          610714    0.78        0        0.22       0
HI       191901       1          0       0       0          168746       1        0           0       0
IA       204892    0.88       0.01    0.11    0.01          164182     0.9        0        0.08    0.01
ID        99273    0.97          0       0    0.02           85064    0.98        0        0.01    0.01
IL       733237    0.75          0    0.24       0          260338    0.53        0        0.47    0.01
IN       293311    0.66          0    0.32    0.01          334529    0.74        0        0.26    0.01
KS       240971    0.19          0     0.8    0.01          194569    0.25        0        0.74       0
KY       184178    0.96       0.01    0.02    0.01          183265       1        0           0       0
LA       327749    0.89          0     0.1    0.01          287175    0.92        0        0.08       0
MA       679117    0.96          0    0.04       0          581971    0.98        0        0.02       0
MD       426090    0.92          0    0.08       0          353976    0.93        0        0.07       0
ME        93656    0.61          0    0.39       0           81686    0.72        0        0.28       0
MI       499867     0.7          0    0.29    0.01          654179     0.9        0         0.1       0
MN       272651       1          0       0       0          316387       1        0           0       0
MO       399047     0.7          0    0.29    0.01          322929    0.78        0        0.22       0
MS       128627     0.8       0.01    0.18    0.01          117300     0.9        0        0.09    0.01
MT        57293    0.84          0    0.12    0.04           51845    0.88        0        0.11    0.01
NC       440594    0.77          0    0.22    0.01          350545    0.81        0        0.18       0
ND        82930    0.98          0    0.01       0           67569    0.98        0        0.01    0.01
NE        96726    0.66          0    0.31    0.03           88153     0.8        0        0.19    0.01
NH       107310    0.97          0    0.02    0.01           87754    0.99        0           0    0.01
NJ       873581    0.98          0    0.02       0          711940    0.98        0        0.01       0
NM        81586    0.82          0    0.17       0           40989    0.85        0        0.15       0
NV       128670    0.68       0.01     0.3    0.01          105508    0.65     0.01        0.34    0.01
                                                            144482
NY      1785384    0.97          0    0.02       0               0    0.94            0    0.06       0
OH       842523     0.9          0     0.1       0          955972    0.86            0    0.13       0
OK       202981    0.61          0    0.38    0.01           80669    0.38            0    0.61    0.01
                                                      33
OR       234594     0.93          0    0.07       0        228449    0.94        0     0.06         0
                                                           106283
PA      1110624       0.94          0    0.06       0           6       0.98         0     0.02      0
RI        101552      0.75       0.01    0.23    0.01       85611       0.77      0.01     0.22      0
SC        195703      0.85          0    0.14    0.01      158375        0.9         0     0.09   0.01
SD          57999     0.99          0       0    0.01       52654       0.99         0        0   0.01
TN        427090      0.82       0.01    0.17    0.01      353371       0.82         0     0.18      0
TX      1197943       0.53          0    0.47       0      757686       0.25         0     0.75      0
UT        213549      0.75          0    0.24    0.01      244766       0.77         0     0.23      0
VA        536232      0.91          0    0.08    0.01      465807       0.91         0     0.09      0
VT          66264     0.62          0    0.38       0       60698          1         0        0      0
WA        236052        0.8      0.01     0.2       0      275131       0.84         0     0.16      0
WI        368754        0.5         0    0.49       0      407307       0.58         0     0.42      0
WV          72228     0.87          0    0.09    0.03       70902       0.96         0     0.03   0.01
WY         25910      0.64       0.02    0.32    0.03       24148       0.62      0.01     0.34   0.02
U.S.
Total 18038085                                            15814790
U.S. Average          0.79          0     0.2    0.01                   0.81         0     0.19     0
"Data Source: National Association of Insurance Commissioners, by permission. The NAIC does not
endorse any analysis or conclusions based upon the use of its data."
Data from California is incomplete
Cred: Credible.
Credible firms have at least 1,000 member‐years. In 2012, "credible" status is defined by the
aggregated member‐years over 2011 and 2012 for insurers with < 75,000 member‐years




                                                      34
Table 7: Entry and Exit of Insurers 2010‐2012

                                      Comprehensive Individual Market                         Small Group Market



                                                   Not        Not                               Not        Not
                                                                                   Credible
                                Credible 2012    Credible    Present     Total                Credible    Present     Total
                                                                                    2012
                                                  2012        2012                             2012        2012
 Present in 2010, Credible
             Credible in
                                     437             0         18         455        470          0         35         505
             2011

             Not Credible in
                                     37             11            9       57          21         12         12         45
             2011

             Not Present in
                                      1              2         19         22          0           0         35         35
             2011
             Total                   475            13         46         534        491         12         82         585
 Present in 2010, Not-
 Credible
             Credible in
                                     32              0            2       34          24          0          0         24
             2011

             Not Credible in
                                     51             815        291       1157         40        274         62         376
             2011

             Not Present in
                                      0             41         495        536         0           7         93         100
             2011
             Total                   83             856        788       1727         64        281         155        500
 Entered in 2011, Credible           11              8         19         38          12          0          1         13
 Entered in 2011, Not-
                                     13             160        104        277         12         27         16         55
 Credible
 Entered in 2012                      3             129           0       132         9          27          0         36


Credible firms have at least 1,000 member-years. In 2012, "credible" status is defined by the aggregated member-years over
2011 and 2012 for insurers with < 75,000 member-years




                                                             35
Figure 1: Herfindahl‐Hirschman Index (HHI) for the Individual Market, 2010




Figure 2: Herfindahl‐Hirschman Index (HHI) for the Individual Market, 2012




                                                 36
Figure 3: Herfindahl‐Hirschman Index (HHI) for the Small Group Market, 2010




Figure 4: Herfindahl‐Hirschman Index (HHI) for the Small Group Market, 2012




                                                37
Figure 5: Premiums and Claims in the Individual Market, $ (inflated to 2012)

                   3500

                   3000

                   2500

                   2000

                   1500

                   1000

                    500

                      0
                                2010            2011             2012
      Prem/Member Year         2786             2831             3124
      Claims/Member Year       2154             2313             2735


Note: All dollar amounts are inflated to 2012 dollars.

Figure 6: Premiums and Claims in the Small group Market, $ (inflated to 2012)

                   4500
                   4000
                   3500
                   3000
                   2500
                   2000
                   1500
                   1000
                    500
                      0
                                2010             2011              2012
      Prem/Member Year          4173             4240              4160
      Claims/Member Year        3436             3479              3462


All dollar amounts are inflated to 2012 dollars.




                                                        38
Figure 7: Distribution of Premiums, Individual Market

                100
                 90
                 80
                 70
   %Premiums




                 60
                 50
                 40
                 30
                 20
                 10
                  0
                        2010            2011                2012
               Margin    6                3                   1
               Admin     19              16                  14
               Claims    74              81                  85


Note: Claims include spending for other clinical services, quality improvement activities and spending for
detection of fraud



Figure 8: Distribution of Premiums, Small Group Market

                100
                 90
                 80
                 70
   %Premiums




                 60
                 50
                 40
                 30
                 20
                 10
                  0
                        2010            2011                2012
               Margin    5                6                   5
               Admin     13              12                  11
               Claims    82              82                  84


Note: Claims include spending for other clinical services, quality improvement activities and spending for
detection of fraud




                                                    39
Table 8: Medical Loss Ratios, 2010‐2012, Fully Credible Insurers (at least 75,000 member years)

                                       Individual Market                  Small Group Market
                                  2010        2011       2012        2010        2011        2012
Unique Number of Insurers          27          30         28          56          57          53
Number of Insurer‐State Obs.       28          31         28          64          64          57

Percent Met MLR Threshold
(%)                                46          77          89         73         80          88
MLR
Mean                             80.39        83.64       85.38      83.56      83.34       84.88
                                (76.76 ‐     (81.59 ‐    (83.21‐    (82.06 ‐   (82.22 ‐    (83.70 ‐
(95% CI)                         84.03)       85.69)      87.54)     85.05)     84.47)      86.06)
Median                            79.3         81.8       83.55       82.7      83.25        83.7




                                                    40
Table 9: Medical Loss Ratios, 2010‐2012, Partially Credible Insurers (at least 1,000 member years, but

less than 75,000 member years)

                                                 Individual Market                   Small Group Market
                                            2010        2011       2012           2010      2011      2012
Unique Number of Insurers                    184             178        169        274        256        244
Number of Insurer‐State Obs.                 506             492        409        520        477        437
Percent Met MLR Threshold
(%)
No adjustment                                34              46         60         58         61         68
2012 adjusted for
aggregation                                  34              46         51         58         61         67
adjusted for size credibility +
2012 adjusted for
aggregation                                  41              55         61         70         75         76
MLR
No adjustment                     Mean      74.06           79.91      85.39      81.49      82.48      84.14
                                           (72.17 ‐        (78.06 ‐   (83.55 ‐   (80.28 ‐   (80.99 ‐   (83.02 ‐
                                  95% CI    75.96)          81.77)     87.24)     82.69)     83.97)     85.26)
                                  Median     71.5             78        82.6       81.9        82        83.3
2012 adjusted for
aggregation                       Mean      74.06           79.91      83.82      81.49      82.48      83.24
                                           (72.17 ‐        (78.06 ‐   (82.09 ‐   (80.28 ‐   (80.99 ‐   (82.34 ‐
                                  95% CI    75.96)          81.77)     85.54)     82.69)     83.97)     84.15)
                                  Median     71.5             78       80.32       81.9        82       82.55
adjusted for size credibility,
and 2012 adjusted for
aggregation                       Mean      78.43           84.35      86.68      85.18      86.06      85.58
                                           (76.54 ‐        (82.50 ‐   (84.93 ‐   (83.98 ‐   (84.58 ‐   (84.66 ‐
                                  95% CI    80.33)          86.20)     88.43)     86.38)     87.55)     86.49)
                                  Median    75.39           81.68      82.58      84.76      85.23      84.69




                                                      41
REFERENCES

Abraham JM, DeLeire T, Royalty AB. Access to health insurance at small establishments: What can we
learn from analyzing other fringe benefits? Inquiry 2009;46(3):253-273.

Abraham JM, Karaca-Mandic P. Regulating the medical loss ratio: Implications for the individual
market. American Journal of Managed Care 2011;17(3):211-224.

Abraham JM, Karaca-Mandic P. The performance of private health insurers in the commercial market. In:
T. Culyer, ed., Encyclopedia of Health Economics, eds. Tony Culyer, Waltham, MA: Elsevier.
Forthcoming, 2013.

Abraham JM, Karaca-Mandic P, Boudreaux M. Sizing up the individual market for health insurance: A
comparison of survey and administrative data sources. Medical Care Research and Review 2013;
70(4):418-433.

Abraham JM, Karaca-Mandic P, Simon K. How has the Affordable Care Act’s medical loss ratio
regulation affected insurer behavior? Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Working Paper, 2013.

Buchmueller, T., and J. DiNardo. Did Community Rating Induce an Adverse Selection Death Spiral?
Evidence From New York, Pennsylvania, and Connecticut, American Economic Review, 2002, 92(1):
280-294.

Cantor JC, Monheit AC, Brownlee S, Schneider C. The adequacy of household survey data for evaluating
the nongroup health insurance market. Health Services Research 2007;42(4):1739-1757.

Congressional Budget Office. Updated estimates for the insurance coverage provisions of the affordable
care act. Washington, DC: CBO, March 2012.

Cox C, Claxton G, Levitt L. Beyond rebates: How much are consumers saving from the ACA’s medical
loss ratio provision? Kaiser Family Foundation, June 6, 2013. Available at: http://kff.org/health-
reform/perspective/beyond-rebates-how-much-are-consumers-saving-from-the-acas-medical-loss-ratio-
provision/

Davidoff, A., L. Blumberg, and L. Nichols. State Health Insurance Market Reforms and Access to
Insurance for High-Risk Employees, Journal of Health Economics,2005, 24: 725-750.

Department of Health and Human Services. Health insurance issuers implementing medical loss ratio
(MLR) requirements under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. Federal Register
2010;75(230):74864-74934. Available at: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2010-12-01/pdf/2010-
29596.pdf. (Accessed September 30, 2013.)

Government Accountability Office. Private health insurance: Early indicators show that most insurers
would have met or exceeded new medical loss ratio standards. GAO-12-90R, October 31, 2011. Available
at: http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-12-90R. (Accessed September 30, 2013.)

Hall MA, McCue MJ. Estimating the impact of the medical loss ratio rule: A state-by-state analysis. New
York, NY: The Commonwealth Fund, April 2012.
http://kff.org/health-reform/perspective/beyond-rebates-how-much-are-consumers-saving-from-the-acas-
medical-loss-ratio-provision/. (Accessed September 30, 2013.)
                                                  42
Kaiser Family Foundation. Rate review: Spotlight on state efforts to make health insurance more
affordable. Executive Summary. December 2010. Available at:
http://kaiserfamilyfoundation.files.wordpress.com/2013/01/8122.pdf. (Accessed October 1, 2013.)

Karaca-Mandic P, Abraham J. Using data from the National Association of Insurance Commissioners for
health reform evaluation. State Health Reform Assistance Issue Brief. Princeton, NJ: The Robert Wood
Johnson Foundation, July 2013

Karaca-Mandic P, Abraham J, Phelps C. How do health insurance loading fees vary by group size?:
Implications for healthcare reform. International Journal of Health Care Finance and Economics
2011;11(3):181-207.

Karaca-Mandic P, Abraham J, Simon K. Is the medical loss ratio a good target measure for regulation in
the individual market for health insurance? Health Economics. Forthcoming 2013.

Karaca-Mandic P, Feldman R, Graven P. The role of agents and brokers in the market for health
insurance. Working Paper #19342. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research, 2013.

Klerman JA, Davern M, Call KT, Lynch V, Ringel, J. Understanding the current population
survey's insurance estimates and the Medicaid 'undercount'. Health Affairs 2009;28(6):w991-w1001.

Mach A, O’Hara B. Do people really have multiple health insurance plans? Estimates of nongroup health
insurance in the American community survey. SEHSD. Working Paper Number 2011-28, 2011. Available
at: http://www.census.gov/hhes/www/hlthins/publications/Multiple_Coverage.pdf. (Accessed July 2011.)

Marquis, M. S., and S. Long. Effects of “Second Generation” Small Group Health Insurance Market
Reforms, 1993 to 1997, Inquiry, 2002, 38: 365-380.

McCue MJ, Hall MA. Insurers' responses to regulation of medical loss ratios. New York, NY: The
Commonwealth Fund, December 2012.

McCue MJ, Hall M, Liu X. Impact of medical loss regulation on the financial performance of health
insurers. Health Affairs 2013;32(9):1546-1551.
Monheit A, Schone BS. How has small group market reform affected employee health insurance
coverage? Journal of Public Economics 2004;88(1-2):237-254.

Phelps, C. (2010). Health economics. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.

Simon, K. Adverse Selection in Health Insurance Markets? Evidence From State Small-Group Health
Insurance Reforms, Journal of Public Economics, 2005, 89: 1865-1877




                                                  43
