                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




CONVENTIONAL AND UNCONVENTIONAL MONETARY POLICY WITH ENDOGENOUS
                    COLLATERAL CONSTRAINTS

                                          Aloísio Araújo
                                         Susan Schommer
                                         Michael Woodford

                                        Working Paper 19711
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19711


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2013




We thank Kyle Jurado and Stéphane Dupraz for research assistance, and John Geanakoplos, Steve
Williamson, and participants at presentations at IMPA, MIT, the Cowles Foundation Conference on
General Equilibrium and its Applications, the Annual Fall Conference of the Federal Reserve Bank
of St. Louis, and the NBER conference on Lessons from the Financial Crisis for Monetary Policy
for helpful comments. We also acknowledge financial support from CAPES-PNPD and IMPA (Schommer),
and the NSF under grant SES-0820438 (Woodford). The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19711.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Aloísio Araújo, Susan Schommer, and Michael Woodford. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Conventional and Unconventional Monetary Policy with Endogenous Collateral Constraints
Aloísio Araújo, Susan Schommer, and Michael Woodford
NBER Working Paper No. 19711
December 2013
JEL No. D53,E52,E58

                                             ABSTRACT

We consider the effects of central-bank purchases of a risky asset, financed by issuing riskless nominal
liabilities (reserves), as an additional dimension of policy alongside “conventional” monetary policy
(central-bank control of the riskless nominal interest rate), in a general-equilibrium model of asset
pricing and risk sharing with endogenous collateral constraints of the kind proposed by Geanakoplos
(1997). The existence of collateral constraints allows our model to capture the common view that large
enough central-bank purchases would eventually have to affect asset prices. But even when central-bank
purchases raise the price of the asset, owing to binding collateral constraints, the effects need not be
the ones commonly assumed. We show that under some circumstances, central-bank purchases relax
financial constraints, increase aggregate demand, and may even achieve a Pareto improvement; but
in other cases, they may tighten financial constraints, reduce aggregate demand, and lower welfare.
The latter case is almost certainly the one that arises if central-bank purchases are sufficiently large.


Aloísio Araújo                                 Michael Woodford
Instituto Nacional de Matemática Pura e AplicadaDepartment of Economics
aloisioaraujo@gmail.com                                         Columbia University
                                                                420 W. 118th Street
Susan Schommer                                                  New York, NY 10027
Instituto Nacional de Matemática Pura e Aplicada                and NBER
susan.schommer@gmail.com                                        mw2230@columbia.edu




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w19711
    One of the more notable developments in central banking since the global ﬁnancial
crisis has been an increase in the diversity of types of market transactions through
which central banks have sought to inﬂuence ﬁnancial conditions. Before the crisis,
it had become common to think of monetary policy as a uni-dimensional decision:
the periodic reconsideration of the central bank’s operating target for a single, short-
term (typically overnight) nominal interest rate. Over the past ﬁve years, instead, a
number of leading central banks (including the Federal Reserve, the Bank of Japan,
and the Bank of England) have made almost no changes in their policy rates — having
taken those rates to levels viewed as their eﬀective lower bounds by the beginning
of 2009, while additional monetary easing continued to be desired — yet have been
quite active on other dimensions, making dramatic changes in both the size and
composition of their balance sheets.
    While the theoretical literature on the eﬀects of changes in interest-rate policy,
and on the way in which variations in the supply of bank reserves and adjustment of
the rate of interest paid on reserves allow central banks eﬀective control of short-term
interest rates, is well-developed, much less is understood about the eﬀects that should
follow from variations in the central bank’s balance sheet apart from those involved
in implementing interest-rate policy. On one traditional view, the assets held by the
central bank to “back” its issuance of monetary liabilities are of little macroeconomic
signiﬁcance — only the quantity of reserves created should matter, and that only
because of its implications for the determination of short-term interest rates. There
would then be little reason to conceive of multi-dimensional monetary policy options.
On an alternative view, the asset-purchase programs recently implemented by central
banks are simply a variant of what monetary policy has always been about: central
banks exchanging one type of ﬁnancial instrument for another, so as to inﬂuence
market rates of return. On this view, there are naturally multiple possible dimensions
of policy to the extent that there are multiple interest rates — as there naturally are,
given the diﬀerent risk characteristics of diﬀerent instruments.
    Here we undertake a theoretical analysis of the eﬀects of alternative dimensions of
monetary policy, in a general-equilibrium asset-pricing framework in which assets with
diﬀerent risk characteristics co-exist and earn diﬀerent rates of return in equilibrium.
We introduce a central bank with eﬀective control over short-term nominal interest
rates, that can determine the general level of prices (of goods and services in terms of
money) through this “conventional” monetary policy; but we also allow the central to
engage in open-market purchases and sales of the various types of assets with diﬀering


                                          1
risk characteristics that are traded in the marketplace, and consider the extent to
which allowing for variations in the size and composition of the balance sheet, holding
interest-rate policy ﬁxed, provide useful additional dimensions of policy.
    It is important to note that we do not here seek to model central-bank credit
policies: lending by a central bank to speciﬁc types of borrowers at below-market
rates, either because it wishes to subsidize certain activities or institutions, or be-
cause private intermediation has become highly ineﬃcient, as during the most severe
phase of the recent ﬁnancial crisis.1 The policies with which we are concerned, such
as the Fed’s asset-purchase programs since the fall of 2010, involve open-market pur-
chases of assets that are traded on highly liquid markets, and are aimed at achieving
macroeconomic goals by inﬂuencing ﬁnancial conditions for the economy as a whole,
rather than at providing credit for speciﬁc borrowers or categories of borrowers. Our
model is therefore one in which ﬁnancial markets are eﬃcient, in the sense that all
traders are able to purchase the same set of assets, at prices that are independent of
the identity of the purchaser and of the quantity purchased, and that the spread be-
tween the price paid by a buyer and that received by the seller of assets is assumed to
be negligible; and all central-bank trades are assumed to occur at these well-deﬁned
market prices.2
    There is, however, one important respect in which we shall assume that ﬁnancial
markets are not frictionless in the sense of Arrow and Debreu, and this is important
for the consequences of “unconventional” monetary policy: we shall assume, as in
Geanakoplos (1997) and Araújo et al. (2002), that all privately issued ﬁnancial claims
(as opposed to physical assets or government liabilities) must be collateralized. While
the collateral requirements in our model represent a friction, in the sense that some
   1
      Many of the novel policies introduced by the Federal Reserve during the acute phase of the
global ﬁnancial crisis were of this kind; Bernanke (2009) characterized the Fed’s policies during this
period as “credit easing,” to distinguish them from the “quantitative easing” of the Bank of Japan
during the period 2001-2006 (which instead mainly involved open-market purchases of highly liquid
securities, mostly Japanese government bonds). The Fed’s more recent asset-purchase programs can
less obviously be characterized in this way.
    2
      Models such as those of Cúrdia and Woodford (2011) or Gertler and Karadi (2011, 2013) instead
consider central-bank purchases of assets that many investors cannot directly purchase themselves,
because only certain specialized intermediaries (with limited capital and constraints on their access
to ﬁnancing) have the expertise required to evaluate them. These are more obviously appropriate as
models of programs such as the Fed’s “credit easing” policies during the acute phase of the ﬁnancial
crisis, rather than its more recent asset-purchase programs.


                                                2
mutually beneﬁcial trades are precluded, we believe that this assumption is not only
realistic, but a characteristic of the markets that are most eﬃcient in the senses
referred to above, since insistence on collateral of a standardized type is precisely an
institution that makes it possible for transacting parties to be much less concerned
with the identity of the parties with which they trade and the other trades of those
parties.3
    Moreover, rather than assuming collateral requirements (and hence borrowing
limits) of an arbitrary form, we endogenize the collateral requirements, as in the
models of Geanakoplos (1997) and Geanakoplos and Zame (2013).4 This approach
allows markets potentially to exist for both more and less well-collateralized private
debts, with both the questions of what interest rate is required in the case of a given
degree of collateral and which types of partially-collateralized debt will actually be
issued being determined through competition in the marketplace.
    Our main conclusions can brieﬂy be summarized. We ﬁnd that pure changes
in the central bank’s balance sheet, in the absence of any change in the short-term
nominal interest rate, can aﬀect asset prices, the allocation of resources and the
general level of prices; hence they do constitute a potentially useful independent
dimension of policy. However, these eﬀects depend critically upon the way in which
and degree to which collateral constraints bind in equilibrium; hence the allowance
for collateral constraints is crucial to our results. We show that when collateral is
suﬃciently abundant for no households’ collateral constraints to bind, central-bank
asset purchases are irrelevant, aﬀecting neither the equilibrium prices of ﬁnancial
assets nor the money prices of goods and services nor the allocation of resources.
    And even when collateral constraints bind, the eﬀects of asset purchases depend
critically on the particular way in which they bind; for example, we show that central-
bank purchases of the risky good used as collateral will loosen private borrowers’
collateral constraints under some circumstances, but tighten them under others. The
   3
     Sharp increases in collateral requirements were a notable feature of the recent ﬁnancial crisis (as
discussed, for example, by Adrian and Shin, 2010; Brunnermeier, 2009; and Gorton and Metrick,
2012). This makes it of particular interest to ask how collateral constraints matter for the eﬀects of
both conventional and unconventional monetary policies.
   4
     Araújo et al. (2000, 2005) instead propose an alternative approach to the endogenization of
collateral requirements, in which the collateral requirement is set by the lender, rather than being
market-determined. We leave for future work the extent to which our conclusions may depend on
the method used to determine the endogenous collateral constraints.


                                                 3
conditions that determine which will be the case are somewhat complex; but one
quite general observation is that acquisition of a suﬃciently large fraction of the total
supply of the collateral good by the central bank makes it almost inevitable that
the collateral constraints of a non-trivial part of the population will be tightened by
the central bank’s policy. There are, however, conditions under which central-bank
asset purchases will improve the situation of all parties, and thus achieve a Pareto
improvement relative to an ineﬃcient initial status quo; we oﬀer both analytical
suﬃcient conditions for this to be the case and a numerical illustration.
    Finally, we consider the extent to which asset-purchase policies are properly con-
sidered to be nearly equivalent to interest-rate policy, in the sense that asset purchases
can achieve similar macroeconomic eﬀects as an interest-rate reduction, though with-
out requiring any change in the short-term nominal interest rate. Such an equivalence
would suggest that asset purchases are appropriate when further interest-rate cuts
are precluded by the zero lower bound, but perhaps unnecessary under other cir-
cumstances. It would also suggest that standard guidelines for interest-rate policy,
such as the Taylor Rule, should have direct implications for an appropriate use of
asset-purchase policy, once the correct equivalence scale between asset purchases and
interest-rate changes has been worked out.
    In fact, we ﬁnd that while asset purchases can, under at least some circumstances,
achieve certain eﬀects (such as raising the general level of prices) that might be the
goal of an interest-rate cut, this does not mean that they achieve this eﬀect in the
same way — and with the same collateral eﬀects on other variables — as an interest-
rate cut would. Indeed, under circumstances where conventional interest-rate policy
would aﬀect the price level with no eﬀects on any real variables, asset purchases
will instead, if able to aﬀect the price level, do so only by also aﬀecting the severity
of ﬁnancial distortions and hence the real allocation of resources. Asset-purchase
policies, when eﬀective, are thus best viewed as a relatively orthogonal dimension of
policy to conventional interest-rate policy — and hence potentially useful even when
interest rates are not at the zero lower bound.
    We introduce conventional monetary policy (i.e., interest-rate policy) into the
model of collateral-constrained equilibrium proposed by Geanakoplos and Zame (2013)
and Araújo et al. (2012) in section 1, and show that in our model conventional mon-
etary policy has relatively standard eﬀects. We then turn in section 2 to the eﬀects
of central-bank asset purchases. We ﬁrst establish an irrelevance proposition for the


                                          4
case when collateral is suﬃciently abundant, but then discuss why the same argu-
ment will not continue to be valid when the collateral constraint binds for at least
some households. We further distinguish between two diﬀerent ways in which the
collateral requirement may constrain a household’s decisions, and the diﬀerent eﬀects
of asset-purchase policies upon the household’s situation in these two cases.
    The general-equilibrium eﬀects of asset purchases on ﬁnancial and macroeconomic
equilibrium when collateral constraints bind are then developed in more detail in
section 3, focusing on a case of particular interest, in which the collateral requirement
limits the degree to which “natural buyers” of the risky asset are able to leverage
themselves to take a longer position in this asset. Section 4 explores the consequences
of an alternative way in which investors may be constrained, namely the case of a
binding constraint on their ability to short the risky asset; it especially highlights the
characteristic distortions that result when too large a fraction of the supply of the
asset used as collateral comes to be held by the central bank. Section 5 summarizes
our conclusions.


1       A Monetary Model with Endogenous Collateral
        Constraints
Here we present a ﬁnite-horizon general-equilibrium model with endogenous collat-
eral constraints, along the lines of Geanakoplos and Zame (2013) and Araújo et al.
(2012), but with a nominal unit of account, the value of which is determined by
conventional monetary policy, and a central bank that is not subject to the same
collateral constraint as private actors. We use the model to examine the eﬀects of
two independent dimensions of monetary policy, interest-rate policy (“conventional
monetary policy”) and central-bank asset purchases (“unconventional policy”).5
    We consider a pure exchange economy over two time periods t = 0, 1, with un-
certainty about the state of nature in period 1 denoted by the subscript s ∈ S =
{1, . . . , S}. The economy consists of a ﬁnite number of households denoted by the
    5
    The model can also be used to show the eﬀects of “forward guidance,” a further dimension
of policy that has also been used more extensively when conventional policy is constrained by the
interest-rate lower bound. Our primary interest in this paper, however, is in interest-rate policy and
central-bank asset purchases.



                                                5
superscript h ∈ H = {1, . . . H} which can each consume two goods or commodities
each period. One good is a non-durable consumer good, while the other is a durable
good, which yields a service ﬂow in both periods; the service ﬂow from the durable
(which might be thought of as housing) is not perfectly substitutable with non-durable
consumption, and is possibly risky in period 1. The importance of the durable good
in our model is as the only acceptable collateral in private loan contracts, discussed
below; hence the supply of durables will be an important determinant of the scarcity
of collateral.6
    Because the durable good is assumed to be the only possible form of collateral, it
is possible that the households that choose to hold the durable at the end of period
0 will diﬀer from those that choose to consume the services of the durable in period
0. We therefore assume the existence of a market for “rental” of the durable (i.e.,
consumption of its service ﬂow) in addition to purchases of it as an asset to hold until
the next period. There are then eﬀectively three goods each period (in addition to
various types of ﬁnancial assets) — the non-durable good (good 1), the service ﬂow
from the durable (good 2), and the durable good itself, held as an asset (good 3) —
though utility is obtained from the consumption of only the ﬁrst two of these goods.
    Each household has an initial endowment eh1 ≥ 0 of the non-durable and eh3 ≥ 0
of the durable in period 0, and an initial endowment ehs1 ≥ 0 of the non-durable in
state s of period 1. In addition, it is endowed with eh3 ≥ 0 units of the durable good
and dh ≥ 0 units of government debt in period 0. (There are no further period-
1 endowments of these assets.) Each household has a preference ordering deﬁned
                                                              2(S+1)
over consumption plans xh = (xhl , xh1l , . . . , xhSl ) ∈ R+           specifying the household’s
consumption of each of goods l = 1, 2 in each of the states. To simplify the analysis,
we shall assume that households have identical preferences, and each seek to maximize
expected utility
                                                  S
                       uh = u(θ(xh1 , xh2 )) +         π s u(θ(xhs1 , xhs2 )),               (1.1)
                                                     s=1

   6
    Our results do not really depend on the assumption that the asset used as collateral is a real good
that provides a service ﬂow. What is crucial for our results is that the one-period return on the asset
used as collateral is not completely riskless; thus it is important that it is not nominal (one-period)
government debt. Many of our conclusions here about central-bank purchases of the risky durable
good would apply equally to central-bank purchases of longer-term nominal government debt, in a
multi-period model in which longer-term debt is used as collateral for short-term borrowing.



                                                 6
where π s > 0 is the (commonly agreed) probability of occurrence of state s, θ(x1 , x2 )
is a homogeneous-degree-one aggregator of the two goods (an increasing, concave
function of its two arguments), and that u(c) is an isoelastic utility function, so that

                                             u (c) = c−γ                                         (1.2)

for some γ ≥ 0.7 Thus in the examples considered here, the heterogeneity of house-
holds (and hence the role of ﬁnancial exchange) follows solely from their diﬀering
endowment patterns, and not from any diﬀerences in preferences or beliefs. This
provides an especially clear basis for judgments about the welfare consequences of
alternative policies, as the preferences used by each household to evaluate outcomes
for itself are ones shared with everyone else.


1.1     Monetary Policy in a Finite-Horizon Model
                                             
We assume the existence of a supply d ≡ H           h
                                               h=1 d of riskless nominal government
debt, issued prior to the monetary policy decisions (taken in period 0) with which
we are concerned in this model. A unit of government debt is a promise to deliver
one unit of money (the economy’s nominal unit of account) in period 1, regardless
of the state s reached at that date, and we assume that there is no doubt about the
government’s ability and intention to raise the tax revenue necessary in period 1 to
pay oﬀ this debt. We let q0 denote the price (in units of money) at which a unit of
government debt trades in period 0.
    We also assume the existence of a central bank that can acquire assets in period 0,
ﬁnancing its open-market purchases by issuing riskless nominal liabilities (reserves)
of its own. These reserves are the economy’s unit of account (called “money” in the
previous paragraph); thus a price p3 for the durable good in period 0 means p3 units
of reserve balances at the central bank in period 0. If the central bank chooses to
acquire dCB units of public debt and xCB3  units of the durable good, it creates

                                   M = q0 dCB + (p3 − p2 )xCB
                                                           3                                      (1.3)
   7
     Several of our more general characterizations of equilibrium below do not depend on preferences
of this special form, or even on the assumption of identical preferences. But restricting attention to
this special case allows more detailed characterizations of collateral-constrained equilibria in section
3.



                                                 7
units of reserves. (Note that the eﬀective cost of a unit of the durable is only p3 − p2 ,
since the central bank can rent the durable in period 0; alternatively, we may suppose
that the central bank purchases the durable after the period-0 rental income has
already been collected by the initial owner.) We shall restrict attention to policies
under which at least one element of the vector (dCB , xCB     3 ) is positive (while both
elements are non-negative), so that M > 0. Allowing the central bank to separately
vary dCB and xCB   3  means that we can separately consider the eﬀects of variation in
the size of the balance sheet and its composition. Moreover, purchases of the durable
allow us to consider the eﬀects of purchases of assets with diﬀerent risk exposure than
the liabilities issued to purchase them.8
    Reserves held at the central bank pay a riskless nominal return i; that is, one
unit of reserves held after trading in period 0 becomes a claim to 1 + i units of
reserves in period 1, regardless of the state s. This riskless nominal interest rate is
a policy variable, that may be freely set by the central bank; this choice represents
“conventional monetary policy” in our model. Note that the central bank is free to
set the interest rate on its liabilities at whatever level it likes, given that the unit of
account is only deﬁned in terms of balances held at the central bank, and the only link
between the unit of account in two successive periods arises from the central bank’s
willingness to deliver future money in exchange for money held now on particular
terms.9 Under the assumption that M > 0, so that some amount of reserves earning
   8
     In practice, central banks are less likely to directly hold real assets, such as real estate, than to
hold securities that represent claims to income ﬂows from the real assets. But what is important
for our analysis is the type of risk exposure that we allow the central bank to take onto its balance
sheet, as should be made clear below. Also, in our model, the durable good is the only acceptable
form of collateral for private borrowing, and central banks certainly do acquire risky assets, such as
longer-term Treasury bonds, that are commonly used as collateral in ﬁnancial transactions.
   9
     In practice, central banks choose the interest rate paid on reserves as a policy variable, but the
equilibrium riskless nominal rate of interest is not this rate, but one that diﬀers from it because of
the liquidity premium earned by reserves owing to their role in the payments system; and central
banks inﬂuence the riskless rate both by varying the interest rate paid on reserves and the supply of
reserves (which inﬂuences the liquidity premium by aﬀecting the scarcity of reserves), as discussed
in Woodford (2003, chap. 1). Here we simplify by abstracting from the existence of a liquidity
premium, as in the “cashless economy” of Woodford (2003, chap. 2). The analysis here is also
applicable to the case of an economy in which the supply of reserves is maintained at all times at
such a high level as to satiate the economy in reserves, allowing direct control of the riskless rate by
variations in the rate of interest paid on reserves, as in the “ﬂoor system” for the implementation
of monetary policy used by the Norges Bank (the central bank of Norway) over the past decade


                                                  8
the return i must be voluntarily held, in any equilibrium (deﬁned below) i will also
have to be the rate of return on any other riskless nominal asset that may be traded,
including riskless government debt. Hence in equilibrium q0 = (1+i)−1 , and monetary
policy determines “the” riskless nominal interest rate.
    There is, however, an important constraint on the central bank’s ability to freely
choose the value of i, under typical institutional arrangements. This is that it is not
possible to choose a value of i less than zero, if people are also free to exchange reserves
for currency that oﬀers a riskless nominal return of zero. In practice, non-interest-
earning currency typically coexists with reserve balances at the central bank paying a
positive interest rate, because of certain special uses for currency (not modeled in this
paper); but the fact that holders of reserves always have the right to convert them
into currency at a ﬁxed parity prevents the central bank from driving the riskless rate
below zero by paying a negative interest rate on reserves.10
    In our model, there are no special uses of currency, and so currency will not be
held in the case that the interest on reserves is positive. But even though currency
will not be issued or held in any of our equilibria corresponding to policies i > 0, the
possibility of requesting currency matters, because it implies that the central bank
cannot choose a value of i less than zero. To economize on notation, we simply assume
that the central bank’s monetary liabilities all pay the same interest rate i, but that
this rate must satisfy the constraint i ≥ 0.
    If the central bank acquires some of the durable (xCB  3   > 0), and the nominal value
of the durable diﬀers across states of the world in period 1 (as we shall assume in
all of the equilibria considered below), then the value of the central bank’s assets
will not exactly equal the value of its liabilities in all states. We assume that any
such balance-sheet earnings of the central bank are transferred to the Treasury, and
reduce the taxes that must be collected to retire the government debt in period 1;
correspondingly, any balance-sheet losses of the central bank are made up by the
Treasury, and increase the taxes that must be collected in that state. The revenues
required to retire the public debt (and pay oﬀ any losses of the central bank) are
(Bowman et al., 2010).
  10
     In fact, the existence of small positive holding costs for currency mean that a slightly negative
interest rate on reserves is possible; but this does not change the fact that the existence of currency
puts a ﬂoor on the central bank’s interest-rate target. For simplicity, we abstract from holding costs
of currency here, and treat the lower bound as exactly zero.



                                                 9
raised through lump-sum taxation. The share of taxes raised from each household h
                                                            
is θh ≥ 0, assumed to be the same for each state s, where h θ h = 1. Hence the tax
obligation of household h in state s (in nominal units) is θh (μ − ps3 xCB
                                                                        3 ), where


                                  μ ≡ (1 + i)M + (d − dCB )                                    (1.4)

is the total public supply of riskless nominal assets (in terms of their value at maturity
in period 1).
     Finally, monetary policy also speciﬁes the value of the nominal unit of account (in
terms of real goods) in each state s in period 1. In an inﬁnite-horizon model, there
would be no need for such an additional dimension of policy; we could simply specify
monetary policy as a choice of i, dCB and xCB    3   each period. But in such a model,
expectations about the value of the money that the central bank promises to deliver
in the following period when it promises to pay the interest rate i will be determined
by expectations about monetary policy in that subsequent period (and thereafter).11
Here, instead, period 1 is a terminal period, in which there are no further decisions
about interest-rate policy or the supply of bank reserves to make; but we nonetheless
suppose that the value of the nominal unit of account in any state in period 1 can be
made higher or lower by central-bank policy at that time. Technically, we suppose
that the central bank redeems all nominal quantities remaining in accounts with it at
the end of period 1 trading in terms of a speciﬁed (positive) number of units of the
non-durable good per unit of money, as would occur under a “commodity money”
scheme (though here there is convertibility only at the terminal date). Thus for each
state s, the price ps1 of good 1 in units of money is ﬁxed by monetary policy. A
complete speciﬁcation of monetary policy in our model is then given by the variables
           3 , {ps1 }s=1 ), with the implied supply of reserves given by (1.3).
(i, dCB , xCB        S




1.2     Private Borrowing with Endogenous Collateral Require-
        ments
We also allow for trading in privately issued ﬁnancial claims; but contrary to what is
assumed in the Arrow-Debreu [A-D] model or in standard models of general equilib-
  11
    See Woodford (2003, chap. 2) for illustration of how the price level (or exchange value of money)
can be determined in each of an inﬁnite sequence of periods purely by interest-rate policy in each
of the sequence of periods.


                                               10
rium with incomplete asset markets [GEI],12 we do not assume that households can
issue arbitrary quantities of ﬁnancial claims as long as they are able to deliver the
promised amount in each possible state of the world. Instead, we assume that bor-
rowing must be collateralized, as in the models of Geanakoplos (1997) and Araújo et
al. (2002), though the collateral requirements are determined endogenously (by what
people will pay for private ﬁnancial claims that are collateralized to a greater or lesser
extent), rather than speciﬁed exogenously (for example, by law or social custom). We
ﬁrst introduce the notation that we use to describe collateralized borrowing, and then
discuss what it means for the collateral requirements to be endogenously determined.
    We assume that any privately issued ﬁnancial claim speciﬁes a quantity of money
that must be repaid (independently of the state s) in order to extinguish the debt,
and also a quantity of the durable good that must be held by the borrower (i.e., issuer
of the claim) as collateral for the debt, and that can be seized by the lender (i.e.,
holder of the claim) in the event of default (i.e., non-payment of the speciﬁed amount
of money). We also assume that the claim gives the holder no rights to assets of the
issuer except the right to seize the assets pledged as collateral for the loan in the
event of default; and it gives the issuer the right to discharge the claim (preventing
seizure of the collateral) by paying the speciﬁed amount of money. Diﬀerent types
of private ﬁnancial claims may simultaneously be traded, that are collateralized to
diﬀerent extents; thus there may be both “prime” and “subprime” loans collateralized
by housing, where in our model the diﬀerence relates to the value of the collateral
relative to the size of the loan, and not to any personal characteristics of the borrowers.
But we assume a competitive equilibrium in which arbitrary quantities of a given type
of ﬁnancial claim can be purchased at a given per-unit price; hence we may without
loss of generality normalize each of the types of private ﬁnancial claims so that “one
unit” of the claim promises delivery of one unit of money at maturity.
    Thus we assume trading in a variety of types of privately issued ﬁnancial claims
j ∈ J . Each asset j promises delivery of one unit of money in period 1, regardless of
the state s. The collateral requirement for asset j is denoted Cj ≥ 0; any issuer must
hold Cj units of the durable in period 0 per unit sold of asset j. Given the possibility
of default, the actual payoﬀ of asset j in state s is min(1, ps3 Cj ) in units of money,
where ps3 is the price of the durable (in units of money) in state s of period 1. We
let qj denote the price (in units of money) at which assets of type j trade in period 0.
  12
       See Geanakoplos and Zame (2013) for discussion of these alternative model structures.


                                                11
    Thus far, we have supposed that the set of assets that may be issued and the
collateral requirement associated with each of them is given; but in fact, these can be
endogenously determined. As ﬁrst proposed by Geanakoplos (1997) and developed
more thoroughly by Geanakoplos and Zame (2013), we may actually suppose that
competitive markets exist in which all possible collateralized ﬁnancial claims are
traded, though the equilibrium quantities issued of most of these securities will be
zero. (The “market-determined” collateral requirements will then simply be those
values of collateral for which the existence of such a market is not redundant.)
    In the present example, the set of possible private ﬁnancial claims corresponds
to diﬀerent possible values of Cj . Moreover, one can show that it suﬃces to assume
trading in a particular ﬁnite set of assets, j = 1, . . . , S, such that

                                           Cj = 1/pj3                                         (1.5)

for each j; that is, asset j is a claim with a collateral requirement such that if state
j is realized in period 1, the value of the collateral will exactly equal the face value
of the debt. In the case of any equilibrium for an economy with a set of private
ﬁnancial claims that includes the S types (1.5), but possibly other types as well,
there necessarily exists a corresponding equilibrium for an economy with only the S
markets (1.5) open, in which the prices of all goods and assets traded in the restricted
economy are the same as in the original equilibrium, and the consumption allocation
is also the same. (See Proposition 1 of Araújo et al., 2012.13 )
    Because of this result, we do not reduce the set of equilibria by assuming that
only (at most) the set of S assets deﬁned above are traded.14 From now on, we
assume that J = {1, . . . , S} and Cs = 1/ps3 for each j. These are our endogenously
determined collateral requirements, as in Araújo et al. (2012).
  13
      The model and deﬁnition of equilibrium with collateral constraints in Araújo et al. (2012) is
somewhat diﬀerent than here, because of the absence of money, monetary policy, or a central bank
in that paper. But the demonstration in the earlier paper that the S assets of the form (1.5) suﬃce
applies directly to the present extension of the model as well.
   14
      In fact, asset 1 is also redundant, as shown by Lemma 6 in the Appendix. We nonetheless retain
a market for asset 1 in our notation for the general case, in order to preserve a simple association
between the number of the asset and the state in which the value of the collateral just suﬃces to
allow repayment in full of the debt.




                                               12
1.3     Equilibrium
Let p1 , p2 , p3 denote the prices (in units of money) of the non-durable, the service
ﬂow from the durable, and the durable good respectively in period 0, and similarly
let ps1 , ps2 , ps3 be the prices of the same three goods in state s in period 1. In fact, we
necessarily have have ps3 = ps2 in each state s (as there is no reason to acquire the
durable in period 1 other than to enjoy the period 1 service ﬂow). We can also simplify
notation by observing that government debt and reserves issued by the central bank
will be perfect substitutes, so that in equilibrium q0 = (1 + i)−1 , and households are
indiﬀerent as to how much of their holdings of publicly issued riskless assets are of
one type or the other. We then have 2S + 3 goods prices to determine (where we
omit the redundant prices {ps3 } from the price vector), along with the S privately-
issued ﬁnancial asset prices. Each household h chooses a consumption plan xh and a
portfolio described by a vector ψ h ∈ RS+ of asset purchases (lending), a vector ϕh ∈ RS+
of asset issuance (borrowing), a quantity μh ≥ 0 of post-trade holdings of publicly-
issued riskless assets (measured in units of their value at maturity in period 1), and
a quantity xh3 ≥ 0 of post-trade holdings of the durable good. Note that we must
separately specify ﬁnancial asset purchases and issuances (rather than simply net
trades, as in a GEI model), because of the need to satisfy the collateral requirements,
that are increased by issuance of ﬁnancial claims but not reduced by purchases of
such claims. These are the prices and quantities that we seek to determine.
    Given prices and ﬁnancial conditions described by p ∈ R2S+3     ++ , q ∈ R+ , C ∈ R+ ,
                                                                                 S          S

and q0 , i ≥ 0, household h chooses a consumption plan and portfolio (xh , ψ h , ϕh , μh , xh3 )
that solve the problem

                                        max                      uh (xh )    s.t.                  (1.6)
                           xh ≥0, ψh ≥0, ϕh ≥0, μh ≥0, xh
                                                        3 ≥0




  p1 (xh1 − eh1 ) + p2 (xh2 − xh3 ) + p3 (xh3 − eh3 ) + q · (ψ h − ϕh ) + (1 + i)−1 (μh − dh ) ≤ 0,

                                                  S
      ps1 (xhs1 − ehs1 ) + ps2 (xhs2 − xh3 ) −            h
                                                   j=1 (ψ j     − ϕhj ) min{1, ps2 Cj }
                                              +θ (μ − ps2 ωe3 ) − μh ≤ 0,
                                                  h
                                                                                          ∀s ∈ S

                                                      
                                                      S
                                            xh3   ≤         ϕhj Cj ,
                                                      j=1


                                                      13
where uh is given by (1.1) and μ is determined by (1.3) and (1.4). A competitive
equilibrium is then deﬁned as usual as a situation in which each household’s plan is
optimal and markets clear. Our concept of competitive equilibrium with endogenous
collateral constraints involves the additional requirement that the set of privately
issued assets include all non-redundant ﬁnancial assets of the kind discussed above.

Deﬁnition 1 Let an economy E be deﬁned by endowments (eh1 , eh3 , {ehs1 }s∈S ) for each
h ∈ H and a monetary policy speciﬁcation (i, dCB , xCB   3 , {ps1 }s∈S ). Then an equi-
librium for the economy E is a vector [(x, ψ, ϕ, μ, x3 ); (p, q); C̄] consistent with the
monetary policy speciﬁcation, such that in addition
                                         h
  (i) for each h ∈ H, (xh , ψ , ϕh , μh , xh3 ) solves problem (1.6), given prices (p, q), the
      interest rate i, and collateral requirements C̄;
         H                H
  (ii)      h=1   xh1 =           h
                             h=1 e1 ;
         H                H
 (iii)      h=1   xh2 =           h
                             h=1 e3 ;
         H      h    CB
                                  H         h
 (iv)       h=1 x3 + x3  =              h=1 e3 ;
         H                H
  (v)       h=1   xhs1 =           h
                              h=1 es1    for each s ∈ S;
         H                H
 (vi)       h=1   xhs2 =           h
                              h=1 e3    for each s ∈ S;
         H          h
(vii)       h=1 (ψ       − ϕh ) = 0;
         H
(viii)      h=1   μh = μ ≡ d + (1 + i)(p3 − p2 )xCB
                                                 3 ; and


 (ix) C̄s = 1/ps2 for each s ∈ S.

Here condition (ix) reﬂects the endogenous determination of the collateral require-
ments (1.5).
    A useful general observation about equilibrium in this model concerns the market
for riskless (fully collateralized) private debt securities (asset S).15

Lemma 1 There exists no equilibrium in which qS < 1/(1 + i). Moreover, if in equi-
librium, some household h holds a quantity of collateral xh3 that exceeds the quantity
required to satisfy the household’s collateral constraint,then q S = 1/(1 + i). Finally, if
  15
       The proofs of all numbered lemmas and propositions are given in Appendix A.

                                                     14
in equilibrium, q S > 1/(1 + i), no units of asset S are issued in equilibrium, and the
market is inessential, in the sense that the same equilibrium could be obtained if the
market were to be closed.

    The signiﬁcance of this result is to show that if riskless private debt exists, it
must promise the nominal interest rate i set by monetary policy. Hence our model
is one in which the central bank has eﬀective control of the riskless (one-period)
nominal interest rate in private transactions (as well as the nominal interest yield on
government debt, as already noted), subject to the constraint that it must choose a
value i ≥ 0.


1.4     Eﬀects of Conventional Monetary Policy
We ﬁrst consider the eﬀects of “conventional” monetary policy, by which we mean
changes in the nominal interest-rate target i, while holding ﬁxed the size and compo-
sition of the central-bank balance sheet.16 In our ﬂexible-price model, we obtain the
following simple result.

Proposition 1 For a given economy E speciﬁed by the endowment pattern, let period-
1 monetary policy commitments {ps1 }s∈S and the balance-sheet variables (dCB , xCB3 )
be ﬁxed, but consider alternative interest-rate policies i ≥ 0. Such variations in
interest-rate policy have no eﬀect on the equilibrium allocation of resources x, on
any relative prices (p2 /p1 , p3 /p1 , ps2 /ps1 , qj /p1 ), or on any real rates of return ((1 +
i)p1 /ps1, ps3 /(p3 − p2 ) · p1 /ps1 , min{1, ps2 Cj } · p1 /qj ps1 ). That is, if there is an equi-
librium associated with a given value of i, then for any other value of the interest rate
(leaving unchanged the other dimensions of monetary policy), there exists a corre-
sponding equilibrium, in which the allocation, relative prices, and real rates of return
are the same, as are all period 1 prices, while period 0 prices vary inversely with 1 + i.

   This result makes it clear that interest-rate policy can be used to determine the
general level of prices in period 0, and indeed that any price level below a certain
upper bound (the one achieved by the “loosest” possible policy, i = 0) is achievable
by an appropriate choice of interest-rate policy. Moreover, interest-rate policy has an
  16
    Note that no changes in the balance sheet are required to implement the bank’s desired interest-
rate target, because of the possibility of varying the rate of interest paid on reserves.


                                               15
eﬀect on prices of the conventional sign: a “tightening” of current policy (raising i) is
disinﬂationary (lowers the period 0 prices of all goods). Similarly, interest-rate policy
can be used to control aggregate demand, in the sense of achieving a given volume of
aggregate nominal expenditure

                                            
                                            h
                                      Y ≡         [p1 xh1 + p2 xh2 ],                     (1.7)
                                            h=1

in period 0, since this quantity also varies inversely with 1 + i.
    It is true that in our ﬂexible-price endowment economy, variations in aggregate
demand aﬀect only the general level of prices, and not real activity. In an extension
of the model to allow for sticky prices and endogenous output, however, conventional
monetary policy would also aﬀect equilibrium output.17 And even in an endowment
economy, the equilibrium allocation of resources would generally be aﬀected if we
were instead to suppose that households are initially endowed with nominal claims
that promise to pay a ﬁxed nominal amount in period 0, rather than assuming (as
above) that their initial endowments of nominal ﬁnancial claims consist only of gov-
ernment debt maturing in period 1; in that case, a change in the period-0 price level
would (except in special cases) redistribute real income among the households. We do
not pursue the equilibrium implications of such redistributive eﬀects of conventional
policy here, as there would be little novelty to such an analysis. It suﬃces for our
purposes in this paper to have a simple benchmark for the eﬀects of conventional
monetary policy against which we can compare the eﬀects of “unconventional” poli-
cies, i.e., variations in the size and composition of the balance sheet unrelated to any
change in the interest-rate target.


2       Collateral              Constraints                   and       the      Eﬀects    of
        Unconventional Policy
We now consider the additional dimensions of policy that result from possible vari-
ations in the size and composition of the central bank’s balance sheet, unrelated to
any change in the interest-rate target. In our simple framework, there are two such
additional dimensions to consider: variations in the size of the balance sheet, and
 17
      We leave the analysis of this extension of the model for a future paper.


                                                  16
hence in the supply of reserves M, that need not be associated with any change in
the amount of risk on the central bank’s balance sheet, if M is increased by pur-
chasing riskless government debt (“quantitative easing” in the original sense of the
term); and variations in the quantity of risky durables xCB
                                                         3   held by the central bank,
that need not be associated with any change in the supply of reserves, if the risky
asset is substituted for riskless government debt. We consider each of these additional
dimensions of policy in turn.


2.1    Irrelevance Results for Central-Bank Asset Purchases
A ﬁrst simple result concerns the eﬀects of open-market purchases or sales of govern-
ment debt, resulting in corresponding increases or decreases in the supply of bank
reserves (the monetary base).

Proposition 2 Let interest-rate policy, the terminal-period price-level targets, and
the central bank’s purchases of the risky durable be ﬁxed, but consider variations in
the central bank’s purchases dCB of riskless public debt, and corresponding variations
in the supply of reserves M implied by (1.3). Then the equilibrium values of all real
and nominal variables listed in Deﬁnition 1 are independent of the value of dCB (and
hence also independent of the value of M, to the extent that variations in the supply
of reserves occur through open-market operations of this kind.

    The reason for this is easy to understand: such open-market operations simply
substitute one asset (riskless nominal one-period government debt) for another (re-
serve balances at the central bank) that is a perfect substitute for the ﬁrst asset, as
far as private investors are concerned. While private investors must (in aggregate)
change the quantity of reserves as opposed to government debt that they hold, they
do not need to change the total quantity μh of publicly-supplied riskless assets that
each holds, and so the same values of the quantities listed in Deﬁnition 1 continue
to represent optimizing, market-clearing choices, at the same equilibrium prices as
before.
    Of course, this result depends on the fact that in our model “government debt”
means short-term debt, indeed of the same maturity as reserves held at the central
bank (corresponding to very short-maturity Treasury bills). Longer-term Treasury
securities would not generally be riskless, in terms of their short-term holding returns,

                                         17
and so open-market purchases of them do not represent a substitution of equivalent
assets; but this type of open-market operation is eﬀectively the purchase of a risky
asset, of the kind that we take up next, rather than purchase of a riskless asset, as
considered in this proposition. The result also depends on the fact that we abstract
here from any special role of reserves in the payments mechanism, that cannot equally
be fulﬁlled by riskless government debt. However, even in an extension of the model
allowing reserves to supply transactions services, an irrelevance result of this kind
would still be obtained once the supply of reserves is suﬃcient to drive the shadow
value of additional balances in facilitating transactions to zero — as should be the
case once the zero lower bound on the short-term nominal interest rate is reached (see,
e.g., Eggertsson and Woodford, 2003). Yet this is the context in which “quantitative
easing” policies have been pursued in practice. In such a situation, the lesson of
Proposition 2 applies: to the extent that balance-sheet policies can inﬂuence ﬁnancial
conditions, it is not the size of the balance sheet as such, or the supply of monetary
liabilities by the central bank that matters, but rather the extent to which the central
bank takes certain types of risk onto the asset side of its balance sheet.
    We next consider the eﬀect of variations in xCB  3 , the central bank’s purchases
of the risky durable. It is convenient to parameterize this as xCB     3    = ωe3 , where
0 ≤ ω ≤ 1 indicates the fraction of the total supply of the durable that is held by
the central bank. In the (generic) case that ps2 is not the same in all states s, in this
case the asset purchased is not a perfect substitute for the liabilities issued to ﬁnance
the central bank’s purchases. Yet even in this case, there need not be any eﬀects
of central-bank purchases on either real or nominal variables, though the conditions
required for the irrelevance result are now more restrictive than in Proposition 2.

Proposition 3 In the case that the central bank’s share of the risky durable is 0 ≤
ω̄ < 1, suppose there is an equilibrium in which each household h holds a quantity xh3
of the durable that exceeds the quantity required to satisfy the household’s collateral
constraint. Then for any ω satisfying ω̄ < ω < 1 and
                                                   
                                             xh3 − j ϕhj Cj
                          (ω − ω̄)e3 ≤ min                  ,                     (2.1)
                                          h        θh
additional central-bank purchases that increase the central bank’s share to ω result in
an equilibrium in which all prices are unchanged (both goods prices and asset prices),
and the consumption allocation {xh }h∈H is similarly unchanged.

                                         18
    Thus in this case, we obtain an irrelevance result for central-bank asset purchases
in the spirit of Wallace (1981), though we do not assume A-D ﬁnancial markets, as
Wallace does.18 Proposition 3 demonstrates the fallacy in a common way of discussing
the eﬀects of asset purchases. Central banks often appeal, in their explanations of
the eﬀects that they expect their asset-purchase programs to have, to a theory of
“portfolio balance eﬀects”: if the central bank holds less of certain assets and more
of others, then the private sector is forced (as a requirement for equilibrium) to hold
more of the former and less of the latter, and (according to this theory) a change
in the relative prices of the assets should be required to induce the private parties
to change the portfolios that they prefer. In order for such an eﬀect to exist, it is
thought to suﬃce that private parties not be perfectly indiﬀerent between the two
types of assets, owing to diﬀerences in their pattern of state-contingent payoﬀs.19
    But Proposition 3 shows that this is not the case. The ﬂaw in the “portfolio-
balance” theory is a simple one. The theory assumes that if the private sector is
forced to hold a portfolio that includes more exposure to a particular risk — say, a
low return in the event of a real-estate crash — then private investors’ willingness to
hold that particular risk will be reduced: investors will anticipate a higher marginal
utility of income in the state in which the real-estate crash occurs, and so will pay
less than before for securities that have especially low returns in that state. But
the fact that the central bank takes the real-estate risk onto its own balance sheet,
and allows the representative household to hold only securities that pay as much in
the event of a crash as in other states, does not make the risk disappear from the
economy. The central bank’s earnings on its portfolio will be lower in the crash state
as a result of the asset exchange, and this will mean lower earnings distributed to the
  18
      It might be thought that the result requires an assumption about the suﬃciency of collateral
that implies that the equilibrium of our model is equivalent to an A-D equilibrium, but this is not
quite correct. It is possible, at least in non-generic cases, that the set of assets allowed for in our
model will not span all states of the world; yet Proposition 3 remains true in this case as well.
In fact, the form of proof given in the appendix for this proposition can also be used to establish
irrelevance of central-bank purchases in a GEI model, without any need for the assumption about
the quantity of collateral held by households.
   19
      Thus Gagnon et al. (2010) discuss the theoretical basis for the Fed’s Large Scale Asset Purchase
program by noting that “the LSAPs have removed a considerable amount of assets with high duration
from the markets.... In addition, the purchases of MBS [mortgage-backed securities] reduce the
amount of prepayment risk that investors have to hold in the aggregate.”



                                                19
Treasury, which will in turn mean that higher taxes will have to be collected by the
government from the private sector in that state; so households’ after-tax income will
be just as dependent on the real-estate risk as before. This is why the asset pricing
kernel does not change, in the case illustrated by Proposition 3, and why asset prices
are unaﬀected by the open-market operation.
    In fact, households that correctly understand the ﬁscal implications of the asset-
purchase policy have a motive to change their own portfolios (assuming unchanged
prices) in ways that exactly oﬀset the transactions of the central bank. If household
h bears fraction θh of the ﬁscal consequences, this creates a hedging motive for a
portfolio shift that oﬀsets exactly θh of the central bank’s trades (selling fraction θh
of the durables purchased by the central bank, and increasing its money holdings by
fraction θh of the increase in the money supply); summing over all households, the
central bank’s transactions are exactly oﬀset.
    We can thus already give an answer to the question whether central-bank asset
purchases have eﬀects that are equivalent to those achieved by a cut in the short-term
nominal interest rate in the case of conventional monetary policy. When Proposition
3 applies, the answer is obviously no. In this case, neither policy would have any
eﬀect on real quantities; but interest-rate policy would still be able to inﬂuence the
general price level (for example, to head oﬀ unwanted deﬂation, as long as it is
not constrained by the zero lower bound), by Proposition 1, while asset purchases
would have no eﬀect on equilibrium prices or quantities. (Nor, in the case described
by Proposition 3, is there any eﬀect on ﬁnancial market prices, while conventional
monetary policy inﬂuences not just the riskless rate but the equilibrium interest rates
on the various types of risky private debts as well.)
    The validity of Proposition 3 depends, however, on the assumption that all house-
holds have more collateral than they need to satisfy their collateral constraints. The
interest of the result therefore depends on this being a possibility. The following
result indicates that such a situation can indeed occur.

Proposition 4 Consider an economy in which all households are identical, both as
to their preferences and their endowments, and pay an equal share of taxes (θh =
1/H ∀h) as well. Then for any speciﬁcation of central-bank policy with ω < 1, there
is an equilibrium in which each household holds durables in excess of the quantity
required to satisfy its collateral requirement.


                                         20
    This result shows that it is possible to have an economy for which the hypothesis of
Proposition 3 holds. Proposition 4 might seem to refer to an extremely special case, as
it requires exact equality between the endowment patterns of the diﬀerent households.
But in fact the result that the collateral constraints do not bind in equilibrium for any
household will continue to be true for any economy with an endowment pattern close
enough to one satisfying the assumptions of Proposition 4: as long as the households
have endowment patterns that are similar enough, there will be no need for them to
choose large net positions in the ﬁnancial assets, or for them to choose to hold much
less than their proportional share of the aggregate supply of durables not held by the
central bank, so that households will all continue to hold durables in excess of the
quantity needed to satisfy their collateral requirement. Thus there will be an open
set of endowment speciﬁcations satisfying the hypothesis of Proposition 3, though we
omit a formal demonstration of this.
    But while robust examples can be constructed to which the irrelevance result of
Proposition 3 applies, it is equally possible to construct robust examples of economies
in which central-bank asset purchases do aﬀect ﬁnancial conditions — and aﬀect the
equilibrium allocation of resources, not just prices, as we now explain.


2.2    Intertemporal Allocation of Expenditure:                           The Case
       S=2
The case in which collateral is insuﬃcient, so that collateral constraints bind for at
least some households, is more complex to analyze, and the eﬀects of central-bank
asset purchases depend on the precise way in which the constraints bind. We can
simplify our analysis by restricting attention to the case of two equi-probable states
in period 1 (πs = 1/2 for s = 1, 2).
    Out analysis is also simpliﬁed by assuming preferences of the homothetic form
(1.1). The homotheticity of the aggregator function θ(x1 , x2 ) implies that in any pe-
riod, and any state of the world, each household chooses the same relative consump-
tion x1 /x2 as any other household, determined purely by the relative price p2 /p1 ,
regardless of the intertemporal allocation of expenditure that may be chosen. This
has the following useful implication.

Lemma 2 If each household has preferences of the form (1.1), then in any equilib-


                                         21
rium, the equilibrium relative price of the two goods is given by

                                          p2   θ2 (e1 , e3 )
                                             =                                                (2.2)
                                          p1   θ1 (e1 , e3 )
            
where el ≡ h ehl for l = 1, 3 are are the aggregate endowments of the two goods in
that period and state of the world.

Thus the relative prices p2 /p1 , p12 /p11 , p22 /p21 , can each be determined from the
economy’s endowment pattern alone. These must therefore be independent of policy,
and can be solved for without having to solve for the intertemporal allocation or asset
prices. Hence we can treat them as already known, in solving the rest of the model
(though not necessarily the same over time or across states).
    It is then possible to deﬁne an indirect utility function
                                                                   p2
                    ũ(c) = max       u(x1 , x2 )     st. x1 + (      )x2 ≤ c
                             x1 ,x2                                p1

for the initial date 0, where c is the value of total expenditure (in units of the non-
durable good) in a given period and state of the world. The deﬁnition of the indirect
utility function depends on the value of (p2 /p1 ), but this is independent of policy.
We can deﬁne a corresponding indirect utility function ũs (c) for each of the possible
states s at date 1.20 Preferences can then be deﬁned over intertemporal expenditure
plans: each household chooses a plan (ch , ch1 , ch2 ) to maximize
                                             1            1
                              U h = ũ(ch ) + ũ1 (ch1 ) + ũ2 (ch2 ).                        (2.3)
                                             2            2
This allows us to write the model entirely in terms of the intertemporal allocation of
expenditure, without any further reference to endowments or consumption of the two
individual goods.
    The way in which alternative portfolio choices aﬀect the household’s intertempo-
ral allocation of expenditure can be represented by a vector of intertemporal transfers
yh , where for each s ∈ S, element ysh of this vector indicates the value of the house-
hold’s portfolio (in units of the non-durable good) in state s of period 1, and hence
  20
    While we have assumed that the direct utility function u(c) is the same at each date and in
each state, the relative price may diﬀer across periods and states of the world (because of diﬀering
relative endowments), so that the indirect utility function may diﬀer as well.



                                                22
the amount by which the household’s real expenditure can exceed the value of its
endowment (net of taxes) in that state. In terms of the notation used above,
                              1+i h     1  h               ps2 h
                      ysh =        μ +       (ψ j − ϕhj ) +    x
                               ps1     ps1 j                ps1 3

for each state s. In the case that S = 2, it is especially simple to characterize
the set of feasible intertemporal transfers, and the cost (in terms of reduced period-
0 expenditure) of achieving any given transfer vector. Here we consider only the
generic case in which p12 = p22 , so that the durable good is not equivalent to a
riskless nominal asset. Using the convention proposed in section 1.2 for the ordering
of states, we shall therefore assume (without loss of generality) that p12 > p22 .

Lemma 3 Consider an economy with S = 2 in which all households have homothetic
preferences of the form (1.1), and suppose that p12 > p22 and that the endogenous
collateral requirements are given by (1.5). Then the set of feasible intertemporal
transfers for any household h (abstracting from any limit on the household’s budget
in period 0) consists of those vectors yh such that

                                    p21 y2h ≤ p11 y1h                              (2.4)

and
                                        y2h ≥ 0.                                   (2.5)
Moreover, the cost (in units of the period-0 non-durable good) of a portfolio achieves
these intertemporal transfers is given by a yh , where a is a vector of state prices
a1 , a2 > 0, consistent with the market valuations of riskless debt and the durable good,
in the sense that                                  
                                   1+i           1+i        1
                              a1          + a2          = ,                         (2.6)
                                    p11           p21      p1
                                                         
                                p12         p22       p3 − p2
                           a1         + a2        =            .                    (2.7)
                                p11         p21          p1

     Thus the consequences of ﬁnancial market conditions for the intertemporal trans-
fers that are feasible for any household can be summarized by the two state prices
a1 , a2 , that are uniquely deﬁned in the case of any equilibrium as the unique solution



                                          23
to the two linear equations (2.6)–(2.7), given the equilibrium price of goods and as-
sets.21 The household decision problem can then be written in a more compact form,
as the choice of a plan (ch , ch1 , ch2 , y1h , y2h ) to maximize (2.3) subject to the constraints
                                                        p 3 − p2 h  1
                         ch + a1 y1h + a2 y2h ≤ eh +            e3 + dh                         (2.8)
                                                            p1      p1

                                                μ − ps2 ωe3
                        chs ≤ ehs1 + ysh − θh               ,   for s = 1, 2                    (2.9)
                                                   ps1
and (2.4)–(2.5); where eh ≡ eh1 + (p2 /p1 )eh3 is the value of the household’s “total non-
durable endowment” in period 0, if we split the endowment of the durable good into
the period 0 service ﬂow (counted as part of the “total non-durable endowment”) and
treat only the value of the asset after the period 0 service ﬂow as an asset endowment;
and μ is deﬁned in (1.4).
    Here (2.8) and (2.9) are the budget constraints for period 0 expenditure and period
1 expenditure (in each of the two possible states) respectively. Inequalities (2.4) and
(2.5) are two additional restrictions implied by the collateral constraint. It might
seem surprising that we obtain two inequality constraints for each household, given
that the collateral constraint is a single inequality constraint, indicating a minimum
amount of collateral that a household must hold, given all of the debt contracts
that it issues of various sorts. However, the required level of collateral in order to
achieve a given vector of intertemporal transfers y h is not a linear function of y h ; for
while more negative net holdings of a given asset (i.e., greater issuance of that asset)
increase the collateral requirement, more positive net holdings of the same asset do
not correspondingly reduce the collateral requirement. This results in a kink in the
boundary of the attainable region of the y1 −y2 plane (see Figures 1 and 2 below). The
boundary can therefore be conveniently represented by a pair of linear constraints,
as in (2.4)–(2.5).
    Budget constraints (2.8)–(2.9) are the same as in an A-D model; only the addi-
tional constraints (2.4)–(2.5) make our model diﬀerent. In the absence of the latter
two constraints, it would be possible to combine (2.8)–(2.9) into a single intertempo-
ral budget constraint, that makes no reference to the elements of y h . But we ﬁnd it
  21
    See Fostel and Geanakoplos (2013) for further discussion of the possibility of characterizing
households’ budget constraints in terms of state prices, in the case that (as here) there are only two
possible states in the second period. Note that this would not always be possible if there were more
than two states.


                                                24
useful to write the separate period budget constraints as above in our model, since
the collateral constraints (2.4)–(2.5) are more conveniently written in terms of the
vector y h .
   The household’s problem can be written still more compactly if we represent the
household’s portfolio choice not by the vector yh , but instead by the vector ỹh with
elements
                                                        
                              ps2    (1 + i)p1     p12         p22
             ỹs ≡ ys + θ
               h    h     h
                                  −             a1      + a2          ωe3 ,
                              ps1       ps1        p11         p21

indicating the net amount by which the household’s budget is increased in state
s by the sum of the net returns on its portfolio and the ﬁscal consequences for the
household of the central bank’s balance-sheet policy. Thus ỹh represents a household’s
eﬀective vector of intertemporal transfers, when one counts both the transfers that the
household arranges itself and those that the central bank arranges “for it” (whether
desired or not). Since the ﬁscal consequences of the central bank’s policy are assumed
to be known to the household when it chooses its portfolio, the vector ỹh can also be
treated as a choice of the household.
    In terms of this alternative notation, the household’s budget constraints (2.8)–
(2.9) can be alternatively written as

                          ch + a1 ỹ1h + a2 ỹ2h ≤ eh + a1 f1h + a2 f2h ,                 (2.10)

                                        chs ≤ gsh + ỹsh ,                                (2.11)
using the notation
                                             ps2 h       1
                                   fsh ≡ (       )e3 + ( )dh ,
                                             ps1        ps1
                                                           d
                                       gsh ≡ ehs1 − θ h       ,
                                                          ps1
for s = 1, 2. With this change of notation, the only endowments that need to be
speciﬁed are (eh , f1h , f2h , g1h , g2h ), all of which can be speciﬁed independently of policy.
These give the value of household h’s endowment (in units of real expenditure) in
each state at each date, and also indicate how the value of its period-0 endowment
depends on the endogenous state prices. Once this notation is adopted, there need
no longer be any reference to either goods prices or asset prices (except for the state
prices a) in stating the household’s problem.


                                               25
   We can solve equations (2.10)–(2.11) for the expenditure allocation implied by
any choice of the vector ỹh , and substitute this into the objective (2.3) to obtain an
indirect utility function
                                                               1                   1
 U h (ỹh ; a) ≡ ũ(eh + a1 (f1h − ỹ1h ) + a2 (f2h − ỹ2h )) + ũ1 (g1h + ỹ1h ) + ũ2 (g2h + ỹ2h ). (2.12)
                                                               2                   2
The advantage of writing the problem in terms of the vector of total intertemporal
transfers ỹh instead of yh is that the indirect utility function U h (ỹh ; a) is independent
of the central bank’s balance-sheet policy (except through the eﬀects of such policy
on the equilibrium state prices a).
    In terms of this alternative notation, the collateral constraints (2.4)-(2.5) take the
form
                             p21 ỹ2h ≤ p11 ỹ1h − θh [p12 − p22 ]ωe3 ,                  (2.13)
                                          ỹ2h ≥ −θh φ(a)ωe3 ,                                       (2.14)
where
                                               a1 (p12 − p22 )
                                     φ(a) ≡                    >0                                    (2.15)
                                               a1 p21 + a2 p11
is a homogeneous degree zero function of the vector a. Note that φ(a) is a known
function, given the data (p12 /p11 , p22 /p21 ) that are determined by the endowments,
and p21 /p11 that is determined by monetary policy.
    We can then deﬁne equilibrium more compactly as follows.

Deﬁnition 2 Given a two-state economy E with homothetic preferences of the form
(1.1), and a policy speciﬁed by (p11 , p21 , i, ω),22 an equilibrium is a vector of state
prices a and a vector of total intertemporal transfers ỹh for each h, such that

  (i) for each h, ỹh maximizes U h (ỹh ; a) subject to the constraints (2.13)-(2.14); and

 (ii) for each s = 1, 2,
                                               
                                               H              
                                                              H
                                                     ỹsh =         fsh .                            (2.16)
                                               h=1            h=1

  22
    We omit the choice of dCB or M from the speciﬁcation of policy, as these are irrelevant for
equilibrium determination, according to Proposition 2.




                                                  26
    Once we determine state prices a that satisfy these equilibrium conditions, the
equilibrium values of all other goods and asset prices are then uniquely determined
as well. Since p11 and p21 are given as part of the speciﬁcation of monetary policy,
it follows from Lemma 2 that p12 and p22 are already known as well; and this means
that p13 and p23 are also already known. The only goods prices that remain to be
determined are therefore p1 and p3 , which can be uniquely determined from (2.6)–
(2.7), given a solution for the state prices a1 , a2 . The price of a riskless bond, 1/(1+i),
is determined by monetary policy; and the price of any other ﬁnancial claim can be
determined using the state prices (to determine its period-0 value in units of the non-
durable good) and the solution for p1 (to convert this value into units of money).23
    Solving in this way for p1 allows us to determine how both conventional and
unconventional monetary policy aﬀect the general level of prices in period 0. Since
aggregate nominal expenditure Y will vary in proportion with p1 , we can similarly
determine how both policies aﬀect aggregate demand. If we deﬁne the expected real
rate of return on riskless nominal assets as
                                                    1 1    1 1
                              1 + r ≡ p1 (1 + i)         +      ,                            (2.17)
                                                    2 p11 2 p21
then solving for p1 also allows us to solve for r. We can similarly deﬁne the expected
real return on the risky durable r dur as
                                                           
                                          p1      1 p12 1 p22
                        1+r ≡ dur
                                                       +        ,                (2.18)
                                      p 3 − p2    2 p11 2 p21
and obtain a solution for the way that balance-sheet policy aﬀects this rate of return
as well.


2.3     Collateral Constraints and the Eﬀects of Open-Market
        Operations
This more compact reformulation of the model in the two-state case provides insight
into the source of the irrelevance result in Proposition 3, and into the diﬀerence that
binding collateral constraints should make. A simple geometrical exposition may help
to clarify the way in which central-bank asset purchases aﬀect the set of intertemporal
expenditure allocations that are possible.
  23
    In fact, the only relevant assets in this model are the riskless asset and the risky durable, as
explained in the proof of Lemma 3.

                                               27
  ỹ2                    (a)                             ỹ2                    (b)
                                             A




                                  B                                                      B
                                                                                             B

                                                 ỹ1                                                     ỹ1
 O                  C                                    O
                                                               O


Figure 1: How central-bank purchases shift the set of feasible vectors ỹ of intertem-
poral transfers.

    Panel (a) of Figure 1 shows the feasible set of intertemporal transfers y for a
given household24 as a grey region, where y1 is on the horizontal axis, and y2 on
the vertical axis. (Alternatively, Figure 1(a) shows the attainable vectors ỹ for the
                                                              −→
case of no central-bank purchases of durables, ω = 0.) Ray OA represents transfers of
purchasing power to period 1 that are possible by holding diﬀerent amounts of riskless
                     −−→
assets (only);25 ray OB instead represents transfers that are possible by holding risky
                        −−→                         −→
durables (only). (Ray OB is clockwise relative to OA under the assumption that the
durable is worth more, in terms of money, in state 1 than in state 2.) Points in the
region between these two rays are attainable by holding a positive quantity of each
of the two assets.
                                         −−→
    Points in the grey region below ray OB are instead attainable only by holding a
positive quantity of durables and issuing riskless debt (collateralized by the durables).
For example, point C can be achieved by holding a quantity of durables corresponding
          −−→                                                    −−→              −−→
to vector OB and then issuing debt corresponding to vector BC. (Note that CB is
            −→
parallel to OA, since both represent changes in the quantity of riskless assets held
by the household.) Point C is on the lower boundary of the grey region, because
−−→
BC is the greatest amount of riskless debt that can be issued, given the collateral
  24
      We dispense with the superscript h in this discussion, as we discuss the budget constraints of a
single household.
   25
      This ray is the diagonal if p11 = p21 , i.e., the price level target in period 1 is independent of the
state.


                                                  28
                                                           −−→
requirement and the household’s durables holdings of OB. (The vertical component
     −→
of OC is zero, indicating that this amount of collateral is just enough to allow the
debt to be repaid even in state 2. The positive horizontal component indicates that
in state 1, the collateral will be worth more than the face value of the debt.)
      Figure 1(b) instead shows how the attainable set of vectors ỹ shifts as a result of
central-bank purchases ω > 0. The change in the value of ỹ corresponding to y = 0
(no holdings of any assets by the household, nor any borrowing) is shown by the
         −−→
vector OO . It is the sum of household h’s “share” of the central bank’s purchases of
                                     −−→
the durable (a vector on the ray OB) and household h’s “share” of the riskless debt
                                                          −−→
issued to ﬁnance those purchases (a vector parallel to BC). However, the quantity of
riskless liabilities issued by the central bank to ﬁnance its purchases is greater than
the maximum amount that a household would be able to issue using the durables as
collateral, since the central bank is not subject to a collateral constraint.26 Hence the
         −−→                               −→
vector OO  points clockwise relative to OC, the maximum degree of leverage possible
                                        −−→
for a household. In fact, the ray OO  is part of the line deﬁned by the equation
a ỹ = 0, which is downward-sloping because both state prices are positive. (O  must
lie on this line, because the liabilities issued to ﬁnance the asset purchases have the
same market value as the durables that are purchased.)
      Every value of y is mapped into a value of ỹ obtained by adding to y the vector
−−→
OO , so the entire attainable region (again shown as the grey region) is linearly
translated down and to the right. The indirect utility function U(ỹ) is not aﬀected
by the change in ω, however. The iso-utility curves can be drawn in the plane, and
remain ﬁxed as ω varies. These iso-utility curves are shown as ellipses in the ﬁgure;
in the case shown, point B represents the highest possible value of U.27
      Since point B is in the interior of the grey region when ω = 0 (panel (a)), this is
the intertemporal expenditure plan that the household will choose, achieved through
                                       −−→
the portfolio represented by vector OB. When the central bank purchases durables in
the amount indicated in panel (b), the attainable part of the plane shifts, but point
B remains in the interior of the grey region, so the household still prefers exactly the
  26
     The geometry of Figure 1 should make it clear that central-bank asset purchases can allow
a household to achieve intertemporal allocations that would not otherwise be feasible for it only
because the central bank is not subject to the same kind of collateral constraint as households.
  27
     Point B in panel (b) need not be the same point as that labeled B in panel (a); it represents
the maximum of the indirect utility function, and need not correspond to a portfolio consisting only
of durables.


                                               29
same pattern of intertemporal expenditure (assuming no change in the state prices),
and can still achieve. However, the portfolio choice required to support this plan is no
                                  −−→                −−→
longer represented by vector OB, but instead by O B. Relative to the portfolio that it
                                                                     −−→
would have chosen in the absence of the central-bank purchases (OB, or equivalently,
                         −−−→                                               −−→
its parallel translation O B  , the household makes additional net trades B  B, in order
to achieve its desired intertemporal expenditure plan.28 This is the additional hedging
demand created by the central bank’s purchases.
                                                                  −−→
    Note that the change in the household’s desired portfolio B  B is exactly the ad-
                                −−→
ditive inverse of the vector OO , representing the household’s share θh of the central
bank’s trades. Hence in the absence of any change in asset prices, the household
chooses to undo fraction θh of the central bank’s trades. If each household is in a
situation like that depicted in Figure 1(b), as assumed in Proposition 3, then the
aggregate additional trades of the households will exactly oﬀset the central bank’s
trades, and markets will continue to clear at the same prices as before. Hence the
conclusion of Proposition 3: there is no change in asset prices, no change in goods
prices, and no change in the equilibrium allocation of resources.
    This result depends, however, on the assumption that each household’s decision
is the one depicted in Figure 1(b): the collateral constraint does not restrict the
household’s intertemporal expenditure plan, either before or after the central bank’s
purchases. This need not be the case. Households might be constrained by the
collateral constraint, in either of two ways, depicted in the two panels of Figure 2.
    In the case shown in Figure 2(a), the household’s preferred intertemporal transfers
in the absence of central-bank purchases is shown by point D; this is not the house-
hold’s unconstrained optimum, but represents the highest indiﬀerence curve that the
household can reach while remaining in the grey region. Such a household would
like to reduce expenditure in state 2 even further, by borrowing more while acquiring
durables that pay oﬀ more in state 1 than in state, but cannot because it would
violate its collateral constraint. In this case, if the central bank purchases durables,
then if asset prices do not change, the attainable region shifts as shown, and the
household’s constrained optimum will now be point E. Eﬀectively, the central bank
borrows on the household’s behalf, and so relaxes the collateral constraint for such a
household.
    Alternatively, a household’s situation could be the one shown in Figure 2(b). In
  28
       This change in the household’s portfolio is stated algebraically in (A.1)–(A.2).


                                                  30
 ỹ2                  (a)                      ỹ2                  (b)




                                                                F

                                                                          G

                     D
                                         ỹ1                                           ỹ1
 O                                             O
        O           E                               O


       Figure 2: Two ways in which a household’s collateral constraint might bind.

this case, the household’s preferred intertemporal transfers when ω = 0 are shown by
point F. Here again, this is not the household’s unconstrained optimum; but in this
case, the collateral constraint prevents the household from increasing its expenditure
in state 2 — or more precisely, it prevents it from carrying more purchasing power
into state 2 than into state 1. In this case, if the central bank purchases durables, then
if asset prices do not change, the household’s constrained optimum will now be point
G. Once again, the household does not undo the central bank’s trades, owing to the
binding collateral constraint — but in this case, because it cannot. Eﬀectively, the
household’s collateral constraint is tightened in this case, rather than being relaxed.
    These examples illustrate how collateral constraints can invalidate the argument
relied upon to establish Proposition 3. In either case, constrained households will fail
to adjust their portfolios so as to oﬀset their “share” of the central bank’s trades,
and may adjust their portfolios little at all; the aggregate eﬀect, if some households
are constrained while others are not, will thus typically be an excess demand for the
durable good and an excess supply of riskless assets, at unchanged asset prices. One
should then expect the central bank’s purchases to raise the equilibrium price of the
asset that it purchases (the durable good), as we illustrate through both analytical
and numerical examples below.
    Yet even this simple partial-equilibrium discussion should indicate that the eﬀects
are more complex than common discussions of central-bank asset purchases assume.
First of all, there need not be eﬀects of asset purchases on asset prices; this only


                                          31
occurs when collateral is suﬃciently scarce (relative to the degree of asymmetry in
the situations of diﬀerent economic agents) for collateral constraints for a suﬃcient
number of traders. Second, even when collateral constraints bind, there are a variety
of ways in which central-bank asset purchases can interact with them. The asset
purchases may eﬀectively relax the collateral constraints, as in Figure 2(a), but they
might equally well tighten them further, as in Figure 2(b). And third, the mere fact
that the central bank’s purchases succeed in raising the price of the asset (when they
do) is not necessarily informative as to whether ﬁnancial constraints are eased by the
policy. For both in Figure 2(a) and in Figure 2(b), the central bank’s policy creates
excess demand for the durable at unchanged prices, and so is likely to increase the
price of the durable. But in one case the excess demand is created by loosening the
constraint on a household’s ability to hold more risk correlated with the return on
the durable, while in the other case, it is created by tightening the constraint on a
households’ ability to short such risk.
    It is also important to recognize that the welfare eﬀects of the asset purchases
cannot be simply read oﬀ from these partial-equilibrium diagrams. The ﬁgures show
how a household’s level of expected utility would change in each case if prices were
not to change, but in the cases where collateral constraints bind, prices must change
in order for markets to clear. The welfare eﬀects of the price changes must be taken
into account as well, and they may outweigh the partial-equilibrium welfare eﬀects
shown here.
    For example, Figure 2(a) shows a household that achieves a higher level of ex-
pected utility as a result of central-bank purchases of the durable, if prices do not
change. But the price changes that are needed to clear markets — exactly because of
the behavior shown in the ﬁgure for the case of unchanged prices — are likely to hurt
a household in this situation. The excess demand for durables and excess supply of
riskless assets in the case of unchanged prices should be expected to raise the price of
the durable and lower the price for which riskless debt can be issued; but since this
household issues riskless debt and acquires durables in order to satisfy the collateral
requirement for such issues, such price changes are likely to reduce the budget of the
household shown in the ﬁgure. We show explicitly in the next section that because of
such price eﬀects, it is possible for the welfare of a household in the situation shown
in Figure 2(a) to be reduced.29
 29
      See Figure 3 below, and discussion in section 3.3.


                                                 32
3     Eﬀects of Asset Purchases When Leverage
      Constraints Bind
A full consideration of the eﬀects of central-bank asset purchases requires that we
go beyond the partial-equilibrium analysis presented above, and also consider the
endogenous price changes that result, in general, when collateral constraints bind for
at least some households. In this section, we consider such eﬀects while restricting our
attention to equilibria of a particular type: ones in which the collateral constraint of
each households either binds in the way shown in Figure 2(a), or does not bind at all.
We focus on the situation in which the collateral constraints bind in the way shown in
Figure 2(a) — that is, in which constraint (2.14) binds rather than (2.13) — because,
as shown in the ﬁgure, this is the case in which the asset purchases would increase
the welfare of the constrained households in the absence of asset-price changes. The
case in which the constrained households are leveraged households — who wish to
borrow more in order to acquire even more of the risky durable, but are unable to
owing to the collateral constraint — is also of particular interest because authors
such as Adrian and Shin (2010) and Geanakoplos (2010) emphasize, in their models
of the role of ﬁnancial constraints in asset pricing, the role of variations in degree to
which the “natural buyers” of risky assets are able to leverage themselves in order to
acquire as much of these assets as they would like.
    It is not possible, however, for constraint (2.14) to bind for everyone. For if (2.14)
binds, the household chooses a portfolio that transfers no income to state 2 in period
1 (y2h = 0); such a household must issue the maximum quantity of debt allowed by
the collateral requirement given its holdings of durables, and hold no riskless assets.
But everyone cannot issue debt while no one chooses to hold such assets. (And there
must be a positive aggregate capacity to issue debt, since households in aggregate
must hold a positive quantity of durables, as long as ω < 1.) Hence in the case of only
two types, we consider equilibria in which one household is constrained, and one not.
We ﬁrst consider the conditions required for such an equilibrium, and then ask, when
these conditions are satisﬁed, what the eﬀects of increased central-bank holdings of
durables will be.




                                          33
3.1    Equilibrium When Only the Leverage Constraint Binds
We ﬁrst note some general properties of collateral-constrained equilibria in which
only constraint (2.14) binds (on some households), while constraint (2.13) binds for
no one. These results do not depend on the restriction to an economy with only two
household types, though they do rely on the special form of preferences (1.1)–(1.2).
Note that (1.2) implies that the indirect utility functions used in (2.3) are such that

                             ũ (c) = αc−γ ,   ũs (c) = αs c−γ                    (3.1)

for some coeﬃcients α, α1 , α2 > 0 that depend on the relative supplies of durables
and non-durables in the diﬀerent states.
    In the case that no households are short-sale constrained, we can establish the
following.

Lemma 4 Consider a two-state economy with homothetic preferences. If an equi-
librium exists in which constraint (2.13) does not bind for any household, then the
equilibrium value of state price a1 must equal
                                                            γ
                                1 α1      e1 + (p2 /p1 )e3
                          a1 =                                  ,
                                2 α      e11 + (p12 /p11 )e3
                          
where e1 ≡ h eh1 , e11 ≡ h eh11 . Thus the state price a1 will be unaﬀected by pol-
icy (either conventional or unconventional monetary policy), to the extent that the
variation in policy does not change the fact that constraints (2.13) do not bind.

    This simple result is already enough to allow us to establish some useful con-
clusions about the possible eﬀects of monetary policy on asset prices. Policy can
inﬂuence real asset prices and real rates of return only insofar as it changes the equi-
librium value of a2 , keeping a1 ﬁxed at the value indicated in the above lemma. This
gives us a one-parameter family of possible equilibrium outcomes.

Proposition 5 In an economy with homothetic preferences and two states in period
1, suppose that for any policy in some set under consideration, an equilibrium exists
in which constraint (2.13) does not bind for any household, though constraint (2.14)
may bind for some. Suppose also that the period 1 price-level commitments {ps1 }s∈S
are the same for all policies in the set. Then if any policy change (whether in interest-
rate policy or in the central bank’s asset purchases) raises (lowers) the real price of the

                                           34
durable p3 /p1 in period 0 must also lower (raise) the expected real return on riskless
debt r; and while it also lowers (raises) the expected real return r dur on the durable,
it increases (decreases) the spread

                                                    1 + r dur
                                r̂ dur − r̂ ≡ log             .
                                                     1+r
    Suppose further that only the central bank’s asset-purchase policy is changed, while
the interest-rate target i remains ﬁxed. Then a policy that raises (lowers) the real price
of the durable in period 0 must lower (raise) the general price level in period 0 (i.e.,
the money prices of both non-durables and rental of the services of durables). More-
over, the general price level must fall (rise) by a greater amount, in percentage terms,
than the increase (decrease) in the real price of durables, so that the nominal price
of the durable good in period 0 must also fall (rise). Thus an asset-purchase policy
that increases (decreases) the nominal price of the durable in period 0 must increase
(decrease) the equilibrium real return r on riskless nominal debt, reduce (increase) the
size of the spread r̂ dur − r̂ between the expected real returns on durables and those on
riskless debt, and increase (decrease) aggregate nominal expenditure on goods and ser-
vices, resulting (in our ﬂexible-price endowment economy) in an increase (decrease)
in the general level of prices.

    Thus to the extent that an asset-purchase policy is able to raise the nominal price
of the asset purchased by the central bank, consequences necessarily follow for both
the equilibrium real returns on other assets, and for aggregate nominal spending. This
suggests that the concern of central banks with policies intended to raise the prices of
particular assets, as a way of inﬂuencing macroeconomic conditions more generally,
is not misguided. However, it is worth noting that the eﬀects allowed by Proposition
5 are rather diﬀerent than those implied by the “portfolio balance” theory typically
relied upon by central banks as a theory of these policies.
    According to the “portfolio balance” theory, the central bank’s purchase of assets
that are more exposed to a particular type of risk than are assets in general — in
this case, the risk of a low return in state 2, the state in which the return on durables
is relatively low compared to that on riskless nominal debt, and hence to that on
the economy’s aggregate portfolio as well — should lower the market risk premium
associated with that type of risk, and hence lower the risk premium for holding the
type of assets purchased by the central bank. It is generally supposed that this

                                           35
reduction in the risk premium should also reduce the expected real return on the
risky asset purchased by the central bank, since there is less reason for the riskless
real rate to be inﬂuenced by the purchase of risky assets; and it is this reduction
in the expected real return on risky assets that is relied upon to increase aggregate
demand.
    It remains to be analyzed whether asset purchases by the central bank should
indeed reduce the risk premium associated with the assets purchased; below, we give
conditions under which this will be true, though they are not as general as might be
expected. But even granting that they do, it is already evident from Proposition 5
that the conventional story does not match what happens in our model. An asset-
purchase policy that reduces the spread r̂dur −r̂ would have to reduce a2 ; such a policy
would indeed reduce aggregate nominal expenditure, according to the proposition, but
it would be associated with an increase rather than a decrease in the expected real
return r dur on the risky asset, and a decrease rather than an increase in the asset’s
real price. Thus the conventional account would not be correct, either about the
implications of the reduction in the spread for the expected real return on the risky
asset purchased by the central bank, or about the role of this return in explaining
the eﬀects on aggregate demand.
    In order to consider how central-bank asset purchases should aﬀect a2 (and hence
the asset prices and returns just discussed), it is useful to further simplify our def-
inition of equilibrium for the special case under consideration. We can write each
household’s intertemporal allocation of expenditure problem as one with two stages:
ﬁrst, the optimal division of total lifetime expenditure between the part ch2 allocated
to state 2 of period 1 on the one hand, and another part,

                                    ch01 ≡ ch + a1 ch1

indicating the total present value of expenditure allocated to period 0 and to state 1
of period 1; and second, the optimal allocation of the quantity ch01 between the two
dates. The latter problem is (by hypothesis) unaﬀected by the collateral constraint,
and depends only the state price a1 which is independent of policy. A household’s
optimal expenditure in state 1 of period 1 will be given by ch1 = χch01 , where
                                         h
                                            k
                             χ ≡  h h 1 h > 0,
                                     h e + a1   h k1



                                          36
introducing the notation ksh = fsh + gsh , for all h and s. We can similarly write ch as
a ﬁxed fraction of ch01 , and express the maximized value of
                                                1
                                       ũ(ch ) + ũ1 (ch1 )
                                                2
as (1/2)ũ01(ch01 ), where the indirect utility function is of the form ũ (c) = α01 c−γ
where α01 is another positive constant.
   We can then write the ﬁrst sub-problem as the choice of (ch01 , ch2 ) to maximize
                                        1
                                Uh =      ũ01 (ch01 ) + ũ2 (ch2 ) ,                 (3.2)
                                        2
subject to the constraints

                              ch01 + a2 ch2 ≤ eh + a1 k1h + a2 k2h ,                  (3.3)

                                   ch2 ≥ g2h − θh φ(a2 )ωe3 .                         (3.4)
Here (3.4) is an alternative expression of the leverage constraint (2.14); φ(a2 ) is simply
the function φ(a) deﬁned earlier, in which the value a1 deﬁned in Lemma 4 has been
substituted for a1 . The solution to this two-stage problem will be one in which the
short-sale constraint (2.13) does not bind if and only if the solution (ch01 , ch2 ) to the
ﬁrst-stage problem is one for which

                p21 ch2 ≤ χp11 ch01 + (p21 eh21 − p11 eh11 ) − θh (p12 − p22 )ωe3 .   (3.5)

   We can then state necessary and suﬃcient conditions for an equilibrium in which
constraint (2.13) binds for no households.

Deﬁnition 3 A state price a2 and intertemporal expenditure plans (ch01 , ch2 ) for each
of the h ∈ H describe an equilibrium in which the short-sale constraint (2.13) binds
for no households if

  (i) for each h ∈ H, the plan (ch01 , ch2 ) maximizes the function U h deﬁned in (3.2),
      subject to the constraints (3.3)–(3.4);

 (ii) markets clear in state 2, so that
                                           
                                           H               
                                                           H
                                                 ch2   =         k2h ;                (3.6)
                                           h=1             h=1

      and

                                              37
(iii) inequality (3.5) is satisﬁed for each h ∈ H.

We need not add a corresponding market-clearing relation for aggregate expenditure
in the initial period and in state 1, as this is guaranteed by condition (ii) and Walras’
Law. We shall also say that we have an equilibrium neglecting short-sale constraints
if conditions (i)–(ii) are satisﬁed (but possibly not condition (iii)). This modiﬁed
equilibrium concept has the advantage of being more easily characterized, as shown
below.


3.2     Eﬀects of Asset Purchases with One Constrained
        Household
Explicit calculations of the eﬀects of central-bank asset purchases are especially simple
if we further restrict ourselves to the case of an economy made up of households of
only two types (h = 1, 2), assumed to exist in equal numbers.30 In the case of only two
households, the possible equilibrium allocations of expenditure, in any equilibria of
the kind deﬁned in Deﬁnition 3 can be represented using an Edgeworth Box diagram.
In Figure 3, the allocation between the two households of expenditure in the initial
period and in state 1 is indicated on the horizontal axis: movement to the right
indicates an increasing value of c101 , and a corresponding decreasing value of c201 , since
                                                         
in any feasible allocation these must sum to h eh +a1 h k1h , a quantity independent
of policy. Similarly, the allocation between the two households of expenditure in
state 2 of period 1 is indicated on the vertical axis: movement upward indicates an
increasing value of c12 , and a corresponding decreasing value of c22 , since these must
        
sum to h k2h , a quantity that is also independent of policy.
    The preferences of each household can be depicted by indiﬀerence curves in the
plane, representing the level curves of the indirect utility function U h deﬁned in
(3.2). In the ﬁgure, the indiﬀerence curves of household 1 are the ones that are
  30
    Note that there is no loss of generality in assuming that the number of households of the
two types are equal since, in the case of homothetic preferences, the only thing that matters for
equilibrium is the share of the aggregate endowment of each good that is controlled by households of
a given type, and not the number of households among whom the endowment is divided. Thus when
we refer to parameters such as e13 /e23 , they should be understood to specify the relative quantities
owned by households of the two types in aggregate, and not the relative size of the endowments of
individuals.


                                               38
                                ·
                                    E*


                                        E
                                    ·




                                                       ·
                                                           Ω




Figure 3: Possible equilibria in the case of two households and two states, shown in
an Edgeworth Box diagram. The equilibria at Ω, E and E ∗ correspond to diﬀering
degrees of tightness of the leverage constraint of household 2.

concave upward (solid curves), and indiﬀerence curves that are higher and farther
to the right represent higher expected utility for this household. The indiﬀerence
curves of household 2 are the ones that are concave downward (dashed curves), and
indiﬀerence curves that are lower and farther to the left represent higher expected
utility for household 2.
    Equilibria neglecting short-sale constraints can be characterized using this dia-
gram. The budget constraint (3.3) corresponds to a straight line with slope −1/a2 ,
passing through the endowment point Ω, which represents the allocation ch01 =
eh + a1 k1h , ch2 = k2h for each household. The location of this point is unaﬀected by


                                            39
changes in a2 or the central bank’s balance sheet. A household for which the leverage
constraint (3.4) does not bind must choose an expenditure plan on this line where the
line is tangent to one of its indiﬀerence curves. A household for which the leverage
constraint binds, instead, must choose the point on the line which reaches the high-
est indiﬀerence curve that is attainable given the lower bound on ch2 implied by the
leverage constraint. (Three possible budget lines, corresponding to diﬀerent values of
a2 , are shown in the ﬁgure.)
     An equilibrium in which the leverage constraint binds for neither type must cor-
respond to point E ∗ in Figure 3, as this is the unique point with the property that (i)
the indiﬀerence curves of the two types are tangent to each other at this point, and
(ii) the common tangent line to the two indiﬀerence curves passes through point Ω.
(It corresponds to the A-D equilibrium of this economy, which can easily be shown to
be unique given our assumption of homothetic preferences.) Point E ∗ will represent
an equilibrium neglecting short-sale constraints if when a2 has the value implied by
the slope of the budget line through point E ∗ , constraints (3.4) are satisﬁed for both
households. Speciﬁcally, the lower bound for c12 must correspond to a vertical height
not higher than point E ∗ , while the lower bound for c22 must correspond to a vertical
height not lower than point E ∗ . Since these constraints depend on the value of ω, this
condition may be satisﬁed for some values of ω but not for others.
     In the generic case (illustrated in the ﬁgure), the A-D equilibrium will not coincide
with the endowment point Ω. If so, the slopes of the indiﬀerence curves of the two
types through point Ω will be unequal; moreover, one must have an indiﬀerence curve
               −−→
steeper than ΩE ∗ , and the other an indiﬀerence curve that is ﬂatter. Without loss of
generality, let us suppose that
                                     k21           k22
                                             <             ,                        (3.7)
                                 e1 + a1 k11   e2 + a1 k12
so that household 1 has the ﬂatter indiﬀerence curve through point Ω, as shown in
the ﬁgure.
    An equilibrium in which the leverage constraint binds for household 2 only is
illustrated by point E in Figure 3. At this point, household 1’s indiﬀerence curve is
tangent to the budget line passing through the point, so this represents an allocation
that household 1 would choose (if a2 takes the value implied by the slope of the budget
line) if not constrained by its leverage constraint. Household 2, instead, would prefer
to move up and to the left on the budget line, as it could reach higher indiﬀerence

                                           40
curves in that case. However, point E can be a constrained optimum for household
2, if its leverage constraint requires c22 to be no lower than the value corresponding
to point E. Thus point E represents an equilibrium neglecting short-sale constraints,
if the leverage constraints imply a lower bound for c12 somewhere below the value
corresponding to the vertical height of point E, while they imply a lower bound for
c22 exactly equal to the corresponding to the vertical height of E. Since the heights of
these lower bounds depend on ω, there will be at most one precise value of ω for which
point E will be an equilibrium. The value of ω that is required is the unique value
that causes (3.4) to hold with equality for household 2 at the allocation represented
by point E.
      All equilibria of this kind must therefore correspond to points (like E) that lie on
the “oﬀer curve” of household 1, the set of pairs (c101 , c12 ) that maximize U 1 subject
to the budget constraint (3.3), for some value of the state price a2 > 0. This curve
passes through points Ω, E and E ∗ (in the case shown in the ﬁgure) as the value of a2
is progressively reduced (tilting the slope of the budget line passing through Ω). Each
point on the oﬀer curve between Ω and E ∗ corresponds to a diﬀerent lower bound
for c22 that would be required to support this allocation as an equilibrium neglecting
short-sale constraints, and hence to a diﬀerent value of ω that causes (3.4) to hold
with equality for household 2 at that point. Thus the diagram illustrates the way
in which a changing quantity of risky durables on the balance sheet of the central
bank can sweep out a one-parameter family of alternative equilibrium allocations,
corresponding to points on the oﬀer curve of household 1.
      Standard results on the properties of oﬀer curves then allow us to establish several
properties of this family of possible equilibrium allocations. For any value of a2 , let
c12 (a2 ) denote household 1’s desired level of expenditure in state 2 in the case of state
price a2 . The value of a2 for which the oﬀer curve passes through the A-D equilibrium
(point E ∗ ) is given by
                                         h           h γ
                                    α2      h e + a1     k
                                ∗
                               a2 =             h h 1          ;
                                    α01           h k2

                                     −−→
thus −1/a∗2 is the slope of the line ΩE ∗ in the ﬁgure. Similarly, the value of a2 for
which household 1’s oﬀer curve passes through the endowment point Ω is given by
                                                 γ
                             ∗∗    α2 e1 + a1 k11
                            a2 =                     > a∗2 .
                                   α01      k21

                                          41
(The budget line with this slope is also shown in the ﬁgure, as the ﬂattest of the three
dark straight lines passing through point Ω.) Moreover, c1∗        1 ∗
                                                            2 ≡ ĉ2 (a2 ), household 1’s
expenditure in state 2 in the A-D equilibrium, will necessarily be greater than k21 , as
also shown in the ﬁgure. We can then establish the following general result about
equilibria neglecting short-sale constraints.

Proposition 6 Consider a two-state model with two types of households with homo-
thetic preferences. Suppose that the endowment allocation is not Pareto optimal, and
let household 1 be identiﬁed by the inequality (3.7). Let the value of i ≥ 0 be ﬁxed,
but consider alternative possible balance-sheet policies.
    Then for any value of c12 in the interval

                                           k21 ≤ c12 ≤ c1∗
                                                        2 ,                           (3.8)

there is a unique value of a2 in the interval a∗2 ≤ a2 ≤ a∗∗            1          1
                                                          2 such that ĉ2 (a2 ) = c2 . If in
addition these values (c12 , a2 ) satisfy the bounds

                                 c ≤ c12 < c + θ 2 φ(a2 )e3 ,                         (3.9)

where                                                              
                                     p22                2        d
                            c≡                 e3 − θ                     + e121 ,
                                     p21                        p21
then there exists an asset-purchase policy 0 ≤ ω < 1 for which the point on household
1’s oﬀer curve corresponding to the values (c12 , a2 ) represents an equilibrium neglecting
short-sale constraints, in which household 2’s borrowing is constrained by the leverage
constraint (3.4), except in the limiting case in which c12 = c1∗    2 , but household 1 is
unconstrained.
    In the case of any c12 < c1∗
                              2 , the unique value of ω consistent with this equilibrium
is
                                         1     c12 − c
                                 ω = ω̂(c2 ) ≡ 2         e3 ,                        (3.10)
                                              θ φ(a2 )
while for the case c12 = c1∗                                      1∗
                          2 , any value of ω in the interval [ω̂(c2 ), 1) is consistent with
the equilibrium. The value of a2 associated with each of these possible equilibria is a
monotonically decreasing function of c12 . Moreover, a higher value of c12 is associated
with a lower value of the real price p3 /p1 for the durable, with the consequences for
other asset prices and rates of return stated in Proposition 5.


                                                 42
    This result establishes conditions under which there will exist a continuum of
distinct real allocations of resources, each of which corresponds to an equilibrium
neglecting short-sale constraints under an appropriate choice of ω. (Only one of these,
however, corresponds to an equilibrium in which the leverage constraints do not
bind for either household; thus the possibility of obtaining diﬀerent real allocations
and diﬀerent equilibrium asset prices through variation in the central bank’s asset
purchases depends on the fact that the leverage constraint binds for household 2.)
These will also correspond to distinct possible equilibria of the model with collateral
constraints, as long as the additional inequality constraints (3.5) do not bind. This
must be checked in addition to the conditions stated in Proposition 6; but since these
are inequalities, it is possible for a non-empty interval of values of c12 to satisfy both
of them, as we verify through a numerical example below.
    Under somewhat stronger assumptions, we can sign the relationship between the
change in the central bank’s balance sheet and the changes in the endogenous variables
that are related to one another in Proposition 6.

Lemma 5 If preferences are of the form (1.1)–(1.2) with γ ≤ 1, then the value of ω
deﬁned by (3.10) is an increasing function of c12 .

    In this case, over the range of values for c12 satisfying the hypotheses of Proposition
6, increases in central-bank holdings of the durable are associated with relaxations of
the leverage constraint of the constrained household (household 2) — i.e., a reduction
of the lower bound for c22 — as in the partial-equilibrium analysis shown in Figure
2(a). Hence increasing ω results in a movement up the oﬀer curve (away from the
endowment point Ω and toward the Pareto-optimal equilibrium E ∗ ), which must be
associated with a decrease in a2 .
    In such a case, we can give a clear answer to our questions about the eﬀects of
central-bank purchases on both asset prices and goods prices. If ω is increased while
i is held constant, then — over the range of variation in ω for which an equilibrium
exists in which constraints (3.5) do not bind — a2 must fall. Proposition 5 then
implies that the real price of the durable p3 /p1 falls, while its nominal price p3 rises;
that the expected return r dur rises, along with the expected return r on riskless debt,
but that the spread r̂ dur − r̂ decreased; and that the money prices of goods and
services in period 0 increase, so that aggregate nominal expenditure in period 0 also
increases.

                                          43
3.3    Welfare Consequences of Asset Purchases
We have shown in the previous section that under certain conditions, central-bank
purchases of the durable have a variety of eﬀects on real and nominal variables. This
means that this dimension of policy is not irrelevant, under circumstances where
the leverage constraints of some economic agents bind in equilibrium. Moreover,
our results show that the eﬀects of asset-purchase policy are distinct from those of
interest-rate policy. According to Proposition 1, changes in i have no eﬀect on any
real variables or relative prices, and only change the general level of prices in period
0. Our results above show, instead, that under certain conditions, central-bank asset
purchases change a variety of relative prices and real rates of return, in addition to
their eﬀects on the nominal prices of goods and services in period 0.
    But in judging how best to use this additional dimension of policy, it is important
to consider not merely whether asset prices are aﬀected, by how these price changes
aﬀect the welfare of economic agents. In fact, the mere fact that central-bank pur-
chases of the durable can loosen a household’s leverage constraint does not always
imply that the household beneﬁts from such a policy. Consider the shift from equilib-
rium E to equilibrium E ∗ in Figure 3, which results from an increase in central-bank
holdings of the durable (under the assumption made in Lemma 5), that reduces the
lower bound on c22 for household 2. In this example, household 2 is the one whose
collateral constraint binds in equilibrium, and the constraint is relaxed — indeed,
it ceases to bind, if purchases are suﬃcient to shift the equilibrium all the way to
point E ∗ . In the absence of any price changes, the situation of household 2 would
be the one depicted in Figure 2(a), and the household would clearly beneﬁt. But in
fact, in the case shown in Figure 3, the expected utility of household 2 is reduced by
the policy. This results from the adverse eﬀect on household 2 of the price changes
resulting from the policy: these leveraged investors suﬀer an income loss when the
real market price of the debt that they issue falls by more than does the real market
price of the risky assets that they purchase, and this loss more than oﬀsets the gain
from relaxation of the leverage constraint.
    On the other hand, household 1 beneﬁts from the policy change, even though
household 1’s collateral constraint does not bind. The income eﬀect of the price
changes is positive for household 1, for the same reason that it is negative for house-
hold 2. One’s conclusion about the desirability of the policy change will therefore


                                         44
depend on the relative weight placed on the welfare of households in the two situa-
tions.
    In fact, the eﬀects of central-bank asset purchases on the welfare of the constrained
household depend on how sharply this household is constrained by its leverage con-
straint; that is, on how close the equilibrium allocation is to the A-D allocation (the
allocation in the limiting case in which the leverage constraint no longer binds).

Proposition 7 In any equilibrium neglecting short-sale constraints of the kind de-
scribed in Proposition 6, the expected utility of household h is given by Û h (c12 ), the
value of the function U h deﬁned in (3.2) evaluated at the point in the Edgeworth
Box that is the unique point on the oﬀer curve of household 1 with this value of
c12 . The function Û 1 (c12 ) is a monotonically increasing function of c12 over the entire
range (3.8); thus if asset purchases by the central bank relax the leverage constraint
of household 2 (as under the hypothesis of Lemma 5), raising the equilibrium value of
c12 , they necessarily increase the welfare of household 1. The function Û 2 (c12 ), instead,
is non-monotonic. In particular, it is necessarily monotonically increasing for values
of c12 close enough to k21 , but monotonically decreasing for values of c12 close enough to
c1∗                                                                        2 1∗         2 1
  2 . Over the entire range (3.8), it is on average increasing, since Û (c2 ) > Û (k2 ).


    This result shows that the fact that in moving from equilibrium E to equilibrium
E ∗ in Figure 3, the result that household 2 is harmed by the policy that relaxes its
leverage constraint is no error in the drafting of the ﬁgure; this is necessarily the case
if the asset-purchase policy moves the economy to the A-D equilibrium E ∗ from any
suﬃciently nearby equilibrium E in which household 2’s leverage constraint binds.
However, the proposition also implies that it is possible for an increase in the central
bank’s holdings of the durable to increase the welfare of both types of households.
This possibility is illustrated by a movement from equilibrium Ω to equilibrium E
in Figure 3. Note that point Ω is also a potential leverage-constrained equilibrium,
corresponding to the case in which household 2’s leverage constraint requires c22 to be
at least as large as k22 .
    Central-bank purchases of the durable can move the equilibrium from point Ω to
point E, again by reducing the lower bound for c22 implied by household 2’s lever-
age constraint (3.4), though not by enough for household 2’s leverage constraint to
cease to bind. In the case shown in the ﬁgure, equilibrium E is strictly preferred by
both households to the original equilibrium Ω; hence there would be a clear beneﬁt

                                            45
from central-bank asset purchases in this case. This result depends on the indiﬀer-
ence curves of household 2 being a good deal steeper than those of household 1, in
both equilibria; in other words, the Lagrange multiplier associated with the leverage
constraint for household 2 is substantial in the situation depicted.
    Figure 3 only illustrates the possibility of a Pareto improvement to the extent
that the equilibria neglecting short-sale constraints shown in the ﬁgure are actually
equilibria of the model with collateral constraints; that is, that the short-sale con-
straints (3.5) are satisﬁed for both households in the allocations corresponding to
both points Ω and E. We show through numerical examples in the next section that
Pareto improvements of this kind can indeed occur.


4    Distortions             Resulting             from         Central-Bank
     Monopolization of Collateral
In the previous section, we have emphasized the possibility of equilibria in which the
collateral constraints bind for some households in the way shown in Figure 2(a) —
what we have called a binding leverage constraint — rather than binding in the way
shown in Figure 2(b), the case of a binding short-sale constraint. This does not mean,
however, that the short-sale constraint cannot also be relevant in equilibrium; our
numerical examples below show that either or both of the two types of constraints may
bind, depending on parameter values. Indeed, it is worth remarking that suﬃciently
large asset purchases by the central bank will almost certainly create a situation in
which many households are constrained in the way shown in Figure 2(b).
    When ω approaches 1, so that most of the durable is held by the central bank,
equilibrium will necessarily involve many households holding more riskless assets than
durables, so that they will be at a position not far from the upper boundary of the
grey region shown in Figures 1 and 2. (Recall that the upper boundary corresponds
to portfolios made up solely of riskless assets.) Equilibrium will require asset prices
that lead households to choose points in that region; and assuming some degree of
heterogeneity in the endowment patters of the diﬀerent households, it will almost
certainly be the case that many households are driven entirely to the boundary (so
that they would like to short the durable, at the equilibrium prices, but are unable
to), while the (now very expensive) durable is held only by those households with


                                        46
the greatest desire to shift more income into state 1 than into state 2. Hence except
in very special cases (such as the one assumed in Proposition 4), as ω → 1, one
will eventually have an equilibrium in which the short-sale constraint binds for many
households, while none may be constrained in the way shown in Figure 2(a).
    This will mean that while the central bank will still be able to further increase the
price of the durable by purchasing more of it, these eﬀects will surely be achieved by
tightening traders’ ﬁnancial constraints, rather than relaxing them. Moreover, this
tightening of ﬁnancial constraints will necessarily reduce welfare for many (though
not necessarily all) households. If nearly all collateral is held by the central bank, risk-
sharing between households ceases to be possible, as does borrowing; households can
only obtain an expenditure pattern diﬀerent from that determined by their endow-
ments by accumulating riskless assets. In addition to preventing mutually beneﬁcial
trades, the fact that the policy raises the price of the durable good redistributes pe-
riod 0 income from households with shares of the aggregate endowment of durables
less than θh to households with shares greater than θh . The latter beneﬁt from this
redistribution, but the former are hurt. Thus central-bank asset purchases on too
large a scale will necessarily have signiﬁcant costs, owing to the impairment of the
functioning of ﬁnancial markets that predictably results from an induced scarcity of
collateral.
    We illustrate this point with two numerical examples. In each of the examples,
there are two states in period 1, and the economy has two types of household h = 1, 2,
each with a utility function of the form

                                      
                                      2
                                                        1 
                                                           2   2
                              h
                            u (x) =          log(xl ) +           log(xsl ).                  (4.1)
                                       l=1
                                                        2 s=1 l=1

Note that preferences of this form are an example of the general form (1.1)–(1.2)
assumed above, corresponding to the value γ = 1. This the stronger preference hy-
pothesis of Lemma 5 is also satisﬁed, so that all of our analytical results above apply
to the examples considered here (and in the Appendix).
    In our ﬁrst example, we assume that both households have equal endowments of
both the non-durable and durable goods in period 0, and that initial endowments
of government debt (that are in any event very small) and tax shares are equal as
well.31 Thus the two household types diﬀer only with regard to the distribution
  31
       See the discussion of “Example 1” in the Appendix for further details of the numerical speci-

                                                  47
of their endowments of the non-durable good in period 1. To make this diﬀerence
especially stark, we suppose that in state 1, only household 1 has a positive non-
durable endowment, while in state 2, only household 2 has a positive non-durable
endowment.32
    We assume a period-1 monetary policy commitment to achieve the same inﬂation
rate regardless of the state, so that p11 = p21 ; hence the riskless nominal contracts are
also riskless in real terms (in units of the non-durable good). We assume instead that
the aggregate non-durable good endowment in state 1 is 15/7 times the aggregate
endowment of the durable good, while in state 2 it is only 6/7 times the durable
endowment; this implies that p12 /p11 = 15/7 in state 1, while p22 /p21 = 6/7 in state
2. Thus the nominal value of the durable in state 2 is only 40 percent of its value
in state 1. The collateral requirement for debt that defaults in state 2 but not in
state 1 is accordingly C1 = 7/15, while the collateral requirement for riskless debt is
C2 = 7/6.
    In Figure 4, we consider how equilibrium varies as the value of ω varies from zero
to 1, ﬁxing the endowment patters as above.33 Panel (a) shows how p1 and p3 vary
as ω increases; the graphs show the amount by which the log of each price changes,
relative to the equilibrium prices when the central bank holds none of the durable.
(Thus the vertical distance between the two curves also shows how the log of the
relative price p3 /p1 changes.) Panel (b) shows how the expected utilities of the two
household types vary as a result of changes in the allocation of risk; here the expected
utility of each is measured relative to its expected utility when the central bank holds
none of the durable.
    In this numerical example, the short-sale constraint of household 1 binds for all
values of ω, but no other collateral constraints bind. (Household 1 would like to short
the durable and instead hold a long position in the riskless asset, because its endow-
ment risk is positively correlated with the return on the durable.34 ) As illustrated by
ﬁcation. As shown by Lemma 7 in the Appendix, our qualitative conclusions about the eﬀects of
central-bank purchases depend only on the households’ shares of the aggregate endowment, and not
on the size of the aggregate endowments in each state.
  32
     The implications of alternative assumptions about the two households’ relative endowments in
the two period-1 states are treated in the Appendix.
  33
     We use the algorithm described in Schommer (2013) to numerically solve for the collateral-
constrained equilibrium associated with each possible parameter conﬁguration.
  34
     See further discussion of this example in the Appendix.



                                             48
                                           (a)                                                                                (b)
                0.02                                                                                 0
                                             p3
                   0                                                                                                                 Household 2
                                                                                                  -0.05
                -0.02


                -0.04                                                                              -0.1




                                                                       Expected utility changes
                -0.06                                                                                                  Household 1
Price changes




                                                                                                  -0.15
                                             p1
                -0.08

                                                                                                   -0.2
                 -0.1


                -0.12                                                                             -0.25

                -0.14
                                                                                                   -0.3
                -0.16


                -0.18                                                                             -0.35
                        0   0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9   1                                       0   0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9   1
                                            ω                                                                                 ω


Figure 4: Eﬀects of variation in ω for Example 1: (a) eﬀects on prices; (b) welfare
consequences.

Figure 2(b), it follows that central-bank purchases of the durable will further tighten
the short-sale constraints of households of type 1, rather than loosening ﬁnancial
conditions. In this example, further central-bank purchases of the durable also pro-
gressively reduce aggregate nominal spending, as shown by the monotonic decline in
p1 in panel (a). Nonetheless, the price p3 of the durable is increased, until central-
bank holdings of the durable reach nearly 60 percent of the total supply. Thus the
mere fact that asset purchases raise the price of the asset is not suﬃcient to imply
that such purchases increase aggregate demand.
    Nor does it suﬃce for one to conclude that welfare is increased. As shown in panel
(b) of Figure 4, the welfare of household 1 is monotonically decreasing in ω in this
example, over the entire feasible range of values. The welfare of household 2 is also
decreasing as ω increases, until the central bank already holds more than 80 percent of
the total supply, though for very high values of ω, further asset purchases raise these

                                                                  49
households’ level of expected utility somewhat. Thus everyone’s welfare is reduced,
in all of the cases in which the policy raises the price of the durable; however, at
least some can beneﬁt, when the policy reduces the asset price to a suﬃcient extent.
Even in this last case, however, the reduction in the welfare of type 1 as ω increases
is greater than the increase in the welfare of type 2; and the equilibria with very
high values of ω are in any event Pareto dominated by those with low values of ω
(even if they are not Pareto dominated by the equilibria associated with only slightly
lower values of ω). Hence in this example, central-bank asset purchases are clearly
undesirable.
    In the case of alternative endowment patterns, some households may instead be
“natural buyers” of the risky asset who are constrained (by the collateral require-
ment) in their ability to make as large a leveraged position in this asset as they
would otherwise wish, as in Figure 2(a). Consider an example in which aggregate
endowments are the same as in the previous example, and period-0 endowments of
the non-durable good are again equal for the two types; but suppose now that only
households of type 2 are initially endowed with the durable. Let us also assume now
that in state 1, only household 2 has a positive non-durable endowment, while the
non-durable endowments are equal for the two types in state 2. We also now assume
asymmetric tax shares: θ1 = 0.9, θ2 = 0.1.35
    The fact that household 1 has a period-1 endowment only in state 2 means that
holding the durable will allow this type of household to hedge its endowment risk, so
that these households become “natural buyers” of the asset. The fact they have no
initial endowment of the durable, and only a tiny initial endowment of government
debt, means furthermore that they need to borrow in order to ﬁnance purchases of
the risky asset. Under our parametric assumptions, if we start from a situation in
which the central bank holds suﬃciently little of the durable, households of type 1
wish to purchase so much of the durable that their leverage constraint binds. No
other constraint binds, and so we have a leverage-constrained equilibrium of the
kind characterized in section 3. Central-bank purchases of the durable then relax
the leverage constraint of the type 1 households, with the consequences described




                                        50
                                            (a)                                                                                (b)
                0.08                                                                               0.08
                                              p1                                                                            Household 1

                0.07                                                                               0.06


                                                                                                   0.04
                0.06

                                                                                                   0.02




                                                                        Expected utility changes
                0.05                                                                                                        Household 2
Price changes




                                              p3
                                                                                                      0
                0.04
                                                                                                   -0.02

                0.03
                                                                                                   -0.04

                0.02
                                                                                                   -0.06

                0.01                                                                               -0.08


                     0                                                                              -0.1
                         0   0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9   1                                       0   0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9   1
                                             ω                                                                                 ω


Figure 5: Eﬀects of variation in ω for Example 2: (a) eﬀects on prices; (b) welfare
consequences.

earlier.36
    The eﬀects of variation in ω over its entire feasible range are shown in Figure
5, using the same format as Figure 4. As long as the central bank owns less than
32 percent of the total supply of the durable, the leverage constraint for household
1 continues to bind, and no other ﬁnancial constraints bind.37 Over this range, in
accordance with Proposition 6), p1 and p3 both increase with further central-bank
purchases, though the relative price p3 /p1 falls, as shown in Figure 5(a) by the fact
that ln p3 increases less steeply than does ln p1 .
                35
     The numerical assumptions made are described in greater detail in the Appendix.
                36
     The larger tax share for type 1 in this example ampliﬁes the eﬀects of central-bank asset pur-
chases on the collateral constraints of this type; recall that the shifts in the feasible regions shown
in Figure 2 are proportional to θh .
  37
     The dependence of this result on the exact nature of the second-period endowment pattern is
explored in the Appendix.


                                                                   51
    Initially (until the central bank owns about 28 percent of the durables), the lever-
age constraint of household 1 binds to a suﬃcient extent for the welfare of both types
to be increased by a modest increase in central-bank holdings of the durable, so that
a Pareto improvement is achieved.38 (The eﬀects of asset purchases are like those re-
sulting from a movement from equilibrium Ω to equilibrium E in Figure 3, but with
the roles of the two households reversed.) But as the leverage constraint of house-
hold 1 is relaxed to a suﬃcient extent (and the A-D allocation is approached), the
adverse income eﬀect of the relative-price change dominates the beneﬁt to household
1 of relaxation of the constraint. The expected utility of household 1 then decreases
with additional central-bank purchases, though the expected utility of household 2
continues to rise, in accordance with Proposition 7.
    Yet even in this example — constructed so as to illustrate the possibility of a
relaxation of ﬁnancial constraints through central-bank asset purchases — further
purchases, beyond a certain point, cease to have this eﬀect. Once the central bank
owns more than 32 percent of the durable, neither household’s leverage constraint
binds any longer, and the A-D allocation results. In this case, neither prices nor the
allocation of resources are aﬀected by further central-bank purchases (up until the
bank owns 79 percent of the total supply), in accordance with Proposition 3, resulting
in ﬂat regions of the plots in both panels of Figure 5.
    And if the central bank continues to increase its share beyond 79 percent, the
collateral constraint of household 1 binds again — but now in the way shown in
Figure 2(b); that is, it is the short-sale constraint (2.13) that now binds. Because of
the central bank’s losses on its large holdings of the durable in state 2, tax obligations
are substantially higher in state 2 than in state 1; and because of the eﬀects of this
on after-tax income, household 1 eventually no longer wishes to hold the durable as a
hedge, and instead would prefer to short the durable (or issue debt on which it could
default in state 2), if the collateral constraint did not prevent this.
    In the numerical example, the short-sale constraint eventually binds for household
1 rather than household 2, because of the assumed distribution of tax obligations:
households of type 1 are assumed to pay 90 percent of the taxes, and therefore are
more strongly aﬀected by the central bank’s balance-sheet risk. While the equilibrium
allocation of resources does not change as ω increases from 32 percent to 79 percent,
  38
    The range of second-period endowment patterns for which a Pareto improvement results is also
explored in the Appendix.


                                             52
household 1’s holdings of the durable steadily decline, as the amount of this asset
needed to achieve its desired balance of after-tax income between states 1 and 2 falls,
reaching zero as ω reaches 79 percent.
     Beyond this point, further central-bank purchases cause household 1’s short-sale
constraint to bind ever more tightly. As in the example shown in Figure 4, central-
bank asset purchases reduce aggregate demand (and hence the equilibrium price level
p1 ) in this case, even though they succeed in increasing the price of the durable p3 ,
as shown in Figure 5(a). Moreover, the welfare of household 1 is reduced by the
tighter ﬁnancial constraint, as seen in Figure 5(b). Household 2 continues to beneﬁt
from the higher relative price of the durable, as household 2 sells all of the durables
purchased by the central bank; but household 1’s budget suﬀers, as household 1 bears
a disproportionate share of the burden of paying for the central bank’s losses on the
transactions that have been so proﬁtable for household 2. Household 1’s losses are
a consequence of two factors: the income redistribution to household 2, but also the
progressive reduction in risk-sharing between the two households, as household 1 is
forced to accept an after-tax income pattern that is skewed further toward greater
income in state 1 (the state in which the central bank’s risky assets pay oﬀ well) than
is that of household 2. Though in this example household 2 continues to beneﬁt from
additional central-bank purchases, even when ω is already large, household 1 suﬀers
a substantial welfare loss.
     Thus even in the case of an endowment pattern for which central-bank asset
purchases of a modest size are clearly beneﬁcial, it remains the case that too large
a quantity of asset purchases by the central bank will be harmful. In fact, in the
example shown in Figure 5, it is the “natural buyers” of the risky asset who are
eventually harmed — to such an extent that their welfare is lower for high values of
ω than if there had been no asset purchases by the central bank at all.


5    Conclusions
We have considered the consequences of central-bank purchases of a risky asset, which
is also the asset used as collateral for private debt contracts, in a general-equilibrium
asset pricing model with endogenous collateral constraints. We have shown that it is
possible for purchases of such an asset by the central bank to increase its equilibrium
price, as has been the intention of recent central-bank asset-purchase programs. Yet

                                         53
as elementary as such a conclusion might seem, we have found that it will not obtain
under all circumstances. In our model, if there exists a suﬃcient level of collateral
for no household’s collateral constraint to bind in equilibrium, central-bank asset
purchases will have no eﬀect on equilibrium asset prices, as the ﬁscal consequences of
the changes in the central bank’s state-contingent revenues provide households with
a hedging motive to adjust their portfolios in ways that, in aggregate, will perfectly
oﬀset the trades by the central bank.39 Moreover, even when this is not true, owing
to a greater degree of heterogeneity in the situations of diﬀerent households, the mere
fact that collateral constraints bind and that central-bank purchases alter ﬁnancial
conditions does not imply that the price of the asset purchased by the central bank
will necessarily increase. It is possible, instead, for it to decrease.40 And even when
purchases increase the nominal price of the asset (p3 ), they do not necessarily increase
its real price (p3 /p1 ).41 To the extent that the goal of policy is to lower real yields on
assets in order to encourage borrowing and discourage saving, asset purchases fail to
achieve the desired goal in the latter case, even though collateral constraints bind.
    We have also shown that the eﬀects of asset purchases are not equivalent to those
of adjusting the central bank’s nominal interest-rate target by a certain amount.
This means that the mere fact that a central bank is prevented from lowering the
nominal interest rate as much as it would wish to, owing to the zero lower bound,
does not suﬃce to imply that asset purchases are desirable. On the other hand, the
non-equivalence of these two types of policies also means that the mere fact that
interest-rate policy is available (because the lower bound has not been reached) does
not necessarily imply that there is no reason to consider asset purchases. In principle,
multiple objectives can be more fully achieved when multiple (non-equivalent) policy
instruments are available. In particular, asset-purchase policies may be of interest
because they can aﬀect the size of distortions associated with ﬁnancial constraints,
and hence the eﬃciency of risk sharing, in addition to their consequences for aggre-
gate demand. When a central bank is free to adjust policy along both dimensions
independently, it may make sense to use unconventional policy mainly to inﬂuence
the allocation of risk, while the consequences of the central bank’s asset purchases
  39
     See Proposition 3 above.
  40
     See, for example, the case in which the central bank owns more than 60 percent of the total
supply of the asset, in Figure 4(a) above.
  41
     See, for example, Proposition 6, and the case illustrated in Figure 5(a), when the central bank
owns less than 32 percent of the total supply.


                                               54
for aggregate demand are oﬀset by a suitable adjustment of the interest-rate target.
    However, it is important to note that the eﬀects of unconventional policy on the
market price of the asset acquired by the central bank is not suﬃcient information
from which to draw a conclusion as to whether the policy will be successful at “easing
ﬁnancial conditions,” increasing aggregate demand, or preventing unwanted disinﬂa-
tion or deﬂation. When collateral constraints bind, one cannot say in general whether
purchases of the risky asset by the central bank will loosen households’ borrowing
constraints, or instead tighten them. This depends on whether the constraints bind
in the way shown in Figure 2(a) or in the way shown in Figure 2(b).42 It follows
that even when asset purchases increase the real price of the asset, one cannot con-
clude that the corresponding intertemporal marginal rate of substitution (IMRS) is
reduced for everyone in the economy; for if the increase in the real price of the asset
is associated with a tightening of the short-sale constraints of some households (as in
the example shown in Figure 4 for values of ω less than 0.7, or the example shown in
Figure 5 for values of ω greater than 0.8), then the wedge between these households’
IMRS and the reciprocal of the asset price increases, so that an increase in the asset
price need not imply a decrease in every household’s IMRS.
    We have also shown that asset purchases do not necessarily raise p1 , the general
price level in period 0,43 even when they increase the real price of the durable.44 This
means that when the central bank is unable to use conventional interest-rate policy
to prevent deﬂation, or unwanted disinﬂation, due to the zero lower bound on i, a
resort to asset purchases will not necessarily be of any help — these may lower the
equilibrium price level still further.45 In such a case, central-bank asset purchases also
lower aggregate nominal expenditure (on goods and services, as opposed to assets) in
period 0 — the “aggregate demand” that interest-rate cuts are intended to increase.
  42
     Of course, it is possible for constraints of both types to bind in a given equilibrium, as some of
our numerical examples illustrate.
  43
     Recall that under our assumption of homothetic preferences, p1 and p2 must change in the same
proportion, so that the change in log p1 is also the change in the log of an index of the prices of
both non-durable goods and the services received from durable goods, i.e., the entire household
consumption basket in period 0.
  44
     See Figure 4, and Figure 5 for the case of ω greater than 0.8.
  45
     Of course, if there is suﬃcient collateral for households’ constraints not to bind, asset purchases
have no eﬀect on the price level of either sign — just as they have no eﬀect on other asset prices, or
on the equilibrium allocation of resources.



                                                55
    Because we assume an endowment economy, a reduction in nominal aggregate
demand has no consequences for the aggregate quantity of goods that are produced
and consumed; but in an extension of the model with an endogenous supply of goods
in period 0 and sticky wages or prices, the reduction of nominal aggregate demand
can translate into reduced output — again, the opposite of what a cut in the nominal
interest rate (if one is possible) would achieve.46 This it is not always even approx-
imately correct to view asset purchases as a substitute for an interest-rate cut, that
can be used even when an interest-rate cut is precluded by the zero lower bound.
Moreover, while the conditions that determine which types of eﬀects asset purchases
will have are complex, our numerical examples suggest that asset purchases typically
reduce aggregate demand (and lower the price level) when some households are short-
sale constrained, and none are leverage-constrained — and this case is quite likely to
arise once the central bank owns a suﬃciently large share of the total supply of the
asset.
    These conclusions make the welfare consequences of central-bank asset purchases
complex to assess. In our ﬂexible-price model, there are no eﬀects of monetary policy
(whether conventional or unconventional) on output, nor are there any consequences
of changes in the general price level for household utility. Hence our analysis of the
consequences of policy for household utility takes account only of the consequences of
policy for the eﬃciency of the equilibrium consumption allocation, owing to changes
in the size of the ﬁnancial wedges that separate the IMRS of diﬀerently situated
households, and for the redistributions of income among households that may result
from changes in equilibrium asset prices. We have seen that ﬁnancial constraints
may be either tightened or loosened by central-bank asset purchases, depending on
the way in which households are constrained. If households are prevented from is-
suing as much riskless debt as they would like, central-bank asset purchases relax
this constraint and hence reduce the associated distortion (Figure 2(a)); but if in-
stead households are preventing from shorting the risky asset, central-bank purchases
tighten this constraint and increase the associated distortion (Figure 2(b)). In the
former case, at least one type of household beneﬁts from the more eﬃcient alloca-
tion of resources, but some may be hurt, owing to the redistributive eﬀects of price
changes (the passage from E to E ∗ in Figure 3); only under certain more special
circumstances will the purchases result in a Pareto improvement (as in the passage
 46
      We leave the analysis of this extended model for a separate paper.


                                                56
from Ω to E in Figure 3). When short-sale constraints bind, the welfare of at least
some households must be reduced by the increase in ﬁnancial distortions as a result
of central-bank purchases; and while at least some households may beneﬁt from the
associated price changes (as illustrated by the high-ω region of Figure 5), in other
cases the welfare of all households will be reduced (as illustrated by Figure 4).
    These conclusions about welfare do not take account of any desire on the part
of the central bank to inﬂuence aggregate spending or the general level of prices. If
interest-rate policy can be used to oﬀset the policy’s eﬀects on aggregate demand,
these may not be the consequences of interest in any event (except in order to de-
termine how interest-rate policy must be adjusted in light of the asset purchases).
But when interest-rate policy is constrained by the zero lower bound, this argument
will not apply; and in fact, the unconventional policies undertaken by central banks
recently have primarily been motivated the hope that these policies can increase
aggregate demand and prevent unwanted disinﬂation or deﬂation. In order to ana-
lyze the desirability of unconventional policy under such circumstances, we should
consider not only the eﬀects of household purchases on the utilities of the various
households in our model, but also the eﬀects of aggregate expenditure (or the general
price level, p1 ) in period 0. In the case that only leverage constraints bind (in our
two-household model), we have seen that asset purchases raise p1 , which is a further
beneﬁt of the policy in this case. (In an extended model with nominal rigidities, the
conditions required for a Pareto improvement are likely to be somewhat weaker than
in the analysis here, as all households could beneﬁt from higher utilization of pro-
ductive capacity in period 0.) But when (only) short-sale constraints bind instead,
our examples indicate that asset purchases reduce aggregate demand and the general
level of prices — which would be an additional negative eﬀect of the policy, under
circumstances where aggregate demand is already insuﬃcient, owing to a binding
lower bound on the nominal interest rate.
    It thus matters greatly, in judging the likely beneﬁts of central-bank asset pur-
chases, which sorts of ﬁnancial constraints bind, and to what extent. The mere fact
that aggregate demand is judged to be insuﬃcient in the absence of such purchases
(or given the quantity of purchases that have already been made) is not a suﬃcient
ground for expecting additional purchases to have a desirable eﬀect. First, the eﬀects
of the purchases on the degree to which ﬁnancial constraints bind also matters for
welfare, apart from the consequences for aggregate demand; and second, the eﬀects


                                        57
of asset purchases on aggregate demand cannot be predicted, without taking into
account the way in which they will tighten or loosen the ﬁnancial constraints of dif-
ferently situated parties. Nor can these questions be answered simply by observing
whether central-bank purchases succeed in raising the market price of the assets pur-
chased; the price p3 of the asset purchased by the central bank may increase either in
a case in which ﬁnancial constraints are loosened and aggregate demand is increased
(Figure 5(a) when ω < 0.32), or in a case in which ﬁnancial constraints are tightened
and aggregate demand is reduced (Figure 4(a) when ω < 0.59, or Figure 5(a) when
ω > 0.79). Thus our analysis suggests that such policies should be undertaken only
on the basis of a careful analysis of the consequences of the policies for the allocation
of risk through the ﬁnancial system, and not simply on the basis of an assessment
of the current output or unemployment gap and of the degree to which central-bank
purchases seem to aﬀect market prices.
    While our model’s general implications for the eﬀects of asset purchases on ﬁnan-
cial constraints are diﬃcult to summarize, one fairly simple conclusion is worth noting.
Regardless of whether asset purchases on a modest scale relax ﬁnancial constraints
or tighten them, or model implies that continued asset purchases by the central bank
will eventually result in a situation where many households are constrained in their
ability to short the asset acquired by the central bank. Once a suﬃcient fraction of the
total supply of the asset is held by the central bank, it becomes almost inevitable that
the primary eﬀect of further purchases will be to tighten ﬁnancial constraints, rather
than to loosen them, and to contract aggregate demand, rather than to increase it.
Thus even under circumstances where asset purchases on a suﬃciently modest scale
are clearly beneﬁcial (as in the numerical example considered in Figure 5), at some
point further asset purchases of the same kind become counter-productive from both
microeconomic (eﬃcient risk-sharing) and macroeconomic (aggregate-demand man-
agement) perspectives. Central banks would thus do well to avoid the trap of thinking
that if asset-purchase policies have proven useful, even larger-scale purchases must
always be better.




                                         58
References
 [1] Adrian, Tobias, and Hyun Song Shin, “Financial Intermediaries and Monetary
     Economics,” in B.M. Friedman and M. Woodford, eds., Handbook of Monetary
     Economics, vol. 3A, Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2010.

 [2] Araújo, Aloı́sio, José Fajardo, and Mário R. Páscoa, “Endogenous Collateral,”
     Journal of Mathematical Economics 41: 439-462 (2005).

 [3] Araújo, Aloı́sio, Felix Kubler, and Susan Schommer, “Regulating Collateral when
     Markets are Incomplete,” Journal of Economic Theory 147: 450-476 (2012).

 [4] Araújo, Aloı́sio, Jaime Orrillo, and Mário R. Páscoa, “Equilibrium with Default
     and Endogenous Collateral,” Mathematical Finance 10: 1-21 (2000).

 [5] Araújo, Aloı́sio, Mário R. Páscoa, and Juan Pablo Torres-Martinez, “Collateral
     Avoids Ponzi Schemes in Incomplete Markets,” Econometrica 70: 1613-1638
     (2002).

 [6] Bernanke, Ben S., “The Crisis and the Policy Response,” Stamp Lec-
     ture, London School of Economics, January 13, 2009. [Available online at:
     http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20090113a.htm]

 [7] Bowman, David, Etienne Gagnon, and Mike Leahy, “Interest on Excess Reserves
     as a Monetary Policy Instrument: The Experience of Foreign Central Banks,”
     International Finance Discussion Paper no. 996, Federal Reserve Board, March
     2010.

 [8] Brunnermeier, Markus, “Deciphering the Liquidity and Credit Crunch 2007-08,”
     Journal of Economic Perspectives, 23(1): 77-100 (2009).

 [9] Cúrdia, Vasco, and Michael Woodford, “The Central-Bank Balance Sheet as
     an Instrument of Monetary Policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics 58: 54-79
     (2011).

[10] Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Michael Woodford, “The Zero Bound on Interest
     Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
     2003:1, pp. 139-211.


                                        59
[11] Fostel, Ana, and John Geanakoplos, “Leverage and Default in Binomial
     Economies: A Complete Characterization,” Cowles Foundation Discussion Pa-
     per no. 1877R, revised July 2013.

[12] Gagnon, Joseph, Matthew Raskin, Julie Remache, Brian Sack, “Large-Scale
     Asset Purchases by the Federal Reserve: Did They Work?” Federal Reserve
     Bank of New York Staﬀ Report no. 441, March 2010.

[13] Geanakoplos, John, “Promises, Promises,” in W.B. Arthur, S. Durlauf, and D.
     Lane, eds., The Economy as a Complex, Evolving System, II, Reading, MA:
     Addison-Wesley, 1997.

[14] Geanakoplos, John, “The Leverage Cycle,” in D. Acemoglu, K. Rogoﬀ, and M.
     Woodford, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2009, Chicago: University of
     Chicago Press, 2010.

[15] Geanakoplos, John, and William R. Zame, “Collateral Equilibrium: A Basic
     Framework,” Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper no. 1906, August 2013.

[16] Gertler, Mark, and Peter Karadi, “A Model of Unconventional Monetary Policy,”
     Journal of Monetary Economics 58: 17-34 (2011).

[17] Gertler, Mark, and Peter Karadi, “QE1 vs. 2 vs. 3...: A Framework for Analyzing
     Large-Scale Asset Purchases as a Monetary Policy Tool,” International Journal
     of Central Banking 9 (S1): 5-53 (2013).

[18] Gorton, Gary, and Andrew Metrick, “Securitized Banking and the Run on
     Repo,” Journal of Financial Economics 104: 425-451 (2012).

[19] Schommer, Susan, “Computing General Equilibrium with Incomplete Markets,
     Collateral and Default Penalties,” Annals of Operations Research 206: 367-383
     (2013).

[20] Wallace, Neil, “A Modigliani-Miller Theorem for Open-Market Operations,”
     American Economic Review 71: 267-274 (1981).

[21] Woodford, Michael, Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary
     Policy, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2003.


                                       60
