NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EFFECT OF PATIENT COST SHARING ON UTILIZATION, HEALTH, AND
RISK PROTECTION
Hitoshi Shigeoka
Working Paper 19726
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19726
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2013

This project is supported by a research grant from the Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare (H22policy-033, Principle Investigator: Kenji Shibuya and co-investigator: Hideki Hashimoto). The use
of data in this paper is approved by Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare under this grant. I am
especially grateful to Douglas Almond for his continuous encouragement through my entire dissertation.
I benefited from the suggestions and comments by Janet Currie, Tal Gross, Hideki Hashimoto, Mariesa
Herrmann, Takakazu Honryo, Wojciech Kopczuk, Amanda Kowalski, Ilyana Kuziemko, Frank Lichtenberg,
Adriana Lleras-Muney, Bentley MacLeod, Robin McKnight, Marcos Yamada Nakaguma, Matt Neidell,
Krishna Pendakur, Cristian Pop-Eleches, Bernard Salanie, Louise Sheiner, Yoichi Sugita, Miguel Urquiola,
Eric Verhoogen, Till von Wachter, and the seminar participants at Bank of Japan, Columbia University,
Hitotsubashi University, Kobe University, McGill University, Ministry of Finance Japan, National
University of Singapore, Simon Fraser University, University of Michigan, Uppsala University, NBER
Summer Institute, and NBER/CRIW Conference. The views expressed herein are that of the author
and do not necessarily reflect the views of Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare. All errors are my
own. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Hitoshi Shigeoka. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

The Effect of Patient Cost Sharing on Utilization, Health, and Risk Protection
Hitoshi Shigeoka
NBER Working Paper No. 19726
December 2013
JEL No. I1,I11,I18
ABSTRACT
This paper exploits a sharp reduction in patient cost sharing at age 70 in Japan, using a regression
discontinuity design to examine its effect on utilization, health, and financial risk arising from outof-pocket expenditures. Due to the national policy, cost sharing is 60-80 percent lower at age 70 than
at age 69. I find that both outpatient and inpatient care are price sensitive among the elderly. While
I find little impact on mortality and other health outcomes, the results show that reduced cost sharing
is associated with lower out-of-pocket expenditures, especially at the right tail of the distribution.
Hitoshi Shigeoka
Simon Fraser University
Department of Economics
8888 University Drive WMC 4653, Burnaby
BC, V5A 1S6, Canada
hitoshi_shigeoka@sfu.ca

1

Introduction

Rising medical expenditures due to an aging population and coverage expansion are increasingly
posing an acute fiscal challenge to governments. For example, spending growth for Medicare, the
public health insurance program for the elderly in the United States, has continued unchecked in
spite of a variety of government attempts to control costs.1 As more than one-third of current
health spending is on the elderly, future cost control eﬀorts can be expected to focus on seniors.2
One main strategy for the government to contain health care costs is higher patient cost sharing,
that is, requiring patients to pay a larger share of the cost of care. However, cost sharing has clear
tradeoﬀs. While cost sharing may reduce direct costs by decreasing the moral hazard of health
care services, it may also reduce access to beneficial and necessary health care that could mitigate
future severe and costly health events. Moreover, very high levels of cost sharing may undermine
one of the primary reasons of having health insurance, namely financial protection against large
out-of-pocket medical expenditure. Thus, to help determine the appropriate level of cost sharing,
there is an urgent need for knowledge on how patient cost sharing aﬀects utilization, health, and
risk protection, especially among the elderly.
Credible evidence on the price sensitivity of health care consumption and its eﬀect on health
among the elderly are scarce. Individuals above the age of 62 years were excluded from the wellknown RAND Health Insurance Experiment (hereafter, RAND HIE). Card, Dobkin, and Maestas
(2008, 2009) found that Medicare eligibility at 65 years of age discontinuously increases health
care utilization and also has a modest positive eﬀect on the health of elderly patients above 65
years. However, these studies did not conclusively address whether these changes at the age of
65 are the result of health insurance provision per se (extensive margin) or changes in health
insurance generosity (intensive margin), given that turning 65 years in the US entails a number of
coincident changes.3 Chandra, Gruber, and McKnight (2010) examined the eﬀect of an increase in
co-payments for physician oﬃce visits and prescription drugs in a supplemental Medicare insurance
policy for Californian civil servants, but the change in co-payments was very small and limited
to oﬃce visits and prescription drugs. Only a few studies in the US have examined the eﬀect of
health insurance on the distribution of out-of-pocket medical expenditures (Feldstein and Gruber,
1995; Finkelstein and McKnight, 2008; Englehardt and Gruber, 2011; Finkelstein et al., 2011).
However, these studies examined the eﬀect of insurance provision rather than that of changes in
generosity.
1
Examples of attempts by the US government to control supply side costs include the introduction of prospective
payments for hospitals and reductions in provider reimbursement rates (Cutler, 1998).
2
Patients aged over 65 years consume 36 percent of health care in the US while they account for only 13 percent
of the population (Centers for Medicaid and Medicare Services, 2005). Furthermore, Medicare costs are expected to
comprise over a quarter of the primary federal budget by 2035, or between 5 and 6 percent of the GDP (Congressional
Budget Oﬃce, 2011). Likewise, in Japan, the elderly consume five times as many health care services as the nonelderly (Okamura, Kobayashi, and Sakamaki, 2005).
3
These changes include transitions from private to public health insurance, increases in multiple coverage due
to supplementary coverage (e.g., Medigap), and fewer gatekeeper restrictions due to the change from managed care
to fee-for-services. Indeed, Card, Dobkin, and Maestas (2009) concluded that it is not clear whether reductions in
mortality are due to health insurance provision or generosity.

2

My research design exploits a sharp reduction in cost sharing for patients aged over 70 in
Japan, to examine its eﬀect on utilization, patient health, and financial protection against risk.
Due to the prevailing national policy, cost sharing for outpatient visits and inpatient admissions is
as much as 60—80 percent lower at age 70 than at age 69 in Japan.4 This reduction is substantial,
especially for inpatient admissions: out-of-pocket medical expenditures for inpatient admissions
can reach as much as 27 percent of the average monthly income of a 69-year-old patient.5 By
exploiting this price variation, I compare the outcomes of patients just below 70 versus those just
over that age using a regression discontinuity (RD) design.
This setting oﬀers a number of advantages over previous empirical settings. First, there are no
confounding factors at age 70, and thus, I can plausibly isolate the eﬀect of patient cost sharing on
demand for health care services; under universal health insurance coverage in Japan, the change
at age 70 only reflects increases in benefit generosity, rather than the combined eﬀect, of health
insurance coverage and generosity. Also, as shown later, turning 70 in Japan does not coincide with
changes in any other factors such as employment or receiving pension. Second, I can estimate the
elasticities of inpatient admissions of the elderly as well, since cost sharing for inpatient admissions
also changes abruptly at age 70. Third, since I have detailed information on outpatient visits, I
can investigate the price sensitivity of preventive care in the outpatient setting. In contrast, most
existing datasets capture either outpatient visits or inpatient admissions. Fourth, I examine the
eﬀect of cost sharing, rather than health insurance per se, on exposure to out-of-pocket medical
expenditure risk.
Finally, the unique setting in Japan allows me to separate the demand elasticities of patients
from responsive behavior by insurers and medical providers, because they typically play a small
(if any) role in patients’ demand for health care services; physicians’ payments are based on a
national fee schedule that does not depend on patients’ insurance type, and thus prevents cost
shifting, where medical providers charge private insurers higher prices to oﬀset losses from the
beneficiaries of government-funded health insurance (Cutler, 1998). Also, there are no restrictions
by insurers on patients’ choices of medical providers.
I reach three conclusions. First, I find that reduced cost sharing at age 70 discontinuously
increases health care utilization. The corresponding elasticity is modest, at around -0.2 for both
outpatient visits and inpatient admissions. Examining patterns of utilization in more detail, I
also find that lower patient cost sharing is associated with increases in the number of patients
presenting both serious and nonserious diagnoses. For example, I find large increases in outpatient
visits for diagnoses that are defined as Ambulatory Care Sensitive Conditions (ACSCs), for which
proper and early treatment reduces subsequent avoidable admissions.
4

Japan introduced free care for the elderly aged over 70 years in January 1973. However, this policy substantially
increased the utilization of health care services and medical expenditure. In fact, medical expenditure rose by 55
percent in just one year. In February 1983, 10 years after the Japanese government had introduced its generous
policy, it imposed cost sharing on the elderly aged over 70 years. Despite this, the large discrepancy in cost sharing
between those just above and below the age of 70 persists. Due to data availability, this study focuses on the period
after the implementation of cost sharing for the elderly.
5
Note that inpatient admissions are associated with hospitalizations, while outpatient visits refer to visits that
do not require an overnight stay in clinics or hospitals.

3

Second, in terms of benefits, I do not find that lower patient cost sharing improves any of the
health measures I examine, such as mortality and self-reported physical and mental health. Since
health is a stock, it may take some time for the most observable health eﬀects to be realized.
Therefore, it is challenging to address it using the RD approach unless the causes of death are
acute. Nonetheless, I do not find any change even in acute cause-specific mortality. The lack of
diﬀerences in health in spite of utilization changes implies that patient cost sharing can reduce
health care utilization without adversely aﬀecting health, at least in the short run.
Finally, I do find that lower cost sharing at 70 yields reductions in out-of-pocket expenditure,
especially at the right tail of the distribution, because the reduction in price at age 70 overwhelms
oﬀsetting increases in utilization. This finding suggests that patients with high medical spending
benefit substantially from financial protection against risk due to lower cost sharing.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly describes the institutional
background. Section 3 describes the data and presents the identification strategy. Section 4 shows
the main results on utilization. Section 5 refers to the analysis on benefit and examines the health
outcomes as well as risk reduction. Section 6 discusses the implications of the findings, and section
7 concludes.

2

Background

2.1

Institutional Setting

All Japanese citizens are mandatorily covered by health insurance.6 Patients have unrestricted
choices of medical providers; for example, it is common for the Japanese to visit hospitals rather
than clinics for outpatient care (similar to physician oﬃce visits in the US).7 Patients have direct
access to specialist care without going through a gatekeeper or a referral system. There is also no
limit on the number of visits. Patients may either go to hospitals or clinics for outpatient visits
and to hospitals for admissions, unlike in the US, where those who lack insurance use hospitals for
primary care.
A patient pays coinsurance, which is the percentage of medical costs for which the beneficiary is
responsible. Since inpatient admissions are more expensive than outpatient visits, the coinsurance
rate for inpatient admissions tends to be set lower than that for outpatient visits. The insurer
pays the remaining fraction of expenses until the beneficiary meets the stop-loss (also known as the
maximum out-of-pocket), and the insurer pays all expenses above the stop-loss. Unlike a normal
health insurance plan in the US, there is no deductible in Japan.
The elderly become eligible for lower cost sharing on the first day of the next month after they
turn 70. They receive a new insurance card and a notice from the government indicating that
they are eligible for Elderly Health Insurance. They can present the card at medical institutions
6

Japan achieved universal health insurance coverage in 1961. See Kondo and Shigeoka (2013) for more details
about the eﬀect of the introduction of universal health insurance on utilization and supply side responses.
7
In Japan, hospitals are defined as medical institutions with 20 or more beds, and clinics are medical institutions
with less than 19 beds.

4

to receive the discount. Elderly Health Insurance is also provided to bedridden people between
the ages of 65 and 70, but the proportion of such people is not substantial. According to a report
by the Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare (2009), the fraction of bedridden people between
the ages of 65 and 70 was 4.2 percent on average during 1984—2001. Nonetheless, since those
covered by Elderly Health Insurance at a younger age should have relatively worse health, the
price elasticity and health consequences I estimate may be interpreted as the lower bound.
Table 1 displays the cost sharing formulas for those below and above age 70 for outpatient
visits and inpatient admissions for each survey year of the Patient Survey (described in detail
in section 3). For those below age 70, the coinsurance rate is determined by the type of health
insurance, employment status (retired or not), and whether the person is a (former) employee
or a dependent. There are two types of health insurance for those below age 70. Employmentbased health insurance covers the employees of firms that satisfy certain requirements and the
employees’ dependents. National Health Insurance (hereafter, NHI) is a resident-based system that
provides coverage to everyone else, mainly the employees of small firms, self-employed workers, the
unemployed, and the retired. Employment-based health insurance had a lower coinsurance rate
than NHI until 2003, after which both were equalized to a common coinsurance rate of 30 percent
for outpatient visits as well as inpatient admissions.
At the age of 70, people switch to Elderly Health Insurance and, in principle, face the same cost
sharing.8 Importantly, on the other hand, all medical providers are reimbursed by the national
fee schedule, which is uniformly applied to all patients regardless of their insurance type and age.9
Since a patient’s insurance type and age do not aﬀect reimbursements, physicians have arguably
few incentives to influence patient’ demand. For example, from the physician’s perspective, in
principle, there are few reasons to delay surgeries until age 70, as long as patients can pay, because
reimbursements do not diﬀer by the patient’s age.

2.2

Changes in Patient Cost Sharing at Age 70

Figure 1 illustrates the out-of-pocket expenditures with respect to total monthly medical expenditures for 2008, as an example of the formula in Table 1. Unlike in the US, the stop-loss is set
monthly, rather than annually, in Japan. This is for purely administrative reasons. Reimbursements to medical institutions are conventionally paid monthly in Japan. The x -axis indicates total
monthly medical expenditures, and the y-axis, the corresponding monthly out-of-pocket medical
expenditures. Since the stop-loss diﬀers for outpatient visits and inpatient admissions for those
over 70, I show separate lines for the two services. For those below 70, there was no distinction
8
In fact, high-income earners above 70 have been charged a higher coinsurance rate (20 percent instead of 10
percent) since October 2002. As the bar for “high income” is set quite high, a limited number of patients fall in
this category (7 percent, according to Ikegami et al. (2011)). Since income is not recorded in the Survey of Medical
Care Activities in Public Health Insurance, which I use to derive monthly out-of-pocket expenditures, I compute
expenditures considering a “normal” family. See Section A1 in the Online Appendix for details.
9
The national schedule is usually revised biennially by the Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare, through
negotiations with the Central Social Insurance Medical Council. The latter includes representatives of the public,
payers, and providers. See Ikegami and Campbell (1995) for details.

5

between these two services in 2008. Figure 1 shows that the price schedule for those above 70
always lies below that of those below 70, suggesting that for any given medical expenditures, the
out-of-pocket payment for those above 70 was always smaller than that for those below 70 in 2008.
Unfortunately, information concerning actual out-of-pocket expenditure of the general population is only available for year 2007, and these data do not distinguish between outpatient visits
and inpatient admissions. However, I have access to individual level insurance claim data for
outpatient visits and inpatient admissions, which summarizes the monthly medical expenditures
claimed for insurance reimbursement to medical institutions (called the Survey of Medical Care
Activities in Public Health Insurance). Since a portion of this monthly total medical expenditure
is paid as patient cost sharing according to the formula in Table 1, I can compute the out-of-pocket
medical expenditures for each insurance claim.
Table 2 summarizes the actual average monthly out-of-pocket expenditures of a 69-year-old and
the counterfactual monthly out-of-pocket medical expenditures for a 70-year-old. For those aged
70, since the observed out-of-pocket medical expenditures already reflect the change in cost sharing
(i.e., out-of-pocket medical expenditures are endogenous), I compute their counterfactual out-ofpocket expenditures by applying the cost sharing rules of Elderly Health Insurance to utilization
by an average 69-year-old. See Section A1 in the Online Appendix for details on these derivations.
In the main analysis, I do not exploit the year-to-year variation in cost sharing, and instead, I
pool all the survey rounds to increase the statistical power and smooth out cohort size eﬀects.10
As a robustness check, I run separate regressions for periods before and after 2002. I choose 2002
since the price schedule for those above age 70 changes from flat monthly or daily copayment to
coinsurance with stop-loss (as shown in Table 1), which could generate quite diﬀerent utilization
incentives. Overall, out-of-pocket medical expenditure, conditional on using health care services
in Table 2, is the weighted average of out-of-pocket medical expenditure across all survey years,
using the population of 69-year-olds in each survey year as weights.
Table 2 reveals a couple of interesting facts. First, out-of-pocket medical expenditures, especially from inpatient admissions, can pose a substantial financial burden on the near elderly (those
just below age 70). Since the average annual income for a 69-year-old is 1,822 thousand Yen (or
roughly 18,220 US dollars), out-of-pocket medical expenditures for inpatient admissions can reach
as much as 27 percent of a person’s average monthly income.11 On the other hand, once the
patient turns 70, the counterfactual ratio of medical expenditures to average monthly income is
reduced to as little as 8.6 percent.12
One complication in the abovementioned calculations is the nonlinearity imposed by the stoploss, which is a classic, but important, challenge in estimating elasticities and dates back to the
10

Due to the smaller sample size, the estimates from each year are noisy and do not have any consistent pattern.
Also, these results should be viewed with caution, since fluctuations in cohort size due to events like the Spanish
Flu pandemic and World War I may heavily aﬀect the estimates in this RD framework, which are based on counts
instead of rate. These results are available from the author upon request.
11
One thousand Yen is roughly equal to 10 US dollars. The rate of 27 percent was calculated by the author using
the Comprehensive Survey of Living Conditions (CSLC), i.e., 417(182212) = 027
12
This rate was calculated by the author using the CSLC, i.e., 130(182212) = 0086

6

RAND HIE (Keeler, Newhouse, and Phelps, 1977; Ellis, 1986). The problem is that although
in many cases, medical expenditure is caused by unpredictable illnesses, economically rational
individuals who anticipate spending beyond the stop-loss may spend more when the price is low
(Keeler and Rolph, 1988). The size of the diﬀerence between true and nominal out-of-pocket prices
depends on the probability that the individual will subsequently exceed the stop-loss. Indeed,
under fairly restrictive assumptions, it can be shown that the eﬀective price before the stop-loss
is reached takes the simple form (1 − ) , where  is the nominal price, and  is the probability
of exceeding the stop-loss (Keeler and Rolph, 1988).
Accounting for nonlinearity associated with the stop-loss is challenging, since to fully understand the size of the diﬀerence between the true price and the nominal price, I may need data on
episodes of illness rather than monthly aggregated data. I argue that the eﬀect of the stop-loss on
overutilization is probably much smaller in my case, unlike the RAND HIE, for the following two
reasons. First, the probability of reaching the stop-loss is not high even for inpatient admissions–
14 percent for those admitted (see Column (4) in Table 2) and 2 percent for the non-conditional
population. Second, the stop-loss is set monthly in Japan, rather than annually like for the RAND
HIE and most health insurances in the US. To the extent that illnesses are unpredictable, this
shorter interval may make it harder for people to time and overuse medical services. In fact, even
under an annual stop-loss, Keeler and Rolph (1988) empirically showed that people in the RAND
HIE responded myopically to the stop-loss, i.e., people do not appear to change the timing of their
medical purchases to reduce costs.13
Nonetheless, to partially account for this eﬀect, I simply apply the formula (1 −  ) for
those whose out-of-pocket medical expenditures exceed the median in each survey year , since
this problem is most relevant for consumers who are close to reaching the stop-loss. Since the
probability of reaching the stop-loss is not high even for inpatient admissions, the nominal price
(38.0 thousand Yen) for those just below age 70 is not so diﬀerent from the true price (35.3
thousand Yen). Therefore, the bias coming from the nonlinearity associated with the stop-loss
may be negligible in this case.

3

Data and Identification

I use one of the most comprehensive health-related data sources ever assembled on Japan. In
this section, I summarize the most important datasets used in the study. Further details on the
same appear in Section A3 in the Online Appendix. My main outcomes are health care, health
outcomes, and out-of-pocket expenditures.
13

Aron-Dine et al. (2012) also showed that while there are some forward-looking aspects in health care utilization,
individuals’ behavior is much closer to full myopia, such that they respond only to the spot price instead of looking
forward as individuals responding only to the future price. See also Kowalski (2012) and Marsh (2012) on the recent
application of nonlinear budget set estimation to analyze the eﬀect of health insurance contracts.

7

3.1

Data

The dataset for health care utilization is the Patient Survey, a nationally representative repeated
cross-sectional survey that collects administrative data from hospitals and clinics. Since the survey
is conducted every three years, I have individual patient-level data for nine rounds of surveys
between 1984 and 2008. One of the biggest advantages of this survey relative to usual hospital
discharge data is that it also includes information on outpatient visits, unlike most existing datasets
that capture either outpatient visits or inpatient admissions. In fact, the Agency for Healthcare
Research and Quality (AHRQ) has recognized the need to develop a methodology for studying
preventive care in an outpatient setting by using inpatient data, to identify avoidable inpatient
admissions. In my case, I directly look at changes in the number of patients for beneficial and
preventive care in the outpatient setting. The disadvantage of this data is that like most discharge
data, it only includes limited individual demographics, such as gender and place of residence.
There is no record of education and income.
The Patient Survey consists of two types of data: outpatient data and discharge data. I use
the former to examine outpatient visits, and the latter, inpatient admissions. Outpatient data
are collected during one day in the middle of October of the survey year and provide information
on all patients who made outpatient visits to the surveyed hospitals and clinics on the day of
the survey.14 These data include patients’ exact dates of birth and the survey dates, which is
equivalent to the exact dates of the visits. The discharge data contain the records of all patients
who were discharged from surveyed hospitals and clinics in September of the survey year. The
discharge data report the exact dates of birth, admission, surgery, and discharge, which enable me
to compute age at admission.15
As health outcomes, I examine both mortality and morbidity. I examine mortality, since it is
one of the few objective and well-measured health outcomes, the data for which are often easily
available and comparable across diﬀerent countries. I use the universe of death records between
1984 and 2008, which report the exact dates of birth and death, place of death, and cause of death
using the International Classification of Diseases (ICD) 9 or 10. The main advantage of the death
records is that they cover all deaths that occur in Japan, unlike hospital discharge records, which
only report in-hospital mortality by definition.
I complement the mortality results by examining other morbidity-related measures in the
Comprehensive Survey of Living Conditions (CSLC), which is survey of a stratified random sample
of the Japanese population conducted every three years between 1986 and 2007, mostly in June.
The survey asks questions about insurance coverage, self-reported physical and mental health,
stress levels, and so forth. Age is reported by month in this dataset. Descriptive statistics for the
Patient Survey, CSLC, and mortality data are reported in Table A in the Online Appendix.
14

Since data concerning outpatient visits are collected on one day only, the survey is susceptible to external factors
such as the weather. This short survey period is another reason I do not exploit the year-to-year variation in cost
sharing in this paper.
15
I describe these dates in chorological order for simplicity, but each unit of data is as per the discharge.

8

3.2

Identification Strategy

My identification strategy is very similar to studies from the U.S. that use an RD design to
examine the eﬀect of turning 65 (Card, Dobkin, and Maestas, 2004, 2008, 2009; Chay, Kim, and
Swaminathan, 2011). However, in Japan, the change at age 70 only reflects increases in benefit
generosity rather than the combined eﬀects of change in health insurance coverage and benefit
generosity. Moreover, as shown later, turning 70 in Japan does not coincide with changes in any
observable factors, such as employment or receiving pension.
Even though the idea behind the identification strategy is the same, for clarity, I write two
regression equations, one for the CSLC and the other for the Patient Survey and mortality data.
My basic estimation equation for the CSLC is a standard RD model as follows:
0

 =  () +  70 +   + 

(1)

where  is a measure of morbidity or out-of-pocket medical expenditure for individual  at age
 in survey year ,  () is a smooth function of age,  is a set of individual covariates, and 
is an unobserved error component.  70 is a dummy that takes the value one if individual
 is over age 70. My parameter of interest is the coeﬃcient . Other controls include a set of
dummies for gender, marital status, region, birth month, and survey year. I use a quadratic in
age, fully interacted with the post dummies as a baseline specification with samples aged 65—75
years. As robustness checks, I limit the sample to a narrower age window (ages 67—73) and add
cubic terms in age. To account for common characteristics within cells of the same age, following
Lee and Card (2008), the standard errors are clustered at age in months.
Unlike the CSLC in which I see all individuals, the unique features of the Patient Survey and
mortality data is that I only observe individuals who are present in the medical institutions or
are deceased, respectively. My approach to deal with this issue is to assume that the underlying
populations at risk for outpatient visits, inpatient admissions, and deaths trend smoothly with
age. Since I pool several years of data, this assumption seems plausible.16 Therefore, I use the
log of counts as the dependent variable for these datasets and modify the regression equation as
follows:
log( ) =  () +  70 + 

(2)

where  indicates the count of patients or deaths at age  in year . Throughout the paper, for
regressions where the dependent variable is either binary or log, the coeﬃcients on  70 and
their standard errors are multiplied by 100 to make them easier to interpret as percentage changes.
There is one remaining empirical issue in estimating the equation (2) using the Patient Survey.
As seen in Figure A in the Online Appendix, there is substantial seasonality and heaping in the
16

See Card, Dobkin, and Maestas (2004) for formalization of this approach. Since I am using nine rounds of the
Patient Survey, the patients at each age in my samples are from nine diﬀerent age cohorts. This approach should
smooth out cohort sizes fluctuations.

9

reported birthdays of patients observed in the Patient Survey. First, I observe heaping on the first
day of the month, which is likely due to reporting.17 Second, there are many more births in the
first quarter than in the other three quarters throughout the sample period. Some argue that this
observation is due to farmers timing births for the winter, when there is less work, but evidence
proving this notion is scant (Kawaguchi, 2011).
Whatever the reason, heaping and seasonality in birthdays pose a challenge for estimating the
equation (2), since the Patient Survey is only conducted in one day in October for outpatient
visits and in one month (September) for inpatient admissions. To account for heaping within the
month, I collapse the data into age in months. Since people become eligible for Elderly Health
Insurance at the beginning of the next month after their 70th birthday, this approach allows me
to code age in months and the post age-70 dummy using dates of birth and dates of visits without
error. To account for seasonality in birth distribution, I include the birth month fixed eﬀects in
addition to survey year fixed eﬀects in all specifications (see e.g., Barreca et al., 2010; Carneiro
et al., 2010). Thus, the cell indicates the birth month for each age for each survey year. There
are 120 observations (12 birth months for each year times 10 years of age (65—75) windows) per
survey round, and there are nine rounds of surveys. Thus, there are 1,080 cells in the estimation
for outpatient visits.
I also try two diﬀerent approaches to account for the heaping and seasonality. One approach
is to collapse the data into age in quarters and then convert the counts into rates, since I have
population data by the quarter of the birth month from the population censuses that are conducted
every five years. The disadvantage of this approach is that the interpolation of population may
introduce additional noise in the estimates. In fact, the estimates from this approach tend to be
smaller than those in the main approach, probably due to measurement error in the population
estimates. Another approach is to collapse the data into age in days and include 365 day-ofbirth fixed eﬀects as well as year-of-birth fixed eﬀects into the equation (2), so as to account for
seasonality and cohort size eﬀects where age in days at the time of the outpatient visit or inpatient
admission is the running variable (Gans and Leigh, 2009; Barreca et al., 2010). The disadvantage
of this approach is that when I divide the sample into finer subsamples (e.g., by diagnoses), there
are many birthdays without any observations, which may introduce noise in the running variable.
The approach of using age in months does not suﬀer much from this problem since I usually
observe at least one observation in each month cell. The results using this alternative approach
yield similar results as the main approach as long as there are not many zero cells in the data.
Since both alternative approaches face diﬀerent disadvantages, I prefer to take the approach I first
described. Some of the results using age in days as the running variable are shown in Table E in
the Online Appendix.
The discharge data pose a slightly more complicated problem. Unlike the outpatient data, the
admission day can be any day of the year, as long as patients are discharged in September. To
17

For example, individuals (or their designated respondents) who do not know their exact birthday may report
the first day of their birth month as their birthday. Other heaps occur at multiples of five and ten days and at the
end of the month.

10

avoid including patients with unusually long hospitals stays, I limit the sample to those admitted
within three months from discharge in September (July, August, and September) in the survey
year. This approach is reasonable since 90 percent of admissions in my data are concentrated
within these three months. Later, I show that the estimates are robust to using diﬀerent windows
from the discharge date. The cell for discharge indicates the year of birth, month of birth, month
of admission, and survey year, the latter being identical to the admission year. Since there are
1,080 cells for each admission month, there are a total of 3,240 cells in the estimation of inpatient
admissions. The estimations include birth month fixed eﬀects, admission month fixed eﬀects, and
survey year fixed eﬀects.
For the mortality data, I estimate the same equation (2), replacing  with death counts. While
I observe that deaths occur throughout the year, seasonality remains an issue. As shown in Figure
B in the Online Appendix, more births as well as more deaths are observed in winters. Thus, if I
just plot the raw number of deaths by age, I mechanically observe more deaths around each patient’
birthday. To account for seasonality (as well as heaping in birthdays, similar to the observation
made in the Patient Survey), I collapse the mortality data into birth year/birth month/death
year/death month (i.e., age in months) and include birth months and death months fixed eﬀects.
This approach is analogous to the estimation of inpatient admissions, with the admission month
being replaced by the death month. Since mortality data spans 1984—2008, I limit the sample to
those born during 1919—1933, so that I can trace the deaths throughout ages 65—75.18 There are
21,600 cells.19 The main drawback of using death records is that in those records I only observe
the exact date of death. In contrast, in the hospital discharge data, I observe the exact date of
admission, which (unlike the date of death) determines the price schedule applicable to the patient.
Note that this may attenuate the estimates, since people who died immediately after their 70th
birthday may not be eligible for Elderly Health Insurance at the time of admission even though I
consider them as treated.
Importantly, “age RD design” is distinct from the standard RD design. Because all individuals
will eventually age into the program (age 70 in this case), assignment to treatment is inevitable.
Therefore, individuals who are likely to anticipate a price change at age 70 may behave in a certain
way before treatment is provided (Lee and Lemieux, 2010). This issue is particularly relevant for
inpatient admissions, since there is a possibility that people may delay some expensive medical
procedures until they become 70, which may accentuate the size of the discontinuity.20
However, the age RD setting allows me to visually examine whether the discontinuity is accentuated; if the increase is transitory rather than permanent, I should observe a tendency to
revert to the previous level after age 70 as well as a drop-oﬀ just shy of age 70. Indeed, as I show
later, the overall age trend does not seem to display any catch-up eﬀects, but close inspection of
18

The results using all deaths that occurred between the ages of 65 and 75 during 1984—2008 are quantitatively
similar.
19
This calculation is a result of 15 birth years (1919—1933), 12 birth months, and 12 death months for 10 years of
age (65—75) windows (21600 = 15 × 12 × 12 × 10).
20
It is not always the case that such anticipation accentuates the magnitude of the discontinuity; it can also mute
the discontinuity (Lee and Lemieux, 2010).

11

inpatient admissions with elective surgery shows some drop-oﬀ just below age 70 and a sudden
surge just over it. Though not far from perfect, to partially account for the catch-up eﬀect, I run
a “donut-hole” RD by excluding a few observations around the threshold (Barreca et al., 2011).
The caveat of this methodology is that there is no clear economic or statistical consensus on the
optimal size of the donut, and excluding observations near the threshold undermines the virtue
of the RD design, that is, comparing outcomes just below and above the threshold. Nonetheless, this donut-hole RD may show whether my RD estimates are sensitive to catch-up eﬀects or
intertemporal substitution.
The underlying assumption of a typical RD model still applies to the age RD design; in this
case, the assumption is that expected outcomes below and above age 70 are continuous at age 70
(Hahn, Todd, and van der Klaauw, 1999). Continuity requires that all other factors that might
aﬀect the outcome of interest trend smoothly at age 70. Following Lee and Lemieux (2010), I simply
fit the same models, such as equation (1), for confounding variables and test for discontinuities at
age 70.
Figure C in the Online Appendix displays the actual and fitted age profiles of employment for
the 1986—2007 pooled CSLC sample (age measured in months). These profiles all trend relatively
smoothly at age 70 for both genders.21 Row (1) in Table B in the Online Appendix confirms that
there is no jump in employment at age 70. In the remaining rows in the table, I also investigate
age profiles of marriage and income in the CSLC, but neither outcome shows any discontinuities
at age 70. Therefore, employment, marriage, and income are unlikely to confound the impact of
cost sharing at that age.

4

Utilization Results

In this section, I examine the eﬀect of changes in patient cost sharing on utilization. I use the
pooled 1984—2008 Patient Survey for people between ages 65 and 75. I examine outpatient visits
and inpatient admissions, respectively .

4.1

Outpatients Visits

I examine changes in the number and characteristics of outpatient visits at age 70. As I mentioned
earlier, I collapse counts of patients by age in months and include birth month fixed eﬀects as well
as survey year fixed eﬀects to account for heaping and seasonality in birthdays. Therefore, for
most of the graphs shown in this section, the plotted average is residual from a regression of the
log counts on birth month fixed eﬀects and survey year fixed eﬀects.
Figure 2A shows the actual and fitted age profiles of outpatient visits based on pooled outpatient data. The markers in the figure represent averages of the log number of outpatient visits (by
21

The mandatory retirement age in Japan used to be either 55 or 60 years. Pension receipts start at either 60 or
65 years, depending on the type of job. Also, long-term care (LTC) health insurance was introduced in Japan in
2000, but it does not specify the age of eligibility as 70. Indeed, I do not see any change at age 70 in the probability
of receiving LTC, as shown in Table B in the Online Appendix.

12

age in months). The lines represent fitted regressions from models with a quadratic age profile
fully interacted with a dummy for age 70 or older. Overall outpatient visits smoothly increase
prior to age 70 and then jump sharply at age 70. Also, the increase appears to be permanent
rather than transitory since I do not observe any tendency after age 70 to revert to the previous
level.
Panel A in Table 3 shows that the jump in Figure 2A corresponds to a 10.3 percent increase.
The implied elasticity of the outpatient visits is -0.18 (= 0103((11) − (40))), where the
denominator is the log diﬀerence in price between ages 69 and 70 from the first row in Table
2.22 Since I do not visually observe catch-up eﬀects and stop-loss is rarely reached, the bias on
estimating the elasticity of outpatient visits seems minimal.
Panel B divides the sample before and after 2002, when the price schedule for those above age
70 changes from the flat monthly or daily copayment to coinsurance with stop-loss, which could
generate quite diﬀerent utilization incentives. Even though the RD estimates are larger pre 2002
than post 2002 (12.0 vs. 6.9 percent, respectively), the corresponding price elasticity is relatively
similar across periods (-0.19 vs. -0.15, respectively), since price reduction at age 70 was larger in
the period before 2002 (see Table K in the Online Appendix). In addition, the null hypothesis
that RD estimates are the same for pre and post 2002 cannot be rejected at the conventional level.
Another way to look at more frequent access to outpatient care is to examine the change in
the interval since the last outpatient visits. A shorter interval indicates a higher frequency of
outpatient visits. As much as 94 percent of patients are repeat visit patients (i.e., visits for the
same underlying health conditions and made at the same hospitals or clinics as last time) rather
than first-time visitors, as shown in Table A in the Online Appendix. Figure 2B plots the age
profile of days from the last outpatient visit for repeat patients. Consistent with the increase in
outpatient visits, the duration from the last visit steadily decreases prior to age 70, and then drops
sharply by roughly one day at age 70.
So far, I find compelling evidence that people use more outpatient care once they turn 70. Next,
I investigate whether the increase in outpatient visits solely reflects moral hazard or increases in
beneficial care, although distinguishing between the two is a very diﬃcult task. To investigate this
question, I divide the sample into various dimensions in the remaining rows in Table 3. In Panel
C, I divide outpatient visits by first visit or a repeat visit. Interestingly, not only repeat visits but
first visits also increase by more than 10 percent.23 Since repeat visits account for 94 percent of
all outpatient visits, the increase in first visits is small in magnitude relative to total outpatient
22

Note that I used the average price rather than the marginal price in the denominator. Thus, the elasticity
estimated is with respect to the average price. However, the marginal price and the average price may not diﬀer
much. For example, for 2008, the log marginal price diﬀerence would be log(0.1) - log(0.3) without stop-loss (Table
1), while the log average price diﬀerence is log(1.1) - log(4.0) for outpatient visits and log(13.0) - log(41.7) for
inpatient admissions (Table 2).
23
Figure D in the Online Appendix shows the age profiles for first-time and repeat outpatient visits. The age
profiles of first visits show a very interesting trend; the number of first visits steadily decreases prior to age 70,
reflecting the trend of deteriorating health as people get older, and then jumps sharply at age 70. The age profiles
of repeat visits are very similar to those of total outpatient visits, since most of total outpatient visits are repeat
visits.

13

visits. But the increase in new visits raises the possibility that those receiving outpatient care for
the first time may avoid outpatient visits before turning 70 due to their cost.
For repeat visits, Panel D in Table 3 shows that most of the increases are concentrated within
a short interval from the last visit. In fact, most of the increase is concentrated among those who
received their last outpatient care within 7 days, and the largest increase of 17.9 percent is observed
within one day from the last visit, indicating that some of these visits may be less beneficial.24
Panels E and F show that the increase in outpatient visits is concentrated at clinics and at visits
without referrals. Since people have much easier access to small clinics (rather than large hospitals)
without referrals, these results imply that these outpatient visits are more discretionary and less
serious.
Most of the findings so far suggest that those who visit medical institutions for outpatient care
once they turn 70 are less seriously ill than those who visit these institutions at the age of 69. To
further investigate this point, I examine the size of discontinuity at age 70 by type of diagnoses.
Panel H in Table 3 presents the RD estimates for selected diagnoses. Although the majority of
large increases are not likely to be for life-threatening diagnoses, these conditions, such as diseases
of the skin and genitourinary and musculoskeletal systems, probably require treatment to enhance
the quality of life. However, I also find an increase in potentially more serious diagnoses, such as a
15.2 percent increase for cerebrovascular disease and 14.3 percent increase for respiratory disease,
both of which are statistically significant at the 1 percent level. Figure 3 displays the age profile
for these commonly examined diagnoses (see e.g., Chay, Kim, and Swaminathan, 2010).
Further, I look at diagnoses listed as ACSCs, for which proper and early outpatient care reduces
subsequent avoidable admissions. ACSCs are developed by the AHRQ to study preventive care in
an outpatient setting using inpatient data and to identify admissions that should not occur in the
presence of suﬃcient preventive care (see Table D in the Online Appendix for a list of ACSCs).25
Since I do have the outpatient datasets, I can directly look at changes in the number of patients
for such beneficial and preventive care. In fact, I find a statistically significant 8.2 percent increase
in ACSCs.26 Panel D in Figure 3 confirms that there is a modest jump at age 70 for ACSCs.
In sum, while I find a modest increase for diagnoses, such as ACSCs, indicating the need for
beneficial and preventive care, I find much a larger increase for discretionary diagnoses. However, I
need to view this result with considerable caution, since any conclusion based only on the diagnoses
is unwarranted, due to the large heterogeneity of severity within the diagnoses.
Table E in the Online Appendix summarizes the results of alternative specifications that use
24

The average number of days from the last outpatient visit for patients aged 65—75 years is 13.6 days, as shown
in Table A in the Online Appendix.
25
The leading ACSC is hypertension, which is by far the most frequent diagnosis of all outpatient visits (see Table
C in the Online Appendix). Untreated high blood pressure can be an important risk factor for the elderly, and
thus, proper treatment may prevent subsequent hospitalization or even death from conditions such as heart failure,
cerebrovascular disease or stroke, and heart attacks (Pierdomenico et al., 2009).
26
I also try to investigate each ACSC separately, but due to smaller sample sizes, I cannot obtain precise estimates
for most ACSCs. The two exceptions are Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD), a progressive disease
that makes it hard to breathe, and hypertension. The increase for patients with COPD and hypertension is 17.2
percent (t-stat = 2.10) and 8.5 percent (t-stat = 3.54) respectively.

14

age in days as the running variable with birthday fixed eﬀects and shows quantitatively similar
results for most of the outcomes.27 As a falsification test, I also run the same estimation for other
ages that should not have any discontinuity (each single age between 66 and 74 years) and do not
find any statistically significant changes in them (results available upon request). This result is
not surprising, since I do not see any visible discontinuity in other ages in either Figures 2 or 3.

4.2

Inpatient Admissions

Figure 4A shows the actual and fitted age profiles of inpatient admissions based on the pooled
discharge data for 1984—2008. The plotted average is the residual from a regression of log counts on
birth month, admission month, and survey year fixed eﬀects. Overall inpatient admission steadily
increases prior to age 70 and then jumps sharply at age 70. The increase appears to be permanent
in this case as well as for outpatient visits, with no tendency to return to prior levels.
Since the sharp change in cost sharing in inpatient admissions coincides with that of outpatient
visits, it may be diﬃcult to conclusively distinguish if the change in inpatient admissions for a
certain condition is the result of lower inpatient cost sharing per se or of substitution with increased
outpatient visits. For example, preventive and beneficial outpatient care may replace avoidable
admissions in the future. Alternatively, more frequent checkups at outpatient visits allow detection
of serious conditions and, hence, increase subsequent admissions. However, since I do not see a
discontinuity with time lag in the graph for inpatient admissions, it is more likely that the jump
I observe is the reflection of lower cost sharing rather than any interaction with outpatient visits.
I will return to this point in section 6.
The first entry in Table 4 shows that the jump in overall inpatient admissions in Figure 4A
corresponds to an 8.2 percent increase. The implied elasticity of inpatient admissions is -0.16 (=
0082((130) − (417))), where the denominator is the log diﬀerence in price between ages 69
and 70 (from the second row in Table 2). Panel B presents the RD estimates from the sample before
and after 2002 (similar to what was done for outpatient visits). While the RD estimates are larger
for the period before 2002 than after 2002 (9.6 vs. 5.3 percent, respectively), the corresponding
price elasticities become relatively similar across periods (-0.17 vs. -0.12, respectively), since
price reduction at age 70 was larger in the former period (see Table K in the Online Appendix).
Moreover, the null hypothesis that the RD estimates are the same pre and post 2002 cannot be
rejected at the conventional level.
As I discussed earlier, there is a potential bias in estimating elasticity, especially due to the
catch-up eﬀect. To account for this eﬀect, I run a donut-hole RD by excluding a few months of
observations around the threshold. There is no guide as to the size of the donut-hole statistically
or economically, because it is not clear what magnitude of delay is fathomable/medically low-cost
for patients. Thus, I experiment with a threshold of zero to six months. However, removing six
27

I choose some outcomes that do not have zero cells for any age in days in Table E in the Online Appendix. It is
conventional to add one or a small positive value before taking the log value of such cells, but zero cells introduce
noises and hence, attenuate the estimates. In fact, as the number of zero cells increases, the estimates obtained by
using age in days as the running variable start to deviate from those of age in months.

15

months from either side of age 70 may be too drastic, since it would essentially mean comparing
patients aged 69.5 and 70.5. Figure D1 in the Online Appendix shows that the estimates get
smaller and the standard errors larger as the hole is expanded. But as long as the removal of the
data is within three months of age 70, the estimates are statistically significant at the 5 percent
level. Taking the conservative RD estimate from the three-month donut-hole RD, the lower bound
of implied elasticity is -0.14 (= 0072((130) − (417))), which is not so diﬀerent from naive
elasticity.
Figure D2 in the Online Appendix presents the RD estimates by diﬀerent windows from the
discharge date. Since the applicable price schedule changes monthly in Japan, those who enter
the scheme before age 70 and stay until after 70 may see a price reduction in the middle of a
spell. This fact implies that the RD estimates may get smaller as I include longer stay, since the
expected price for those below age 70 can be lower than the nominal price. However, Figure D2
shows that the results are pretty stable across the length of windows from the discharge date.
Another source of bias due to forward-looking behavior is the timing of admission within a
month. To the extent that patients are forward looking, they may time their admissions early in
the month to fully exploit the monthly nature of stop-loss, and hence, those who enter hospitals at
diﬀerent times within a month may have diﬀerent characteristics. To investigate this possibility, I
divide the sample into those who are admitted in the first half and the second half of the months,
and I run RD regressions separately. Panel C in Table 4 shows that the estimates are very similar
and in fact, not statistically distinguishable. Therefore, the timing of the admissions does not
seem to aﬀect the compositions of patients and RD estimates.
So far, I have shown that estimates on inpatient admissions are pretty robust. Next, I examine
the characteristics of inpatient admissions in the remaining rows in Table 4. First, in Panel D, I
divide the sample by whether the patients received surgery. Interestingly, I find that the increase
in admissions for people who received surgery is larger than the overall growth in admissions (12.0
percent versus an overall increase of 8.2 percent, respectively), while estimates from non-surgery
admissions are smaller in magnitude (6.4 percent). Indeed, close inspection of the age profile of
patients with surgery in Figure 4B reveals a drop-oﬀ just prior to age 70, coupled with a temporary
surge shortly after age 70. This pattern suggests that some people who are close to 70 years of age
delay surgery until they become eligible for Elderly Health Insurance, so as to reduce out-of-pocket
expenditures.
In Panel E, I further investigate the sizes of discontinuities across types of surgeries. Unfortunately, this information was only collected in the most recent four survey years (1999, 2002, 2005,
and 2008), and the categorization is quite coarse. Therefore, it is diﬃcult to obtain precise estimates. While the estimates on any procedures are positive, I find that open-stomach surgery and
intraocular lens implantation, the latter with substantial overlaps with admissions for cataracts
(clouding of the lens of the eye), show statistically significant increases at age 70. Figure F in the
Online Appendix displays the age profile of inpatient admissions for these two procedures. Similar
to the overall age profiles for inpatient admissions with surgery, I find a drop-oﬀ just prior to age
70 coupled with a temporary surge shortly after age 70 for both procedures. These results are
16

plausible since on the one hand, these procedures such as cataract surgeries are easily deferred,
and on the other, they may substantially improve the quality of life (Card, Dobkin, and Maestas,
2008).
These findings raise two possibilities for physicians’ and patients’ roles in the demand for
health care services. First, it may imply that physicians may consider the financial eﬀects of
treatments on patients, since there are no financial incentives for physicians to delay surgeries
until age 70, because reimbursements do not diﬀer by patient age. Alternatively, it may raise the
possibility of patients playing a more active role in determining their treatments. Indeed, Hai and
Rizzo (2009) pointed out that recent organizational changes (e.g., alternative sources of medical
information such as the internet, health care report cards, and direct-to-consumer advertising of
pharmaceuticals) might have fostered patient-initiated requests for specific treatments.
Next, I examine patients’ heterogeneous responses by the severity of the conditions. Figure 5
plots the RD estimates at age 70 on the y-axis and the severity measure on the x -axis. While there
is no perfect measure of the severity of an illness, following Dobkin (2003), I use the fraction of
weekend admissions as a severity measure.28 The idea behind this measure is that if the condition is
urgent and serious, admission occurs even during the weekend without triage, and thus, weekend
admissions tend to be higher for these diagnoses. Since three digits of ICD9 are insuﬃcient in
providing precise RD estimates for each diagnosis, I group diagnoses into roughly 60 groups based
on the Basic Tabulations of Diagnoses (see Table G in the Online Appendix for lists of diagnosis
groups). I omit diagnosis groups with less than 1 percent of total observations, because such
sample sizes are too small to provide credible estimates. This leaves me with roughly 20 diagnosis
groups. The graph presents a clear negative relationship: the higher the severity, the smaller the
RD estimates, suggesting that patients are less price sensitive for more serious conditions.
Panel G in Table 4 presents the RD estimates for selected diagnoses.29 Interestingly, the observed patterns by admission diagnoses are similar to the findings in Card, Dobkin, and Maestas
(2008), which examined Medicare eligibility at age 65; they found smaller increases for conditions
typically treated with medication or bed rest (heart failure, bronchitis, and pneumonia) and large
increases for those treated with specific procedures (chronic ischemic heart disease and osteoarthrosis). While I do not find an increase in admissions for respiratory diseases and the ACSCs that
are typically treated with medication, I do find increases for cataracts, cerebral infarction, and
(chronic) ischemic heart disease, which may require procedures, such as intraocular lens implantation, open-head surgery, and open-heart surgery, respectively.30 These results imply that diagnoses
that are treated with expensive but elective procedures are quite price sensitive, probably due to
their large cost, and hence, patients delay treatment so as to reduce out-of-pocket expenditures.
28

Unfortunately, the discharge data in the Patient Survey do not record whether the admission was elective,
urgent, or for emergency care.
29
Table C in the Online Appendix lists the top 5 diagnoses in 3-digit ICD9 codes and the corresponding RD
estimates. Also, Figure G in the Online Appendix displays the age profile of inpatient admissions for the commonly
examined broad set of diagnoses.
30
Note that estimates on ischemic heart disease are mostly driven by chronic, rather than acute, heart attacks
(clinically referred to as an acute myocardial infarction or AMI).

17

Finally, I also examine the interaction between outpatient visits and inpatient admissions by
looking at the route before admission to hospitals. Panel E in Table 4 shows that there is a
statistically significant 9.7 percent increase in admissions that come from outpatient visits to the
same hospitals, implying that patients wait to switch from outpatient visits to inpatient admissions
within the hospital till they reach the age of 70.
Table F in the Online Appendix shows the results of alternative specifications for selected
outcome variables. The results are quite robust to diﬀerent specifications, such as limiting the
sample to a narrower age window (ages 67—73) and including a cubic polynomial in age fully
interacted with a dummy for age 70 or older. However, specifications with a cubic polynomial in
age sometimes give larger estimates due to a drop-oﬀ in the number of inpatient admissions just
prior to age 70.

5

Benefits

To investigate the benefit side of cost sharing, I first explore whether lower cost sharing benefits
the health of those above age 70, and then, I examine risk reduction.

5.1

Health Outcomes

A priori, the impact of cost sharing on mortality is ambiguous. On the one hand, cheaper access
to health care services may reduce mortality. On the other hand, lower cost sharing may increase
mortality if those who are just below 70 delay life-saving treatment. Most importantly, if the
marginal patient is not severely ill, I may find no eﬀects on mortality.
Figure 6 shows the actual and fitted age profiles of the log of overall deaths among those
aged between 65 and 75 using pooled mortality data from 1987—2008. The plotted average is the
residual from a regression of log outcome on birth month and death month fixed eﬀects. The first
entry in Panel A in Table 5 shows that the estimate (-0.2 percent) is not statistically significant
at the conventional level. The remaining columns in Panel A present similar results from diﬀerent
specifications. It is important to note that while none of the point estimates are statistically
significant, the 95 percent confidence interval for the mortality eﬀects includes declines of elderly
mortality up to 2.6 percent (based on the first entry in Panel A). In addition, Panel G (Table 3),
Panel F (Table 4), and Panel B (Table 5) are stratified by gender, but none of the estimates are
statistically diﬀerent from each other between male and female patients.31
Further, I examine cause-specific deaths for three leading causes of death among the elderly in
Japan (cancer, heart disease, and cerebrovascular disease) and also respiratory disease.32 Figure
H in the Online Appendix shows the there are no discernible patterns for any causes of death.
Panel C in Table 5 confirms that there is no clear change in cause-specific mortality at age 70.
31

Unfortunately, as the Patient Survey and mortality data only include limited individual demographics except
for gender, I could not examine heterogeneous eﬀects based on individual characteristics.
32
The corresponding 3-digit ICD9 codes are as follows: cancer (140—208), heart disease (390—398, 402, 404, 410—
429), cerebrovascular disease (430—434, 436—438), and respiratory disease (460—519).

18

These results are, to some extent, expected; in general, it is hard to detect the eﬀect on health
in an RD framework, because health is stock (Grossman, 1972). Thus, it may take a while for the
most observable eﬀects to be realized, unless the causes of death are acute, such as heart attacks
or strokes (see e.g., Card, Dobkin, and Maestas, 2009; Chay, Kim, and Swaminathan, 2010).
Following Card, Dobkin, and Maestas (2009), I also examine nondeferrable conditions (those with
very similar weekend and weekday admission rates), but I do not find any discernible patterns in
the age profile (results available upon request).
I also examine trends in self-reported physical and mental health as a morbidity measure before
and after age 70, but I do not find any evidence that lower cost sharing leads to a discrete jump
in morbidity as well (see Figure I and Table H in the Online Appendix).33 These results are not
surprising, since the findings in the utilization imply that the marginal patient receiving health
care because of lower cost sharing is not severely ill, and also, it is unlikely that people delay
life-saving procedures.34
It is worthwhile mentioning that the available health measures here are limited. In fact, several
of the procedures that show large increases at age 70 are likely to yield substantial health benefits.
For example, cataract surgeries may improve peoples’ vision and reduce injury (Desapriya et al.,
2010). While self-reported health measures should capture such health improvements, I may still
underestimate the overall health benefit.

5.2

Risk Reduction

Other than improved health, another benefit of lower cost sharing is a lower risk of unexpected outof-pocket medical spending. As Finklestein and McKnight (2008) pointed out, this benefit is often
overlooked in the literature. Some claim that protection against large medical expenditure risk is
arguably the primary purpose of health insurance (e.g., Zeckhauser, 1970). Indeed, for risk-averse
individuals, the largest welfare gains from lower cost sharing come from reducing catastrophic
negative shocks to consumption.
To examine the eﬀect of cost sharing on risk reduction, I use self-reported out-of-pocket medical
expenditure in the CSLC. Unfortunately, the CSLC started collecting this information in 2007.
Thus, I only have one survey year of individual out-of-pocket expenditures. Out-of-pocket medical
expenditures include any medical expenses, such as over-the-counter drug spending, which is not
covered by health insurance, and this expenditure does not distinguish between outpatient visits
and inpatient admissions. With these caveats in mind, my primary interest is to examine total
individual out-of-pocket medical expenditures, regardless of how they were spent. Therefore, in
the analysis in this section, I focus on data for 2007. My analysis is based on 66,112 individuals
aged between 65 and 75 years, with non-missing out-of-pocket medical expenditure. The average
33

See also Nishi et al. (2012) on mental health.
In contrast, Card, Dobkin, and Maestas (2009) showed that Medicare eligibility has a modest positive eﬀect on
the health of those above age 65. The diﬀerence in the two results is probably because supply side incentives diﬀer
significantly at age 65 in the US. In fact, Card, Dobkin, and Maestas (2008) showed that both supply side incentives
and shifts in insurance characteristics play an important role for the utilization of health care services at age 65 in
the US.
34

19

annual out-of-pocket spending among those aged 65—69 is 142 thousand Yen (1,420 US dollars),
while the median out-of-pocket medical expenditure is 48 thousand Yen (480 US dollars).35
I first present an RD estimate at the mean on out-of-pocket medical expenditures by estimating
equation (1), where the model assumes quadratic in age fully interacted with a  70 dummy.
On average, lower cost sharing is associated with decline in out-of-pocket medical expenditure
by 52 thousand Yen (520 US dollars). The estimate is close to the conventional level, but it is
not marginally statistically significant (t-stat = -1.47). However, the mean impact may miss the
distributional impact of lower cost sharing. As is well known, the distribution of out-of-pocket
spending is highly right-skewed. Among those aged 65—69, the top 5 percent of spenders account
for almost 40 percent of out-of-pocket medical spending, while 72 percent of the sample has outof-pocket spending below 100 thousand Yen (1,000 US dollars) in a year.
Figure 7A shows the age profiles of out-of-pocket medical expenditures at the 75th, 90th, and
95th percentiles. Out-of-pocket medical expenditures steadily increase prior to age 70, reflecting
worse health as people age. Then, they decline sharply at age 70 at all three percentiles, with
the largest decline at the highest percentile.36 This result is consistent with other studies in the
US that showed a pronounced decline in the right tail of the distribution of out-of-pocket medical
expenditures through Medicare Parts A and B (Finkelstein and McKnight, 2008), Medicare Part
D (Englehardt and Gruber, 2011), and Medicaid (Finkelstein et al., 2011). As noted previously,
these studies looked at the eﬀect of insurance coverage rather than changes in generosity.
To gauge the magnitude of the decline, I estimate equation (1) for each quantile , where the
outcome is out-of-pocket medical expenditure. Figure 7B plots the RD estimates at age 70 on each
quantile, along with their 95 percent confidence interval. The standard error is computed based on
the empirical standard deviation of 200 bootstrap repetitions of quantile treatment estimates.37
Note that the coeﬃcient and standard errors on the  70 dummy are not multiplied by 100,
because the outcome variable is a level rather than a log. The units for this coeﬃcient are thousand
Yen.
The graph shows that lower patient cost sharing at age 70 is associated with declines in out-ofpocket spending at almost all (nonzero) quantiles of the distribution. While lower cost sharing has
a very small eﬀect at low quantiles, it grows consistently with baseline spending. At the median,
the impact on out-of-pocket spending is a reduction of 23.5 thousand Yen; at the 95th quantile,
35

The data record out-of-pocket payments in the last month (May), whereas the survey is conducted in June.
I multiply the data by 12 to convert the value to “annual” out-of-pocket costs. Note that seasonality in medical
spending may introduce a measurement error. Moreover, this may overstate the likelihood of very high out-of-pocket
payments if few patients visit a hospital every month.
36
Figure J in the Online Appendix compares the whole distribution of out-of-pocket medical expenditure in 2007
for diﬀerent age groups.
37
See Frandsen, Froelich, and Melly (2010), which proposed the nonparametric estimator for quantile treatment
eﬀects in an RD design. Recognizing the potential bias due to the misspecification, I choose to use the parametric
approach, since I also want to obtain the coeﬃcients on other control variables used to derive the distribution of
out-of-pocket medical expenditure at each quantile, conditional on individual characteristics later in the welfare
analysis in Section A2 in the Online Appendix. In fact, I also estimate the proposed nonparametric estimators and
compare them to the parametric ones. The estimates are quite similar throughout the percentile, except for a slight
deviation among the top 3 percentile. The results are available from the author.

20

it grows to 107 thousand Yen, a 26 percent decline from the value just below age 70 (see Table I
in the Online Appendix). These results show that patients at the right tail of the distribution in
particular are substantially benefited from lower cost sharing, since the reduction in price at age
70 overwhelms oﬀsetting increases in utilization.

6

Discussion

6.1

Implications of Price Elasticities

I estimated the price elasticities of outpatient and inpatient care separately, since the price schedule
of patient cost sharing diﬀers for the two services. The data I use in this paper do not generally
allow me to distinguish own- from cross-price eﬀects, because the prices of outpatient and inpatient
care both drop by roughly 70 percent at age 70. Thus, the behavioral responses of roughly 10
percent increases in visits for both outpatient and inpatient care may be driven in principle by both
eﬀects.38 However, for some diagnosis groups, cross-price eﬀects should be nearly zero, because
for these diagnosis groups nearly all treatment is outpatient or nearly all treatment is inpatient.
Figures K1 and K2 in the Online Appendix show RD estimates by diagnosis group (see Table
G in the Online Appendix for the list) as they relate to the fraction of visits in each group using
outpatient or inpatient care at age 69, respectively. In each figure, the RD estimates are generally
driven by both own- and cross-price eﬀects. However, the right-hand limit of each figure covers
diagnosis groups where nearly all patients use outpatient or inpatient care, respectively. For these
diagnosis groups, the RD eﬀects should be driven almost entirely by own-price eﬀects. The bottom
line is that these own-price eﬀects are about 10 percent, which is in line with the total eﬀects given
in Table 3 and Table 4.
Specifically, the diagnosis group with highest fraction of outpatient care in Figure K1 is hypertensive disease (diagnosis group 26), where the fraction is 94.2 percent. In fact, hypertension,
which is included in this diagnosis group, is the leading cause for outpatient visits at the 3-digit
ICD9 level (see Table C1 in the Online Appendix). The RD estimate for this diagnosis group is
8.2 percent, and it is not statistically diﬀerent from the overall estimate of 10.3 percent (see Panel
A in Table 3).
I conduct the same exercise for inpatient care. The diagnosis group with the highest fraction
of inpatient care in Figure K2 is benign neoplasm (diagnosis group 15), with a fraction of 78.5
percent. Compared to the result for outpatient care, the claim that nearly all patients are treated
as inpatients does not really fit–nearly a quarter of patients in this group are outpatients. The
RD estimate for this diagnosis group is 11.7 percent, while the overall estimate is 8.2 percent (see
Panel A in Table 4). Here, we see that the overall estimate is somewhat lower than the estimate for
38

Whether outpatient and inpatient care are substitutes or complements is an important, but unsettled, question.
Most of the literature, including that pertaining to the RAND HIE, has found that outpatient and inpatient care
are complements (e.g., Kaestner and Lo Sasso, 2012). A recent study by Chandra, Gruber, and McKnight (2010)
is an exception: it found evidence of substitution eﬀects, namely that while the copayment increase in outpatient
visits reduces the number of such visits, it leads to an increase in subsequent hospitalizations.

21

this diagnosis group (although not statistically significantly diﬀerent). Taken together, the results
for inpatient and outpatient care show that for diagnosis groups where cross-price eﬀects are a
priori small, the overall behavioral eﬀect of the price change (RD estimate) is an approximately 10
percent increase in visits, which is similar to the overall estimate, which includes both cross- and
own-price eﬀects. To the extent that the magnitude of own-price eﬀects is similar across diagnosis
groups, this suggests that own-price eﬀects are the dominant factor in the RD estimates presented
in this paper.

6.2

Comparison to Prior Literature

While the elderly are the most intensive consumers of health care, credible evidence on price
elasticities for this group is very scarce. As Finkelstein (2007) argues, it is not clear a priori
whether the elderly are expected to have larger or smaller price elasticities of demand for health
care services than the non-elderly. The former’s price elasticities may be larger if they are poorer
or more credit-constrained than the latter and smaller if their health problems are more severe
than those of the latter.
One notable exception is Chandra, Gruber, and McKnight (2010), which examined the price
elasticity of physician oﬃce visits among the recipients of a supplemental Medicare insurance policy
in the US. My estimate for outpatient visits (-0.16) is slightly larger than the estimates in Chandra
et al. (-0.07 to -0.10). Also, while individuals over the age 62 are excluded from the RAND HIE,
my estimate is similar to the estimates found therein for the non-elderly (roughly -0.2).39 In any
case, my estimate is within the range of similar estimates in prior literature.
Nevertheless, I need to view these comparisons with considerable caution since there are many
institutional diﬀerences between Japan and the US. For example, the ratio of medical expenditure
to GDP was 6.5 percent in 1984 and 8.6 percent in 2008 in Japan, while the corresponding figures
in the US were much higher, namely 10.2 percent and 16.6 percent, respectively (OECD, 2012).
In fact, in 2008, Japan’s ratio was the lowest (20th) among the OECD countries. This fact is
interesting because given Japan’s universal coverage without the need to go through a gatekeeper
or a referral system, Japan has the highest per-capita number of physician visits among all OECD
countries. Physician consultations per-capita per year number 13.2 in Japan, which is more than
twice as large than that in the US (3.9). Some argue that Japan’s low medical spending is achieved
through low reimbursements to hospitals, controlled by the stringent national fee schedule (e.g.,
Ikegami and Campbell, 1995).
Interestingly, while there is a five-year age diﬀerence between the Medicare population in the
US (those over age 65) and individuals covered under Elderly Health Insurance in Japan (those
over age 70), there is some indication that the underlying population may be similar. In fact, in
2008, the life expectancy at birth was 82.7 in Japan and 78.1 in the US (OECD, 2012). Conditional
on surviving until the eligibility age for public insurance for the elderly is reached, these figures
39

In addition, see Aron-Dine, Einav, and Finkelstein (2013), which reexamined the core findings of the RAND
HIE, including the well-known elasticity estimate of -0.2. Chandra, Gruber, and McKnight (forthcoming) found
price elasticities of about -0.16–similar to my estimates–for a low-income population sample in Massachusetts.

22

for life expectancy are not much diﬀerent.

6.3

Cost—benefit Analysis

Finally, I conduct a simple cost—benefit analysis associated with the change in the price of health
care services at age 70. The details are summarized in Section A2 in the Online Appendix. Since
I needed to make a number of assumptions, the results from this exercise are mostly speculative.
The social cost is the combination of the deadweight loss of program financing and the moral
hazard, while the benefit is risk protection against unexpected out-of-pocket medical spending.
My estimates suggest that the welfare gain of risk protection from lower patient cost sharing is
comparable to the total social cost, indicating that the welfare gain from risk protection may fully
cover the total social cost in this setting. One limitation of this welfare analysis is that it does not
incorporate welfare gains from health improvements. While I do not find any short-term reduction
in mortality or improvement in any self-reported health measures, it is possible that preventive care
induced by lower cost sharing at age 70 may prevent severe future health events, thus improving
health in the long run. It is infeasible to estimate long-run eﬀects in this framework, because
individuals eventually age into treatment.

7

Conclusion

Previous studies of patient cost sharing have had diﬃculty separating its eﬀect on patients from the
responsive behavior by medical providers and insurers. In addition, the estimates are confounded
by the joint eﬀects of changes in health insurance coverage and benefit generosity. This paper
attempted to overcome these limitations by examining a sharp reduction in patient cost sharing
at age 70 in Japan, using an RD design. I find that the implied price elasticities are -0.2 for both
outpatient visits and inpatient admissions. While I did not detect any eﬀects on health, I did
find reduced cost sharing benefits for patients at the right tail of the out-of-pocket distribution,
lowering it by roughly 30 percent. One limitation of the paper is that I cannot take long-run health
benefits into account in this empirical framework. Estimating the long-term eﬀect of patient cost
sharing on health is beyond the scope of the current paper, but it clearly remains an important
topic for future research.

References
Aron-Dine, Aviva, Liran Einav, and Amy Finkelstein. 2013. “The RAND Health Insurance
Experiment, Three Decades Later.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 27(1): 197—222.
Aron-Dine, Aviva, Liran Einav, Amy Finkelstein, and Mark Cullen. 2012. “Moral Hazard
in Health Insurance: How Important is Forward Looking Behavior?” National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper No. 17802.

23

Barreca, Alan, Melanie Guldi, Jason M. Lindo, and Glen R. Waddell. 2011. “HeapingInduced Bias in Regression-Discontinuity Designs.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 17408.
Card, David, Carlos Dobkin, and Nicole Maestas. 2004. “The Impact of Nearly Universal
Insurance Coverage on Health Care Utilization and Health: Evidence from Medicare.” National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 10365.
Card, David, Carlos Dobkin, and Nicole Maestas. 2008. “The Impact of Nearly Universal
Insurance Coverage on Health Care Utilization: Evidence from Medicare.” American Economic
Review 98(5): 2242—2258.
Card, David, Carlos Dobkin, and Nicole Maestas. 2009. “Does Medicare Save Lives?”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(2): 597—636.
Carneiro, Pedro, Katrine V. Loken, and Kjell G. Salvanes. 2010. “A Flying Start? Long
Term Consequences of Maternal Time Investments in Children During Their First Year of Life.”
IZA Discussion Paper No. 5362.
Carpenter, Christopher, and Carlos Dobkin. 2009. “The Eﬀect of Alcohol Consumption
on Mortality: Regression Discontinuity Evidence from the Minimum Drinking Age.” American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1(1): 164—182.
Centers for Medicaid and Medicare Services. 2005. National Health Expenditures. www.cms.hhs.gov/NationalHealthExpendData/04_NationalHealthAccountsAgePHC.asp
(accessed Aug 7, 2013)
Chandra, Amitabh, Jonathan Gruber, and Robin McKnight. 2010. “Patient Cost-Sharing
and Hospitalization Oﬀsets in the Elderly.” American Economic Review 100(1): 193—213.
Chandra, Amitabh, Jonathan Gruber, Robin McKnight. (forthcoming). “The impact of
patient cost-sharing on LOW-INCOME POPULATIONS: Evidence from Massachusetts.” Journal
of Health Economics.
Chay, Kenneth Y., Daeho Kim, and Shailender Swaminathan. 2010. “Medicare, Hospital
Utilization and Mortality: Evidence from the Program’s Origins.” Unpublished.
Congressional Budget Oﬃce. 2011. CBO’s 2011
http://www.cbo.gov/publication/41486 (accessed Aug 7, 2013)

Long-Term

Budget

Outlook.

Cutler, David M. 1998. “Cost Shifting or Cost Cutting?: The Incidence of Reductions in
Medicare Payments.” Tax Policy and the Economy 12: 1—27.
Desapriya, Ediriweera, Sayed Subzwari, Giulia Scime-Beltrano, Lionel A.
Samayawardhena, and Ian Pike. 2010. “Vision improvement and reduction in falls after expedited cataract surgery: Systematic review and metaanalysis.” Journal of Cataract and Refractive
Surgery 36(1): 13—19.
24

Dobkin, Carlos. 2003. “Hospital Staﬃng and Inpatient Mortality.” Unpublished.
Ellis, Randall. 1986. “Rational Behavior in the Presence of Coverage Ceilings and Deductibles.”
RAND Journal of Economics 17(2): 158—175.
Engelhardt, Gary V., and Gruber, Jonathan. 2011. “Medicare Part D and the Financial
Protection of the Elderly.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 3(4): 77—102.
Feldstein, Martin, and Jonathan Gruber. 1995. “A Major Risk Approach to Health Insurance
Reform.” Tax Policy and the Economy 9: 103—130.
Finkelstein, Amy. 2007. “The Aggregate Eﬀects of Health Insurance: Evidence from the Introduction of Medicare.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (3), 1—37.
Finkelstein, Amy, and Robin McKnight. 2008. “What Did Medicare Do? The Initial Impact
of Medicare on Mortality and Out of Pocket Medical Spending.” Journal of Public Economics
92(7): 1644—1668.
Finkelstein, Amy, Sarah Taubman, Bill Wright, Mira Bernstein, Jonathan Gruber,
Joseph P. Newhouse, Heidi Allen, Katherine Baicker, and The Oregon Health Study
Group. 2012. “The Oregon Health Insurance Experiment: Evidence from the First Year.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 127(3): 1057—1106.
Frandsen, Brigham, Markus Frolich, and Blaise Melly. 2010. “Quantile Treatment Eﬀects
in the Regression Discontinuity Design.” Unpublished.
Gans, Joshua S., and Andrew Leigh. 2009. “Born on the First of July: An (Un)natural
Experiment in Birth Timing.” Journal of Public Economics 93(1-2): 246—263.
Grossman, Michael. 1972. “On the Concept of Health Capital and the Demand for Health.”
Journal of Political Economy 80(2): 223—255.
Hahn, Jinyong, Petra Todd, and Wilbert van der Klaauw. 2001. “Identification and
Estimation of Treatment Eﬀects with a Regression-Discontinuity Design.” Econometrica 69(1):
201—209.
Hai Fang, and John A. Rizzo. 2009. “Competition and Physician-enabled Demand: The Role
of Managed Care.” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 72(1): 463—474.
Ikegami, Naoki, and John C. Campbell. 1995. “Medical Care in Japan.” New England Journal
of Medicine 333: 1295—1299.
Ikegami, Naoki, Byung-Kwang Yoo, Hideki Hashimot, Masatoshi Matsumoto, Hiroya
Ogata, Akira Babazono, Ryo Watanabe, Kenji Shibuya, Bong-Min Yang, Michael
R Reich, and Yasuki Kobayashi. 2011. “Japanese Universal Health Coverage: Evolution,
Achievements, and Challenges.” The Lancet 378(9796): 1094—1105.
25

Imbens, Guido W., and Thomas Lemieux. 2008. “Regression Discontinuity Designs: A Guide
to Practice.” Journal of Econometrics 142(2): 615—635.
Kaestner, Robert, and Anthony T. Lo Sasso. 2012. “Does Seeing the Doctor More Often
Keep You Out of the Hospital?” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 18255.
Kawaguchi, Daiji. 2011. “Actual Age at School Entry, Educational Outcomes, and Earnings.”
Journal of the Japanese and International Economies 25(2): 64—80.
Keeler, Emmett B., Joseph P. Newhouse, and Charles E. Phelps. 1977. “Deductibles
and the Demand for Medical Care Services: The Theory of a Consumer Facing a Variable Price
Schedule Under Uncertainty.” Econometrica 45(3): 641—656.
Keeler, Emmett, and John E. Rolph. 1988. “The Demand for Episodes of Treatment in the
Health Insurance Experiment.” Journal of Health Economics 7(4): 337—367.
Kondo, Ayako, and Hitoshi Shigeoka. 2013. “Eﬀects of Universal Health Insurance on Health
Care Utilization and Supply-Side Responses: Evidence from Japan.” Journal of Public Economics,
99: 1—23.
Kowalski, Amanda. 2012. “Estimating the Tradeoﬀ between Risk Protection and Moral Hazard
with a Nonlinear Budget Set Model of Health Insurance.” National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper No.18108.
Lee, David S., and David Card. 2008. “Regression Discontinuity Inference with Specification
Error.” Journal of Econometrics 142(2): 655—674.
Lee, David S., and Thomas Lemieux. 2010. “Regression Discontinuity Designs in Economics.”
Journal of Economic Literature 48: 281—355.
Manning, Willard G., Joseph P. Newhouse, Naihua Duan, Emmett B. Keeler, and
Arleen Leibowitz. 1987. “Health Insurance and the Demand for Medical Care: Evidence from
a Randomized Experiment.” American Economic Review 77(3): 251—277.
Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare. 2010. Estimates of National Medical Care Expenditure. http://www.e-stat.go.jp/SG1/estat/List.do?lid=000001058043 (accessed Aug 21, 2011)
Ministry
of
Health,
Labour
and
Welfare.
2009.
Report
on
Health
Service
for
Elderly
(Rojin
Iryo
Jigyo
Houkoku)
(In
Japanese).
http://www.mhlw.go.jp/bunya/iryouhoken/database/seido/roujin_houkoku.html
(accessed
May 5, 2013)
Newhouse, Joseph, and the Insurance Experiment Group. 1993. Free for All? Lessons
from the RAND Health Insurance Experiment. Harvard University Press.

26

Nishi, Akihiro, Michael J McWilliams, Haruko Noguchi, Hideki Hashimoto, Nanako
Tamiyae, and Ichiro Kawachi. 2012.“Health benefits of reduced patient cost sharing in Japan.”
Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 90(6): 426-435A.
Marsh, Christina. 2012. “Estimating Demand Elasticities using Nonlinear Pricing.” Unpublished.
Okamura, Shinichi, Ryota Kobayashi, and Tetsuo Sakamaki. 2005. “Case-mix Payment
in Japanese Medical Care.” Health Policy 74: 282—286.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. 2012. OECD Health
Data. http://www.oecd.org/els/health-systems/oecdhealthdata2012-frequentlyrequesteddata.htm
(accessed May 21, 2013)
Pierdomenico, Sante D., Marta Di Nicola, Anna L. Esposito, Rocco Di Mascio, Enzo
Ballone, Domenico Lapenna and Franco Cuccurullo. 2009. “Prognostic Value of Diﬀerent
Indices of Blood Pressure Variability in Hypertensive Patients.” American Journal of Hypertension
22: 842—847.
Zeckhauser, Richard. 1970. “Medical Insurance: A Case Study of the Tradeoﬀ between Risk
Spreading and Appropriate Incentives.” Journal of Economic Theory 2: 10—26.

27

Figure 1: Patient Cost Sharing Below 70 and Above 70 (2008)

Below 70

Above 70: Inpatient

Above 70: Outpatient

Note: See Table 1 for the formula used to calculate patient cost sharing. For those above age 70, since the
coinsurance rate and stop loss differs by outpatient visits and inpatient admissions, I show two separate lines for
each service. For those below 70, there was no distinction between outpatient visits and inpatient admissions in
year 2008. One thousand Yen roughly equaled 10 US dollars in 2008.

28

Figure 2: Age Profile for Outpatient Visits
2A. Overall Outpatient Visits (Log Scale)

2B. Days from Last Outpatient Visit for Repeat Patients

Note: I pool outpatient data for 1984–2008 from the Patient Survey. The markers in 2A represent the averages of
residuals from regressions of log outcomes on birth month fixed effects and survey year fixed effects (aggregated
by age in months). The markers in 2B represent the simple average. The lines represent fitted regressions from
models that assume a quadratic age profile, fully interacted with a dummy for age 70 or older.

29

Figure 3: Age Profile for Outpatient Visits for Selected Diagnoses (Log Scale)
A. Heart Disease

C. Respiratory Disease

B. Cerebrovascular Disease

D. ACSCs

Note: I pool outpatient data for 1984–2008 from the Patient Survey. Except for Panel A, the corresponding RD estimates at age 70 are statistically
significant at the 5 percent level. The markers represent the averages of residuals from regressions of log outcomes on birth month fixed effects and
survey year fixed effects (aggregated by age in months). The lines represent fitted regressions from models that assume a quadratic age profile, fully
interacted with a dummy for age 70 or older. “ACSCs” stands for Ambulatory Care Sensitive Conditions developed by the Agency for Healthcare
Research and Quality (AHRQ). See Table D in the Online Appendix for the list of ACSCs.

30

Figure 4: Age Profile for Inpatient Admissions (Log Scale)
4A. Overall

-.1

0

.1

.2

4B. With Surgery

65

66

67

68

69

70
Age

71

72

73

74

75

Note: I pool discharge data for 1984–2008 from the Patient Survey. The markers represent the averages of
residuals from regressions of log outcomes on birth month fixed effects, admission month fixed effects, and
survey year fixed effects (aggregated by age in months). The lines represent fitted regressions from models that
assume a quadratic age profile, fully interacted with a dummy for age 70 or older.

31

0

RD Estimates at 70 (x100)
5
10
15

20

Figure 5: RD Estimates and Fraction of Weekend Admissions

.05

.1
.15
.2
Fraction of Admissions during Weekend
Note: I pool discharge data for 1984–2008 from the Patient Survey. The y-axis represents the RD estimates at age
70, and the x-axis is the fraction of admissions during weekends for each diagnosis group. The size of each dot
reflects the number of observations in the discharge data for the control group (those aged 69). See Table G in the
Online Appendix for the list of diagnosis groups. I omit diagnosis groups with less than 1 percent of the total
observations, because their sample sizes are too small to provide credible estimates. The solid line is a linear fit,
using the reciprocal of the variance of each RD estimate as weight for the observation.

-.4

-.2

0

.2

.4

Figure 6: Age Profile of Overall Mortality

65

66

67

68

69

70
71
72
73
74
75
Age
Note: I pool mortality data for 1984–2008 for patients born during 1919–1933. The markers represent the
averages of residuals from regressions of log outcomes on birth month fixed effects and death month fixed
effects (aggregated by age in months). The lines represent fitted regressions from models that assume a quadratic
age profile, fully interacted with a dummy for age 70 or older.

32

0

Thousand Yen
200
400

600

Figure 7: Age Profile of Out-of-pocket Medical Expenditures (2007)
7A. At the 75th, 90th, and 95th Percentile

65

66

67

68

69

70

71

72

73

74

75

80

90

100

Age
75th

90th

95th

-400

-300

Thousand Yen
-200
-100

0

100

7B. RD Estimates at Each Quantile

0

10

20

30

40

50
60
Percentile

70

Note: The data are sourced from the Comprehensive Survey of Living Conditions for 2007. I multiply the monthly
out-of-pocket expenditures by 12 to convert the values to an annual basis. One thousand Yen roughly equaled 10
US dollars in 2007. The markers in Figure 7A represent actual averages (age measured in months), and the lines
represent fitted regressions from models that assume a quadratic age profile, fully interacted with a dummy for age
70 or older. Figure 7B plots the RD estimates at each quantile along with their 95 percent confidence interval. The
confidence interval for the 99th percentile (-989.38, -9.25) is not shown on the graph.

33

Table 1: Formula for Patient Cost Sharing Below and Above Age 70
A. Outpatient Visits
Below 70
Coinsurance
Employment- Employmentbased
based
(Employee,
(Dependent,
Percent)
Percent)
10
30
10
30
10
30
10
30
10
30
20
30

Year

NHI
(percent)

1984
1987
1990
1993
1996
1999

30(1)
30(1)
30(1)
30(1)
30(1)
30(1)

2002

30(1)

20

30

2005

30

30

30

2008

30

30

30

Stop-loss
(thousand Yen)
51.0
54.0
57.0
63.0
63.0
63.6
63.6+(TC-318)
×0.01
72.3+(TC-241)
×0.01
80.1+(TC-267)
×0.01

Above 70
Coinsurance
Stop-Loss
(thousand
All
Yen)
0.4/month
0.8/ month
0.8/month
1.0/month
1.02/month
0.53/day (2)

-

10

12.0

10

12.0

10

12.0

Note: (1) Among the retired, former employees pay 20 percent, and their dependents, 30 percent. (2) Up to four
times per month. TC stands for total cost per month. All monetary values (i.e., values not expressed as percent) are
in thousand Yen (roughly 10 US dollars in 2008).

Year

NHI
(percent)

1984
1987
1990
1993
1996
1999

30(1)
30(1)
30(1)
30(1)
30(1)
30(1)

2002

30(1)

2005

30

2008

30

B. Inpatient Admissions
Below 70
Coinsurance
Employment- EmploymentStop-Loss
based
based
(thousand Yen)
(Employee,
(Dependent,
Percent)
Percent)
10
20
51.0
10
20
54.0
10
20
57.0
10
20
63.0
10
20
63.0
20
20
63.6
63.6+(TC-318)
20
20
×0.01
72.3+(TC-241)
30
30
×0.01
80.1+(TC-267)
30
30
×0.01

Above 70
Coinsurance
Stop-Loss
(thousand
All
Yen)
0.4/day (2)
0.4/day
0.4/day
0.7/day
0.71/day
1.2/day

-

10

37.2

10

40.2

10

44.4

Note: (1) Among the retired, both former employees and their dependents pay 20 percent. (2) Up to two months.
TC stands for total cost per month. All monetary values (i.e., values not expressed as percent) are in thousand Yen
(roughly 10 US dollars in 2008).

34

Table 2: Estimated Out-of-pocket Medical Expenditure per Month
Percent Reached
Stop-loss among
Insurance Claims

Out-of-pocket Medical Expenditure
(thousand Yen)

Type of Service
Outpatient Visits

Below 70

Above 70

(1)

(2)

Percent
Reduction
((1)-(2))/(3)

4.0

1.1

41.7

13.0

Below 70

Above 70

(4)

(5)

73

0.1

0.6

69

14.6

0.0

Inpatient Admissions
Note: All monetary values (i.e., values not expressed as percent) are in thousand Yen (roughly 10 US dollars in 2008).

Table 3: RD Estimates on Outpatient Visits at Age 70
A. All
B. By Period
Years 1984–1999
Years 2002–2008
C. By Visit Type
First visits
Repeat visits
D. Days from Last Outpatient Visit
Among Repeat Visits
1 day
2–3 days
4–7 days
15–30 days
31–60 days
E. By Institution
Hospital
Clinic

10.3***
(1.8)

F. By Referral
Without referral

With referral
12.0***
(1.8)
6.9*
G. By Gender
Male
(3.6)
Female
12.7***
(3.3)
10.3*** H. By Diagnosis
(1.9)
Heart disease
Cerebrovascular disease
17.9***
(2.5)
16.4***
(4.4)
13.3***
(2.8)
2.8
(2.9)
-1.5
(4.3)

Respiratory disease
Ambulatory Care Sensitive
Conditions
Cancer

Diseases of the nervous system and
sense organs
Diseases of the genitourinary
system
Diseases of the skin

5.1**
(2.0)
13.8***
(1.8)

Diseases of the musculoskeletal
system

10.5***
(1.9)
6.4
(5.2)
11.3***
(2.2)
9.7***
(1.9)
3.0
(4.6)
15.2***
(5.9)
14.3***
(3.6)
8.2***
(2.3)
6.1
(8.0)
10.4***
(2.8)
14.9***
(5.4)
17.4***
(4.9)
18.6***
(2.5)

Note: Each cell is the estimate from separate estimated RDs at age 70. The specification is quadratic in age, fully interacted
with dummy for age 70 or older among people between ages 65–75. Controls are dummies for each survey year and each
month of birth. I use pooled samples of 1984–2008 outpatient data. Sample size is 1,080. Robust standard errors are in
parentheses. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels respectively. As all
coefficients on Post70 and their standard errors have been multiplied by 100, they can be interpreted as percentage changes.

35

Table 4: RD Estimates on Inpatient Admissions at Age 70
A.

All

8.2***
(2.6)

B.

By period
Years 1984–1999
Years 2002–2008

C.

By admission day
First half of the month
Second half of the month

D.

Surgery
Without surgery
With surgery

E.

Type of Surgery
Open-head surgery
Open-heart surgery
Open-stomach surgery
Musculoskeletal surgery
Endoscopic surgery: stomach
Intraocular lens implantation

9.6***
(2.2)
5.3**
(2.6)

F.

Gender
Male
Female

G.

9.8***
(2.8)
8.7***
(3.2)

By Diagnosis
Heart disease
Hypertensive disease
Ischemic heart disease

Cerebrovascular disease
6.4**
(2.6)
12.0***
(3.5)
11.3
(7.9)
8.1
(8.0)
12.6**
(5.3)
5.6
(5.0)
8.7
(7.1)
22.9***
(5.2)

Intracerebral hemorrhage
Cerebral infarction

Respiratory Diseases
Ambulatory Care Sensitive Conditions

Cancer
Cataract
H.

Location Before Admission
Outpatients in the same hospital
Other

8.1***
(2.8)
9.0***
(2.8)
11.4**
(5.7)
4.8
(5.5)
14.5**
(7.1)
10.5***
(3.9)
8.0
(6.1)
12.8***
(4.6)
6.9
(4.8)
5.6
(5.2)
6.5
(4.6)
22.6***
(6.5)
9.7***
(2.9)
4.3
(2.7)

Note: Each cell is the estimate from separate estimated RDs at age 70. The specification is quadratic in age, fully interacted
with a dummy for age 70 or older among people between ages 65–75. Controls are dummies for each survey year, each
month of birth, and each month of admission. I use pooled samples of 1984–2008 discharge data. Sample size is 3,240
excluding Panels E and H. Sample size for Panel E is 1,440 (4 years, 1999–2008) and that for Panel H is 1,800 (5 years,
1996–2008), since these data were only collected in later years. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***, **, and *
denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels respectively. As all coefficients on Post70 and their
standard errors have been multiplied by 100, they can be interpreted as percentage changes.

36

Table 5: RD Estimates on Mortality at Age 70

A.

All

B.

Gender

Male
Female
C.

By Diagnosis
Cancer
Heart diseases
Cerebrovascular diseases
Respiratory diseases

Basic

67-73
years

Cubic

(1)
-0.2
(1.1)

(2)
0.1
(0.8)

(3)
0.0
(0.9)

-0.2
(1.3)
-0.2
(1.2)

0.3
(1.1)
0.1
(0.9)

0.1
(1.2)
-0.1
(1.0)

-0.6
(1.3)
0.3
(1.6)
0.3
(1.6)
1.5
(2.4)

-0.6
(1.3)
0.0
(1.4)
1.2
(1.6)
1.9
(2.6)

-0.5
(1.4)
0.0
(1.5)
2.1
(1.7)
0.0
(2.7)

Note: Each cell is the estimate from separate estimated RDs at age 70. The dependent
variable is the log of the number of deaths. I use pooled 1984–2008 mortality data for
patients born during 1919–1933. Sample size is 21,600. Robust standard errors are in
parentheses. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10
percent levels respectively. As all coefficients on Post70 and their standard errors have
been multiplied by 100, they can be interpreted as percentage changes.

37

The E¤ect of Patient Cost Sharing on Utilization, Health,
and Risk Protection
Hitoshi Shigeoka

A

Online Appendix

A.1

Derivation of Out-of-pocket Health Expenditures

This section describes how I convert the cost sharing formula in Table 1 into actual monthly outof-pocket health expenditures in Table 2. Ideally, I would like to have access to information on
actual out-of-pocket expenditures at the individual level (like Medical Expenditure Panel Survey
in the US). In the absence of such data, I attempt to derive the same.
Fortunately, I know the exact formula for cost sharing (Table 1) and have access to individuallevel insurance claim data, which is the monthly summary of medical expenditures claimed for
insurance reimbursement to medical institutions (called the Survey of Medical Care Activities in
Public Health Insurance). Since a portion of this monthly total medical expenditure is paid as
patient cost sharing, using the formula in Table 1, I can compute the average out-of-pocket medical
expenditures at each age for each survey year of the Patient Survey.1
The insurance claim data are monthly, since reimbursements to the medical institutions are
conventionally paid monthly in Japan. Thus, the stop-loss is set monthly, rather than annually,
unlike the US. The age of patients is measured in years in this data.
The steps used to compute the average monthly out-of-pocket expenditures are as follows. Note
that the cost sharing formula di¤ers by outpatient visits and inpatient admissions; since inpatient
admissions are more expensive and put more …nancial burden on patients, the coinsurance rate of
inpatient admissions tends to be set lower than that of outpatient visits.
1

The remaining medical expenditures are paid by insurance societies, the source of this money being a fund of
pooled premiums of insured members and assistance from the government.

1

A.1.1

Patients below age 70

First, I compute the average monthly out-of-pocket health expenditures for 69-year-old patients.
For those below age 70, the coinsurance rate is determined by the type of health insurance: National Health Insurance (NHI), employees in employment-based health insurance, and dependents
of employees in employment-based health insurance. Among those subscribing to NHI, the coinsurance rate di¤ers among those who are still employed, retired former employees, and dependents of
retied employees. I use information from the Comprehensive Survey of Living Conditions (CSLC)
to compute the rate of those employed among the NHI recipients. Also, assuming that males who
are not employed are retired former employees and that females who are not employed are dependents of retired employees, I compute the weighted average of the coinsurance rate for NHI. This
assumption does not make any major di¤erence to this computation since the fraction of retired
former employees is quite small. In fact, the coinsurance rate for only outpatient visits during
1984–2002 di¤ers by 10 percent between retired former employees and dependents of retired employees, and the computed weighted coinsurance rate for NHI is around 28 percent, which is very
close to the coinsurance rate for the employed and dependents of retired employees subscribing
to NHI (30 percent). For inpatient admissions, this assumption plays no role, since the coinsurance rate for inpatient admissions is the same (20 percent) for retired former employees and their
dependents.
Then, actual out-of-pocket medical expenditures, AMipt , for individual i whose health insurance
plan is p (p= 1-3, where 1: NHI, 2: employees in employment-based health insurance, and 3:
dependents of employees in employment-based health insurance), and who use service j (j =1-2,
where 1: inpatient admissions, 2: outpatient visits) in survey year t, is given as follows:
AMipt = min(EMijpt ; SLjpt )
where EMijpt is the expected payment without stop-loss (or the maximum amount of out-of-pocket
expenditure), and SLjpt is the stop-loss for each plan p and each service use j in survey year t.
Suppose there is an individual whose total medical expenditure for inpatient use in June 2008
is 1 million Yen, and the coinsurance rate is 30 percent. This indicates an EMijpt of 300 thousand
Yen. On the other hand, SLjpt is 87,430 Yen (80; 100 + (1; 000; 000

267; 000)

0:01, according

to the formula in Table 2). Since SL is smaller than EM , AM is 87,430 Yen. I compute AM for

2

each individual-level claim data and take the simple average to compute the average expenditure
AMjpt by each plan type p, for each service j in survey year t.
Finally, I take a weighted average of each insurance type Wpt obtained from the CSLC. Therefore, the average monthly out-of-pocket medical expenditure AM for age 69 is
3
X
AMjt (age69) =
(Wpt

AMjpt )

p=1

for use of service j in each survey year t of the Patient Survey. I take Wpt for each year t from the
CSLC in year t

1, since the CSLC is conducted a year before the Patient Survey. The exception

is the Patient Survey for 1984, for which I use the fraction from 1987 of the CSLC as a weight,
since it is the closest year for which information is available. The majority of 69 year-olds (roughly
70-80 percent) subscribe to NHI, and the rest to employment-based health insurance.
A.1.2

Patients above age 70

Next, I compute the average out-of-pocket health expenditures for 70-year-old patients, all of whom
receive Elderly Health Insurance. Since the utilization is endogenous (i.e., the observed out-ofpocket medical expenditure already re‡ects the change in cost sharing), I compute a counterfactual
out-of-pocket expenditure for 70-year-old patients assuming that they have the same amount of
utilization as the average 69-year-old. I compute the average monthly frequency of outpatient
visits and the average length of stay for inpatient admissions for age 69. Then, I apply the formula
for age 70 to compute the monthly average out-of-pocket medical expenditures in the same manner
as I have done for age 69.
Finally, the overall out-of-pocket medical expenditure in Table 2 is the weighted average of
the out-of-pocket medical expenditure across all survey years for outpatient visits and inpatient
admissions, using the populations at age 69 in each survey year as the weights. Table K in the
Online Appendix shows the estimated out-of-pocket medical expenditure for each survey year.
It is worth mentioning that these …gures are a rough estimate of actual out-of-pocket medical
expenditures, since the actual cost sharing is slightly more complicated. For example, di¤erent
coinsurance rates are applied to speci…c populations, and there is another way to reduce out-ofpocket medical expenditures. For example, in October 2002, the coinsurance rate for those over
age 70 with high income— 7 percent of the population, according to Ikegami et al. (2011)— was

3

raised from 10 percent to 20 percent. Also, for all ages, the stop-loss is set lower for people with
very low income. Nonetheless, since most of the patients are covered under the basic cost sharing
formula, the cost sharing I estimate should be within an acceptable range.

A.2

Cost-Bene…t Analysis

In this section, I conduct a simple cost–bene…t analysis. Since it requires making a number of
assumptions, the results are more speculative. Nonetheless, the exercise provides a rough estimate
on the social costs and bene…ts of the marginal change in cost sharing at age 70.
To understand the costs and bene…ts in this framework, I …rst describe the items of social
costs and bene…ts associated with the change in the price of health care services at age 70. The
program incurs two types of costs. The …rst entails extra spending for mechanical reasons, i.e., the
government has to bear additional payments due to higher reimbursements for consumers above
70 (I denote this as item #1). The second refers to e¢ ciency costs from the moral hazard on
increased health spending (I denote this as item #2). The sum of items #1 and #2 is the amount
of increased spending by the government. Since marginal costs are associated with raising public
revenue, these numbers have to be multiplied by the marginal cost of funds (MCF) to estimate the
total social cost. On the bene…t side, there are two bene…ts. The …rst concerns the mechanical gain
by lower cost sharing accrued to consumers, which is exactly the mirror image of the increase in
government reimbursement (i.e., item #1). The other bene…t is risk protection against unexpected
out-of-pocket medical spending, which I explain at length later on in this Appendix (I denote this
as item #3). Note that since I did not …nd any short-term health e¤ects, the social bene…t does
not include a health bene…t. Thus, the net bene…t can be written as follows.
N et Benef it = (T otal Benef it)
= (#3 + #1)
= #3

(M CF

M CF
1)

(1)

(T otal Cost)
(#1 + #2)
#1

M CF

#2

Note that the mechanical cost is multiplied by (MCF-1), which is the excess burden of the
public fund or dead weight loss, while the moral hazard is multiplied by MCF, since there is no
bene…t accrued by consumers to o¤set the cost. Next, I estimate each component (items #1, #2,
and #3).
4

A.2.1

Social Cost

The …rst cost is the mechanical cost. Since the out-of-pocket medical expenditures reported in
the CSLC do not distinguish between outpatient visits and inpatient admissions, I need to make
an assumption to estimate the out-of-pocket spending distribution that mechanically adjusts for
what the Elderly Health Insurance would have covered if it were applied to those just below age
70. Since the coinsurance rate for both inpatient admissions and outpatient visits was 30 percent
for those below 70, and 10 percent for those above 70 in 2007, I assume that two-thirds of the
out-of-pocket medical expenditures just below age 70 is the mechanical cost.2 Since the average
out-of-pocket medical expenditure just below age 70 is 152 thousand Yen (see the …rst row of Table
I in the Appendix), the average mechanical cost is 102 thousand Yen (1,020 US dollars).
Second, there are e¢ ciency costs from the moral hazard on increased health spending. As seen
from the results on utilization, most of the increased spending may have been socially ine¢ cient.
However, it is di¢ cult to pinpoint exactly what may be considered as socially e¢ cient use of
medical services. By treating the entire increase in utilization as a social cost, I provide an upper
bound on the e¢ ciency costs of lowered cost sharing. The di¤erence between the counterfactual
and actual out-of-pocket medical expenditure just above age 70 should be the moral hazard. The
…rst row in Column (1) in Table I in the Appendix indicates that the counterfactual mean value
of the out-of-pocket medical expenditure is 51 thousand Yen (= 152/3). The actual out-of-pocket
medical expenditure just above the cut-o¤ is 100 thousand Yen (152 - 52), and therefore, the moral
hazard is 49 thousand Yen.
A.2.2

Social Bene…t: Welfare Gains from Risk Protection

To estimate the reduction in risk exposure, I combine the expected utility framework with the
quantile RD estimates and calculate the change in the risk premium associated with out-of-pocket
expenditure as a measure of the welfare gain from lower cost sharing at age 70.3
Speci…cally, I assume that each individual has utility U (C), which is the function of net nonhealth consumption C. I then assume the individual must satisfy a budget constraint for each
2
This assumption is reasonable since only 2 percent of those aged 65–69 pay beyond the stop-loss in the sample.
Note that Table 2 shows that 14.6 percent of those aged 65–69 reach the stop-loss conditional on being admitted.
3
This approach is akin to that used in Feldstein and Gruber (1995), Finkelstein and McKnight (2008), and
Englehardt and Gruber (2011). My welfare estimates may be bound to be lower than those in the US, since it
is much less likely to have catastrophic health expenses in Japan due to the government’s stringent control over
national fee schedules (Ikegami and Campbell, 1995).

5

period C = Y

M , where Y denotes per-period income, and M is the individual’s out-of-pocket

medical expenditure. M is a random variable with the probability density function f (M ) with
support [0; M ].
I calculate the change in the risk premium associated with lower cost sharing by computing
the risk premium for both just below (denoted as zero) and above age 70 (denoted as one). For
those just below age 70, the risk premium (or certainty equivalence)
amount such that
U (Y

0)

=

Z

0

can be de…ned by a …xed

M

U (Y

M0 )f (M0 )dM0 :

(2)

0

The expression measures the amount a risk-averse individual would be willing to pay to insure
against random variation in out-of-pocket spending.
For those just above age 70, lower cost sharing at age 70 reduces not only the variance but
also the mean of the out-of-pocket spending distribution. However, since the di¤erence between
the mean values of M0 and M1 is simply a transfer between the insured and insurers (or the
government), I calculate the certainty equivalence for the out-of-pocket risk distribution just above
age 70 with an adjustment to make the mean of the risk distribution just above age 70 equal to
that of just below age 70 (i.e., I evaluate the mean-preserving spread in risk).
Thus, I de…ne the risk premium

U (Y

1)

=

1

Z

for those just above age 70 as
M

U (Y

M1 +

1

0 )f (M1 )dM1 ;

0

where

0

and

1

are the mean of M0 and M1 respectively.

A decrease in risk exposure just above 70 to just below 70 is re‡ected as a decline in the risk
premium; the absolute value of this decline

provides a measure of the insurance value, and

hence, the welfare gain of lower cost sharing. Thus,
=j
In practice, I measure

1

0 j:

(3)

in the three steps. First, I estimate the following equation for each

quantile q
Miq =

q
0

+

q
1 P ost70i

6

0

+ f q (a) + Xi

q

+ "i ;

(4)

where Miq is the out-of-pocket medical expenditure at quantile q, and f q (a) is a quantile-speci…c
0

smooth function of age, where age a is normalized to zero at age 70. Xi are demographic controls
in the form of dummy variables for marital status, gender, region and birth month. Note that
Figure 5 in the main text plots

q
1,

along with their 95 percent con…dence interval.

Second, I use these quantile estimates to calculate for each individual i in the sample the quan^ q , conditional on the individual’s characteristics
tiles of the out-of-pocket spending distribution M
i
0
^ q for those
Xi just below and above age 70. Speci…cally, for each i = 1; :::; N in the sample, M
i0

below age 70 can be written as
^ q = ^ q0 + X 0 ^ q ;
M
i
i0

(5)

for q = 1; :::; 99, where ^ q0 and ^ q come from equation (4) at each quantile q as above.
For those above age 70, I compute the counterfactual out-of-pocket spending distribution the
individual faces once the quantile treatment estimates of lower cost sharing estimated in equation
^ q for those above age 70 can be written as
(4) are applied. Therefore, M
i1
^q = M
^ q + ^ q1 ;
M
i1
i0

(6)

where ^ q1 is the RD estimate from equation (4) for each quantile q.
Because there are 99 quantile estimates for each individual i, to ensure that the sum of the
probabilities is one, I set conditional out-of-pocket spending at the very bottom of the distribution
^ i10 = M
^ i00 = 0. I now have 100 points of equal probability of occurrence in
to zero, or q = 0, i.e., M
the out-of-pocket spending distribution for each individual. Following Finkelstein and McKnight
(2008) and Englehardt and Gruber (2011), I truncate predicted out-of-pocket spending from below
at zero and from above at 80 percent of individual income as a benchmark.
Finally, I calculate the risk premium

0i

for those below age 70 for each individual i by solving

" 99
1 X
U (Yi
0i ) =
100 q=1

U (Y

#

^ 0i ) + U0 ;
M

(7)

where U0 = U (Yi ), and the right-hand side is the average utility, given its income Yi for each
individual. In a similar vein, I calculate the risk premium
solving
U (Y

1i )

=

1
100

"

99
X

U (Yi

q=1

7

1i

^ 1i + ^ 1
M

for individuals just above age 70 by
#

^ 0 ) + U1 ;

where U1 = U (Yi + ^ 1

^ 0 ), and I make an adjustment by subtracting from the individual’s income

the average di¤erence in out-of-pocket expenditures between the 100 estimates for the original
distribution just below age 70 (^ 0 ) and the 100 estimates for the counterfactual distribution (^ 1 ).
Following the literature, I specify the constant relative risk aversion (CRRA) utility function
U (C) =

1
1

C1

, which implies the Arrow–Pratt measure of relative risk aversion of

=

CU
U0

00

.

For a typical risk aversion of 3 in the CRRA utility function (see e.g., McClellan and Skinner,
2006), I estimate that this decline in risk premium, or welfare gain, is 37 thousand Yen (370 US
Dollars) per person. This is less than the average cost of the moral hazard.
However, it is important to note that the previous estimate on the decline in risk exposure
is understated, since the out-of-pocket expenditures include the behavioral response of increased
utilization of health care services. Here, I once again assume that cost sharing would have been
one-third if Elderly Health Insurance was mechanically applied to those just below age 70. For a
typical risk aversion (= 3) in the CRRA utility function, using this mechanically adjusted out-ofpocket spending, I estimate that this decline in risk premium is doubled from 37 to 98 thousand
Yen per person.
Table J in the Online Appendix shows the sensitivity of the welfare gain to two particular
assumptions: risk aversion and maximum level of out-of-pocket medical expenditures as a share of
income. In fact, the estimates are quite sensitive to these two assumptions. First, Panel A shows
that compared to an estimated welfare gain of 98 thousand Yen per person with a relative risk
aversion of 3, the welfare gain falls to about 8 thousand Yen with a relative risk aversion of 1 and
rises to 306 thousand Yen with a relative risk aversion of 5 (assuming the cap on out-of-pocket
spending is 80 percent of income). Next, if I replace my baseline 80 percent cap on out-of-pocket
medical expenditures as a share of income with a cap of 60 percent, the estimated welfare gain
falls from 98 thousand Yen to 33 thousand Yen, and if I impose a cap of 90 percent, the welfare
estimate rises to 203 thousand Yen (assuming a relative risk aversion of 3). Finally, Panel B shows
the risk premium at other percentiles. The median is 85 thousand Yen, and the 95th percentile is
214 thousand Yen, suggesting the welfare gains are skewed.
A.2.3

Discussion

My central estimate of risk reduction is 98 thousand Yen per person (980 US Dollars). One way
to gauge the size of the estimate is to simply plug estimated bene…ts and costs into equation (1)

8

and calculate the MCF such that the two are equal. Since I have the estimated values for all
components (items #1, #2, and #3), it is straightforward that the MCF is 1.32, or in other words,
the MCF should be less than 1.32 to have positive net bene…ts. This value is very close to some
of the estimates of the MCF in the 1990s (e.g., 1.3; see Poterba, 1996).4
Put di¤erently, assuming the MCF is 1.3, the sum of the program …nancing costs and moral
hazard suggests that the total annual social cost was 94.3 thousand Yen (102

0:3 + 49

1:3) per

elderly bene…ciary. Here, the deadweight loss and moral hazard associated with program …nancing
was responsible for one-third and two-thirds of the total cost. My estimate of risk reduction (98
thousand Yen per person) suggests that the welfare gain of risk protection from lower patient cost
sharing is comparable to the total social cost, indicating that the welfare gain of risk protection
may fully cover the total social cost in this setting.
Although somewhat speculative, a simple cost–bene…t analysis shows that the welfare gain of
risk protection from lower cost sharing is on the same order of magnitude as the total social cost.
However, there are a number of caveats to my welfare calculation. On the one hand, the stylized
welfare calculations may overstate the welfare gains, since the use of a one-period model ignores the
possibility that individuals can use savings or other mechanisms to smooth expenditure risk over
several periods, thus potentially leading me to overstate the welfare gains from lower cost sharing.
This may indeed be the case, since the elderly seem to have some savings.5 On the other hand, the
welfare gains may be understated because the calculations were based on an annual, rather than
lifetime, measure of medical expenditure risk. In fact, there is some evidence that out-of-pocket
medical expenditures are positively serially correlated (Feenberg and Skinner, 1994; French and
Jones, 2004). These studies suggest that the lifetime distribution of out-of-pocket spending may be
even more right-skewed than the annual distribution; therefore, the reduction in risk exposure in
the lifetime scale may be even greater.6 Furthermore, my welfare calculation does not incorporate
the welfare gains from health improvements. While I do not …nd any short-term reduction in
4

There is no consensus estimate for the MCF, since it depends on behavioral responses to taxation and may
di¤er by country at any given point in time. Nonetheless, to have a rough estimate, I focus on income tax, since
it is a major source of taxes. The simplest formula is (1 1( t )) where is the elasticity of taxable income and t
1

t

is the income tax rate (Kopczuk, 2005). Assuming that both the elasticity of taxable income and the tax rate are
0.4, the MCF would be 1.36, which is close to the value I use (1.3).
5
The average net savings at age 69 is 5,418 thousand Yen, which is roughly two and half times the average
annual income (1,860 thousand Yen). Since saving and debt are only reported at the household level, I divide the
net saving (i.e., saving - debt) by the number of household members.
6
Further, the stylized model treats medical expenditures as a¤ecting the budget constraint only and does not
allow for any utility change from increased medical expenditures.

9

mortality or improvement in any self-reported health measures, it is possible that preventive care
induced by lower cost sharing at age 70 may prevent future severe health events and thus improve
health in the long run. It is infeasible to estimate long-run e¤ects in this framework, because
individuals eventually age into treatment.

A.3

Data Appendix

In this study, I use a variety of datasets collected mainly by the Ministry of Health, Labour and
Welfare. A brief description of each dataset is provided in this data appendix. The English to
Japanese translations of the dataset titles can be found at the website of the Ministry of Health,
Labour and Welfare (http://www.mhlw.go.jp/toukei/itiran/eiyaku.html).
Name of Dataset
Period
Interval
1 Patient Survey
1984-2008
Every three year
(9 rounds in total)
2 Comprehensive Survey of Living Conditions
1986-2007
Every three year
(8 rounds in total)
3 Survey of Medical Care Activities in Public Health 1984-2008
Every year
Insurance
4 Vital Statistics: Mortality data
1984-2008
Every year
1. Patient Survey
Source: http://www.mhlw.go.jp/english/database/db-hss/dl/sps_2008_06.pdf
Started in 1948, the Patient Survey is a national sample survey of hospitals and clinics that
gathers information on the utilization of medical institutions in Japan. The comprehensive version of the Patient Survey has been conducted every three years since 1984. It covers roughly
2,000–7,000 hospitals and 3,000–6,000 clinics per survey year. It collects information on the International Classi…cation of Diseases (ICD) codes, patients’principal sources of payment, and limited
sociodemographic characteristics such as gender and patients’place of residence. Individual-level
patient microdata …les are available from 1984 onwards.
There are two datasets in the Patient Survey, namely outpatient data and discharge data, which
I use to examine outpatient visits and inpatient admissions respectively.
1.1 Outpatient Data
The outpatient data in the Patient Survey is collected on one day in mid-October (normally a
weekday in the second week) and includes information on all patients who visit hospitals or clinics
as outpatients (i.e., visits to hospitals or clinics not culminating in hospitalization). The datasets
10

contain 75,000–100,000 individuals/outpatient visitors. This data include the exact dates of birth
and the survey, the latter being equivalent to the exact dates of visits. This enables me to compute
age in days at the time of the outpatient visit. The sample size of the outpatient data is about
500,000–1,500,000 per survey year.
1.2 Discharge Data
The discharge data in the Patient Survey report details of all the inpatients discharged from
the surveyed hospitals and clinics in the month of September of the survey year. The datasets
contain about 180,000–970,000 inpatient records per survey year. The sample size has become
larger in more recent years. The data include the exact dates of birth, admission, discharge, and
surgery. The data also contain information about whether the patient needed surgery and the
types of main surgeries conducted (collected from 1999 onwards). Unlike the CSLC, the discharge
data include patients who die in the surveyed hospitals and clinics.
2. Comprehensive Survey of Living Conditions
Source: http://www.mhlw.go.jp/english/database/db-hss/cslc.html
The CSLC is a nationwide repeated cross-section survey of households that has been gathering
information on the health of the Japanese people since 1986. The CSLC collects information on
sociodemographic characteristics and health-related topics. The long version of CSLC (used in
this study) is conducted every three years. Individuals are sampled randomly from 3000–5000
districts from the National Census, which is conducted every …ve years. The microdata …les are
available from …scal year 1986 onwards. The survey reports the month of birth. Knowing the
month the survey was conducted in, I use this information to compute the age in months. The
long version of the CSLC consists of three questionnaires: household, health, and income and
savings. A long-term care questionnaire was added in 2004. I mainly use the data pertaining to
the health questionnaire that collects information on self-reported physical and mental health and
limitations in individuals’daily activities.
I also use the information concerning insurance in the household questionnaire to compute the
average health insurance coverage of each health insurance type. I map the same to the Survey of
Medical Care Activities in Public Health Insurance to derive out-of-pocket medical expenditures.
The household forms also include basic individual sociodemographic information, such as gender,
marital status, employment, and household size. The income and savings questionnaire records the
amounts of income, savings, and debt as well as the source of income. Information on out-of-pocket

11

medical expenditures at the individual level was collected in 2007 alone. I use individual income
and out-of-pocket medical expenditures to compute the welfare gains from risk reduction.
The survey typically covers 240,000–290,000 households and 740,000–800,000 household members in each round. The income and savings questionnaire is conducted for approximately only 15
percent of the whole sample.
3. Survey of Medical Care Activities in Public Health Insurance
Source: http://www.mhlw.go.jp/english/database/db-hss/dl/shw-03.pdf
The Survey of Medical Care Activities in Public Health Insurance is a survey of health insurance
claims data, which gathers yearly information on detailed statements of medical fees. I use this
information to derive the average monthly out-of-pocket medical expenditures for those who use
medical institutions as described in Appendix Section A1.
Due to the monthly reimbursements to medical institutions, the claim data are a summary of the
medical expenditures per month per individual using these institutions in June of the survey year.
The data are collected from the prefectural branches of the Social Insurance Medical Fee Payment
Fund for employment-based health insurance recipients and the Federation of National Health
Insurance for NHI recipients. Health insurance claim data from society-managed employmentbased health insurance recipients has been collected since 1999. The individual’s age is recorded
in years.
4. Vital Statistics: Mortality Data
Source: http://www.mhlw.go.jp/english/database/db-hw/outline/index.html
The 1984–2008 National Mortality Details Files is an annual census of deaths in Japan. The
data contain the universe of deaths and information on the deceased’s dates of birth and death,
which enables me to compute age in days at the time of death. The data also include gender,
nationality, place of death, and cause of death, the latter being classi…ed according to the ICD. In
Japan, the ICD9 classi…cation was used till 1994, after which it adopted ICD10.

References
[1] Engelhardt, Gary V., and Gruber, Jonathan. 2011. “Medicare Part D and the Financial
Protection of the Elderly.”American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 3(4): 77–102.

12

[2] Feenberg, Daniel, and Jonathan Skinner. 1994. “The Risk and Duration of Catastrophic
Health Expenditures.”Review of Economics and Statistics 76(4): 663–647.
[3] Feldstein, Martin, and Jonathan Gruber. 1995. “A Major Risk Approach to Health
Insurance Reform.”Tax Policy and the Economy 9: 103–130.
[4] Finkelstein, Amy, and Robin McKnight. 2008. “What Did Medicare Do? The Initial
Impact of Medicare on Mortality and Out of Pocket Medical Spending.” Journal of Public
Economics 92(7): 1644–1668.
[5] French, Eric, and John Bailey Jones. 2004. “On the Distribution and Dynamics of Health
Care Costs.”Journal of Applied Econometrics 19(6): 705–721.
[6] Ikegami, Naoki, and John C. Campbell. 1995. “Medical Care in Japan,” New England
Journal of Medicine, 333: 1295–1299.
[7] Ikegami, Naoki, Byung-Kwang Yoo, Hideki Hashimot, Masatoshi Matsumoto, Hiroya Ogata, Akira Babazono, Ryo Watanabe, Kenji Shibuya, Bong-Min Yang,
Michael R Reich, and Yasuki Kobayashi. 2011. “Japanese Universal Health Coverage:
Evolution, Achievements, and Challenges.”The Lancet 378(9796): 1094–1105.
[8] Kopczuk, Wojciech. 2005. “Tax Bases, Tax Rates and the Elasticity of Reported Income.”
Journal of Public Economics 89(11–12): 2093–2119.
[9] Poterba, James. 1996. “Government Intervention in the Markets for Education and Health
Care: How and Why?”in Individual and Social Responsibility Victor Fuchs (ed). University of
Chicago Press.

13

Appendix Figures and Tables
FIGURES
Figure A: Seasonality in Day of Birth in the Patient Survey Data
This figure shows that there is substantial seasonality and heaping in the reported birthdays of patients
observed in the Patient Survey. First, heaping on the first day of the month is observed, which is likely
due to reporting. Second, there are many more births in the first quarter than in the other three quarters
throughout the sample period.
Figure B: Seasonality in the Mortality Data
Figures B1 and B2 show seasonality in the mortality data. Figure B1 shows seasonality in the reported
birthdays of those deceased, and this pattern is very close to that observed in the Patient Survey in
Figure A. Figure B2 plots the reported death dates, and there is substantial seasonality in the death
dates also. First, heaping on the first day of the month is observed, which is likely due to reporting.
Second, there are many more deaths in the winter than in the summer, and the highest number of deaths
is observed in January.
Figure C: Age Profile of Employment by Gender
This figure displays the actual and fitted age profiles of employment for the 1986–2007 pooled
Comprehensive Survey of Living Conditions (CSLC) sample (age measured in months). These profiles
all trend relatively smoothly through age 70 for both genders.
Figure D: Age Profiles for First-time and Repeat Outpatient Visits
Figures D1 and D2 display the age profiles for first-time and repeat outpatient visits, respectively.
Figure D1 shows that the number of first-time visits decreases steadily prior to age 70, reflecting the
trend of deteriorating health as people get older, and then, it jumps sharply at age 70. Figure D2 shows
that the age profiles of repeat visitors are very similar to those of overall outpatient visits, since 94
percent of total outpatient visits are repeat visits.
Figure E: Robustness of Results on Inpatient Admissions
Figures E1 and E2 show the robustness of the estimates on inpatient admissions. Figure E1 shows the
results on the donut-hole RD, by excluding a few months of observations around the threshold. The
figure shows that the estimates get smaller and the standard errors larger as the “hole” is expanded.
However, as long as the removal of the data is within a three-month period from both sides of age 70,
the estimates are statistically significant at the 95 percent level. Figure E2 shows that the results on
inpatient admissions are not driven by how I limit the sample by admission dates. The results are pretty
robust to the length of the windows from the discharge date. Note that more than 90 percent of
inpatient admissions occurred within three months from the date of discharge.
Figure F: Age Profile for Inpatient Admissions for Selected Surgery
This figure displays the age profile of inpatient admissions for two procedures: open-stomach surgery
(Figure F1) and intraocular lens implantation (Figure F2). I find a drop-off just prior to age 70, coupled
with a temporary surge shortly after age 70 for both procedures. This pattern suggests that some people
who are close to 70 delay surgery until they become eligible for Elderly Health Insurance, in order to
reduce out-of-pocket expenditures.
Figure G: Age Profile of Inpatient Admissions for Selected Diagnoses
These graphs display the age profile of inpatient admissions for the following selected diagnoses: heart
disease, cerebrovascular disease, respiratory diseases, and Ambulatory Care Sensitive Conditions
(ACSCs) (see Table D in the Appendix for the list of ACSCs). Figures G1 and G2 show that there are
14

sharp increases in the number of inpatient admissions for heart disease and cerebrovascular disease,
and they are statistically significant (as shown in Table 4). While there are slight increases for
respiratory diseases and ACSCs in Figures G3 and G4 respectively, they are not statistically significant
at the conventional levels.
Figure H: Age Profile for Cause-specific Mortality
This figure plots age profiles for mortality from cause-specific deaths for three broad leading causes of
death among the elderly (cancer, heart disease, cerebrovascular disease), and also respiratory diseases.
These figures show that there are no discernible patterns for any of the selected causes of deaths.
Figure I: Age Profiles for Fraction in Good or Very Good Health
Respondents to the Comprehensive Survey of Living Conditions (CSLC) report health on a five-point
scale (very poor, poor, fair, good, or very good). This figure shows the age profiles of the fraction of
people who report themselves to be in good or very good health (cumulatively 31 percent of the
population), based on pooled 1986–2008 CSLC samples. The graph shows that health gradually
declines with age, but I do not find any observable change in self-reported health at age 70. Table I in
the Appendix confirms this age pattern.
Figure J: Out-of-pocket Medical Expenditures
Figure J1 compares the distribution of out-of-pocket medical expenditures in 2007 for 65–69 year-olds
(not covered by Elderly Health Insurance) and 70–74 year-olds (covered by Elderly Health Insurance).
The graph reveals that 70–74 year-olds at the top of the distribution spend substantially less than 65–69
year-olds, despite the large offsetting increase in utilization among those above 70. Figure J2 compares
an adjacent age group (age 60–64) to the near-elderly (age 65–69), neither of whom benefit from lower
cost sharing. The figure shows that out-of-pocket medical expenditure among 65–69 year-olds is higher
than that among 60–64 year-olds, indicating that medical expenditure tends to increase with age. This
finding is reassuring; it suggests that Figure J1 is not measuring any systematic change in spending by
age groups.
Figure K: RD Estimates and Fraction of Outpatient or Inpatient Care
Figure K1 and K2 show the RD estimates by diagnosis group (see Table G for the list) as they relate to
the fraction of visits in each group using outpatient or inpatient care at age 69, respectively. The
diagnosis group with highest fraction of outpatient care in Figure K1 is hypertensive disease (diagnosis
group 26), where the fraction is 94.2 percent. The RD estimate for this diagnosis group is 8.2 percent,
and it is not statistically different from overall estimate of 10.3 percent (see Panel A in Table 3).
Similarly, the diagnosis group with the highest fraction of inpatient care in Figure K2 is benign
neoplasm (diagnosis group 15), where the fraction is 78.5 percent. The RD estimate for this diagnosis
group is 11.7 percent, and it is not statistically different from overall estimate of 8.2 percent (See Panel
A in Table 4).

15

TABLES
Table A: Summary Statistics (Ages 65–75)
This table summarizes descriptive statistics for the Patient Survey (outpatient data and discharge data),
CSLC, and mortality data.
Table B: RD Estimates on Employment and Family Structure at Age 70
This table shows the RD estimates at age 70 on a variety of demographic outcomes in the CSLC. None
of these outcomes show any discontinuities at age 70.
Table C: Top 5 Diagnoses and RD Estimates
This table lists the top 5 diagnoses for outpatient visits and inpatient admissions and their
corresponding RD estimates.
Table D: List of Ambulatory Care Sensitive Conditions (ACSCs)
This table lists the ACSCs developed by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ), for
which proper and early treatment can reduce subsequent avoidable admissions.
Table E: Robustness of RD Estimates on Outpatient Visits for Selected Outcomes
This table reports alternative specifications for RD models of outpatient visits for selected outcomes.
There are three alternative estimates of the RD at age 70: (1) the basic RD estimates from the main
tables in the paper, (2) an RD estimate from a model fit to data for people who are 67–73 years old, (3)
an RD estimate from a cubic polynomial in age, fully interacted with a dummy for age 70 or older.
Both age in months as well as age in days are used as the running variables. Outcomes are selected so
that there are no zero cells for any age in days for these outcomes.
Table F: Robustness of RD Estimates on Inpatient Admissions for Selected Outcomes
This table reports alternative specifications for RD models of inpatient admissions for selected
outcomes. There are three alternative estimates of the RD at age 70: (1) the basic RD estimates from
the main tables in the paper, (2) an RD estimate from a model fit to data for people who are 67–73
years old, (3) an RD estimate from a cubic polynomial in age, fully interacted with a dummy for age 70
or older.
Table G: List of Diagnosis Groups
This table lists the diagnosis groups used for Figure 5.
Table H: RD Estimate on Morbidity at Age 70
This table reports RD estimates on morbidity using 1986–2007 CSLC data. Column (2) presents
estimates from linear probability models for the probability that people report their health as good or
better. Column (4) reports estimates from a simple linear regression for the mean assessment of health
(assigning 1 to poor health and 5 to very good health). In the remaining columns, I also look at the
mental health, but I do not find any changes in mental health outcomes either. Overall, I do not find
any evidence that lower cost sharing leads to a discrete jump in morbidity measures.
Table I: RD Estimates on Out-of-pocket Medical Expenditures at Age 70
This table reports the RD estimates on out-of-pocket medical expenditures in 2007 at each tenth centile
above the 40th percentile and at the 95th and 99th percentile in Column (2), with a mean value just
below age 70 in Column (1). This table corresponds to Figure 7B.
Table J: Sensitivity of Welfare Gain from Risk Protection
This table shows the sensitivity of welfare gain to two particular assumptions: risk aversion and
16

maximum level of out-of-pocket medical expenditures as a share of income.
Table K: Estimated Out-of-pocket Medical Expenditure per Month across Survey Years
This table reports the estimated out-of-pocket medical expenditure per month across survey years using
Survey of Medical Care Activities in Public Health Insurance (see Section A3 in the Online Appendix).
The number used to compute the elasticity in the main text is the weighted average of the out-of-pocket
medical expenditure across all survey years for outpatient visits and inpatient admissions, using the
populations at age 69 in each survey year as weights. See Section A1 in the Online Appendix for
details.

17

Figure A: Seasonality in Day of Birth in the Patient Survey Data

Note: I pool outpatient data for 1984–2008 from the Patient Survey. The circles indicate the first day of the month.

18

Figure B: Seasonality in the Mortality Data

0

Number of Observations
20000
40000
60000
80000

100000

B1. Seasonality in Day of Birth

Jan1 Feb1 Mar1 Apr1 May1 Jun1 Jul1 Aug1 Sep1 Oct1 Nov1 Dec1
Day of Birth in a Year

18000

Number of Observations
20000
22000
24000

26000

B2. Seasonality in Day of Death

Jan1 Feb1 Mar1 Apr1 May1 Jun1 Jul1 Aug1 Sep1 Oct1 Nov1 Dec1
Day of Death in a Year
Note: I pool mortality data from among those born during 1919–1933 for 1984–2008. The circles indicate the first
day of the month.

19

.1

.2

Fraction of Employed
.3
.4
.5

.6

Figure C: Age Profile of Employment by Gender (1987–2007 CSLC)

65

70
Age
Male

75
Female

Note: I pool outpatient data for 1986–2007 from the CSLC. The markers represent actual averages (age in
months), and the lines represent fitted regressions from models that assume a quadratic age profile, fully
interacted with a dummy for age 70 or older, separately for male and female patients.

20

Figure D: Age Profiles for First-time and Repeat Outpatient Visits (Log Scale)
D1. First-time Visits

D2. Repeat Visits

Note: I pool outpatient data for 1984–2008 from the Patient Survey. The markers represent averages of the
residuals of log outcomes regressed by birth month fixed effects and survey year fixed effects, to partial out the
seasonality in birth and the underlying common shocks in the survey year, respectively. The lines represent fitted
regressions from models that assume a quadratic age profile, fully interacted with a dummy for age 70 or older.

21

Figure E: Robustness of Results on Inpatient Admissions
E1. Estimates from the “Donut-hole” RD

E2. Limiting the Sample by Different Windows from Discharge

Note: I pool discharge data for 1984–2008 from the Patient Survey. The model here is a quadratic age profile, fully
interacted with a dummy for age 70 or older. The dashed line indicates the 95 percent confidence interval.

22

Figure F: Age Profile for Inpatient Admissions for Selected Surgery (Log Scale)

-.2

-.1

0

.1

.2

F1. Open-stomach Surgery

65

66

67

68

69

70
Age

71

72

73

74

75

73

74

75

-.6

-.4

-.2

0

.2

.4

F2. Intraocular Lens Implantation

65

66

67

68

69

70
Age

71

72

Note: I pool discharge data for 1999, 2002, 2005, and 2008 from the Patient Survey, since surgery-specific
information was collected for only these four survey years. I use admissions within three months from discharge,
and thus, the sample size is 1,440. The markers represent the averages of residuals of log outcomes regressed by
birth month fixed effects, admission month fixed effects, and the survey year fixed effects, in order to partial out
the seasonality in birth and the underlying common shocks in the survey year, respectively. The lines represent
fitted regressions from models that assume a quadratic age profile, fully interacted with a dummy for age 70 or
older.

23

Figure G: Age Profile of Inpatient Admissions for Selected Diagnoses (Log Scale)
G1. Heart Disease

G3. Respiratory Disease

G2. Cerebrovascular Disease

G4. ACSCs

Note: I pool discharge data for 1984–2008 from the Patient Survey. The corresponding RD estimates at age 70 are statistically significant at
5 percent for Figures H1 and H2 only. The markers represent the averages of residuals from regressions of log outcomes on birth month
fixed effects, admission month fixed effects, and survey year fixed effects (aggregated by age in months). The lines represent fitted
regressions from models that assume a quadratic age profile, fully interacted with a dummy for age 70 or older.

24

Figure H: Age Profile for Cause-specific Mortality (Log Scale)
H3. Respiratory Disease

.5
0
-.5
-1

-.4

-.2

0

.2

1

.4

H1. Heart Disease

65

66

67

68

69

70
Age

71

72

73

74

75

65

66

67

68

70
Age

71

72

73

74

75

71

72

73

74

75

H4. Cancer

-.3

-.4

-.2

-.2

-.1

0

0

.2

.1

.2

.4

H2. Cerebrovascular Disease

69

65

66

67

68

69

70
Age

71

72

73

74

75

65

66

67

68

69

70
Age

Note: I pool mortality data for 1984–2008 for patients born during 1919–1933. The markers represent the averages of residuals from
regressions of log outcomes on birth month fixed effects and death month fixed effects (aggregated by age in month). The lines represent
fitted regressions from models that assume a quadratic age profile, fully interacted with a dummy for age 70 or older.

25

Figure I: Age Profiles for Fraction in Good or Very Good Health

Note: I pool data for 1986–2007 from the CSLC. The markers represent actual averages (age in months), and the
lines represent fitted regressions from models that assume a quadratic age profile, fully interacted with a dummy
for age 70 or older.

26

Figure J: Out-of-pocket Medical Expenditures
J1. Ages 65–69 (Near-elderly) and Ages 70–74 (Elderly)

J2. Ages 60–64 and 65–69 (Near-elderly)

Note: The data are sourced from the 2007 CSLC. I multiply the monthly out-of-pocket expenditures by 12 to
convert the values to an annual basis. One thousand Yen roughly equaled 10 US dollars in 2007.

27

Figure K: RD Estimates and Fraction of Outpatient or Inpatient Care

-5

RD Estimates on Outpatient Care (x100)
0
5
10
15

20

K1. RD Estimates on Outpatient Care

0

.1

.2

.3

.4

.5

.6

.7

.8

.9

1

.9

1

Outpatient/(Outpatient+Inpatient) at Age 69

0

RD Estimates on Inpatient Care (x100)
5
10
15

20

K2. RD Estimates on Inpatient Care

0

.1

.2

.3

.4

.5

.6

.7

.8

Inpatient/(Outpatient+Inpatient) at Age 69
Note: I pool outpatient data and discharge data for 1984–2008 from the Patient Survey. The y-axis represents the
RD estimates at age 70, and the x-axis is fraction of visits in each diagnosis group using outpatient or inpatient
care at age 69, respectively. See Table G for the list of diagnosis groups. I omit diagnosis groups with less than 1
percent of the total observations of outpatient and inpatient care respectively, because their sample sizes are too
small to provide credible estimates. The size of each dot reflects the number of observations for the control group
(those aged 69) for outpatient and inpatient care, respectively. The solid line is a kernel-weighted local linear
smoothing, using the reciprocal of the variance of each RD estimate as weight for the observation.

28

Table A: Summary Statistics (65–75 years)
Mean
(SD)

Variables
A.

Outpatient Data
Repeat visits
Hospital

0.94
0.44

Clinic
Male
With referral
Days from last outpatient visit (days)
B.

Discharge Data
With surgery
Male
Hospital
Clinic
Open-head surgery
Open-heart surgery
Open-stomach surgery
Musculoskeletal surgery
Endoscopic surgery: Stomach
Intraocular lens implantation
Length of stay (days)
Location before admission: outpatients in the same
hospital

C.

CSLC Data
Self-reported health: Good or better
Are stressed
Male
Currently married
Employed
Hours of work per week
Income (thousand Yen)
Receiving pension
With long-term health insurance

D.

Mortality Data
Male

0.56
0.42
0.05
13.6
(20.2)
0.35
0.54
0.99
0.01
0.007
0.011
0.038
0.045
0.007
0.021
18.1
(17.7)
0.67

0.31
0.41
0.45
0.74
0.31
6.82
1,860
(1,920)
0.95
0.03

0.64

Note: One thousand Yen roughly equaled 10 US dollars.

29

Table B: RD Estimates on Employment and Family Structure at Age 70
By Gender

A. Employment-related
(1) Employed
(2)

Retired

(3)

Hours of work

(4)

Family income (thousand Yen)

(5)

Income (thousand Yen)

B. Family Structure
(6) Married spouse present
(7)

Head of household

C. Other
(8) Receiving pension
(9)

Long-term care insurance

Data
Years
Available

Sample
Size for
“All”

0.1
(0.5)
-0.7
(0.6)
0.0
(0.2)
88.1
(144.9)
-34.1
(54.3)

1986–2007

573,104

1986–2007

573,104

2004–2007

39,978

1986–2007

77,967

2004–2007

18,757

0.5
(0.5)
-0.1
(0.4)

0.4
(0.7)
0.1
(0.6)

1986–2007

573,104

1986–2007

573,104

0.2
(0.4)
-0.5
(0.4)

0.4
(0.4)
0.2
(0.3)

1986–2007

573,104

2001–2007

232,928

All

Male

Female

0.3
(0.4)
-0.1
(0.5)
0.0
(0.0)
-54.9
(113.0)
-32.3
(89.8)

0.5
(0.5)
0.8
(0.7)
0.1
(0.1)
-212.0
(174.9)
-29.9
(179.9)

0.5
(0.5)
0.0
(0.4)
0.3
(0.3)
-0.1
(0.3)

Note: Estimated regression discontinuities at age 70 are shown from models that include a quadratic of age, fully
interacted with dummy for age 70 or older among people between ages 65–75. The exception is a pension
dummy, since there is a discrete jump at age 65 favoring the probability of receiving pension. Thus, I limit the
sample to ages 66–74. Other controls include indicators for gender, region, marital status, birth month, and
sample year. I use pooled 1986–2007 samples from the CSLC. Sample sizes differ by variables, since some
variables are only collected for a shorter period. Note that income is collected for roughly 15 percent of all
samples. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the age-in-months level, as this is the most refined
available version of the age variable. All regressions are weighted to take into account the stratified sampling
frame in the data. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels respectively.
As all coefficients on Post70 and their standard errors have been multiplied by 100, they can be interpreted as
percentage changes.

30

Table C: Top 5 Diagnoses and RD Estimates
Rank
1
2
3
4
5

C1. Outpatient Visits
ICD9
Diagnosis
(3-digit)
Essential Hypertension
401
Spondylosis and Allied Disorders
721
Diabetes Mellitus
250
Osteoarthrosis and Allied Disorders
715
Cataract
366

Share
(Percent)
16.1
4.7
4.7
4.3
3.4

RD
Estimates
8.0***
23.7***
1.7
25.3***
12.0**

SE
2.4
3.6
4.4
4.2
4.9

C2. Inpatient Admissions
ICD9
Share
RD
Rank
Diagnosis
SE
(3-digit) (Percent) Estimates
1
Cataract
366
4.4
22.6***
6.5
2
Angina Pectoris
413
4.1
11.4
7.3
3
Occlusion of Cerebral Arteries
434
3.8
13.7***
4.6
4
Diabetes Mellitus
250
3.2
7.4
5.8
5
Malignant Neoplasm of the Stomach
151
3.1
4.8
6.1
Note: For both Figures C1 and C2, I pool outpatient data for 1984–2008 from the Patient Survey. ***, **,
and * denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels respectively.

Table D: List of Ambulatory Care Sensitive Conditions
No.
1
3
5
7
8
10
11
12
13
14
15
16

Diagnosis
Diabetes, Short-term Complications
Diabetes, Long-term Complications
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease
Hypertension
Congestive Heart Failure
Dehydration
Bacterial Pneumonia
Urinary Infections
Angina without Procedure
Uncontrolled Diabetes
Adult Asthma
Lower Extremity Amputations among Patients with Diabetes

Note: I excluded entry #2 (Perforated Appendicitis) from the analysis, since this index
indicates the number of admissions for perforated appendices as a share of admissions for
appendicitis only. In addition, entry #14 requires the fifth digit of ICD9, which I do not have,
since this diagnosis includes 25002 and 25003 only (25000, 25001, and 25009 should not be
included). To account for this, I only include Diabetes (2500), which also report secondary
diagnosis.

31

Table E: Robustness of RD Estimates on Outpatient Visits for Selected Outcomes
Month

Running Variable: Age in

Basic

A. All
B. By Period
Years 1984–1999
C. By Visit Type
Repeat visits
D. Days from Last Outpatient Visits
among Repeat Visits
1 day
4–7 days
E.

F.

By Institution
Clinic
By Referral
Without referral

G. By Gender
Male

Age
67–73

Day

Cubic

Basic

Age
67–73

Cubic

(1)
10.3***
(1.8)

(2)
(3)
11.3*** 12.1***
(2.3)
(2.6)

(4)
(5)
(6)
11.4*** 12.3*** 12.7***
(1.6)
(2.1)
(2.2)

12.0***
(1.8)

12.3*** 12.5***
(2.2)
(2.5)

14.0*** 14.1*** 14.2***
(1.7)
(2.2)
(2.3)

10.3***
(1.9)

11.2*** 12.1***
(2.3)
(2.6)

11.4*** 12.1*** 12.5***
(1.6)
(2.1)
(2.2)

16.4***
(4.4)
8.5***
(3.0)

20.9*** 21.6***
(6.1)
(6.5)
6.6
8.7*
(4.1)
(4.6)

15.7*** 17.1*** 16.5***
(2.1)
(2.7)
(2.9)
9.6*** 11.7*** 10.5***
(2.3)
(3.1)
(3.2)

13.8***
(1.8)

15.1*** 16.0***
(2.3)
(2.6)

13.4*** 14.2*** 14.7***
(1.1)
(1.5)
(1.5)

10.5***
(1.9)

11.6*** 12.5***
(2.3)
(2.6)

11.5*** 12.3*** 12.8***
(1.6)
(2.1)
(2.2)

11.3***
(2.2)
9.7***
(1.9)

11.7*** 12.5***
(2.7)
(3.1)
11.1*** 11.9***
(2.3)
(2.6)

12.7*** 14.2*** 13.6***
(2.0)
(2.7)
(2.8)
Female
10.1*** 11.3*** 12.3***
(1.7)
(2.2)
(2.4)
Note: Each cell is the estimate from separate estimated regression discontinuities at age 70. I use pooled 1984–2008
samples of outpatient data. Column (1) is the model that includes quadratic of age, fully interacted with dummy for age
70 or older among people between ages 65–75, where the data are collapsed into age in months. Controls are dummies
for each survey year and each month of birth. The “Basic” model in Column (4) includes a quadratic age profile, fully
interacted with dummy for age 70 or older among people between ages 65–75, where the data are collapsed into age in
days. Controls are dummies for each survey year and each day of the year. Robust standard errors are in parentheses.
***, **, and * denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels respectively. As all coefficients on
Post70 and their standard errors have been multiplied by 100, they can be interpreted as percentage changes.

32

Table F: Robustness of RD Estimates on Inpatient Admissions for Selected Outcomes

A.

All

B.

By Period
Years 1984–1999
Years 2002–2008

C.

By Admission Day
First half of the month
Second half of the month

D.

Surgery
Without surgery
With surgery

E.

Type of Surgery
Open-stomach surgery
Intraocular lens implantation

F.

Female
By Diagnosis
Cataract
Occlusion of cerebral arteries
Ischaemic heart disease
Cerebral infarction
H.

Age 67-73

Cubic

(1)
8.2***
(2.6)

(2)
10.0***
(3.4)

(3)
11.2***
(3.6)

9.6***
(2.2)
5.3**
(2.6)

10.9***
(2.8)
8.0**
(3.3)

12.2***
(3.0)
9.4***
(3.6)

9.8***
(2.8)
8.7***
(3.2)

12.1***
(3.6)
10.4**
(4.2)

13.8***
(3.7)
11.8***
(4.4)

6.4**
(2.6)
12.0***
(3.5)

6.9**
(3.4)
17.3***
(4.5)

8.0**
(3.6)
20.0***
(4.7)

12.6**
(5.3)
22.9***
(5.2)

15.1**
(6.6)
29.7***
(6.7)

15.5**
(6.9)
38.5***
(8.3)

8.1***
(2.8)
9.0***
(2.8)

10.2***
(3.6)
10.4***
(3.6)

11.1***
(3.8)
12.2***
(3.9)

22.6***
(6.5)
13.7***
(4.6)
14.5**
(7.1)
12.8***
(4.6)

31.6***
(8.5)
16.3***
(5.9)
17.3*
(9.3)
14.4**
(6.0)

46.4***
(9.7)
18.2***
(6.3)
16.5*
(9.7)
14.5**
(6.3)

9.7***
(2.9)

11.3***
(3.7)

13.0***
(3.9)

Gender
Male

G.

Basic

Location Before Admission
Outpatients in the same hospital

Note: The “Basic” model includes a quadratic age profile, fully interacted with dummy for age 70 or older among
people between ages 65–75. Controls are dummies for each survey year, each month of birth, and each month of
admission. I use pooled 1984–2008 samples of discharge data. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***, **, and *
denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels respectively. As all coefficients on Post70 and their
standard errors have been multiplied by 100, they can be interpreted as percentage changes.

33

Table G: List of Diagnosis Groups
No.
1
2
3
4
5
6

ICD 9
001-009
010-018
020-041
045-079
080-088
090-099

7

100-139

8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17

140-149
150-159
160-165
170-175
179-189
190-199
200-208
210-229
230-234
235-239
240-259
270-279
260-269
280-289
290-319
320-359
360-379
380-389
390-398
401-405
410-414
415-429
430-438
440-459
460-465,
470-478
466, 480-519
520-529
530-579
580-599
600-608
610-629
630-639
640-646
647-648
650
680-709
710-739
740-759
760-779
780-799
800-829
830-848
850-869,
950-957
870-904
930-939

18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51

Diagnosis Group
Intestinal Infectious Diseases
Tuberculosis
Other Bacterial Diseases
Viral Diseases
Rickettsiosis and Other Arthropod-borne Diseases
Venereal Diseases
Other Infectious and Parasitic Diseases and Late Effects of Infectious and
Parasitic Diseases
Malignant Neoplasm of Lip, Oral Cavity, and Pharynx
Malignant Neoplasm of Digestive Organs and Peritoneum
Malignant Neoplasm of Respiratory and Intrathoracic Organs
Malignant Neoplasm of Bone, Connective Tissue, Skin, and Breast
Malignant Neoplasm of Genitourinary Organs
Malignant Neoplasm of Other and Unspecified Sites
Malignant Neoplasm of Lymphatic and Hematopoietic Tissue
Benign Neoplasm
Carcinoma in Situ
Other and Unspecified Neoplasm
Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases, Immunity Disorders
Nutritional Deficiencies
Diseases of Blood and Blood-forming Organs
Mental Disorders
Diseases of the Nervous System
Disorders of the Eye and Adnexa
Diseases of the Ear and Mastoid Process
Rheumatic Fever and Heart Disease
Hypertensive Disease
Ischemic Heart Disease
Diseases of Pulmonary Circulation and Other Forms of Heart Disease
Cerebrovascular Disease
Other Diseases of the Circulatory System
Diseases of the Upper Respiratory Tract
Other Diseases of the Respiratory System
Diseases of Oral Cavity, Salivary Glands, and Jaws
Diseases of Other Parts of the Digestive System
Diseases of Urinary System
Diseases of Male Genital Organs
Diseases of Female Genital Organs
Abortion
Direct Obstetric Causes
Indirect Obstetric Causes
Normal Delivery
Diseases of Skin and Subcutaneous Tissue
Diseases of the Musculoskeletal System and Connective Tissue
Congenital Anomalies
Certain Conditions Originating in the Perinatal Period
Signs, Symptoms, and Ill-defined Conditions
Fractures
Dislocations, Sprains, and Strains
Intracranial and Internal Injuries, Including Nerves
Open Wounds and Injury to Blood Vessels
Effects of Foreign Body Entering through Orifice
34

52
53
54
55

56

940-949
960-989
996-999
910-929,
958-959,
990-995

Burns
Poisonings and Toxic Effects
Complications of Medical and Surgical Care
Other Injuries, Early Complications of Trauma

Late Effects of Injuries, of Poisonings, of Toxic Effects, and of Other External
Causes
Note: This list of diagnosis groups is sourced from the Basic Tabulation List of ICD 9. Note there are no
observations for birth-related group 38–41 and 45. See http://www.wolfbane.com/icd/icd9a.htm.
905-909

Table H: RD Estimates on Morbidity at Age 70
Self-reported Health

Stress-related

Good or Better
Health
(Percent)

Linear
Regression (1
= poor, 5 =
excellent)

Stress Dummy
(Percent)

Stressed Due
to Own Health
and Care
(Percent)

Age
68–69

RD at
70

Age
68–69

RD at
70

Age
68–69

RD at
70

Age
68–69

RD at
70

A. All

(1)
31.4

(2)
-0.3
(0.6)

(3)
2.8

(4)
1.1
(1.3)

(5)
41.1

(6)
0.4
0.4

(7)
25.3

(8)
0.2
(0.7)

B. By HH Income
Above median

32.1
30.1

2.3
(4.3)
-5.1
(4.7)

39.2

Below median

-0.1
2.7
(1.9)
1.4
2.8
(2.0)
1986–2007

-0.7
22.9
(2.4)
-3.2
29.2
(2.5)
1995–2001

1.0
(2.0)
-0.5
(2.3)

Years Available

44.8

Note: Entries in the odd-numbered columns are the mean of the outcome variables shown in the column headings for
68–69 years-olds. Entries in the even-numbered columns are estimated regression discontinuities at age 70, from
models that include quadratic control for age, fully interacted with a dummy for age 70 or older among people between
ages 65–70. Other controls include indicators for gender, region, marital status, birth month, and survey year. Except
Column (4), estimates are based on a linear probability model fit to pooled samples of CSLC conducted every three
years since 1986. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the age-in-months level, as this is the most refined
available version of the age variable. All regressions are weighted to take into account the stratified sampling frame in
the data. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels respectively. Available
years for each outcome are described in the last row. Income is collected for roughly 15 percent of all samples, and thus,
the sample size of Panel B is smaller than that of the full sample. All coefficients in the even-numbered columns on
Post70 and its standard error have been multiplied by 100, in order to interpret them as percentage changes. HH stands
for household.

35

Table I: RD Estimates on Out-of-pocket Medical Expenditures at Age 70
Out-of-pocket
Expenditure Just
Below Age 70

RD Estimates at
Age 70

(1)

(2)

Mean

152

-52

40th Percentile
Median
60th Percentile
70th Percentile
80th Percentile
90th Percentile
95th Percentile
99th Percentile

30
52
65
96
139
247
419
1,793

-13***
-24***
-24***
-38***
-50***
-74***
-107***
-499*

Note: All monetary values are in thousand Yen in 2007 (roughly equal to 10
US dollars). ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent,
and 10 percent levels respectively.

Table J: Sensitivity of Welfare Gain from Risk Protection
Distribution Adjusted
Using Quantile
Estimates

Determined
“Mechanically”

(1)

(2)

1
3
5

2
37
123

8
98
306

60
90

10
85

33
203

B. Distribution
(80 Percent Cap, Risk Aversion = 3)
25th percentile
Median
75th percentile
90th percentile
95th percentile
99th percentile

11
19
46
105
130
161

45
85
146
192
214
249

A. At Mean
1. Risk Aversion
(80 percent income cap)

2. Cap on Percent of Income
(Risk Aversion = 3)

Note: All estimates are in thousand Yen in 2007. One thousand Yen roughly equaled 10 US
dollars in 2007. See Section A2 in the Online Appendix for details.

36

Table K: Estimated Out-of-pocket Medical Expenditures per Month across Survey Years
K1. Outpatient Visits
Percent Reached
Stop-loss

Cost Sharing

Year
All
1987
1990
1993
1996
1999
2002
2005
2008

Below 70

Above 70

(1)
3.99
3.96
4.26
4.48
4.23
3.91
3.61
3.97
3.69

(2)
1.08
0.80
0.80
1.00
1.02
1.00
1.30
1.28
1.20

Percent
Reduction
((1)-(2))/(1)
73
80
81
78
76
74
64
68
68

Below 70

Above 70

(4)
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.2
0.1

(5)
0.6
0.5
0.7
0.5

K2. Inpatient Admissions
Percent Reached
Stop-loss

Cost Sharing

Year
All
1987
1990
1993
1996
1999
2002
2005
2008

Below 70

Above 70

(1)
41.65
44.52
42.21
40.78
39.70
38.65
35.86
46.39
45.64

(2)
13.10
7.86
7.42
11.91
10.65
15.09
15.54
15.73
15.63

Percent
Reduction
((1)-(2))/(1)
69
82
82
71
73
61
57
66
66

Below 70

Above 70

(4)
14.6
26.6
21.6
11.5
11.5
9.2
8.7
18.3
13.5

(5)
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

Note: All monetary values are in thousand Yen in 2007 (roughly equal to 10 US dollars).
See Section A1 in the Online Appendix for details.

37

