                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             FEELING THE HEAT:
              TEMPERATURE, PHYSIOLOGY & THE WEALTH OF NATIONS

                                             Geoffrey Heal
                                              Jisung Park

                                         Working Paper 19725
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19725


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2013




We are very grateful to Raj Chetty, Lawrence Katz, Andrei Shleifer, Edward Glaeser, Sendhil Mullainathan,
Joseph Aldy, Roland Fryer, David Cutler, Jeff Miron, Martin Weitzman, Michael Hanemann, Kerry
Smith, Sol Hsiang, Kyle Meng, Wolfram Schlenker, Josh Graff-Zivin, Francis Teal, Abdulrahman
El-Sayed, Lucas Brown, Jong Ho Hong, Emily Sands, Duncan Gilchrist, Richard Sweeney, Richard
Carson, Angus Deaton and Harrison Hong for helpful comments and feedback. Thanks to Nan Zhong
and Ratna Gill for excellent research assistance. Part of this research was funded by the National Science
Foundation (NSF) Graduate Research Fellowship Program (GRFP). The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Geoffrey Heal and Jisung Park. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Feeling the Heat: Temperature, Physiology & the Wealth of Nations
Geoffrey Heal and Jisung Park
NBER Working Paper No. 19725
December 2013, Revised June 2014
JEL No. J01,Q54,Q56

                                              ABSTRACT

Does temperature affect economic performance? Has temperature always affected social welfare through
its impact on physical and cognitive function? While many economic studies have explored the indirect
links between climate and welfare (e.g. agriculture, conflict, sea-level rise), few address the possibility
of direct impacts operating through physiology, despite a deep medical literature documenting the
temperature sensitivity of human task performance. This paper attempts a synthesis of these literatures
by (1) presenting a microeconomic model of labor supply under thermal stress, and (2) using country-level
panel data on temperature and income (1950-2005) to illustrate the potential magnitude of temperature-
driven productivity impacts. Using a fixed effects estimation strategy, we find significant temperature
sensitivity of per capita income that varies, crucially, with a country's position relative to an optimal
temperature zone. Hotter-than- average years are associated with lower output per capita for countries
in hot climates and higher output per capita for countries in cold ones: approximately 3%-4% per degree
C in both directions. Air-conditioning mediates the adverse impact of hotter years, consistent with
the physiological explanation. This more direct causal link between climate and social welfare has
important implications for both the economics of climate change and comparative development.


Geoffrey Heal
Graduate School of Business
616 Uris Hall
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027-6902
and NBER
gmh1@columbia.edu

Jisung Park
Columbia University
jisungpark@gmail.com
   FEELING THE HEAT: TEMPERATURE, PHYSIOLOGY & THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 3
                                      1. Introduction

   What can temperature uctuations tell us about the relative wealth of nations?
How does the climate in which we live and work aect our economic well-being?
Specically, does temperature stress from heat or cold inuence our ability to focus
or to engage in productive activities?         If a temperature-performance relationship
does in fact exist, what could this tell us about past and present dierences in
income and productivity levels across countries and regions, or the potential future
impacts of climate change? Exploring more deeply the potential causal relationship
between temperature and economic welfare is the primary objective of this study.
   We bring together two stylized facts from rather dierent elds.             Each is con-
ventional wisdom in its own eld, yet we believe their juxtaposition can add value.
They come from economics and physiology. The economic fact is that hotter coun-
tries tend to be poor.       The physiological fact is that human performance over a
range of tasks degrades sharply as temperature rises above or falls below an opti-
mal threshold.
   Each of these ideas is at the center of a substantial literature.           Scholars have
noted for centuries that hotter countries tend to be poor (Montesqieu [1750]; Hunt-
ington [1915]). Taking a cross-section of countries in 2000, for example, average per
capita income decreases by roughly 8.5% per °C as one moves closer to the tropics
(Horowitz [2001]). Sala-i Martin [1997] shows that growth rates decrease sharply
with absolute latitude, which is a good proxy for temperature. More recently, Dell
et al. [2008] nd that hotter than average years are associated with lower than aver-
age GDP growth by roughly -1% per degree Celsius for a subset of poor countries,
mostly in Sub-Saharan Africa.
   That human performance on both physical and intellectual tasks degrades with
temperature is also well-established.         While economists have noted this only re-
       1
cently , similar observations have a much longer history in the medical literature,
which suggests that heat can have measurable negative eects on physical and cog-
nitive performance across various metrics.           Thermal stress has well-documented
eects on athletic performance (Wendt et al. [2007]), and can also adversely impact
simple tasks such as manual tracking (e.g.           guiding a steering wheel) and cogni-
tive tasks such as sentence completion or basic arithmetic (Grether [1973], Wyon
[1974]).   Equally well-established is the ability of heating and air-conditioning to
                                          2
oset some of these adverse impacts , though the link between air-conditioning and
macroeconomic growth has not yet been documented.
   Our observation in this paper is that the phsyiological fact can help explain the
economic one: that the temperature-performance gradient at the individual level
can contribute to explaining the relationship between temperature and economic
performance, and ultimately inform our understanding of the impact of future cli-
mate change.
   Our most policy-relevant result is that annual climate shocks have non-trivial
impacts on GDP per capita, but that the direction and magnitude of these impacts
are grossly unequal. The economic impact of a warmer world may depend crucially
on the initial temperature zone in which one is situated. Warmer-than-average years

   1For example, Hsiang et al. [2012] show that student performance in standardized math tests
falls as the temperature rises above the low 70s Fahrenheit.
   2For instance,   Deschenes and Greenstone [2007] nd that local air-conditioning penetration
reduces the mortality response to heat shocks in US states.
   FEELING THE HEAT: TEMPERATURE, PHYSIOLOGY & THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 4
lead to negative per capita output shocks in hot countries (e.g. Bangladesh); in cold
countries (e.g. Sweden), the reverse seems to be true. And while, given the spatial
resolution of our data, we cannot rule out the role of other confounders such as
agricultural yield or storm intensity, we suggest that this systematic heterogeneity
in the treatment eect of temperature on GDP is consistent with the productivity
relationships documented in the sub-micro literature and formalized in our model.
The fact that countries with higher air conditioning per capita are less vulnerable to
temperature shocks provides further evidence of a physiologically-mediated causal
mechanism.
  All of these results are preliminary. They are meant to illustrate the need for
further research into the exact nature and scope of a possible pervasive connec-
tion between temperature, human physiology, and economic welfare, especially in
countries without access to air conditioning and in activities necessarily exposed to
external temperatures   .
  This paper does three things. First, it synthesizes emerging empirical research
on the relationship between climate variables and macroeconomic variables such as
income per capita (Horowitz [2001]; Dell et al. [2008]; Nordhaus [2006]), in con-
junction with a longstanding medical literature on temperature and human task
performance at what we call the  sub-micro level.     Second, it presents a model
of labor supply decisions under temperature stress that is consistent with these
stylized facts and which develops a sucient statistic for future empirical welfare
analysis. The key prediction of the model is that temperature deviations from a
biological optimum (be that in the form of heat or cold) will reduce eective labor
supply, dened as the composite of raw labor hours, physiological task productiv-
ity, and labor eort, irrespective of the types of contract structures or labor market
institutions present. For quasi-linear preferences the willingness to pay for mitigat-
ing these eects can be well-approximated by household expenditures on heating
and cooling. Third, it provides a preliminary attempt at testing this model empir-
ically, using country-level panel data relating per capita income to average annual
temperature uctuations and air conditioning imports per capita. The key ndings
are (1) a universally concave relationship between temperature and income levels
that is dependent on the level of exposure to thermal stress, and (2) a mediating
role played by AC penetration per capita.
  The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a synthesis of
work on climate-economy interactions, through historical and prospective lenses.
Section 3 presents some old and new facts about temperature and human activity
at the level of the individual, which draws heavily from the medical and epidemi-
ological literature.   Section 4 presents the model and some empirical predictions
that arise from it. Section 5 presents a simple empirical framework for identifying
causal impacts of temperature on income at the country level, and presents the
results from international panel data. Section 6 concludes.




2. The Evolving Economics of Geography, Temperature, and Climate
                                        Change

  A casual scatterplot of log GDP and (population-weighted) average annual tem-
peratures reveals a striking temperature-income gradient (Figure 2.1). While there
is still considerable disagreement over how much of this cross-sectional relationship
   FEELING THE HEAT: TEMPERATURE, PHYSIOLOGY & THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 5
is driven by institutions (Acemoglu et al. [2001] among others) or other geograph-
ical correlates such as disease burden (Sachs et al. [2001]), more recent empirical
evidence suggests that a large proportion of the causal eect is driven by climate
variables (Dell et al, 2013).
  Studies using national and sub-national cross-section data (Dell et al. [2009];
Horowitz [2001]), suggest that the income-temperature relationship exists not only
across OECD and non-OECD countries, but also across provinces and counties
within countries. If this is true, and, more importantly, if we can say something
about why it is the case, the potential implications for both development theory
and climate policy would be substantial.




           Figure 2.1. Countries by log income per capita and population-
           weighted average temperature



  Dell et al. [2009] also show that hotter counties and municipalities are, on av-
erage, 1.2%-1.9% poorer per degree C average annual temperature (across 7,793
municipalities in 12 countries in the Americas), conrming that omitted country
characteristics are not wholly driving the cross-sectional relationship (Dell et al.
[2009]).   Even among only OECD countries, +2°F is associated with 3.7% to -
4.0% GDP (Horowitz [2001]).      Simply extrapolating the existing cross-sectional
relationship without accounting for adaptation or institutions might suggest that
an average warming of +6-7°F in the future could lead to an average decrease
of approximately -13%-14% of GDP worldwide, a much higher gure than most
bottom-up climate damage estimates suggest (Horowitz [2001]).
  Most of these studies emphasize the impact of heat (as opposed to temperature
per se), motivated perhaps by the projected rise in global mean temperatures due to
global warming. However, it is plausible that it is the extremity of climate, rather
than the hotness per se, that adversely impacts human activity.     There is much
   FEELING THE HEAT: TEMPERATURE, PHYSIOLOGY & THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 6
evidence to suggest that extreme weather events (e.g. hurricanes) have large and
persistent negative eects on GDP. By this token, then, there is no a priori reason to
expect a monotonic relationship between temperature and economic productivity;
that is, the fundamental relationship between temperature and productivity may,
in fact, be single-peaked, implying something akin to an optimal temperature zone
for human activity.
   While there is strong evidence for an optimal temperature zone at the micro
level, causal evidence at the macro level has so far been thin.              Nordhaus [2006]
uses geospatially indexed economic and climate data at the grid cell level ( gross
cell product ) and nds a relationship between average annual temperature and
output per grid cell that is robust and single-peaked. The fall-o in productivity
toward hotter and colder extremes suggests an optimal temperature zone for human
economic activity.
   But what is the causal pathway underlying these relationships? Are these corre-
lations due to the eect of temperature on institutions, or the incidence of disease
and violent conict? Or are other omitted variables driving the relationship? The
human being, as with the rest of life on earth, is a biological organism evolved to
function more eectively in some environments than others. And yet the question
of whether and to what extent temperature aects economic wellbeing causally re-
mains unresolved in the literature. While most of these studies have steered clear
of emphasizing one causal pathway over another, we believe that insofar as most
plausible pathways operate through human performance and human interaction,
there may be a pervasive and perhaps universal role played by the eect of thermal
stress on the human body.
   Viewing the problem through this lens also leads to an important methdologi-
cal shift. Whereas many studies have treated a +1°C weather shock as the same
treatment across all countries and regions, our approach suggests signicant het-
erogeneity in treatment eect a priori. Whether a hotter year leads to adverse (or
benecial) outcomes depends crucially on whether this shock pushes one away from
or toward the thermoregulatory optimum.
                                                  3

   3. Some Old and New Facts About Heat and Human performance

   That extreme temperatures can hinder human activity at the individual level is
almost tautologically true. Heat or cold can inuence human behavior by making
one less eective at any activity (e.g. working or exercising), and also by nudging
one to choose certain activities over others (e.g. staying in the shade versus working
out in the eld). For example, the eect of heat waves on mortality  particularly
among the elderly  is well documented in the epidemiological literature (Curriero
et al. [2002]; Kilbourne [1997]; Kovats and Hajat [2008]; McMichael and et al [2008],
etc). A growing number of studies have shown that, even in rich countries, extreme
heat waves cause a large number of deaths. In 2003 for example, France suered



   3Of course, there are a number of documented links between climate and economic output that
may be somewhat orthogonal to human physiology. Crop yields are adversely impacted by heat
after a certain point (Schlenker and Roberts [2006]). Sea-level rise will no doubt damage many
low-lying coastal assets (Yohe et al. [1996]). Changing rainfall patterns and storm intensity may
aect the availability of water resources in dierent parts of the world, likely making dry areas
drier, and wet areas wetter (Pachauri and Reisinger [2007]).
   FEELING THE HEAT: TEMPERATURE, PHYSIOLOGY & THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 7
approximately 14,000 heat-related deaths mostly among the elderly, and Europe as
a whole roughly 40,000.
   The slope of the temperature-mortality response is heterogeneous, and in general
not predicted by latitude, as shown by comparisons of cities in the US, Europe, or
around the world (Curriero et al. [2002]; McMichael and et al [2008]). While some
of this has to do with demographics (the relative densities of old and inrm), it
has been suggested that a signicant proportion of this variability is related to
the prevalence of air conditioning (Kovats and Hajat [2008]), a key variable in the
model presented in this paper.          Deschenes and Greenstone [2007] show that hot
days have historically led to very high mortality rates, and that the spread of air
conditioning (AC) in the United States can account for up to 80% of the decline in
heat-related mortality. They suggest that many developing countries which have
much lower levels of residential AC penetration than the US may suer increasingly
severe mortality shocks from future climate change.
                                                               4
   But heat can also aect human welfare at less extreme temperatures, and in less
extreme ways than outright mortality or morbidity.                 Task productivity has been
shown to decline systematically with thermal stress (Wendt et al. [2007]).                     Even
test scores, controlling for individual ability, appear to be sensitive to ambient
temperatures, though the eect is, interestingly, signicant for math but not for
reading scores (Hsiang et al. [2012]).
   There also seems to be evidence for behavioral responses by individuals in labor
and leisure settings. Anticipating lower productivity and/or direct disutility from
higher core body temperatures, individuals choose to exert less eort or devote less
time to eort-involving tasks. A recent report by the Center for Disease Control
and Prevention shows that residents of hotter regions in the US are generally less
physically active (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2011; Figure (6.1)).
There is also evidence emerging from the behavioral psychology literature suggest-
ing that individuals' anxiety levels, depression incidence, and propensity toward
aggression are signicantly correlated with temperature, sunlight, and cloud cover
(Keller et al. [2005]). Insofar as GDP is a cumulative measure of productive ac-
tivity over a year, even such subtle environmental factors could in principle create
accumulated advantages or disadvantages over time. Indeed, there is a documented
relationship between wages and climate amenities at the local level (Blomquist, ;
Sinha and Cropper, ), which may be related to productivity dierences.
   Using data from the American Time-Use Survey, Gra Zivin and Neidell [2010]
nd evidence for changes in time-use decisions resulting from temperature shocks.
In industries with high exposure to climate, workers report lower time spent at
work on hot and cold days, as well as in time spent on outdoor leisure activities.
While Gra Zivin and Neidell do not show this, intuitively one might think that
extreme temperature and weather events lead to a reduced average ow intensity
of economic activity if measured at a high enough level of aggregation. Similarly,
Adhvaryu et al (2013) show that manufactering worker eciency at the plant level
declines substantially on hotter days, an eect that is driven primarily by on-the-job
task productivity declines as opposed to increased absenteeism.
                                                                               5
   4Lee Kwan Yu once declared that air conditioning was the single most important inventions in
history, and that, without it, Singapore could never have grown to the thriving tropical megapolis
that it is today.
   5This is a key intuition that justies our use of country-level data in the empirical analysis. For
example, if a hotter-than-average year leads to ve more days of above-100 degree temperatures,
   FEELING THE HEAT: TEMPERATURE, PHYSIOLOGY & THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 8
   Meta-analyses of this vast and growing literature conrm the presence of a non-
linear relationship between thermal stress and productivity (Seppanen et al. [2006];
Hancock et al. [2007]).
                           6   The stylized empirical trend seems to be a single-peaked
relationship between temperature and productivity, where negative productivity
impacts increase non-linearly the further one deviates from the biological comfort
zone (approximately 18°C to 22°C), a trend consistent with existing models of
human physiology (Figure 3.1).
                                      7




          Figure 3.1. Task performance vs temperature.                  Maximum per-
          formance is normalized to 1 at 22 C. Source: Seppanen et al. [2006]




   In summary, a large number of studies from various disciplines show physical
and cognitive performance to deteriorate with temperature deviations beyond a
biologically optimal zone. In other words, there is a single-peaked and non-linear
relationship between temperature and task eectiveness at the micro or sub-micro
level.
      8   The biological mechanism through which this eect works is that of ther-
moregulation.     We believe this biological mechanism is fundamentally related to
many of the documented climate-economy links in the literature (Table 2).



which leads to the cancellation of several workdays or meetings that were meant to be held during
those days, one would expect a noticeable impact on annual output, unless these shocks were
made up for by cannibalizing leisure time.    From a social welfare perspective, however, even if
individuals engage in forced make-up work by taking away from leisure time, in the absence of
parallel preference shifts, this is a clear welfare loss, even if nominal output may remain the same.
   6Seppanen et al. [2006] and Hancock et al. [2007] conduct meta-analyses of 24 and 49 lab and
eld studies respectively and nd robust single-peaked relationships between ambient temperature
and objective metrics of worker productivity in indoor, oce environments. Both groups of authors
are cautious to select only those studies that use  objective measures of productivity, as opposed
to subjective measures such as self-reported productivity or peer-evaluations. They also weight the
studies by sample size, which vary from 9 to 500 individuals per study. The tasks measured include
   FEELING THE HEAT: TEMPERATURE, PHYSIOLOGY & THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 9

                   Potential Impacts of Thermal Stress on Human Welfare
                    that Operate through Physiology and Thermoregulation
                      Utility                            Health and Human Capital
  Direct disutility             Connolly [2013]               Mortality          Kovats and Hajat [2008]


   Travel amenity                Unexamined                   Morbidity              Deschenes and

                                                                                    Greenstone [2007]


                                                         Cognitive Function        Hsiang et al. [2012]


                Eective Labor Supply                                Interactive/Political
     Labor Hours       Gra Zivin and Neidell [2010]         Innovation             Dell et al. [2008]


     Labor Eort                 Unexamined              Crime and Violence        Hsiang et al. [2013]


 Labor Productivity        Seppanen et al. [2006]        Political Instability      Dell et al. [2008]


          Table 2. Categorization of Potential Causal Impacts of Thermal
          Stress on Human Welfare




          4. A Model of consumer behavior under thermal stress

   We next develop a simple formal model that reects the issues reviewed above. It
combines elements of the standard labor-leisure choice model from labor economics
with the thermoregulatory factors that emerge as important inuences on labor
productivity as temperatures vary. The result is an optimizing model of the choice
of labor hours and eort, leading to a physiological-economic model of labor supply.
   All human beings regulate core body temperature to keep it as close as possi-
ble to a biological optimum (98.6°F, 37°C ) (Kovats and Hajat [2008]). Scientic
evidence suggests that we do this both subconsciously  through sweating or invol-
untary physical activity modulation (for example, shivering)  and consciously  by
putting on or taking o clothing, or turning on the air-conditioning or heating if it
is available. Core body temperature is aected by a host of factors which can be
grouped into the following three categories: 1) physiological factors, including level
of physical activity, and involuntary acclimatizing activities such as sweating, shiv-
ering, or long-term physical acclimatization (biologists refer to this as the metabolic
rate), 2) ambient temperature and humidity, and 3) the built environment (e.g. the
availability of heating and air conditioning). As the core body temperature moves
further away from the biological optimum, we devote more and more energy to
trying to bring it back: more energy to shivering if it is too low and to sweating


oce type work, text processing, length of customer service time, simple numerical calculations,
and total handling time per customer for call-center workers.
   7The authors suggest that these results likely underestimate the true magnitude of the eect
on productivity, due to the short term nature of many of the lab experiments reviewed (Seppanen
et al, 2005).
   8We call these sub-micro   studies in that the eect often occurs without conscious decisions
or awareness on the part of the agents themselves. Micro-economics typically applies to models of
individual utility maximization and the choices that individuals make, not subconscious processes.
     FEELING THE HEAT: TEMPERATURE, PHYSIOLOGY & THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 10
if too high (Parsons [2003], Kilbourne [1997]). And when the temperature is too
high, the body automatically circulates more blood near the skin in order to take
advantage of cooling opportunities, and limiting the supply to key organs. These
cooling opportunities are more limited if the external environment is hot or humid.
It takes only a small deviation from the optimal core body temperature for a per-
son to be very sick  consider a temperature of 101°F, only three degrees above the
optimum, yet high enough to make it dicult to function. A temperature of 104°F
maintained for several days can prove fatal.
     One of the principal mechanisms through which temperature aects performance
appears to be the ability of the brain to dispose of waste heat: on average the brain
generates 20% of all the heat generated by the human body, and its performance is
temperature-sensitive, so that it needs to dispose of waste heat (Schi and Somjen
[1985], Yablonskiy et al. [2008]). This becomes harder as the ambient temperature
rises.
     In economic terms, the consequences of thermal stress (a shock to body temper-
ature pushing it away from the optimum) are threefold: 1) feeling excessively hot or
cold, which we model as a direct loss of utility or welfare, 2) a drop in task perfor-
mance which lead to a reduction in earning power, and 3) behavioral adjustments
by the agent to reoptimize subject to the new temperature. Body temperature is
determined by the external temperature, by the level of physical activity, and by
expenditures on cooling, such as air conditioning.
     Utility is assumed to depend on income, leisure, eort supplied and core body
temperature. So we have that         U = U (Y, L, A, T )        where     Y   is income,   L   is leisure,
A    is eort supplied to the work (related to the physiological concept of metabolic
rate) and    T   is core body temperature.        U   is increasing in    Y, L    and decreasing in      A.
Utility is a concave function of core body temperature, increasing at low values of
T    and decreasing at high values. Hence the derivative of               U with respect       to   T , UT ,
changes sign as      T   increases, and the second derivative           UT,T is negative.
     These variables are interrelated:

                              Y = (1 − L) AP (T ) , T = T (E, A)
where    E   is the environmental (external) temperature and                  P (T )   is labor perfor-
         9
mance. , a function of core body temperature.                  We normalize the wage rate to
unity.    Hsiang et al. [2012] note for example that math test scores decline with
temperature: this is an aspect of performance, even if it might not be classied as
a change in productivity. Performance increases with temperature at low tempera-
tures and decreases at high temperatures, so that              PT ,     the derivative of   P,   changes
sign from positive to negative and        PT T < 0.          Income is hours worked multiplied
by both eort and performance.           More eort means working harder, and greater
performance means that a given level of eort leads to more output. The core body
temperature      T   is inuenced by external temperature           E   and eort or metabolic rate
A.
     The total supply of labor is taken to be          1.   Hence

                            U = U ((1 − L) AP (T ) , L, A, T (E, A))
gives the full specication of utility. In this relationship,                 E   is a parameter given
by the external environment,        T   and   P   are functional forms given by physiological

     9By using the word performance we intend to include a broader range of eects than would be
indicated by productivity.
    FEELING THE HEAT: TEMPERATURE, PHYSIOLOGY & THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 11
considerations, and      A   and   L    are choice variables selected to optimize            U   subject
to the relationships between the variables. In particular for given functionsU, P
and   T   the choices of A and L depend on the external temperature E : denote the
                           ∗          ∗
maximizing values      by A (E) and L (E). We can then write the indirect utility
function

            V (L∗ (E) , A∗ (E)) = maxA,L U (((1 − L) AP (T ) , L, A, T (E, A)))
More generally we will write

                      W (L, A : E) = U ((1 − L) AP, L, A, T (E, A))
as a simplied representation of utility, showing its dependence on the choice vari-
ables   L, A   and the external parameter          E.
    From this general framework, we will specialize to a particular functional form
and assume that utility is quasi-linear in income:

(4.1)                            U (Y, L, A, T ) = Y + f (L, A, T )
as this makes possible a more precise understanding of the mechanisms at work. In
this specication we are assuming that the interactions between leisure, eort and
temperature are independent of income. We will also adopt a more specic func-
tional form for the relationship between body temperature                   T , external temperature
E   and eort or metabolic rate         A.   We will assume

(4.2)                              T (E, A) = α + βE + g (A)
where     α, β are constants and g (.) is a concave increasing function.              This is consistent
with the physiological literature, which again suggests that core body temperature
is non-decreasing with eort.
    Optimizing behavior is characterized by the two obvious rst order conditions:

                                         ∂W      ∂W
(4.3)                                       = 0,    =0
                                         ∂A      ∂L
and we can treat these as implicit functions relating                L, A   and   E   and dierentiate
these by the implicit function theorem to obtain comparative static results on how
the optimal choices of       A    and   L    respond to an increase in temperature               E.   The
results are
                                                                         
                           dA               WA,E         dL          WL,E
(4.4)                         =−                       ,    =−
                           dE               WA,A         dE          WL,L
                ∂2W
where     WA,E =∂A∂E etc.
    We need to sign the expressions in (4.4). Consider the denominators      WA,A and
WL,L : we assume the problem to be such that the optimal choices of both A and
L are interior maxima. (Below we verify that this condition is in fact satised.) In
this case the second derivative of W with respect to each is at least locally negative,
implying that at an optimum

                                        WA,A < 0, WL,L < 0
Hence the signs of the derivatives in (4.4) are those of the numerators in the paren-
theses, which we investigate next. It is easy to verify that the sign of                   ∂A/∂E ,    the
derivative of eort with respect to external temperature, is equal to that of



(4.5)              (1 − L) PT β + (1 − L) APT T βgA + fA,T β + fT,T βgA
   FEELING THE HEAT: TEMPERATURE, PHYSIOLOGY & THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 12
In this expression, we know that       (1 − L) , β, gA > 0.     We also know that   PT T , fT,T <
0. PT     changes sign from positive at low body temperatures to negative at high
temperatures. We have not yet assigned a sign to               fA,T .
   The issue in this case is: does the marginal disutility of eort rise or fall with
body temperature? We assume            fA,T < 0,     so that the marginal disutility of eort
becomes more negative at higher temperatures.
   The combined eect of these conditions is that the sign of (4.5), which is the
sign of the derivative of eort with respect to external temperature, is negative at
high temperatures (those at which productivity falls with temperature) and could
be positive at low temperatures if      P0      is suciently large.
   Next we check the sign of        ∂L/∂E ,     the eect of the external temperature on the
amount of leisure chosen. This is equal to the sign of

(4.6)                                  −APT β + fL,T β
Here    A, β > 0, and as we have already noted PT changes sign from positive to nega-
tive.   fL,T shows the impact of body temperature on the marginal utility of leisure.
Under the assumption that working in extreme conditions, be they heat or cold, is
dicult and unpleasant, it seems reasonable that the marginal utility of leisure will
be greater at high and low temperatures and lower at intermediate temperatures:
this implies that fL as a function of T is U -shaped and fL,T is negative and then
                 dL
positive. Hence
                 dE is rst negative and then positive: leisure (work) is decreasing
(increasing) then increasing (decreasing) in external temperature. Hence we have
established

Proposition 1. With quasi-linear preferences and under the specied assumptions
about the signs of fA,T and fL,T , an increase in environmental temperature will
lower the amount of eort A supplied at high temperatures, may raise the eort
supplied at low temperatures, and will raise the hours worked at low temperatures
but lower the hours worked at high temperatures.
   This clearly implies that productivity in terms of output per person will fall
with an increase in temperature at high temperatures: people work less hard for
fewer hours. Output per person may rise as temperature rises at low temperatures,
as hours worked rise and eort may also rise, but only if the direct impact on
performance is large enough.

4.1.    Spending on Thermoregulation.               Next we develop a simplied model that
allows us to analyze spending on thermoregulation, and establish a relationship
between this spending and the welfare losses from temperature changes. The model
species only the bare essentials:

                                    U = U (Y − S, T − rS)
where    Y   is income,   T   temperature before cooling as before, and       S   is the amount
the agent spends on cooling. Each dollar spent on cooling reduces temperature by               r
degrees, and of course net income is reduced by           S.   Clearly the rst order condition
for the optimal choice of cooling      C   is

                                                     UY
                                           r=−
                                                     UT
which just tells us that the marginal rate of substitution between income and tem-
perature should equal the cost of reducing the temperature.
   FEELING THE HEAT: TEMPERATURE, PHYSIOLOGY & THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 13
   Now the loss of welfare from a temperature shock             ∆T   is

                                          ∆U = UT ∆T
Next we nd the change in spending on cooling as a result of this temperature
shock. For this we need the derivative of         S   with respect to     T   when the rst order
condition is satised. This is
                                                                    
                              ∂S              −UY T − rUT T
                                 =−
                              ∂T          UY Y + 2UY T + r2 UT T
which in the quasi-linear case reduces to1/r. The welfare loss is ∆U = ∆T UT =
∆T UY /r = ∆T /r as UY = 1 in the quasi-linear case. But the increment to spending
   ∂T ∆T = r . Hence in this case the increment to spending as a result of
   ∂S      ∆T
is
the temperature shock exactly equals the associated welfare loss10.
Proposition 2. With quasi-linear preferences the welfare cost of a temperature
shock is exactly equal to the extra spending that results from the shock.
4.2.   Implications for empirical work.            Several points from this theoretical anal-
ysis have implications for our empirical work.

       (1) For quasi-linear preferences, the increase in spending on cooling (or heating)
           as a result of an increase (decrease) in temperature is exactly equal to the
           welfare loss from this increase. For more general preferences, the increase
           in spending is a lower bound on the welfare loss.
       (2) Holding external temperature constant, changes in eort (or other factors
           that inuence metabolic rates such as whether or not someone is working)
           will aect the expenditure on cooling or heating.
       (3) With a group of people who have identical (or, strictly speaking, very sim-
           ilar) quasi-linear preferences, then in aggregate they behave as one person
                                            11
           with quasi-linear preferences.        This means that with the model developed
           here, we can move freely between dierent levels of aggregation  from
           individuals to households to larger groups and even nations.
       (4) At high temperatures, an increase in temperature will lead to a drop in
           performance, via decreases in both eort and hours worked  what we call
           eective labor supply.
       (5) At low temperatures, an increase in temperature will lead to an increase in
           hours worked and possibly in eort, and may lead to an increase in output
           per person.
       (6) For a given adverse shock to the external environment (ambient tempera-
           ture), an individual with more installed thermoregulatory capital (higher
           expenditures on cooling and heating) will suer a smaller shock to produc-
           tivity.

According to points (4) and (5) above, we expect that in a study of the impacts of
temperature changes, we will see dierent responses in hot and cold environments,
with output responding negatively to a temperature increase in hot environments

   10Note that a change in core body temperature 4T      can be caused by a change in the external
temperature or by a change in the level of physical or mental activity, which will change the
the metabolic rate. If we compare the responses of people with dierent metabolic rates, those
with higher rates will have a greater change in core body temperature in response to a given
temperature shock.
   11See   Mas-Collel et al. [1995]
   FEELING THE HEAT: TEMPERATURE, PHYSIOLOGY & THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 14
and possibly positively in cold ones.        Point (6) suggest that, at the macro level,
countries with varying levels of thermoregulatory capital may react dierently to
a given temperature shock. We do in fact nd evidence of all three eects in the
analyses that follow.


                                  5. Empirical Results

   In the following section, we take our model to cross-country data on climatic
shocks and income per capita in an attempt to revisit the age old question: what is
the role of climate in explaining the relative wealth of nations? We nd suggestive
evidence of a physiological eect of climate on economic activity at the macro
level, one which may profoundly inuence the way policymakers think about the
welfare consequences of future climate change.            Inasmuch as climate change will
push already heat-stressed countries - which tend to be much poorer on average -
toward more heat-stressed extremes, it may exacerbate existing income inequalities
at the global level.
   Whereas previous studies have focused on the role of heat (or low latitude) in
predicting GDP, we predict that deviations from the thermoregulatory optimum, as
opposed to hotter temperatures per se, are what dictate the magnitude of climate-
GDP impacts. In some sense, we use the medical literature on thermal stress and
human performance to inform our prior about treatment-eect heterogeneity; a
warmer-than-average year (the treatment) would have a very dierent impact on
productivity and GDP for warmer, tropical countries than it would on cooler, tem-
perate ones. It turns out that allowing for this particular form of eect heterogeneity
makes a big dierence in interpreting even the most well-studied macroeconomic
datasets.
   Our analysis suggests that the relationship between temperature and income is
nearly universal (i.e. not necessarily limited to poor countries) and single-peaked, in
line with what the physiological literature and our model imply. The causal eect of
thermal stress is highly negative in already hot environments such as Thailand and
India (as much as -3.9% annual output per capita per degree Celsius) and highly
positive (up to +4.1%) in cool environments such as Canada and Sweden, with an
indeterminate eect in temperate zones. In the time period surveyed (1950-2006)
a one degree C hotter-than-average year occurs roughly once every 17 years. While
we hesitate to extrapolate directly to future climate change scenarios, it is worth
noting that such a two-sided dose-response to global warming could have serious
                                                              12
political, economic, and philosophical consequences.

                                          Figure 6.2

   As we note, there are many potential confounders that limit one's ability to
interpret these estimates literally.      While the single-peaked relationship between
temperature and output per capita is certainly consistent with a model of ther-
moregulatory stress, it may also be driven by other, correlated causal factors  for
example changes in agricultural yield.         In principle it may also arise from spuri-
ous correlation resulting from secular time trends in temperature and total factor
productivity (TFP). We attempt to control for these confounders by using air condi-
tioning data, as well as allowing for exible, country-specic time trends, discussed

   12The   point estimates reported here refer to the contemporaneous impact of temperature on
log per capita income allowing for up to 10 lags in temperature, controlling for precipitation,
country and year xed eects, in addition to capital stock variables. See Table 4
   FEELING THE HEAT: TEMPERATURE, PHYSIOLOGY & THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 15
in more detail below. The core result  a single-peaked relationship between tem-
perature and output  is robust to a wide range of specications.

5.1.   Empirical Framework.
   Before setting out our estimation strategy, we note that there are two important
dimensions to consider when exploring the eect of temperature uctuations on
macroeconomic aggregates.
   First, the initial climate in which an economy is situated matters. Our model
suggests that the impact of a hotter-than-average year will not be the same across
dierent  original climates. A one-degree C hotter-than-average year may lead to
diminished overall labor performance in an already warm environment (Namibia),
but it may actually lead to increased overall labor yield in a cold country (Norway).
Second, in moving from a microeconomic model of thermoregulation to an analysis
of macroeconomic variables, we must take into account industry composition: that
is, the relative compositional sensitivity of the economic activity in a country or
region to the eects of thermal stress on productivity. Occupations more intensive
in outdoor labor are likely to be more sensitive to thermal stress, and countries
with a higher share of economic activity concentrated in these industries to be more
                                     13
sensitive to temperature shocks           . Crucially for this analysis, the sensitivity of GDP
to temperature stress may also be related to the degree of thermoregulatory capital
available: that is, electrication, air conditioning, and access to heating systems
and heat fuel. Given the asymmetric impact of physical activity in cold and hot
environments mentioned above, as well as the relatively advanced technological
requirements of AC (which results in more cross-country variation) we focus on
thermoregulatory capital at the top end: capital that defends against heat stress
in particular.      Using a novel data set on air conditioning penetration by country
that we construct from international trade data, we test whether the sensitivity of
GDP to temperature is mediated by air conditioning, and nd that it appears to
be highly dependent on the amount of AC expenditure per capita.
   Following DJO, we use historical uctuations in temperature within countries to
identify its eect on aggregate economic outcomes. Unlike DJO, we focus on the
eect of temperature on the        level    of income per capita (as opposed to the growth
rate), noting that the impact of thermal stress on labor productivity is mostly
                       14
contemporaneous.
   Suppose each country's annual per capita GDP,                 Yit ,   is produced using a combi-
nation of capital and eective labor input:

                                     Yit = Y (θi , Nit , Kit )
where once again the inputs are expressed in per capita terms.                        Kit   denotes a
holistic measure of capital (human and physical),           Nit    is a measure of eective labor
supply, and    θi   is some country-specic measure of factor productivity that might
be thought of as the institutional environment in country i.
                                                                            15   Per capita output is
increasing in eective labor supply.

   13Cachon   et al (2012) nd that, even in automobile manufacturing plants in the United States,
temperature shocks have a signicant adverse impact on productivity, suggesting that even indoor
manufacturing occupations may not be immune to the eects of thermal stress.
   14As some recent studies (for example,    Hsiang [2010]) have shown, there may be lagged impacts
insofar as temperature eects investment that would have paid out in future years. It is unclear
how large these eects might be.
   15We abstract away from population growth for simplicity.
     FEELING THE HEAT: TEMPERATURE, PHYSIOLOGY & THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 16
     Dene eective labor input,        Nit , as a composite of labor hours (1 − L), labor
eort      (A),   and labor performance     (P ), a function of the ambient temperature, T :
                                 Nit = Nit ((1 − L), Ait , P (Tit ), Tit )
     Insofar as the level of eective labor supply depends on the ambient temperature
experienced by workers in the country (Tit ), we would expect per capita output to
be a function of experienced temperature:
                                                        16
                                   Yit = Yit (Nit (Tit ), Ai , Kit , Tit ).
     Abstracting from capital inputs, we focus on the role of eective labor inputs:

                                            Yit (Nit , Ait , Tit )
     According to the model presented in section 4, and the mapping from changes
in   Tit   to changes in   Nit   described therein, we expect the relationship between per
capita output and temperature to be single-peaked: with                       Yit   decreasing in both
directions away from the optimal zone. We attempt to estimate this relationship
by utilizing within-country variation in historical annual temperature realizations,
using panel data analagous to that used by DJO (Dell et al. [2008]).

5.2.   Data.
5.2.1.     Climate Data.
     Annual average temperature and precipitation data at the country level are taken
from DJO (Dell et al. [2009]). Temperature is measured in degrees Celsius, precipi-
tation in mm per year. Their data is derived from Terrestrial Air Temperature and
Precipitation: 1900-2006 Gridded Monthly Time Series, Version 1.01 (Matsuura
and Willmott [2007]), and is weighted by population. Population weighting ensures
that the country average picks up the most economically relevant climate realiza-
tions. If, for example, most of a country's population lives in its southern region,
one might expect most of its economic activity to take place there as well. In that
case, taking a geographic average temperature might be misleading, particularly
if that country has sparsely populated areas in extreme climates (e.g. Russia and
Siberia, Canada and its arctic areas, the United States and Alaska).
                                                                                         17
5.2.2.     International Economic Data.
     We use income data from the UN National Accounts.                        Real GDP per capita
is measured in terms of USD$ (2000) using Laspreyes constant prices. Like DJO
(Dell et al. [2008]), we drop countries for which either the climate or GDP data
do not exist, or the panel data does not extend for at least 20 years. This leaves
an unbalanced panel of 134 countries, most of which have economic data for the
period 1950-2006, and a total of 6,101 observations.

5.3.   Statistical Model.
     Given our model, and the literature on task performance under thermal stress,
we expect the underlying relationship between output and temperature to take the
following form:

(5.1)                            yit = f (Tit ) + β3 Kit + θi + γt + it
     16This is one reason why population-weighted average temperature is a more relevant metrix
than a raw geographic average.
     17Ideally, one would use a less aggregated measure of temperature, for instance, cooling and
heating degree days (CDD, HDD). CDD and HDD data, though available at more localized levels
in OECD countries, was not readily available for the cross-country dataset used here.
   FEELING THE HEAT: TEMPERATURE, PHYSIOLOGY & THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 17
where   f (Tit ) is some potentially non-linear function of temperature, Kit           is a vector
of capital stock variables, which in principle may include all country-specic, time-
varying contributors to income per capita,        θi denotes time-invariant country-specic
factors such as natural resource endowments or institutions,             γt represents year-
specic common shocks (e.g. global           recessions), and it is a country-year specic
error term.      A more structurally restrictive version of this equation may assume
a single-peaked (e.g. quadratic) relationship between income and temperature, as
the medical and experimental literature suggests and summarized in the model of
section 4.:



(5.2)                    yit = β1 Tit + β2 Tit2 + β3 Kit + θi + γt + it
   In this case, our main hypothesis is that the coecients on              T   and   T2   are posi-
tive and negative respectively. That is, the relationship between temperature and
income is globally single-peaked around some optimal zone. More specically, we
hypothesize that the GDP-residual, controlling for institutions, capital stock, and
education, is dependent on temperature.
   In an ideal experiment, we would expose otherwise identical economies to a
series of random temperature shocks, and would do so for the whole range of base
climates. This is for obvious reasons impossible at the macro level. Our econometric
challenge is to come as close to such an experiment as possible with the data that
we have.
   The simplest way to estimate this relationship is to run a cross-sectional OLS
regression of the following form, where      δi denotes a country-specic         residual:

                                 yi = α + β1 Ti + β2 Ti2 + δi .
Following this basic estimation strategy, Horowitz [2001] nds that a one degree
increase in temperature is associated with -8.5% change in GDP per capita
                                                                                            18.
   We conrm that there exists a strongly negative cross-sectional relationship be-
tween temperature and income in countries where population-weighted average tem-
peratures are above 20°C. Of course, a key limitation of the existing cross-sectional
analyses is that they may miss country-specic factors such as natural resource en-
dowments or institutions. Researchers often point to the starkly dierent fortunes
of North and South Korea as indicative of the crucial role of institutional factors
                                                                                                  19.
   It is worth noting, furthermore, that previous studies which emphasize the
monotonic cross-sectional relationship between temperature (latitude) and income
(growth) may miss a signicant component of the relationship, due to the limited
number of cold countries in most samples. For example, in our sample there are
only 5 countries which have annual average temperatures below 5° Celsius, even

   18
Dell et al. [2009] and Nordhaus [2006] represent marginal improvements on this regression by
using disaggregated data at the municipality and grid-cell levels respectively. Dell et al (2009)
nd a strong, statistically signicant negative relationships between temperature and income in
a cross-section, of slighly smaller magnitude. In Nordhaus' case, the nding is of a strongly
single-peaked relationship.


   19Selection   via migration to more favorable climates is also something that cross-sectional
correlations cannot account for. Cross-sectional analyses may also be sensitive to period-specic
idiosyncracies. If the data is from a year in which there was a global recession, it is unclear to
what extent this globally correlated shock is aecting the underlying relationship.
   FEELING THE HEAT: TEMPERATURE, PHYSIOLOGY & THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 18
though a much larger number of countries have regions with very cold climates
(e.g.   Alaska and the Upper Midwest in the US; the Tibetan Plateau in China).
More research is needed to uncover the temperature-income gradient within coun-
tries, especially those that have signicant cold regions.              At the very least, the
temperature-income gradient in the cross-section provides us with an upper bound
for any contemporaneous impact of temperature on income: be that positive or
negative.
           20
   The panel nature of the dataset allows for one to control for time-invariant,
country-specic unobservables that may inuence income per capita: for instance,
institutions or natural resource endowments (θi ), and average climate (T̄i ).                 In
addition, we control for country-specic factors that may be changing over time by
adding measures of capital stock directly. Using data from the Penn World Tables,
we control for physical capital (log capital stock per capita) and human capital
accumulation, in the form of an index.
                                              21    One way to think of this is that we are
identifying the impact of hotter or colder than average years for a particular country
on that country's total output, controlling for all sources of variation in income per
capita apart from annual weather uctuations.              By utilizing the  within-group
variation in GDP with respect to temperature, we can interpret an association
between temperature uctuations and income uctuations as causal. As a number
of other studies note (Hsiang et al. [2013], Auhammer et al. [2013]), such annual
uctuations in weather variables can be considered essentially random, though they
may be correlated over time in the short run.
   Thus, our preferred regression framework utilizes country- and year-xed eects,
as well as country-specic trends in physical and human capital accumulation:



(5.3)                        yit = f (Tit ) + β3 Kit + θi + γt + it
   This empirical specication, while utilizing within-country variation, is not im-
mune to issues of spurious correlation.            If variation in temperature is correlated
with variation in capital stock variables, we may be attributing too much of the
variation in income levels to temperature shocks. We discuss the issue of potential
spurious correlation and our attempts to adjust for this in the section below, as
well as in the Appendix.


5.4.    Main Results.
   We begin by estimating a single-peaked (quadratic) relationship between tem-
perature and income per capita. Table 3 presents the coecients from estimating
equation (5.2) above.        We allow for the possibility that temperature may aect
GDP with a time lag, by allowing for 1, 5, and 10 lags. Allowing for lagged impacts
controls for the potential for serial correlation in the shocks, due, for example, to
ENSO climate cycles, usually with a periodicity of 4-8 years.                  Allowing for lags
also helps us to come closer to isolating the physiological eective labor supply
channel as separate from other long-lived investment impacts.
                                                                          22

   20Selective migration based on the intensity of preferences for climate amenities (or adaptive
capacity) notwithstanding.
   21Both variables are taken from the Penn World Tables, version 8.0 (Heston et al, 2013).
   22While we do not discuss long-term impacts of climate shocks here, we note that, in principle,
a large enough thermal shock could have impacts that persist for a very long time. For example,
a heat wave in utero may aect income in one's twenties and thirties.
   FEELING THE HEAT: TEMPERATURE, PHYSIOLOGY & THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 19
   Our coecient of interest, therefore, is the contemporaneous impact of tempera-
ture in year t on income in year t. Columns (9) through (12) suggest a signicant,
concave relationship temperature (degrees C) and log income per capita, allowing
for 0 to 10 lags. Whether or not we allow for lagged eects, the concave relationship
persists. The implied optimal temperature is in the range of 15° and 20° Celsius
across all specications, consistent with the medical literature.
                                                                          23
                                            Table 3

   Next, we consider a more exible functional relationship between temperature
and GDP (5.1), by creating dummies for a range of average temperature bins and
allowing for piecewise linear relationships within each bin. We report the results
for a 5-bin classication, where countries are classied into very hot (average
annual temperature above 25°C), hot (20-25°C), temperate (15-20°C), cold
(10-15°C), and very cold (10°C and below)
                                                    24.   The results suggest a single-peaked
relationship, with the implied peak again occuring somewhere between 15° and 20°
Celsius (Figure 6.2).      A hotter than average year is associated with lower than
average output per capita in countries with average annual temperatures above
20°C (during 1950-2005), while a positive temperature shock of similar magnitude
is associated with higher output per capita in cooler countries (average annual
temperatures below 20°C). There is higher variance among very hot countries, but
the overall pattern of negative eects of heat shocks in warm climates and positive
eects of heat shocks in cooler climates is noticeable. This pattern persists across
various bin classications (e.g. three climate bins as opposed to ve).

                                            Table 4

                                            Table 5

   The magnitude of temperature-related output uctuations implied by these re-
gressions is large. Very hot countries such as Thailand, India, and Nigeria suer
negative output shocks on the order of 3-4% per capita GDP per degree Celsius.
Very cold countries such as the UK, Canada, Norway, and Sweden have signicantly
higher output in warmer years (and, notably, lower output in colder years). These
eect sizes are consistent with the emerging literature, and well within the upper
bounds signied by cross-sectional studies. For example, looking at 28 Caribbean
countries, Hsiang [2010] nds large contemporaneous impacts of temperature shocks
on output which ranges from negligible in some to over -6% per degree C in oth-
ers. The implication seems to be that a quadratic (concave) relationship between
temperature and income per capita is a good approximation of the underlying re-
lationship, controlling for time-invariant factors such as institutions and natural
resource endowments.

5.4.1.    Robustness Checks for Omitted Variables, Adaptation, and Spurious Corre-
lation.
   We have established a single-peaked relationship between temperature and out-
put per capita, and posited that this arises in part from the physiological factors
discussed in earlier sections.      There are of course alternative mechanisms which
could lead to this relationship, as well as possible time-series properties of the data

   23These ranges are likely shifted downward systematically relative to the optimum implied by
lab studies, primarily due to the fact that our data is in annual averages, which counts nighttime
temperatures as well as daytime temperatures.
   24The number of observations in each bin are 1384, 1151, 470, 544, and 442 respectively.
      FEELING THE HEAT: TEMPERATURE, PHYSIOLOGY & THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 20
that might bias our results. These include standard omitted variable bias, the dis-
tinction between weather and climate (and potential for adaptation over time), and
spurious correlation between temperature trends and TFP trends. In this section,
we tackle each issue in turn.
      We know for example that the connection between crop yield and temperature
is highly non-linear, with yields increasing in temperature up to a point and then
falling precipitously (Schlenker and Roberts [2006]).               This suggests that, looking
only at agricultural societies, we could nd a single-peaked connection between
temperature and output. One would not expect this relationship to persist across
industrial countries, but it could, in principle, explain a portion of the observed
temperature-dose-GDP-response relationship. However, average agricultural value-
added as a proportion of GDP in OECD countries is roughly 3% (over the period
1960-2006), and even in many developing economies less than 10%, suggesting that
the eects cannot be totally attributable to decreases in agricultural yield (Table
6).

                                               Table 6

      There is also evidence to believe that negative public health impacts from ex-
treme temperatures work through a diverse range of mechanisms, including in-
uenza outbreaks, the spread of tropical disease vectors, and the eects of heat
stress on outright mortaility. While the focus to date has been on thermal stress at
the high end (Deschenes and Greenstone [2007]), it is also the case that very low
temperatures lead to increased mortality, and to a range of health stresses too. All
of these explanations are consistent with our ndings.
      It is worth noting that our identication strategy relies on the hypothesis that
variations in temperature from year-to-year in a given country (short-term vari-
ations, inter-annual variability) lead to the same sort of economic responses as
variations in temperature across countries that are maintained over long periods of
time (climate variation). In other words, as a country experiences say a 2 degree
C hotter than average year, it reacts in the same way as a country that is on av-
erage 2 degrees C hotter, conditional on compositional characteristics (agricultural
value-added, air-conditioning penetration, etc). Short and long-run responses are,
as a matter of simplication, treated as if they are the same: there is only one
temperature-income relationship rather than several that depend on the time scale.
The various papers by DJO use the same assumption (Dell et al. [2008, 2009]), as
does Hsiang [2010].
      An alternative is that this is not true, and that countries that are maintained at
high temperature over long periods of time can adapt to these in ways that take
time and investment and to some degree mitigate the impact of temperature, while
countries that experience a temperature shock that is not expected to last do not
adapt.      In this case we would expect to see more response to short-run (year to
year) uctuations than to long-run dierences, and our coecients could overstate
the impact of temperature dierences that are maintained over long periods of
time.     We attempt to control for this dierence by allowing for the treatment to
be dened over 3-year intervals (3-year block averages, 3-year moving averages) as
well, but nd relatively minor dierences in eects, suggesting that, at least over
the short-to-medium run, economies seem to adapt only marginally
                                                                                    25.
      25Using longer time intervals might be preferred in testing the weather-climate distinction, but
doing to reduces our sample size signicantly.
   FEELING THE HEAT: TEMPERATURE, PHYSIOLOGY & THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 21
                                         Table 7

   Note that the reported coecients for the 3-year block averages are much larger
than the original specication. This is due to the fact that the shock in question
is now a much rarer and more severe event. Whereas the original regressions use
a 1° C hotter than average year as the treatment unit, this specication uses a
period of 3 years with 1°C hotter than average temperatures. Seen in this light, the
magnitudes seem consistent with a view that partial adaptation is possible. The
3-year impact is greater than the 1-year impact, but less than three times larger,
suggesting some adaptation to prolonged extreme temperatures.

                                         Table 8

   Looking at the 3-year moving average estimates, it is easy to see that the shape
of the relationship remains the same, and that, controlling for lagged impacts, one
sees a similar response to annual uctuations as one does to longer-term shifts in
climate.


5.4.2.   The Role of Air Conditioning.
   Additional evidence strengthens the case for physiological impacts as a key causal
mechanism. We test for the impact of thermoregulatory capital on the temperature-
output gradient, by utilizing data on country-specic air conditioning penetration.
Insofar as thermoregulatory capital may buer the impacts of thermal stress on
labor productivity (as opposed to crop failures, for example), we would expect the
sensitivity of income shocks to temperature to be lower in areas with higher levels
of thermoregulatory capital.
   Using the quadratic model, we attempt to examine whether access to air con-
ditioning attenuates the eect of thermal stress at high temperatures.       Because
country-specic data on air conditioning penetration per capita is not readily avail-
able, we construct a proxy for air conditioning penetration per capita by imputing
the value of air conditioning equipment imports for each country in our data set.
The trade data is taken from the United Nations COMTRADE database, a subset of
the World Integrated Trade Solution data set. In 1995, for instance, expenditures
on air conditioning equipment (proxied by cumulative imports of air condition-
ing equipment since 1960) ranged from $0 per capita (most Sub-Saharan African
countries, for example) to $161 per capita (Kuwait). Detailed descriptions of air
conditioning penetration per capita are presented in the Appendix.       Because we
expect AC to protect against heat shocks but not extreme cold (though AC pen-
etration is likely correlated with heating equipment as well, seeing as though the
adoption of electrication and AC comes later than basic space heating in many
development contexts), we restrict our sample to the subset of temperate, hot, and
very hot countries.
   Using this data for this subset of countries, we stratify the sample based on
whether a country resided in the top third or bottom third of air conditioning pen-
etration per capita averaged over the sample period 1960-2010. Table 11 presents
the results for the two subsets of countries, allowing for lagged impacts once again.
Consistent with the notion that higher levels of thermoregulatory capital dampen
the impact of thermal stress on productivity, the subset of countries with air condi-
tioning penetration in the top-third of the sample feature a less concave relationship
between temperature and income per capita. The temperature-income gradient im-
plied by the coecients on temperature and temperature squared in columns (2),
   FEELING THE HEAT: TEMPERATURE, PHYSIOLOGY & THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 22
(4), (6), and (8)  the subset countries with top-third air conditioning  is shallower
than that implied by the coecients in columns (1), (3), (5), and (7)  which rep-
resent the subset of countries in the bottom third. Countries with lower levels of
AC suer large negative impacts from temperature shocks - between -3.1 and -9.2
log points of income per capita per year
                                               26.
                                            Table 11

   Moreover, it seems that this dierence is not being driven wholly by the corre-
lation between air conditioning and other unobservables that are correlated with
income. While countries with better access to thermoregulatory capital tend to be
richer on average, there are also relatively hot and poor countries with high air
conditioning penetration (for instance, Libya; see Table 6.3).               It seems that the
vulnerability to thermal stress as implied by access to thermoregulatory capital is
not simply a function of poorness per se. This is an admittedly crude measure,
but points us in the right direction for pressing policy-relevant research on climate
adaptation
            27.

                                       6. Conclusion

   Four main implications emerge from our analysis.
   First, it seems that labor productivity may be a key link between climate shocks
and economic outcomes at the macro level.              While many have documented this
causal mechanism at the micro and  sub-micro level, this study is the rst to
demonstrate a connection at the macro level. We take the globally single-peaked
relationship between temperature and output per capita, combined with the me-
diating impact of air-conditioning per capita among temperate and hot countries,
to be highly suggestive of a causal link between climate shocks and economic out-
put that operates through the impact of temperature on human physiology. The
magnitude of these impacts may be as large as 3-4% per degree Celsius  in both
positive and negative directions.        To our knowledge, this paper also presents the
rst micro-founded model of economic behavior under temperature stress.
   Second, in the context of economic development, this study sheds new insight
into the old question of what determines the relative wealth of nations; it seems
that temperature per se has always mattered for economic productivity, despite
its well-documented correlation with institutional variables. The fact that temper-
ature shocks away from an optimal zone can have signicantly negative impacts
for countries with low levels of air-conditioning suggests that Sub-Saharan Africa
remains poor in part because of its inability to provide adequate thermoregulatory
infrastructure to an already heat-stressed workforce. While it is likely that, in the
real world, better institutions, better infrastructure, better education  and many
other documented  deep determinants of growth  go hand in hand, our study
suggests that the growth handicap associated with hotter climates per se may be
worth noting in earnest.
   Third, these results have important implications for social cost of carbon esti-
mates, which are crucial in determining whether and how much countries should


   26The sum of all lagged temperature impacts in the 5- and 10-lag cases, though not reported
in the table above, are signicantly negative: -0.21*** and -0.32*** respectively.
   27Note that one cannot estimate the impact of AC directly by including AC per capita on the
RHS of the regression. This is because AC per capita is endogenous in a xed eects model.
   FEELING THE HEAT: TEMPERATURE, PHYSIOLOGY & THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 23
act to mitigate climate change. Our estimates suggest that current integrated as-
sessment models may be missing an economically signicant causal link in the form
of labor productivity and labor supply impacts. While many bottom-up analyses of
climate damages include the eects of sea-level rise and agricultural losses among a
host of other causal channels, most do not include a direct eect of heat on human
productivity (Heal, 2008). Given the medical literature on the subject, in conjunc-
tion with the country-level relationships that we document, this seems a non-trivial
omission.
  Fourth, the damages from future climate change may in fact be much more
heterogeneous than previous studies have assumed, and, more specically, that
climate change may widen existing wealth and income disparities. Global warming
may exacerbate income inequalities insofar as it pushes hotter countries, which on
average tend to be much poorer, further away from the thermoregulatory optimum;
and vice versa for relatively temperate and rich countries.    The fact that cooler
countries such as Canada or Russia may benet from warmer weather  due, in part,
to the advantageous impact on days and hours worked, and the relative productivity
of those labor hours  is a dicult one, given the already complex international
politics of climate change.
  It seems that temperature does, in fact, play a role in determining the relative
wealth of nations, through its impact on something very basic:      human physiol-
ogy. Inasmuch as anthropogenic climate change may make some parts of the world
less friendly to human physiology (and some places more), it may have important
consequences not only for local economic productivity, but also for global income
inequality.




                                    References

D. Acemoglu, S. Johnson, and J.A. Robinson. The colonial origins of comparative
  development: an empirical estimation. Nber working paper 7771, 2001.
Maximillian Auhammer, Solomon M. Hsiang, Wolfram Schlenker, and Adam So-
  bel. Using weather data and climate model output in economic analyses of climate
  change.     Rev Environ Econ Policy, Summer:181198, 2013.
Marie Connolly. Some like it mild and not too wet: The inuence of weather on
  subjective well-being.   Journal of Happiness Studies, pages 117, 2013.
Frank C. Curriero, Karlyn S. Heiner, Jonathan M. Samet, Scott L. Zeger, Lisa
  Strug, and Jonathan A. Patz.       Temperature and mortality in 11 cities of the
  eastern united states.   American Journal of Epidemiology, 155(1):8087, 2002.
M. Dell, B.F. Jones, and B.A. Olken. Climate shocks and economic growth: Evi-
  dence from the last half century. Nber working paper 14132, 2008.
M. Dell, B.F. Jones, and B.A. Olken. Temperature and income: Reconciling new
  cross-sectional and panel estimates. Nber working paper 14680., 2009.
O Deschenes and M Greenstone. Climate change, mortality, and adaptation: Evi-
  dence from annual uctuations in weather in the us. Nber working paper 13178,
  2007.
Joshua Gra Zivin and Matthew Neidell. Temperature and the allocation of time:
  Implications for climate change. Nber working paper 15717, 2010.
W.F Grether.        Human performance at elevated environmental temperatures.
  Aerospace Medicine, 1973.
   FEELING THE HEAT: TEMPERATURE, PHYSIOLOGY & THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 24
P.A. Hancock, J.M. Ross, and J.L. Szalma. A meta-analysis of performance response
  under thermal stressors.   Human Factors, 49(5):851877, 2007.
J.K. Horowitz. The income-temperature relationship in a cross-section of countries
  and its implications for global warming. Technical report, 2001.
Solomon M. Hsiang. Temperatures and cyclones strongly associated with economic
  production in the caribbean and central america.          Proceedings of the National
  Academy of Sciences, 107(35):1536715372, 2010.
Solomon M. Hsiang, Joshua Gra Zivin, and Matthew Neidell. Mathematical rea-
  soning deteriorates in warm environmental temperatures. June 2012.
Solomon M. Hsiang,      Marshall Burke,      and Edward Miguel.        Quantifying the
  inuence of climate on human conict.           Published online 1 August 2013
  [DOI:10.1126/science.1235367], 2013.
E. Huntington.   Climate and Civilization.   Yale University Press, 1915.
BF. Jones and BA. Olken. Climate shocks and exports. Technical Report 15711,
  NBER, 2010.
Matthew C. Keller, Barbara L. Fredrickson, Oscar Ybarra, Stéphane Côté, Kareem
  Johnson, Joe Mikels, Anne Conway, and Tor Wager. A warm heart and a clear
  head a warm heart and a clear head: The contingent eects of weather on mood
  and cognition.   Psychological Science, 16(9):724731, 2005.
E.M. Kilbourne.    Heat waves and hot environments, pages 245269.      Oxford Univer-
  sity PressE. Noji, 1997.
R.S. Kovats and S. Hajat. Heat stress and public health: A critical review.       Ann
  Rev Public Health, 21:4155, 2008.
Andreu Mas-Collel, Michael Whinston, and Jerry Green.           Microeconomic Theory.
  Oxford University Press, 1995.
K. Matsuura and C. Willmott. Terrestrial air temperature and precipitation: 1900-
  2006 gridded monthly time series, 2007. URL      http://climate.goeg.udel.edu.
Antony J. McMichael and et al. International study of temperature, heat and urban
  mortality.   The International Journal of Epidemiology, 37(5):11211131, 2008.
Baron de Montesqieu.    The Spirit of Laws. 1750.
William D. Nordhaus. Geography and macroeconomics: New data and new ndings.
  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 103(10):35103517, 2006.
P.K. Pachauri and A. Reisinger, editors.Climate Change 2007: Synthesis Report.
  IPCC, Geneva, Switzerland, 2007.
K.C. Parsons.Human Thermal Environments: The Eects of Hot, Moderate, and
  Cold Environments on Human Health, Comfort, and Performance. Taylor and
  Francis, 2003.
J.D. Sachs, A.D. Mellinger, and J.L. Gallup. The geography of poverty and wealth.
  2001.
Xavier Sala-i Martin. I just ran two million regressions.   American Economic Review,
  87(2), 1997.
S.J. Schi and G.G. Somjen. The eect of temperature on synaptic transmission
  in hippcompal tissue slices.   Brain Research, 345:279284, 1985.
Wolfram Schlenker and Craig McIntosh. Identifying non-linearities in xed eects
  models. Technical report, IRPS, UC San Diego, 2006.
Wolfram Schlenker and M.J. Roberts. Estimating the impact of climate change on
  crop yields: The importance of non-linear temperature eects. 2006.
  FEELING THE HEAT: TEMPERATURE, PHYSIOLOGY & THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 25
O. Seppanen, W. Fisk, and Q. Lei. The eect of temperature on task performance
  in oce environment. Lawrence berkeley laboratory working papers., 2006.
D. Wendt, LJC. van Loon, and van Marken-Lichtenbe. Thermoregulation during
  exercise in the heat.   Sports Medicine, 37(8):669680, 2007.
D.P. Wyon. The eects of moderate heat stress on typewriting performance.     Er-
  gonomics, 1974.
D.A. Yablonskiy, J.J.H. Ackerman, and M.E. Raichle. Coupling between changes
  in human brain temperature and oxidative metabolism during prolonged visual
  stimulation.    Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,   97:76037606,
  2008.
Garry Yohe, James Neumann, Patrick Marshall, and Holly Ameden. The economic
  cost of greenhouse-induced sea-level rise for developed property in the united
  states.   Climatic Change, 32:387410, 1996.
FEELING THE HEAT: TEMPERATURE, PHYSIOLOGY & THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 26




   Figure 6.1. Percentage of adults who are physically inactive (2011)
FEELING THE HEAT: TEMPERATURE, PHYSIOLOGY & THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 27




    Table 3. The contemporaneous impact of temperature and tem-
    perature squared on log income per capita, allowing for up to 10
    lag terms in temperature.
FEELING THE HEAT: TEMPERATURE, PHYSIOLOGY & THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 28




    Table 4. The impact of a +1°C hotter-than-average year tem-
    perature shock on log income per capita that year, stratied by
    temperature zone, allowing for up to 10 lags in temperature.
FEELING THE HEAT: TEMPERATURE, PHYSIOLOGY & THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 29




    Figure 6.2.   A 1°C warmer year results in negative output shocks
    in warmer countries, positive output shocks in cooler countries.
    Shaded bands denote 95% condence intervals.      Representative
    countries for each zone.
FEELING THE HEAT: TEMPERATURE, PHYSIOLOGY & THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 30




    Table 5. The pattern of positive impacts in colder countries, inde-
    terminant impacts in temperature countries, and negative impacts
    in hot countries persists across multiple climate classications
FEELING THE HEAT: TEMPERATURE, PHYSIOLOGY & THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 31




    Table 6. Agricultural value-added as proportion of GDP (Select
    countries and regions; 1960-2006)




   Table 7. 3-year block averages for climate and economic variables
FEELING THE HEAT: TEMPERATURE, PHYSIOLOGY & THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 32




  Table 8. 3-year moving averages for climate and economic variables
FEELING THE HEAT: TEMPERATURE, PHYSIOLOGY & THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 33




        Table 9. Allowing for lagged impacts (up to 10 years).
FEELING THE HEAT: TEMPERATURE, PHYSIOLOGY & THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 34




    Table 10. The impact of temperature shocks on log output per
    capita, controlling for country-specic temperature trends, strati-
    ed by 5 and 3 dierent temperature zone classications.




    Table 11. The eect of air conditioning expenditure per capita
    (proxied by import value) on the relationship between population
    weighted average annual temperature and income per capita. Top
    third/bottom third denotes whether or not countries were in the
    top or bottom third of the sample in terms of average per capita
    AC expenditure for the sample period.
FEELING THE HEAT: TEMPERATURE, PHYSIOLOGY & THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 35




    Figure 6.3. Per capita AC expenditure by country, in hundreds
    of thousands of dollars.
   FEELING THE HEAT: TEMPERATURE, PHYSIOLOGY & THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 36
                                    7. Data Appendix

7.1.   Air Conditioning Data.        The AC imports data comes from WITS, the World
Integrated Trade Solution data set (http://wits.worldbank.org/wits/), specically,
the United Nations COMTRADE database, a subset of WITS, which oers large
country and period coverage of trading data (from 1962 and virtually all countries).
According to the WITS User Manual, data from the data base is reported by
statistical oces of each country to relevant international organizations.
   In the COMTRADE database, data are recorded using several nomenclatures.
The nomenclature we use for AC imports data is SITC Revision 1 (a trade classi-
cation maintained by the UN). The reason we chose this nomenclature is because it
includes a product category of  air conditioning machines and provides the longest
time period (from 1962). These data are double-entried  that is, the same good is
accounted for as an import by the importing country and an export by the exporting
country, by two separate book-keeping entities. Given that imports are considered
to be a more accurately recorded than exports, mostly due to the political economy
of tari revenue collection, we use import records to establish AC expenditure. The
unit we use to measure trade ow is trade value (in million dollars). We use this
measure instead of quantity measure because some countries report trade quantity
in weight (kg), others in number of items, which are often inconsistent. Trade value,
on the other hand, is consistently recorded for all countries and years.
   We construct a variable that represents cumulative AC import value per capita
for each country-year recorded in the income data above. One would be skeptical
of using this as an explanatory variable if it is perfectly or very highly correlated
with income. Regressing income per capita on AC expenditure per capita reveals
that this is not the case (r = 0.52).       The list of the top countries by per capita
AC expenditure shows some very rich countries (e.g.          Saudi Arabia) and poorer
countries (e.g. Libya) as having high AC expenditures per capita. Obviously this
measure understates AC expenditure by countries who are large domestic producers
of AC units, notably the US, South Korea, and China. However, the AC expendi-
ture variable as currently constructed allows us to identify countries that have the
lowest levels of thermoregulatory capital, which is the sub-population of interest.

7.2.   Robustness Checks for International Panel Results.             Another concern
is the potential for spurious correlation arising from secular but heterogeneous time
trends in the temperature data. If some countries were warming (cooling) faster
than others during the period of interest, we may incorrectly attribute secular
changes in the GDP residual (from TFP growth, for example) to climate uctu-
ations.   There is a subtle but important interpretation issue here.     Insofar as we
believe that the evolution of capital stock variables  be that physical or human
capital  is mediated by the ambient temperature in a country or region, we might
still be able to attribute causal signicance to temperature even if there is correla-
tion between omitted capital stock variables and the temperature series. The rapid
(or slow) accumulation of capital stock of an economy may be the proximal cause
of higher (or lower) output or income, but temperature may have some ultimate
causal role. For this to be true, however, it must be true that the temperature se-
ries and the omitted capital stock variables are not cointegrated (i.e. both cannot
contain unit roots).
                      28
   28We discuss this issue in more detail in the Appendix.
   FEELING THE HEAT: TEMPERATURE, PHYSIOLOGY & THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 37
  We attempt to control for potential spurious correlation by allowing for country-
specic temperature trends (as opposed to global trends in temperature, which
are captured by year xed-eects in the previous regressions).     While controlling
for country-specic temperature trends reduces the power of the coecients on
temperature markedly, the resulting point estimates remain consistent with a single-
peaked relationship between thermal stress and economic productivity (Table 10).


                                      Table 10


  Income per capita is often considered to be an AR1 process, or to be non-
stationary. If the explanatory variable of interest  temperature in this case  is
also non-stationary, this might lead to spurious correlation simply by virtue of the
time-series properties of the data.   Note that there is a distinction between non-
stationarity of the series and whether or not there are time trends. It seems that
income per capita and global average annual temperatures have clear time trends.
Whether each country-specic temperature series in our panel (1) has a time trend,
and (2) has a unit root is not immediately clear.
  Population-weighted temperature (wtem), despite an apparent time trend for the
global average, appears to be stationary across the panel, though some individual
country series may have unit roots. The Pesaran (2007) panel unit root test suggests
stationary of the wtem variable, even allowing for a series of lags. For the purposes
of this analysis we assume average annual temperature to be a trend-stationary
process. It is unclear exactly how one should account for time-trends in this context.
Should we de-trend the temperature series for each country around its specic time-
trend, or should it be with respect to the global average time-trend?
  As Jones and Olken [2010] note, if hot climates were to cause low-quality in-
stitutions, which in turn cause low income, then controlling for institutions in a
cross-sectional levels regression can have the eect of partially eliminating the ex-
planatory power of climate, even if climate is the underlying fundamental cause. By
the same token, if TFP growth was caused in part by climate variation especially
over the long term, then controlling for TFP trends can have the eect of partially
eliminating the explanatory power of climate. The fact that GDP per capita still
has a clear time trend, even after controlling for capital accumulation and human
capital (as well as institutions via country xed eects), might be interpreted as
a "secular" growth in TFP. We think that regressing this GDP residual on tem-
perature in the presence of clear positive time trends in temperature might lead to
spurious correlation insofar as we would be attributing "secular" TFP changes to
temperature changes. But inasmuch as we believe that temperature is itself a de-
terminant (if not the sole determinant) of TFP changes, then attempting to correct
for this spurious correlation by detrending the temperature series would actually
have the eect of partially eliminating the explanatory power of climate, just as in
the cross-sections.
  Moreover, we would need temperature and the GDP residual to be rising in
cool countries and temperature to be falling and GDP residual to be rising in hot
countries, or for the relative rates of increase to be signicantly dierent among
these groups. Neither seem to be true. The fact that the impact on hot countries
becomes insignicant when controlling for country-specic time trends is somewhat
puzzling, but we speculate that this might be due to 1) the reduced power due to
reduced variation in the x-variable, and 2) the heterogeneity of the countries in
   FEELING THE HEAT: TEMPERATURE, PHYSIOLOGY & THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 38
the "hot" and "very hot" groups; Saudi Arabia and Mali are probably much more
dierent than Canada and Switzerland.

7.3.   Estimating Non-linear Relationships with Fixed Eects.             Our panel
estimation involves using the xed eects regression to test for a non-linear rela-
tionship.   An important distinction to bear in mind is whether or not the non-
linear (single-peaked) relationship between temperature and productivity is global
or  within-group.   Is it that a warmer year leads to lower productivity if you're
already in a hot climate, but higher productivity if you're in a cold climate, as the
literature suggests? Or is it that small deviations around any point have a positive
eect, but large deviations around any point have a diminishingly positive eect?
We wish to test for whether the former is true  that is, whether there is a glob-
ally non-linear relationship between temperature and income.      As such we insert
quadratic terms directly into the estimation equation. That is, we allow the xed
eects estimator to de-mean the squared values of temperature, rather than taking
the square of the de-meaned values (which is what one would do if one expected
a within-group quadratic relationship). For a detailed description of using xed
eects to test for non-linear relationships, see Schlenker and McIntosh [2006].
