                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             HAVE FINANCIAL MARKETS BECOME MORE INFORMATIVE?

                                           Jennie Bai
                                        Thomas Philippon
                                          Alexi Savov

                                       Working Paper 19728
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w19728


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2013




The Smith Richardson Foundation provided financial support for this project.We thank Alex Edmans,
Itay Goldstein, Harrison Hong, Wei Jiang, Liyan Yang, and Kathy Yuan, and conference and seminar
participants at EFA (Cambridge), the NBER Summer Institute Asset Pricing Workshop, the Texas
Finance Festival, the Five-Star conference, the Society for Economic Dynamics conference, the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, Columbia University, New York University, Yale University, Southern
Methodist University, the University of Texas at Dallas, Georgetown University, and Baruch college
at CUNY. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Jennie Bai, Thomas Philippon, and Alexi Savov. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Have Financial Markets Become More Informative?
Jennie Bai, Thomas Philippon, and Alexi Savov
NBER Working Paper No. 19728
December 2013, Revised September 2015
JEL No. E2,G1,N2

                                           ABSTRACT

The finance industry has grown, financial markets have become more liquid, information technology
has undergone a revolution. But have market prices become more informative? We derive a welfare-based
measure of price informativeness: the predicted variation of future cash flows from current market
prices. Since 1960, price informativeness has increased at longer horizons (three to five years). The
increase is concentrated among firms with greater institutional ownership and share turnover, firms
with traded options, and growth firms. Prices have also become a stronger predictor of investment
and investment a stronger predictor of cash flows. These results suggest increased revelatory price
efficiency.


Jennie Bai                                        Alexi Savov
Georgetown University                             Stern School of Business
3700 O St. N.W.                                   New York University
Washington DC, 20057                              44 West Fourth Street, Suite 9-85
jb2348@georgetown.edu                             New York, NY 10012
                                                  and NBER
Thomas Philippon                                  asavov@stern.nyu.edu
New York University
Stern School of Business
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012-1126
and NBER
tphilipp@stern.nyu.edu
      Fama (1970) writes, “The primary role of the capital market is allocation of ownership of
the economy’s capital stock. In general terms, the ideal is a market in which prices provide
accurate signals for resource allocation: that is, a market in which firms can make production-
investment decisions . . . under the assumption that security prices at any time ‘fully reflect’
all available information.” Since these words were written, financial markets have been trans-
formed: information processing costs have plummeted, and information availability has vastly
expanded. Trading costs have fallen and liquidity has increased by orders of magnitude.1
Institutional investing has become dominant and spending on price discovery has increased.2
The financial sector’s share of GDP has doubled. To assess whether these trends have led to
progress towards Fama’s ideal, we ask: Have financial market prices become more informative?
      To answer this question, we first derive a welfare-based measure of price informativeness
and then document its evolution over time. Using U.S. stock market data from 1960 to 2014,
we find that among comparable firms price informativeness has increased at medium and
long horizons (three to five years) while remaining stable at short horizon (one year). Our
results from a number of tests support the interpretation that greater information production
in financial markets has contributed to an increase in the efficiency of capital allocation.
      Our first task is to come up with the right measure of informativeness. Standard q-theory
(Tobin 1969) implies that investment is proportional to the conditional expectation of future
cash flows, making firm value convex in this expectation. Intuitively, investment is an option
on information, and firm value embeds the value of this option. It follows that aggregate
efficiency is increasing in information (Hayek 1945), which can be quantified by the predicted
variance of future cash flows (i.e. the variance of their conditional expectation). We are
particularly interested in the information content of prices, which is given by the predicted
variance of cash flows using market prices as the predictor. Our price informativeness measure
is its square root.
      We construct time series of price informativeness from yearly cross-sectional regressions
of future earnings on current stock market valuation ratios (we also include current earnings
and sector controls). We focus on the one-, three-, and five-year forecasting horizons and on
  1
      NYSE trading volume is up 103 times since 1960.
  2
      Based on French (2008), spending on price discovery has risen from 0.3% to 1% of GDP since 1980.



                                                     2
S&P 500 firms whose stable characteristics allow for a fairly clean comparison over time. We
show that price informativeness is increasing with horizon, consistent with prices capturing
differences in growth rates across firms. Moreover, current earnings are already a good pre-
dictor of next year’s earnings, making prices more useful at longer horizon. From a capital
allocation perspective, the longer horizons are particularly important since the time-to-build
literature suggests that investment plans take over a year to implement, with the cash flows
materializing farther down the road.3
       Our key result is that price informativeness has increased at the three- and five-year
horizons. The upward trend is steady throughout the fifty-year sample and its cumulative
effect is economically significant: price informativeness at the longer horizons is over 50%
higher in 2010 than in 1960, and the increase is statistically significant. Price informativeness
at the one-year horizon, which is smaller to begin with, is relatively unchanged.
       The increase in price informativeness is not explained by changes in return predictability.
Since valuations are driven by either cash flows or expected returns (Campbell and Shiller
1988), a decrease in cross-sectional return predictability (e.g. a drop in the value premium)
could make price informativeness rise even if information production does not. We find that
this is not the case by putting returns on the left side of our forecasting regressions, which
shows that the predictable component of returns remains stable.4
       Theory suggests that the information contained in market prices for future earnings should
also be reflected in investment decisions. We therefore look at the predicted variance of in-
vestment based on market prices. We find that market prices have become stronger predictors
of investment as measured by R&D spending (though not CAPX). The increase is already
apparent at the short one-year horizon, as one would expect given that investment precedes
earnings. Thus, when it comes to real decisions like R&D (for which market information is
   3
     For instance, Koeva (2000) finds that “the average construction lead time for new plants is around two
years in most industries”.
   4
     For completeness, we also calculate our price informativess measure for firms beyond the S&P 500. We
stress, however, that the composition of this sample has changed dramatically over the years (see Fama
and French 2004), making this comparison potentially misleading. This is readily apparent from trends in
observable characteristics such as idiosyncratic volatility and earnings dispersion (measures of uncertainty),
which have increased drastically. By contrast, these characteristics are remarkably stable for S&P 500 firms.
Likely as a result of the compositional shift, price informativeness for firms beyond the S&P 500 appears to
decline. Interestingly, the decline is concentrated at the short horizon so again there is relative improvement
at the long end. Above all, we view these results as motivating our focus on S&P 500 firms.


                                                      3
arguably particularly useful), the informativeness of prices has also increased.
       It is important to note that more informative prices do not necessarily imply that financial
markets have generated an improvement in welfare. Market prices contain information pro-
duced independently by market participants as well as information disclosed to the market by
the firm. It is primarily the independent, market-produced component of price informative-
ness that contributes to the efficiency of capital allocation.5 Bond, Edmans, and Goldstein
(2012) call this component “revelatory price efficiency” (RPE), in contrast to“forecasting price
efficiency” (FPE) which also includes information already known to the manager.
       Although separating FPE and RPE is challenging, we can use our theoretical framework
to guide our analysis. In our framework, managers have access to internal information, some
of which they disclose to the market. Investors combine this disclosure with their own inde-
pendent information to place their trades, and this causes prices to incorporate both types
of information (FPE). Managers then filter out as much of the independent information con-
tained in prices as they can (RPE) and combine it with their own internal information to set
investment optimally (aggregate efficiency). The two-way feedback between firms and markets
allows us to frame many of the existing models in the literature.
       Our framework shows that we can distinguish an increase in market-produced information
(RPE) from a pure increase in disclosure by looking at aggregate efficiency, the predicted
variation of future cash flows based on the manager’s full information set. Under a pure-
disclosure interpretation, aggregate efficiency should remain the same even as price informa-
tiveness (FPE) rises. Although the manager’s information is not observed, it gets reflected in
investment. Specifically, our model shows that we can bound aggregate efficiency from below
by the predicted variation of future cash flows from investment and from above by the cross-
sectional dispersion of investment, both of which are increasing in the amount of information
managers have. Measuring investment as either R&D alone or R&D and CAPX together, we
find that the predicted variation of earnings from investment has increased. We also find that
the cross-sectional dispersion of R&D has increased.6 We interpret these findings to suggest
   5
     We say “primarily” because there are other decision makers besides a firm’s insiders who might benefit from
a more informative price. These include shareholders, competitors, entrants, customers, suppliers, targets,
acquirers, and regulators. Nevertheless, we view the distinction between market-produced and disclosed
information as a useful, if understated, way of assessing the contribution of market prices to aggregate efficiency.
   6
     The lack of increase in CAPX informativeness and dispersion may be due to the overall decline of CAPX.


                                                         4
that aggregate efficiency has increased. Combined with the observed rise in price informative-
ness (FPE), the increase in aggregate efficiency supports the interpretation that market-based
information production (RPE), and not just disclosure, has increased.
    While we are thus able to rule out a pure disclosure story, it remains possible that the
observed rise in price informativeness is explained by an increase in information production
inside firms (to explain the rise in aggregate efficiency) combined with an increase in disclosure
(to explain the rise in FPE). Teasing out this hypothesis is challenging and it requires that we
come up with additional predictions we can test. We construct and test four such predictions
that exploit cross-sectional differences between firms. While neither test is perfect, the totality
of the evidence supports the interpretation that RPE has increased.
    Our first cross-sectional prediction is that market-based information production should be
higher for firms with high institutional ownership. Institutional investors have come to domi-
nate financial markets, their stake in the average firm rising from 20% in 1980 to 60% in 2014.
Given their professional expertise, we expect them to have a large impact on market-based
information production. In our test, we compare firms with institutional ownership above and
below the median.7 Interestingly, dispersion has increased so that gap in institutional owner-
ship between the two groups has widened. We find that price informativeness is both higher
and has increased more for the group with high and increasing institutional ownership. This
result is consistent with the RPE view that information production in markets has increased.
    In our second cross-sectional test, we compare the price informativeness of stocks with
and without option listings. The CBOE began listing options in 1973 and has been adding
new listings in a staggered manner ever since. Our test is based on the idea that options
provide traders with leverage, the ability to hedge, and a low-cost way to sell short, all of
which increase the incentive and scope for market-based information production. We find
that price informativeness has increased more for CBOE-listed firms than for non-listed firms,
again consistent with the RPE view.
    For our third cross-sectional test, we enrich our model with cross-sectional differences
between firms. Specifically, we incorporate the natural feature that a firm’s cash flows from
The median S&P 500 firm had CAPX of 8% of assets in 1980 versus 4% in 2010 (see Figure 1).
  7
    We go beyond the S&P 500 for this test because it provides greater cross-sectional differences.



                                                      5
growth options may not be perfectly correlated with its cash flows from assets in place. Our
idea then is that firm insiders hold an advantage in producing information about assets in
place. For instance, existing product lines provide internal data that only insiders can access.
Corporate finance theory further suggests that managers, who after all put the existing assets
into place, may possess superior knowledge about their productivity. Growth options, on the
other hand, are typically valued by making comparisons to other firms and by analyzing market
trends, and here the market may have the advantage (or at least less of a disadvantage). Based
on this reasoning, under the RPE view that market-based information has increased we would
expect price informativeness to increase more for firms with a lot of growth options (growth
firms), whereas under the view that internal information plus disclosure have increased we
would expect greater improvement among firms with fewer growth options (i.e. value firms).
Consistent with the RPE view, we find that price informativeness has risen for growth firms
whereas it has remained nearly unchanged for value firms. This result is interesting from
a broader perspective as it indicates that the increase in the information content of market
prices is concentrated among hard-to-value firms where it is most needed.
    In our final test, we compare price informativeness for firms with high and low levels
of liquidity as proxied by share turnover. The idea is that greater liquidity facilitates the
incorporation of private information into prices as well as increases the incentives of market
participants to produce more information (RPE). Consistent with this idea, we find that
stocks with higher turnover on average have higher price informativeness. Since liquidity in
general and turnover in particular have been increasing strongly over the past five decades,
this finding helps to explain the observed rise in overall price informativeness.
    The rest of this paper proceeds as follows: Section 1 reviews the literature, Section 2
derives our informativeness measure, Section 3 describes the data, Section 4 presents results,
and Section 5 concludes.



1     Related literature
Levine (2005) categorizes the economic role of the financial sector into five channels: (1) infor-
mation production about investment opportunities and allocation of capital; (2) mobilization


                                                6
and pooling of household savings; (3) monitoring of investments and performance; (4) financ-
ing of trade and consumption; and (5) provision of liquidity, facilitation of secondary market
trading, diversification, and risk management. Our focus is on (1) and our main contribution
is empirical.
   The information production role of financial markets is part of a classic literature in eco-
nomics traced back at least to Schumpeter (1912) and Hayek (1945). Greenwood and Jo-
vanovic (1990) and King and Levine (1993b) provide endogenous growth models in which
information production in financial markets enables efficient investment. We derive a welfare-
based measure of price informativeness in the spirit of this literature, one that is easily taken
to the data.
   The empirical literature on finance and growth largely relies on cross-country comparisons.
Examples include King and Levine (1993a), Rajan and Zingales (1998), Morck, Yeung, and
Yu (2000), and Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad (2001). Our novel methodology exploits firm-
level variation, which allows us to examine the information production channel within a single
country, in our case the U.S., over time.
   The U.S. time series represents a particularly important setting because over the last few
decades the U.S. financial sector has grown six times faster than GDP (Philippon 2015). At
its peak in 2006, it contributed 8.3% to U.S. GDP compared to 2.8% in 1950 (see Philippon
(2015) and Greenwood and Scharfstein (2012) for in-depth discussions). Finance has also
drawn in a large share of human capital (Philippon and Reshef 2012). The question arises
whether these changes have led to an increase in economic efficiency. While it is difficult to
discern a relationship in aggregate U.S. data, we seek to provide a partial answer by examining
the information content of financial market prices.
   The answer is by no means clear a priori. The dot-com bust of 2000 and the financial crisis
of 2008 have called the benefits of financial development into question (e.g. Zingales 2015).
Prices can be distorted due to behavioral biases (e.g. Hong and Stein 1999; Shiller 2000),
or incentives (e.g. Rajan 2005). Gennaioli, Shleifer, and Vishny (2012) argue that financial
innovation can increase fragility. Bolton, Santos, and Scheinkman (2011) provide a model in
which rents in the financial sector attract an excessive share of the economy’s human capital.
Philippon and Reshef (2012) document a potentially distorting wage premium in the financial


                                               7
sector and Philippon (2015) finds that the unit cost of financial intermediation has remained
relatively high in recent decades. Quantifying information production as we do in this paper
contributes to this important effort of measuring value added in the financial sector.
   A large theoretical literature with seminal papers by Grossman and Stiglitz (1980), Glosten
and Milgrom (1985), Kyle (1985), and Holmström and Tirole (1993) studies the incentives of
traders to produce information. As financial technology develops and the cost of producing
information shrinks, the information content of prices increases. The information revolution
and the growth of financial markets suggest that the premise of this proposition is in place.
Our contribution is to assess its implication.
   Bond, Edmans, and Goldstein (2012) survey the literature on information production in
financial markets, emphasizing the challenge of separating the genuinely new information pro-
duced in markets, which they call revelatory price efficiency (RPE), from what is already
known and merely reflected in prices which they call forecasting price efficiency (FPE). This
distinction can be traced back to Hirshleifer (1971) and Tobin (1984). We follow this con-
ceptual framework and seek to disentangle RPE and FPE by measuring the efficiency of
investment and by comparing sub-samples of firms where RPE or FPE is expected to prevail.
   Recent theoretical work on asset prices and real efficiency includes Dow and Gorton (1997),
Subrahmanyam and Titman (1999), Goldstein and Guembel (2008), Ozdenoren and Yuan
(2008), Bond, Goldstein, and Prescott (2010), Goldstein, Ozdenoren, and Yuan (2013), Kurlat
and Veldkamp (2015), and Edmans, Goldstein, and Jiang (2015). While these papers share
the basic feedback from market prices to investment that is the subject of our paper, each
focuses on a particular form of more advanced feedback such as that from investment to
market prices. In Section 2, we use our theoretical framework to discuss these papers in some
detail, and we use their common features to construct testable predictions.
   On the empirical side, Chen, Goldstein, and Jiang (2007) and Bakke and Whited (2010)
find that the relationship between stock prices and investment is stronger for firms with more
informative stock prices, whereas Baker, Stein, and Wurgler (2003) find that it is stronger for
firms that issue equity more often. Turley (2012) exploits a regulatory change to show that
lower transaction costs increase short-term (one to three month) stock price informativeness.
Our contribution here is to examine the evolution of price informativeness over a long period


                                                 8
of time characterized by unprecedented growth in the financial sector.
       The most common measure of informativeness is price non-synchronicity (Roll 1988), which
is based on the correlation between a firm’s return and a market or industry benchmark (a
high correlation is interpreted as lower informativeness). Papers that adopt this measure
include Morck, Yeung, and Yu (2000), Durnev, Morck, Yeung, and Zarowin (2003), and
Chen, Goldstein, and Jiang (2007). Durnev, Morck, Yeung, and Zarowin (2003) show that
price non-synchronicity is positively related to the correlation between returns and future
earnings at the industry level, which helps to validate it as a measure of informativeness. A
second popular measure comes from the microstructure literature: the probability of informed
trading or P IN (Easley, Kiefer, O’Hara, and Paperman 1996), which is based on order flow.
Our contribution here is to derive a welfare-based measure which quantifies the information
contained in prices for real outcomes and is easily computed from readily available data.
       Our paper is also related to the accounting literature on disclosure (see surveys by Healy
and Palepu (2001) and Beyer, Cohen, Lys, and Walther (2010)). Our sample includes some
significant changes in disclosure requirements, most prominently Regulation Fair Disclosure
in 2000 and Sarbanes-Oxley in 2002. Considerable debate remains regarding the effects of
these changes; even their direction is unsettled.8 We find no evidence of structural breaks in
informativeness around these reforms, though possibly because their effects to take hold over
a longer period of time. In any case, our result that aggregate efficiency has increased makes it
unlikely that changes in disclosure alone can explain the observed rise in price informativeness.
       A second related strand of the accounting literature studies value relevance, the impact of
accounting metrics on market values (see e.g. Holthausen and Watts (2001) and Dechow, Zha,
and Sloan (2014)). This literature establishes both that earnings information drives returns
and that returns do not always fully respond to earnings information. This is among the rea-
sons why we include current earnings as an additional predictor in our forecasting regressions.
There is also evidence that the value relevance of earnings has actually declined over our sam-
   8
    Heflin, Subramanyam, and Zhang (2003) find no evidence of increased volatility around earnings an-
nouncements after Reg. FD, or significant deterioration in analyst forecast accuracy, which suggests that the
information available to market participants was not reduced. In contrast, Wang (2007) reports that after the
passage of Reg. FD, some firms cut back on issuing earnings guidance. However, Bushee, Matsumoto, and
Miller (2004) provide evidence that disclosure remained constant or even increased after the passage of Reg.
FD. Kothari, Ramanna, and Skinner (2009) find that firms reduced their withholding of bad news relative to
good news after Reg. FD was implemented.


                                                     9
ple period (Collins, Maydew, and Weiss 1997), which would bias our results downward. The
broader difference between this literature and our paper is that we measure the extent to which
market values predict—as opposed to react to—accounting metrics, specifically earnings and
investment.
        In sum, our paper lies at the intersection of the finance-and-growth literature and the
literature on information production in financial markets. Its underlying premise is that
measuring price informativeness over time helps to assess the economic value of a growing
financial sector.



2         Theoretical framework and discussion
The main contribution of our paper is empirical, but we need a theoretical framework to
clarify the concept of price informativeness and interpret our empirical results. We build such
a framework from two essential components: a q-theory/aggregate efficiency block and an
information environment block.

Q-theory and aggregate efficiency: Consider a firm with ex-post fundamental value

                                                              γ
                                v (z, k) = (1 + z) k + k − k − k 2 ,
                                                        
                                                                                                              (1)
                                                              2k

where k represents assets in place, k is investment in new capital, z is a productivity shock,
and γ is an adjustment cost parameter. This specification is consistent with constant returns
to scale as in the standard q-theory literature following Hayashi (1982).
        Investment is chosen to maximize firm value under the manager’s (more generally, the
decision maker’s) information set Im : k ? = argmaxk E [v (z, k)| Im ].9 We have normalized the
discount rate to zero for simplicity (we address discount rates in Section 4.3). This leads to
    9
     Note that this specification is quite general. We refer to Im as the information set of the manager, but
we can also interpret Im as the information available to the owners of the firm, or to the board of directors,
for giving incentives to the manager. Bond, Edmans, and Goldstein (2012) explain that “even though this
second [incentives] channel does not involve active learning from the price, it is ultimately similar to the first
[direct learning] channel, in that market prices end up having a real effect due to their informational role.”




                                                       10
the well-known q-theory investment equation

                                           k?
                                       γ      = E [z | Im ] .                               (2)
                                           k

The investment rate k ? /k is proportional to the conditional expectation of net productivity z
given the manager’s information set. The maximized ex-post firm value is then

                         v (z, k ? )          z             1
                                     = 1 + z + E [z| Im ] − E [z| Im ]2 .                   (3)
                             k                γ            2γ

We can also write the expected firm value conditional on investment and the information
available to the manager as

                     v (z, k ? )
                                  
                                                         1
                   E             Im = 1 + E [ z| Im ] +    (E [z | Im ])2 .                 (4)
                         k                              2γ

We are interested in the efficiency of capital allocation across firms, so we consider a large
number of ex-ante identical firms (same k) that draw different signals about z. We normalize
z to have mean of zero across these firms. Aggregate efficiency is then defined by the ex-ante
(or cross-sectional average) firm value

                                                        k
                             E [v (z, k ? )] = k +        Var (E [z| Im ]) .                (5)
                                                       2γ

Aggregate efficiency is a function of the variance of the forecastable component of net pro-
ductivity z. This is the first key theoretical point that we use in our empirical analysis. The
next step is to think about how Im is determined in equilibrium.

Information environment: Our next goal is to understand how managers learn and how prices
are determined. In practice, managers have access to information produced inside the firm,
as well as to outside information contained in market prices. We summarize the internal
information with the signal


                                            η = z + η ,                                    (6)



                                                  11
                   
where η ∼ N 0, ση2 . The price-based information is contained in the price p of a security
linked to the firm’s payoff. This information contained in p is itself derived from the private
information of informed traders in the market for this security. We summarize the information
of these informed traders with the signal


                                                s = z + s ,                                  (7)


where s ∼ N (0, σs2 ). We assume that η and s are independent, so we can think of η and s as
the two fundamental sources of information that society can use to improve capital allocation.
       In practice market participants and managers also share common sources of information
(in addition to prices), most prominently through disclosure. To take this into account, we
assume that traders observe an additional signal coming from the manager:


                                                η 0 = η + η0                                 (8)


where η0 ∼ N 0, ση20 is orthogonal to η and s . The disclosure signal η 0 captures the flow
                     

of information from the firm to the market, which runs in the opposite direction of the flow
of information from the market to the firm in the form of the price p.10 To summarize, the
information set of the manager is Im = {η, η 0 , p} and the information set of informed traders
is Iτ = {η 0 , s}.

Feedback and equilibrium: A full-fledged model needs to specify the objectives of the traders
(e.g. CARA or mean variance preferences, constraints, etc.) as well as a trading protocol (e.g.
competitive or strategic, with or without market makers, etc.). We present one such model in
Appendix A, but for the purpose of this discussion it is more important to focus on the key
features shared by nearly all models.
       We must first specify exactly which security is traded in financial markets. Recall that v
is the total value of the firm. In practice, it can be the case that equity is publicly traded but
debt it not, or perhaps that the traded security is an option or a credit derivative.11 So let
us define F (z, k) as the payoff of the claim that is traded in financial markets. An important
  10
       Kurlat and Veldkamp (2015) study optimal disclosure from the viewpoint of investors.
  11
       See Philippon (2009) for q-theory using bond prices instead of equity prices.

                                                      12
particular case is of course F (z, k) = v (z, k) with v (·) as in equation (3). Since the informed
traders’ information set consists of η 0 and s, the equilibrium price typically takes the form


                                     p = αE [F (z, k ? )| η 0 , s] + βu,                                      (9)


where u is noise trading, and α and β are endogenous coefficients that are part of the rational
expectations equilibrium. Exactly how to solve for these coefficients, and whether we actually
obtain a linear price function depends on the details of the model. The more tractable models,
including our appendix model, result in pricing functions of the form in (9).

Equilibrium and basic feedback: To summarize, most models in the literature boil down to
two equations which we restate for convenience:

                                          k
                                     k? =   E [ z| η, η 0 , p]                                               (10)
                                          γ
                                      p = αE [F (z, k ? )| η 0 , s] + βu.                                    (11)


The basic feedback is that managers learn from prices and so k ? depends on p. It implies that
the informativeness of prices matters for firm value, aggregate efficiency, and welfare. This
feature, which is the most important for our analysis, is common to all models we discuss
below, even though they differ in the complexity of the other interactions between value and
prices.

Advanced feedback: The more advanced feedback channels depend on the nature of the traded
claim and on the trading protocol. For instance, Subrahmanyam and Titman (1999) make the
simplifying assumption F (z, k ? ) = z to ensure linearity of the conditional expectations.12 In
  12
     Formally, they assume a perfect correlation between growth options and assets in place, and they assume
that the markets trade a claim on the existing assets F = zk. This is obviously equivalent to assuming that
z is traded directly. Subrahmanyam and Titman (1999) justify their assumption by the fact that there is a
deterministic relation in the model between the cash flows of the assets in place and the cash flows of the entire
firm. However, because this relation is nonlinear, the cash flow of the total firm is non-normal, which precludes
a closed-form solution to the security market equilibrium in a model where a claim on the total firm’s cash
flow is sold. But since a claim on existing assets provides the same information as would the price of the entire
firm, they conclude that this is a sensible assumption. This is correct as long as we take information sets as
given, though we know from the work of Edmans, Goldstein, and Jiang (2015) and others that the feedback
matters once we introduce endogenous information acquisition or strategic trading.



                                                       13
that case the pricing equation (11) does not depend on the mapping k ? in (10) and the model
remains linear and tractable. Our model in the appendix adopts this approach. It can always
be interpreted as a linear approximation of a more complex model, and the approximation is
good as long as k ? /k is not too large.
       Other papers (e.g. Goldstein, Ozdenoren, and Yuan 2013) use the more complex but also
richer case F = v. In that case, p can be interpreted as the market value of the firm. Firm
value is a nonlinear function of z and k ? , so finding p involves solving a complex fixed-point
problem. The traders need to form beliefs about the function k ? , i.e. about how the manager
uses prices to decide on investment. Traders then use these beliefs to forecast total firm value
and this determines the equilibrium price. Dow and Gorton (1997) show that this can lead
to multiple equilibria.13 In one equilibrium managers invest based on prices and this gives
traders an incentive to gather information. In the other equilibrium prices are not informative
and managers do not invest. Goldstein and Guembel (2008) show that the basic feedback can
give incentives to a large uninformed speculator to manipulate the stock price by short-selling
the stock, inducing inefficient disinvestment, reducing firm value, and thereby making the
short-selling strategy profitable. Conversely, Edmans, Goldstein, and Jiang (2015) emphasize
the strategic behavior of a large informed trader. The trader knows that whatever information
is revealed will be used to increase firm value. This helps her make money when the news is
good, but hurts her when the news is bad. Taking this asymmetric payoff into account, the
trader forms an asymmetric trading strategy and this leads to asymmetric revelation of good
and bad news. These effects rely on the basic feedback and on strategic behavior by large
traders who understand that they influence prices.14

Empirical predictions: The simple framework outlined above has so far allowed us to have
a fairly precise discussion of the existing literature. Our next task is to formulate specific
  13
      In their model managers are clueless, ση2 = ∞, and returns on assets in place are independent of z, which
is indeed precisely the opposite assumption from Subrahmanyam and Titman (1999). Ozdenoren and Yuan
(2008) work with another tractable alternative, F = k ? + z, similarly assuming ση2 = ∞. In Bond, Goldstein,
and Prescott (2010), ση2 < ∞ but σs2 = 0 so traders have perfect information.
   14
      It is also important to specify what traders learn about. Bresnahan, Milgrom, and Paul (1992) argue that
speculators have stronger incentives to learn about assets in place than about growth options. Learning about
assets in place makes prices more informative but investment no more efficient. This distinction is somewhat
artificial, however, because it relies on infinite adjustment costs on existing assets (so they cannot be scaled)
and small adjustment costs on new assets.


                                                       14
predictions that we can test empirically.
   We begin by quantifying price informativeness, i.e., the forecasting power of prices for
future cash flows. Bond, Edmans, and Goldstein (2012) call it forecasting price efficiency
(FPE). We scale our data by k to allow for meaningful comparisons across firms, and we
define a firm’s market to book ratio q = p/k. FPE is given by the variance of the predictable
component of firm value v/k given q. From (3), v/k has some non-linear terms in z, but to a
first-order approximation v/k ≈ 1 + z, so we will focus on


                                    VF P E ≡ Var (E [z| q]) .                                  (12)


FPE measures the total amount of information about future payoffs contained in market
prices. At the same time, FPE is only a forecasting concept. As explained above, aggregate
efficiency depends on the information of the manager:


                                  VM ≡ Var (E [ z| η, η 0 , q]) .                              (13)


We are interested in the component of VM that comes from market prices. This is what Bond,
Edmans, and Goldstein (2012) call revelatory price efficiency (RPE). It is given by


                       VRP E ≡ Var (E [z| η, η 0 , q]) − Var (E [z| η, η 0 ]) .                (14)


RPE measures the extent to which prices improve real allocations. When prices are uninfor-
mative or when managers already know the information they contain, RPE is low. On the
other hand, when prices provide managers with information that is useful for improving the
efficiency of investment, RPE is high. This is the core idea of Hayek (1945).
   Each of the theoretical models discussed above gives an explicit mapping from the funda-
mental information structure (σs2 , ση2 , ση20 ) into the objects of interest, VF P E and VRP E . We
cannot do justice to all the subtle predictions based on advanced feedback, but we can focus
on the predictions that are robust across all models. In particular, we test the following:

Prediction 1. All else equal,

  (i) a decrease in σs2 (traders produce more information) increases VF P E , VRP E and VM .

                                                 15
 (ii) a decrease in ση2 (firms produce more information) increases VF P E and VM but not VRP E .

(iii) a decrease in ση20 (firms disclose more information) increases VF P E but neither VM nor
      VRP E .

   When traders produce more information (their signal s becomes less noisy), prices become
more informative and so FPE goes up. RPE also goes up because the additional information
in prices is new to managers. As managers use this information, aggregate efficiency increases.
Aggregate efficiency also increases when managers produce more information (η becomes less
noisy), and this again causes FPE to go up through disclosure. However, in this case prices are
merely reflecting information already available managers and so RPE does not rise. Finally,
an improvement in disclosure (η 0 becomes less noisy) leaves aggregate efficiency and RPE
unchanged because it does not affect the amount of information available to managers. It,
does, however, raise FPE because the additional disclosure gets reflected in prices.
   Prediction 1 allows us to interpret an observed trend in FPE as coming from internal
information, from market participants, or from disclosure by looking for parallel trends in
aggregate efficiency. For instance, an increase in VF P E and VM rules out a pure disclosure
explanation (part (iii)). Separating parts (i) and (ii) then requires additional testable predic-
tions. We construct such predictions by enriching the model with cross-sectional differences
across firms after we have established the basic trends in FPE and aggregate efficiency.

Using investment to learn about welfare. One issue of course is that aggregate efficiency VM
is not observed, but we can bound it between two measurable quantities:

Claim 1. Aggregate efficiency VM is bounded between
                                                  ?
                                  v ?                 k
                           Var E    k    ≤ VM ≤ γVar      .                                 (15)
                                  k                   k

   The inequality on the right comes from the first-order condition (2). In our stylized
                       ?
framework, since γ kk = E [z | η, p], investment perfectly reveals the information set of the
manager and we get an equality. In the real world, investment is noisy and lumpy and there
might be shocks to investment costs that increase the measured variance. In this case we get
a strict inequality.

                                               16
    The inequality on the left simply reflects the fact that investment is chosen by the manager,
hence it is included in the manager’s information set. When the cash flows of assets in place
and growth options are perfectly correlated as in (1), investment is an optimal forecast of
total cash flows and we get an equality. When this is not the case, investment is an optimal
forecast only of cash flows from growth options, and not overall cash flows, and we get a strict
inequality (we explore this case in Section 4.7 below).
    We are now ready to begin the empirical analysis, which centers on Prediction 1. As we
noted, this prediction is common to models in the literature. To motivate it further, we derive
Prediction 1 formally in the model we present in Appendix A.



3     Data and summary statistics
In this section we describe the main aspects of our data and how we construct our sample.

Data sources: Our sample is annual from 1960 to 2014. We obtain stock prices from CRSP.
All accounting variables are from Compustat. Institutional ownership is from 13-F filings
provided by Thomson Reuters. The test on option listings uses listing dates from the CBOE.
The GDP deflator used to adjust for inflation is from the Bureau of Economic Analysis.
    We take stock prices as of the end of March and accounting variables as of the end of
the previous fiscal year, typically December. This timing convention ensures that market
participants have access to the accounting variables that we use as controls.

Sample selection: Unless otherwise noted, we limit attention to S&P 500 non-financial firms.
These firms represent the bulk of the value of the U.S. corporate sector. As we show, their
characteristics have remained remarkably stable, which makes them comparable over time.
This is in contrast to the broader universe of all firms, whose composition has changed dras-
tically. We report results for the universe of all firms in the appendix and summarize them in
the text.




                                               17
Measures: Our main equity valuation measure is the log-ratio of market capitalization M to
total assets A, log M/A.15 Our main cash flow variable is earnings measured as EBIT. In
Appendix B we show that our main results are robust to using alternative measures such as
EBITDA, net income, and cash flows from operations (CFO). We focus on EBIT because it
is most widely available in Compustat and because it is the focus of analyst research. For
investment we use both research and development (R&D) and capital expenditure (CAPX).
We scale both current and future cash flows and investment by current total assets. For
instance, in a forecasting regression for earnings with horizon h years, the left-side variable is
Et+h /At . This specification is implied by our framework (see Section 2 and note that we are
predicting v/k ≈ 1 + z). In particular, it incorporates growth between t and t + h by scaling
by date-t assets. Unlike prices, we do not take logs because it is the level of cash flows that
matters for aggregate efficiency.

Correcting for delisting: We must account for firm delisting to ensure that our forecasting
regressions are free of survivorship bias.16 We do so as follows: When a firm is delisted, we
invest the delisting proceeds (calculated using the delisting price and dividend) in a portfolio
of firms in the same two-digit SIC industry. We use the earnings accruing to this portfolio to
fill in the earnings of the delisted firm. We do the same for investment.

Adjusting for inflation: We adjust for inflation using the GDP deflator. This is necessary be-
cause it is real price informativeness that matters for welfare. Since inflation is multiplicative,
differences in future nominal cash flows between firms are larger than in real cash flows. This
biases the forecasting coefficient upward, particularly during periods of high inflation.17
  15
      The correct functional form is whichever one managers use to extract information from prices. With
identical firms and normal shocks one could use q, the ratio of the market price to existing assets (see Section
2). In practice, we find that taking logs works slightly better because it mitigates skewness in the data. In
Appendix B we show that our main results are robust to incorporating the book value of debt to control for
leverage effects. We leave debt out in the main analysis because market values are not generally available.
   16
      Survivorship bias would arise if the relationship between market valuations and future earnings is different
among firms that are delisted (their future earnings and investment appear as missing in our sample) than
among firms that are not delisted. Since our focus is on trends, it is changes in delisting rates that are of
concern. In our sample of S&P 500 firms, the delisting rate is slightly higher (3.2% per year) in the second
half of the sample than in the first half (2.3%). This is because most delistings occur when a firm is acquired,
so delisting tracks the merger waves of the 1980s and 1990s.
   17
      In the first circulated draft of the paper (dated December 2013) we incorrectly inferred that price informa-
tiveness had remained stable. This was due to the combined effect of three differences in methodology. First,
we did not adjust for inflation. This led price informativeness to be overstated in the high-inflation years of


                                                       18
Summary statistics: Table I presents summary statistics for our main sample of S&P 500 firms.
The first set of columns covers the full period from 1960 to 2014, whereas the second and third
sets cover its first and second half. They show that firms have become larger and their profits
have grown with the economy. Yet profitability (earnings over assets) is stable both in levels
and cross-sectional dispersion. This is true of current as well as future profitability (measured
against current assets), our key left-side variables. Market valuations, our key right-side
variable, have risen with the overall market but their cross-sectional dispersion is only slightly
higher (skewness has increased somewhat). Investment has shifted a bit from CAPX to R&D
and R&D has become more right-skewed, but overall investment rates are stable.
   Figure 1 depicts the cross-sectional distribution of several characteristics over time by
plotting their median (red line) and their 10th to 90th percentile range (gray shading) in a
given year. The top two panels confirm that the distributions of the valuation ratio log M/A
and profitability E/A have remained stable, and the bottom two panels confirm that R&D
has become more right-skewed and CAPX has declined in importance.
   While the underlying characteristics of these firms have remained stable, their trading
environment has changed drastically. As Table I shows, share turnover has increased five-fold,
institutional ownership has risen by about half, and a large majority of firms now have their
options listed on the CBOE. These changes reflect the broader transformation in financial
markets that serves as the backdrop for our investigation of price informativeness. We return
to them in Sections 4.5 to 4.8 below.
   The stability among S&P 500 firms stands in sharp contrast to the broader sample of
all firms, whose characteristics are presented in Table A.II and discussed in Appendix C.
Among all firms profitability has both fallen and become much more disperse. Consistent
with Campbell, Lettau, Malkiel, and Xu (2001), median idiosyncratic volatility has increased
from 9.8% to 12.3% per month (for S&P 500 firms the change is negligible from 6.4% to
6.8%). Fama and French (2004) show that these changes are related to the listing of smaller
and younger firms and to the emergence of NASDAQ. Besides being more uncertain, these
firms are arguably also harder to value since many lack a consistent earnings record. These
the 1970s and early 1980s. Second, we did not correct for delistings, which have increased somewhat in the
latter part of our sample. And third, we did not consider the long five-year horizon.



                                                   19
compositional changes imply that the sample of firms outside the S&P 500 is not comparable
over time. We present results for these firms in the appendix for completeness.



4        Results
Estimation: We first construct our measure of price informativeness (FPE) by running cross-
sectional regressions of future earnings on current market prices. We include current earnings
and industry sector as controls to avoid crediting markets with obvious public information.
Specifically, in each year t = 1960, . . . , 2014 and at every horizon h = 1, . . . , 5, we run
                                                                                     
                    Ei,t+h                               Mi,t                    Ei,t
                           = at,h + bt,h log                        + ct,h                  + dst,h 1si,t + i,t,h ,   (16)
                     Ai,t                                Ai,t                    Ai,t

where i is a firm index and 1s is a sector (one-digit SIC code) indicator.18 These regressions
give us a set of coefficients indexed by year t and horizon h.
       From Section 2, price informativeness VF P E is the predicted variance of future cash flows
from market prices (equation (12)). We compute it here with the minor change of taking a
square root, which gives meaningful units (dollars of future cash flow per dollar of current
assets). From regression (16), price informativeness in year t at horizon h is the forecasting
coefficient bt,h multiplied by the standard deviation of the forecasting variable log M/A:

                                  p       
                                    VF P E           = bt,h × σt (log (M/A)) .                                         (17)
                                               t,h


We are interested in how this measure has evolved over time.

Price informativeness by horizon: Figure 2 gives a first look by plotting average price infor-
mativeness by horizon and sub-sample. We cap the horizon at five years to ensure that we
have enough data to produce reliable estimates. The range between one and five years also
covers the time span over which information can plausibly affect investment and investment
can produce cash flows. For instance, the time-to-build literature finds that investment plans
take about two years to implement with cash flows following in the years after that (Koeva
  18
       Table A.I in the appendix provides the estimates for a sample year (see Appendix B for details).



                                                            20
2000). From a capital allocation perspective, it is therefore the medium and long horizons
that are especially important.
       The red line in Figure 2 plots price informativeness at each horizon averaged over the
full length of our sample (from 1960 to 2014). As expected, informativeness is positive;
market prices are positive predictors of future earnings. More importantly, informativeness is
increasing with horizon. The reason is that while current earnings are already a good predictor
of earnings in one year, prices are useful for predicting earnings farther out.19 This provides
further motivation for focusing on longer horizons as we do.
       The dashed black and dash-dotted blue lines in Figure 2 plot average price informativeness
for the first and second halves of our sample. We see that informativeness is higher in the later
half at every horizon. The increase is itself increasing with horizon: one-year informativeness
is only slightly higher while three- and five-year informativeness show a much larger increase
(we look closely at the magnitude and significance of this increase in the next section). From
here on, for conciseness we focus on horizons of one, three, and five years (h = 1, 3, 5). As
Figure 2 indicates, informativeness at the intermediate horizons falls in between.


4.1       Price informativeness over time

Figure 3 plots the time series of our estimates. The lines in each panel hold horizon fixed and
look across time.20 The two left panels plot the forecasting coefficients bt,h from regressions
(16). The coefficients are always positive; prices and future earnings are positively related.
They are typically higher at the longer horizons, again consistent with current earnings being
a powerful predictor at short horizons and market prices being more useful farther out (see
Figure A.1). We note a drop in the coefficients at the end of the NASDAQ boom in 2000, but
this drop is short-lived and does not influence the long-run trend.
       Our key result can be found in the center panels of Figure 3, which plot price informa-
tiveness over time. While informativeness is relatively flat at the one-year horizon, it shows
  19
     Figure A.1 in the appendix shows that while the forecasting coefficient on prices bt,h is increasing with
horizon, the forecasting coefficient on current earnings ct,h is decreasing with horizon (see Appendix B for
details). Thus, current earnings are relatively more informative at short horizons and prices are relatively
more informative at long horizons.
  20
     Since our data ends in 2014, our last estimates of price informativeness at the three- and five-year horizons
are from 2011 and 2009, respectively. This is why we the horizontal axis ends in 2010.


                                                       21
a clear upward trend at the three- and five-year horizons. The increase is from about 0.03 in
1960 to 0.05 in 2010 at the three-year horizon and from 0.04 to 0.07 at the five-year horizon.
Although the estimates can be noisy from year to year, the upward trend is steady throughout
the five decades of our sample.21 These results show that the extent to which market prices
help to distinguish firms that will deliver high profits in the future from those that will not
has increased over the past five decades.
       The right two panels of Figure 3 show the contribution of market prices to the regression R2 .
Whereas our price informativeness measure captures the amount of information contained in
market prices—this is what matters for welfare—the marginal R2 captures the fraction of the
total variance of future earnings that market prices explain (conditional on current earnings).
The plots show that the marginal R2 has increased similarly to price informativeness.
       As a formal test, we run regressions of our price informativeness series at each horizon on
a set of dummy variables, one for each decade in our sample:

                                \ 
                               p                           X
                                  VF P E          = ah +         bd,h × 1dt + t,h                           (18)
                                            t,h
                                                             d


for decades of d = 1970–79,. . . , 2010–14 (the baseline, omitted decade is 1960–69).22 We
report Newey-West standard errors with five lags to account for potential autocorrelation.23
       Table II presents the results. Overall, they confirm the pattern in Figure 3. The intercepts
are positive, significant, and increasing across horizons. Within the one-year horizon, the
coefficients on the decade dummy variables tend to be small, never larger than a quarter of
  21
     Indeed, there is no evidence for structural breaks anywhere in our sample, including the years 2000, 2001,
and 2002 when the important reforms of Regulation Fair Disclosure, decimalization, and the Sarbanes-Oxley
Act were implemented. We report and discuss the results of structural break tests in Table A.IV and Appendix
D. We find that the evolution of price informativeness is described well by a simple linear time trend. We
interpret this to suggest that the observed changes are driven by deeper, slow-moving trends (e.g. information
technology, institutional investing, liquidity) rather than changes in disclosure requirements which tend to be
discrete in nature (we address slow-moving changes in disclosure in Section 4.4 below).
  22
     Recall that our data ends in 2014, so our last estimate of five-year informativeness is for 2009. This is why
in the third column in Table II there is no coefficient for 2010–14. The same rule applies to remaining tables.
  23
     Our choice of lag is based on two considerations. The first is that our estimates come from overlapping
regressions, which can induce autocorrelation (for instance our five-year estimate for 1960 uses data from 1960
to 1965, that for 1961 uses data from 1961 to 1966, and so on). The longest overlap is at the five-year horizon,
and this is why we use a lag of five (for consistency we apply the same lag at all horizons). The second
consideration is that the optimal lag selection procedure of Newey and West (1994) implies an optimal lag of
between four and five. Our results are robust to alternative choices.



                                                       22
the intercept, and often insignificant. Thus, one-year informativeness has not changed much
over the course of our sample (at most it has increased mildly). Looking at three- and five-year
informativeness, on the other hand, we see coefficients that are large, highly significant, and
in some cases over half the size of the intercept, especially in the later decades of our sample.
For instance, five-year price informativeness is about fifty percent higher in the 2000s than
the 1960s. Since our measure is welfare-based, this represents a sizable increase. Table II thus
shows that the increase in medium- and longer-term price informativeness is both statistically
and economically significant.
      Robustness: Figure A.2 with discussion in Appendix B shows that the increase in price
informativeness is robust to a number of variations. First, we add debt to the valuation ratio
to control for possible leverage effects (that is we use log [(M + D) /A] instead of log (M/A)).24
Second, we use alternative measures of future cash flows, specifically EBITDA, net income, and
cash flows from operations. All measures consistently show an increase in price informativeness
at the three- and five-year horizons.
      Price informativeness outside the S&P 500: Figure A.3 and Table A.III with discussion
in Appendix C replicate the analysis of this section for the universe of all firms. As we saw
in Table A.II, the composition of these firms has changed dramatically. Likely as a result of
these changes, price informativeness outside the S&P 500 appears to decrease. The decline
occurs precisely in the years in which observable characteristics change the most, which is
consistent with a composition effect. This is best seen around the rise of NASDAQ in the
1980s, and indeed as Fama and French (2004) show, the observable changes are to a significant
degree driven by the growing numbers of NASDAQ stocks. Interestingly, the short-horizon
informativeness drops the most, so again there is relative improvement at the long end. We
return to this sample in Section 4.5 below when we look at institutional ownership. For now,
the important point is that these observations lead us to focus on the S&P 500.


4.2       Market prices and investment

We have so far seen that for comparable firms market prices today contain more information
about future cash flows. A natural follow-up question is whether the greater informativeness
 24
      We do not adopt this as our main specification because debt is measured at book value not market value.

                                                      23
extends to real firm decisions. Indeed, our framework predicts that as prices become more
informative, they should also predict investment more strongly.
   To examine this prediction, we calculate the predicted variation of investment from prices.
Following the procedure used to calculate price informativeness (the predicted variation of
earnings from prices), we run our forecasting regressions (16) but with investment on the left
instead of earnings. We also add current investment as an additional control. We look at both
R&D and CAPX. To be precise, in the case of R&D we run
                                                                                             
     R&Di,t+h                            Mi,t                    Ei,t                    R&Di,t
              = at,h + bt,h log                     + ct,h                  + dt,h                    + est,h 1si,t + i,t,h . (19)
       Ai,t                              Ai,t                    Ai,t                     Ai,t

Mandatory disclosure of R&D began in 1972 and so we restrict the sample for the R&D
regression accordingly.25 The predicted variation of investment from prices is then bt,h ×
σt (log (M/A)). The results of this estimation are presented in Figure 4 and Table III.
   Figure 4 confirms that prices are positively related to future investment measured as either
R&D or CAPX. Looking closely at CAPX first (right two panels), there is no visible trend in
predicted variation. Table III shows this formally. As we saw in Table I and Figure 1, CAPX
has been trending down (the opposite is true for R&D). Thus, structural forces appear to be
leading the importance of CAPX to diminish.
   The key result of Figure 4 is that the predicted variation of R&D from prices has increased
by a large factor over our sample (left two panels); it is about four times higher in 2010 than
in 1960. Table III shows that this rise is highly statistically significant. Unlike for earnings,
the upward trend here can be seen even at the short one-year horizon. This is predicted by
our theory because investment precedes earnings.
   Market prices have thus become more informative about real firm decisions such as R&D.
This finding is of particular interest because intangible capital is by nature harder to value,
making any additional information especially valuable.
  25
     Prior to 1972 only about 50 S&P 500 firms report R&D. After 1972 the number jumps to 250. CAPX is
available throughout. The results are the same if we restrict the CAPX regression to the same period as the
R&D regression.




                                                        24
4.3    Market prices and returns

Our results so far show that price informativeness has increased. Our next task is to investigate
the source of this result. One possibility which we consider in this section is that the increase
is due to a decrease in the cross-sectional predictability of returns. As Campbell and Shiller
(1988) point out, asset prices are a combination of expected cash flows and expected returns.
A drop in the cross-sectional variation of expected returns could cause the predicted variation
of cash flows to rise. In other words, prices could become more informative about cash flows
if they become less informative about returns.
   The cross-sectional variation of expected returns could decline for several reasons: risk
prices might fall, the distribution of risk loadings (betas) might become more compressed, or
there could be less “noise trading” in the language of models in the literature. The question
for us is whether such a decline has occurred at all.
   We can test for it by measuring the predicted variation of returns from prices and examining
whether it has declined over time. We do so by running our usual forecasting regressions (16)
but with returns on the left instead of earnings:
                                                                              
                                                  Mi,t                    Ei,t
             log Ri,t→t+h = at,h + bt,h log                  + ct,h                  + dst,h 1si,t + i,t,h ,   (20)
                                                  Ai,t                    Ai,t

where log Ri,t→t+h is firm i’s log return at horizon h starting in year t. The predicted variation
of returns from prices in year t at horizon h is bt,h × σt (log (Mi,t /Ai,t )). The results from this
estimation are presented in Figure 5 and Table IV.
   As Figure 5 shows, market prices predict returns with a negative sign. This is the well-
known value effect: firms with high valuations, i.e. growth firms, tend to have lower average
returns (e.g. Fama and French 1992). There are many theories, both rational and behavioral,
to explain the value effect. What matters for us is whether the value effect has become weaker
over time in a way that could explain the observed increase in price informativeness.
   The main result in Figure 5 is that the predicted variation of returns from prices (solid
red lines) shows no sign of a trend in either direction. Although the year-to-year estimates
are noisy (this is due to the high variability of returns), the series is essentially flat at all



                                                  25
horizons.26 For comparison, we have also plotted our price informativeness measure (dashed
black lines), which climbs steadily throughout the sample as we saw in Figure 3.
       Table IV presents a formal test. We see a couple of significant decade-indicator coefficients,
but their signs alternate between positive and negative.27 Based on these results, we conclude
that there is no evidence of a change in the relationship between prices and expected returns
that can account for the observed increase of price informativeness.


4.4       Aggregate efficiency

Our results so far indicate that price informativeness has risen, and that this is driven by
greater information about cash flows, not lower return predictability. The next question we
ask is where the added information is coming from. As a first step, we want to know whether
it is coming from greater information production or simply improved disclosure. For instance,
total information may have remained unchanged but the amount of information firms disclose
may have increased, perhaps due to more accurate financial reporting. This would make prices
more informative (FPE would go up) but it would not significantly improve real allocations
(RPE would remain the same).28
       We can test the disclosure hypothesis using Prediction 1 of our framework in Section 2.
Prediction 1 says that while an increase in disclosure increases price informativeness (FPE),
it leaves aggregate efficiency unchanged. This is because aggregate efficiency depends on
the information available to the firm’s manager which is unaffected by disclosure. Thus, to
test the disclosure hypothesis we need to see if aggregate efficiency has increased with price
informativeness. Of course this exercise is of interest more broadly as aggregate efficiency is
a key factor in economic growth.
       As we argued in Claim 1, although aggregate efficiency is not observed we can bound it
from below by the predicted variation of cash flows from investment and from above by the
  26
     The brief spike around 2000 in the predicted variation of returns (their covariance with prices turns more
negative) coincides with the end of the NASDAQ boom when many growth firms experienced very low returns.
  27
     Perhaps a more powerful test given the noisiness of the estimates is to simply regress the predicted variation
in returns on a time trend. When we do so the coefficients are small, alternate signs, and are never more than
a fraction of a standard error from zero: −0.03 with s.e. 0.04, 0.03 with s.e. 0.08, and 0.08 with s.e. 0.14 for
h = 1, 3, and 5 (Newey-West standard errors with five lags).
  28
     Recall these terms stand for “forecasting price efficiency” and “revelatory price efficiency” from Bond,
Edmans, and Goldstein (2012), see Section 2 for discussion.


                                                        26
dispersion of investment across firms. We take this approach here.
       From Figure 1 and Table I dispersion in investment rates has increased in the case of R&D
but not CAPX. The cross-sectional standard deviation of the ratio of CAPX to total assets is
similar in the first and second halves of our sample (7.5% and 7.0%). At the same time, the
median of the distribution has fallen by a third from 6.4% and 4.2% (the mean has dropped
similarly from 8.4% to 6.4%). Thus we see a general decline in importance of CAPX.
       By contrast, for R&D we see a dramatic increase in dispersion. The cross-sectional stan-
dard deviation of R&D scaled by total assets has nearly doubled from 2.8% in the first half
of our sample to 5.0% in the second half. From Figure 1, R&D has also become much more
skewed: firms in the 90th percentile now spend 10% of assets on R&D each year compared to
5% in the 1960s (the 10th percentile remains close to zero). The increased cross-sectional vari-
ation in investment as measured by R&D is consistent with managers having more information
and allocating investment accordingly.
       As we argued in Claim 1, however, the variation in investment rates is only an upper
bound on aggregate efficiency. To calculate the lower bound, we need to measure the predicted
variation of earnings from investment. We do this by replacing market prices with investment
in our by now standard forecasting regressions:
                                                                                               
  Ei,t+h                           R&Di,t                        CAP Xi,t                    Ei,t
         = at,h + bt,h log                      + ct,h log                      + dt,h                  + est,h 1si,t + i,t,h ,
   Ai,t                             Ai,t                           Ai,t                      Ai,t
                                                                                                                             (21)


We include R&D and CAPX side by side to extract as much information from investment as
possible. As with market prices, we take logs to mitigate skewness.29 The predicted variation
of earnings from investment is the standard deviation of the fitted value based on investment:
                                                                 
                                      R&Di,t                CAP Xi,t
                        σt bt,h log            + ct,h log               .                                                    (22)
                                       Ai,t                   Ai,t

       The results are presented in Figure 6 and Table V. We include a specifications with R&D
as the sole predictor and one with both R&D and CAPX. The predicted variation of earnings
  29
    We did not take logs in Section 4.2 because investment there serves as a real outcome variable and not an
information signal. We take logs here because it mitigates skewness and thus improves forecastability.


                                                        27
in Figure 6 (solid red line) is noisier than price informativeness, arguably due to measurement
error and the lumpiness of investment. To facilitate assessment given this noisiness, we include
a linear time trend (dashed black line).
       Figure 6 shows a mild increase in earnings informativeness at the three-year horizon and
a larger increase at the five-year horizon. The cumulative increase at the five-year horizon is
about 50% in each specification, which is similar to the rise in price informativeness. Inter-
estingly, CAPX matters most at the end of the NASDAQ boom in the late 1990s when many
R&D-intensive firms ended up having low earnings. Table V conducts a formal test, which
shows that the increase in five-year investment informativeness is statistically significant at
the 10% level with R&D only and the 5% level with both R&D and CAPX.
       Our results thus show that the variation in investment and the predicted variation of
earnings from investment have both increased, at least when it comes to R&D.30 Based on
the logic of Claim 1, these findings suggest that aggregate efficiency, the efficiency of capital
allocation in the economy, has increased. This evidence favors the view that information
production has increased over the view that the increased price informativeness is due to
improved firm disclosure.


4.5       Institutional ownership and price informativeness

The key remaining question is whether this increased information production has taken place
in markets or inside firms. In the framing of Section 2, we want to distinguish parts (i) and
(ii) of Prediction 1. Under part (i), as market participants produce more information, FPE,
aggregate efficiency, and RPE all increase. Under part (ii), as firms produce more information,
FPE and aggregate efficiency increase but RPE does not.
       Pinpointing exactly where information is produced is a challenging task. The ideal ex-
periment would randomize firms’ exposure to market-based information production or their
capacity to produce information internally and determine which source of variation results
in the biggest increase in price informativeness. This ideal experiment is not available to us
  30
    Looking at both measures is especially useful because they make it unlikely that our results are driven by
changes in measurement error, a significant concern when it comes to investment. Changes in measurement
error tend to push the two measures in opposite directions, whereas we see them moving in the same direction.



                                                     28
because our analysis takes place at a high level of aggregation over a long period of time. Our
best alternative is to cut the data in ways that proxy for one type of variation or the other.
In the remaining sections we do this in four different ways.
      Our first test cuts the data by institutional ownership. Among the most salient trends
in financial markets in recent decades is the rise of institutional ownership. The median
institutional share has increased from 12% in 1980 to 69% in 2014 among all firms and from
39% to 80% among S&P 500 firms. The difference between the two groups comes from the
low end of the distribution: the 10th and 90th percentiles among all firms in 2014 are 12%
and 94%, whereas among S&P 500 firms they are 61% and 94%. In other words, essentially
all S& 500 firms are dominated by institutional investors whereas among all firms there is
still a significant number with low levels of institutional ownership. Hence, while both groups
have seen a large increase in average institutional share, the set of all firms offers much more
cross-sectional variation. For this reason, in this test we use the sample of all firms.
      Our test is predicated on the idea that institutional investors are more likely than retail
investors to produce independent information due to their greater scale, expertise, and pro-
fessional resources. Based on this idea, if higher institutional ownership is associated with
higher price informativeness, then that would provide evidence consistent with the hypothesis
that the rise in institutional ownership has contributed to the rise in price informativeness.
This would then suggest that RPE has increased.
      To run our test, we split firms into groups with high and low institutional share with the
median institutional share in each year as the cutoff.31 We then run the forecasting regressions
(16) separately within each group and calculate its price informativeness as in (17).
      Figure 7 presents the results. The left panel shows the average institutional share for the
high and low groups over time. While both have been trending up, the high group has seen a
somewhat larger increase (solid red line) so that the gap between them has grown.
      The second and third panels of Figure 7 plot price informativeness. Recall from Section
4.1 that price informativeness outside the S&P 500 firms appears to decline, likely due to
compositional changes. Figure 7 shows that the decline is entirely contained among firms
with low institutional ownership (dashed black lines). The high group has much higher price
 31
      Results are very similar if we use a fixed cutoff like one third though in that case the groups are unbalanced.


                                                         29
informativeness and it shows no sign of a decrease. The differences are very large: three-year
price informativeness averages 0.044 for the high group versus 0.015 for the low group. At the
five-year horizon these numbers are 0.067 and 0.046. The two groups are far enough apart
that their price informativeness series never cross.
       We provide a formal test in Table VI. Specifically, we regress the difference in price in-
formativeness between the high and low groups on decade dummies. The large and highly
significant constants indicate that informativeness is much larger for firms with high institu-
tional ownership at all horizons. Since institutional ownership data is only available after 1980,
it is harder to test for trends, yet from the three- and five-year horizons we see that the gap
in informativeness has been expanding over time just as the underlying gap in institutional
share in Figure 7 has grown.
       The results of this section demonstrate a strong relationship between institutional owner-
ship and price informativeness. This is consistent with the view that institutional investors
engage in information production and by doing so contribute to a rise in revelatory price
efficiency (RPE).


4.6       Option listings and price informativeness

In the second cross-sectional test we compare price informativeness for firms with and without
traded options.32 The idea behind our test is that option markets facilitate the incorporation of
market-based information into prices by providing liquidity, opportunities to hedge, embedded
leverage, and a low-cost way to short sell.
       Figure 8 shows price informativeness for S&P 500 firms with and without option listings.
While the two groups have similar levels of price informativeness, the upward trend is only
present for the group with option listings.
       We provide a formal test in Table VII where we again regress the difference in price
informativeness between the two groups on decade dummies. The negative intercept suggests
that listed firms actually had lower price informativeness in the 1970s when options first began
trading. In latter decades, however, we see positive and significant coefficients, indicating that
  32
    The CBOE began listing options of firms in 1973. By the end of our sample there are 77 S&P 500 firms
without option listings.


                                                  30
the growth in price informativeness is concentrated among firms with option listings.
   Based on the idea that options facilitate market-based information production, these re-
sults are also consistent with the view that the increased price informativeness we see is
associated with greater revelatory price efficiency (RPE).


4.7    Growth options and price informativeness

So far we have tried to disentangle RPE and FPE by exploiting cross-sectional variation in
information production in markets. In this section we complement this approach by exploiting
cross-sectional variation in information production inside firms. To do this we first extend our
framework from Section 2 by incorporating firm heterogeneity. A particularly relevant source
of heterogeneity empirically is differences in the balance between growth options and assets
in place. To capture such differences, we relax the assumption that growth options and assets
in place are perfectly correlated by replacing (1) with

                                                               γ 2
                            v (z, z̃, k) = (1 + z̃) k + zk −      k ,                      (23)
                                                               2k

where z and z̃ are not be perfectly correlated. This case allows FPE and RPE to evolve
differently for firms with more growth options (low k) than firms with more assets in place
(high k). We call the former growth firms and the latter value firms as is customary. To derive
a specific testable prediction, we make the following assumption:

Assumption 1. Managers know relatively more about assets in place while traders know
relatively more about about growth options. Formally, s = z + s and η = z̃ + η .

   The assumption that managers (firm insiders) possess an information advantage with re-
spect to assets in place is widely used in the literature. For instance, a large literature on
asymmetric information in corporate finance is based on this assumption (e.g Myers and Ma-
jluf 1984). In practice, firms have detailed internal reports on costs and sales of existing
products that outsiders do not have. This type of advantage is likely to be smaller for future
products. For firms that depend on future growth, the relevant information valuation methods
rely on comparisons to other firms and analysis of market trends. Here market participants


                                              31
might have an advantage or at least less of a disadvantage.33 We can now state

Prediction 2. Under Assumption 1, all else equal

  (i) a decrease in σs2 (traders produce more information) increases VF P E more for growth
         firms (low k) than value firms (high k).

 (ii) a decrease in ση2 (firms produce more information) increases VF P E more for value firms
         (high k) than value firms (low k).

       Under Assumption 1, traders focus on valuing growth options. As their information in-
creases, the FPE of growth firms rises more than value firms. Managers, on the other hand,
focus on assets in place, so an increase in their information has the opposite effect. Hence,
Prediction 2 allows us to distinguish RPE and FPE by comparing the trends in FPE of growth
and value firms. Of course, this is not a perfect test but we think it contributes to the overall
picture that emerges from all our tests.34
       To implement it, we split S&P 500 firms into high- and low-valuation groups, using the
median value of the valuation ratio log M/A in each year as the cutoff. The high-valuation
group are the growth stocks and the low-valuation group are the value stocks. We then
calculate price informativeness separately for each group.
       The results are presented in Figure 9 and Table VIII. Looking at Figure 9, value stocks
have relatively low and flat price informativeness over the whole sample. In contrast, for
growth firms price informativeness has increased steadily, roughly doubling over the sample.
Consistent with Figure 9, Table VIII (first three columns) shows that the difference in infor-
mativeness between growth and value firms is generally higher in the latter decades of the
sample, especially at the five-year horizon (the drop in the 2000s is due to the year 2000).
Thus the increase in price informativeness is concentrated among growth firms.
       Under the view that the market has a relative advantage in producing information about
growth firms, these results support the interpretation that RPE has increased. They are also
  33
      For simplicity we write that market participants do not learn about z, but all we need is that they learn
relatively more about z̃.
   34
      For instance, growth firms are more uncertain and may be less transparent. Note, however, that our test
is not about the overall difficulty of valuing growth firms versus value firms. Rather, Prediction 2 says that
when market-based information production changes, the change in price informativeness should be bigger for
growth firms than for value firms.

                                                      32
of interest more broadly as the prospects of growth firms are inherently harder to assess so
any additional information is likely of high value.


4.8    Liquidity and price informativeness

In our final cross-sectional test we examine the relationship between liquidity and price in-
formativeness. The past five decades have witnessed an enormous expansion of liquidity in
financial markets. As one metric, the typical S&P 500 firm had monthly share turnover of just
1.6% in 1960 versus 20% in 2014 (turnover peaked at 42% in 2009). The increase in liquidity
is in part why we pose the question of whether financial market prices have become more
informative. After all, it is through trading that private information enters the market. The
opportunity to trade in a liquid market also increases the incentive to produce information in
the first place.
   The upward trend in price informativeness we documented in Section 4.1 lines up well with
the underlying trend in liquidity. That said, a more stringent test is to see whether higher
liquidity is associated with higher price informativeness in the cross section. Accordingly, in
this section we split our sample into high and low turnover groups using the median turnover
rate in each year as the cutoff. Under the view that liquidity facilitates information production,
price informativeness should be higher for the high turnover group.
   The results are presented in Figure 10. The first panel plots average (log) turnover rates.
As expected, there is a strong upward trend for both groups. There is also some convergence
as the gap has narrowed over time. This is in contrast to institutional share which shows
divergence (Figure 4.5).
   The main result in Figure 10 is that price informativeness is on average higher for the high-
turnover group. This is true at both the three- and five-year horizons. Price informativeness
also rises for both groups over time, consistent with the rise in their turnover rates. Moreover,
there is mild convergence as price informativeness for the low-turnover group catches up with
the high-turnover group towards the end of the sample.
   The last three columns of Table VIII run a formal test. We are mainly interested in the
constant, which measures the difference in price informativeness between the high- and low-
turnover groups. This constant is positive and highly statistically significant. In terms of

                                               33
magnitudes, the difference in five-year informativeness between the two groups is about two
points, which is 50% of the level for the low-turnover group. Looking at the decade dummies,
most are negative though few are statistically significant. The negative coefficients confirm
that the price informativeness of the two groups has become more similar just as their turnover
rates have been converging.
    These results show that higher liquidity is associated with higher price informativeness. As
liquidity has risen significantly over time, this finding supports the view that rising liquidity
has contributed to the observed rise in price informativeness.



5     Conclusion
The past few decades have brought enormous changes to financial markets: Information costs
have plummeted, liquidity has deepened, spending on price discovery has increased, and in-
stitutional investing has become dominant. Against this backdrop, we ask a simple question:
Have financial market prices become more informative? The answer to this question is impor-
tant for capital allocation and for gauging the economic value of a growing financial sector.
    To answer it, we derive a welfare-based measure of price informativeness, the predicted
variation of future cash flows from current market prices. This measure is easily calculated
from firm-level data on stock prices and cash flows. Our measure quantifies the extent to
which market prices help to separate firms that will be productive in the future from those
that will not.
    We find that financial market prices have become more informative, specifically at the key
medium and long horizons of three and five years. Price informativeness today is over 50%
higher than in 1960. We present further evidence to suggest that the increase reflects greater
revelatory price efficiency; that markets today produce more information that is useful for
allocating investment and in doing so are contributing to the efficiency with which capital is
allocated throughout the economy.




                                               34
References
Baker, Malcolm, Jeremy Stein, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2003, When does the market matter?
  stock prices and the investment of equity-dependent firms, Quarterly Journal of Economics
  118, 969–1006.
Bakke, Tor-Erik, and Toni M. Whited, 2010, Which firms follow the market? an analysis of
  corporate investment decisions, Review of Financial Studies.
Bekaert, Geert, Campbell R. Harvey, and Christian Lundblad, 2001, Emerging equity markets
  and economic development, Journal of Development Economics 66, 465 – 504 12th Inter-
  American Seminar on Economics.
Beyer, Anne, Daniel A. Cohen, Thomas Z. Lys, and Beverly R. Walther, 2010, The financial
  reporting environment: Evidence from the last decade, Journal of Accounting and Eco-
  nomics 50, 296–343.
Bolton, Patrick, Tano Santos, and José Scheinkman, 2011, Cream skimming in financial mar-
  kets, Working Paper, Columbia University.
Bond, Philip, Alex Edmans, and Itay Goldstein, 2012, The real effects of financial markets,
  The Annual Review of Financial Economics 4, 339–360.
Bond, Philip, Itay Goldstein, and Edward Simpson Prescott, 2010, Market-based corrective
  actions, Review of Financial Studies 23, 781–820.
Bresnahan, Timothy, Paul Milgrom, and J Paul, 1992, Output Measurement in the Service
  Sectors . chap. The real output of the stock exchange, pp. 195–216 (Chicago University
  Press).
Bushee, B., D. Matsumoto, and G. Miller, 2004, Managerial and investor responses to dis-
  closure regulation: The case of reg fd and conference calls, The Accounting Review 79,
  617–643.
Campbell, John Y., Martin Lettau, Burton Malkiel, and Yexiao Xu, 2001, Have individual
  stocks become more volatile? an empirical exploration of idiosyncratic risk, Journal of
  Finance 56, 1–43.
Campbell, John Y, and Robert J Shiller, 1988, The dividend-price ratio and expectations of
  future dividends and discount factors, Review of financial studies 1, 195–228.
Chen, Qi, Itay Goldstein, and Wei Jiang, 2007, Price informativeness and investment sensi-
 tivity to stock price, Review of Financial Studies 20, 619–650.
Collins, Daniel W., Edward L. Maydew, and Ira S. Weiss, 1997, Changes in the value-relevance
  of earnings and book values over the past forty years, Journal of Accounting and Economics
  24, 39 – 67 Properties of Accounting Earnings.
Dechow, Patricia, Jenny Zha, and Richard Sloan, 2014, Stock prices & earnings: A history of
  research, Annual Review of Financial Economics 6.
Dow, James, and Gary Gorton, 1997, Stock market efficiency and economic efficiency: is there
  a connection?, The Journal of Finance 52, 1087–1129.


                                            35
Durnev, Artyom, Randall Morck, Bernard Yeung, and Paul Zarowin, 2003, Does greater firm-
 specific return variation mean more or less informed stock pricing?, Journal of Accounting
 Research 41, 797–836.
Easley, David, Nicholas M Kiefer, Maureen O’Hara, and Joseph B Paperman, 1996, Liquidity,
  information, and infrequently traded stocks, The Journal of Finance 51, 1405–1436.
Edmans, Alex, Itay Goldstein, and Wei Jiang, 2015, Feedback effects, asymmetric trading,
  and the limits to arbitrage and the limits to arbitrage, American Economic Review.
Fama, Engene, 1970, Efficient capital markets: A review of theory and empirical work, Journal
  of Finance 25(2), 383–417.
Fama, Eugene F, and Kenneth R French, 1992, The cross-section of expected stock returns,
  the Journal of Finance 47, 427–465.
        , 2004, New lists: Fundamentals and survival rates, Journal of Financial Economics
  73, 229 – 269.
French, Kenneth R, 2008, Presidential address: The cost of active investing, The Journal of
  Finance 63, 1537–1573.
Gennaioli, Nicola, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 2012, Neglected risks, financial inno-
 vation, and financial fragility, Journal of Financial Economics 104, 452 – 468.
Glosten, Lawrence R, and Paul R Milgrom, 1985, Bid, ask, and transaction prices in a spe-
  cialist market with heterogeneously informed traders, Journal of Financial Economics 14,
  71–100.
Goldstein, Itay, and Alexander Guembel, 2008, Manipulation and the allocational role of
 prices, Review of Economic Studies 75, 133–164.
Goldstein, Itay, Emre Ozdenoren, and Kathy Yuan, 2013, Trading frenzies and their impact
 on real investment, Journal of Financial Economics 109, 566–582.
Greenwood, Jeremy, and Boyan Jovanovic, 1990, Financial development, growth, and the
  distribution of income, Journal of Political Economy 98, 1076–1107.
Greenwood, Robin, and David Scharfstein, 2012, The growth of modern finance, Working
  Paper, Harvard Business School.
Grossman, Sanford J., and Joseph E. Stiglitz, 1980, On the impossibility of informationally
  efficient markets, American Economic Review 70, 393–408.
Hayashi, Fumio, 1982, Tobin’s marginal q and average q: A neoclassical interpretation, Econo-
  metrica 50, 213–24.
Hayek, Friedrich August, 1945, The use of knowledge in society, The American economic
  review 35, 519–530.
Healy, P. M., and K. G. Palepu, 2001, A review of the empirical disclosure literature, Journal
  of Accounting and Economics 31, 405–440.
Heflin, F., K. Subramanyam, and Y. Zhang, 2003, Regulation fd and the financial information
  environment: Early evidence, The Accounting Review 78, 1–37.


                                             36
Hirshleifer, Jack, 1971, The private and social value of information and the reward to inventive
  activity, The American Economic Review 61, 561–574.
Holmström, Bengt, and Jean Tirole, 1993, Market liquidity and performance monitoring,
  Journal of Political Economy pp. 678–709.
Holthausen, Robert W., and Ross L. Watts, 2001, The relevance of the value-relevance litera-
  ture for financial accounting standard setting, Journal of Accounting and Economics 31, 3
  – 75.
Hong, Harrison, and Jeremy C Stein, 1999, A unified theory of underreaction, momentum
  trading, and overreaction in asset markets, The Journal of Finance 54, 2143–2184.
King, Robert G, and Ross Levine, 1993a, Finance and growth: Schumpeter might be right,
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 108, 717–737.
       , 1993b, Finance, entrepreneurship and growth, Journal of monetary Economics 32,
  513–542.
Koeva, Petya, 2000, The facts about time-to-build, IMF Working Paper.
Kothari, S. P., K. Ramanna, and D. Skinner, 2009, What should gaap in the future look like? a
 survey of past research as guidance for future standards, MIT Sloan School of Management
 working paper.
Kurlat, Pablo, and Laura Veldkamp, 2015, Should we regulate financial information?, .
Kyle, Albert S, 1985, Continuous auctions and insider trading, Econometrica 53, 1315–1335.
Levine, Ross, 2005, Finance and growth: theory and evidence, Handbook of economic growth
  1, 865–934.
Morck, Randall, Bernard Yeung, and Wayne Yu, 2000, The information content of stock
 markets: Why do emerging markets have synchronous stock price movements?, Journal of
 Financial Economics 58, 215–260.
Myers, Stewart C, and Nicholas S. Majluf, 1984, Corporate financing and investment decisions
 when firms have information that investors do not have, Journal of Financial Economics
 13, 187–221.
Newey, Witney, and Kenneth West, 1994, Automatic lag selection in covariance matrix esti-
  mation, Review of Economic Studies 61, 631–653.
Ozdenoren, Emre, and Kathy Yuan, 2008, Feedback effects and asset prices, Journal of Fi-
 nance 63, 1939–1975.
Philippon, Thomas, 2009, The bond market’s q, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 124,
  1011–1056.
       , 2015, Has the u.s. finance industry become less efficient? on the theory and mea-
  surement of financial intermediation, American Economic Review pp. 1408–1438.
       , and Ariell Reshef, 2012, Wages and human capital in the us finance industry: 1909–
  2006, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 127, 1551–1609.
Rajan, R.G., and L. Zingales, 1998, Financial dependence and growth, American Economic

                                              37
  Review pp. 559–586.
Rajan, Raghuram G., 2005, Has finance made the world riskier?, Proceedings of the 2005
 Jackson Hole Conference organized by the Kansas City Federal Reserve Bank.
Roll, Richard, 1988, R2 , The Journal of Finance 43, 541–566.
Schumpeter, Joseph A., 1912, Theorie der wirtschaftlichen Entwicklung (Dunker & Humblot:
  Leipzig).
Shiller, Robert J, 2000, Irrational Exuberance (Princeton University Press: Princeton).
Subrahmanyam, Avanidhar, and Sheridan Titman, 1999, The going-public decision and the
  development of financial markets, Journal of Finance 54, 1045–1082.
Tobin, James, 1969, A general equilibrium approach to monetary theory, Journal of Money,
  Credit and Banking 1, 15–29.
       , 1984, On the efficiency of the financial system, Lloyds Bank Annual Review pp. 1–15.
Turley, Robert, 2012, Informative prices and the cost of capital markets, working paper.
Wang, I., 2007, Private earnings guidance and its implications for disclosure regulation, The
 Accounting Review pp. 1299–1332.
Zingales, Luigi, 2015, Presidential address: Does finance benefit society?, forthcoming, The
  Journal of Finance.




                                             38
Appendix
A    Appendix Model
In this section we provide a full-fledged model of information production and trading as an
example of the framework in Section 2. The model shares the basic setup of Equations (1)–(8).
Following Subrahmanyam and Titman (1999), we assume the traded claim has payoff z (see
our discussion of this assumption in Section 2).There are n informed traders who choose their
demand x to maximize a standard mean-variance objective:
                                                       ρ
                              max xE [z − p| η 0 , s] − x2 Var [z| η 0 , s] ,                               (A.1)
                               x                       2
which leads to the usual demand curve
                                                        E [z| η 0 , s] − p
                                              x =                          .                                (A.2)
                                                        ρVar [ z| η 0 , s]

From (7) and (8),

                                                                     hs s + hη0 η 0
                                          E [z| η 0 , s] =                                                  (A.3)
                                                                    hz + hs + hη0

where hz =    1
             σz2
                   and hs =    1
                              σ2s
                                      and hη0 =        1
                                                  σ2η +σ2
                                                                are the precisions of s and η 0 . We also get that
                                                          η0


                                                                           1
                                        Var [z| η 0 , s] =                         .                        (A.4)
                                                                     hz + hs + hη0

Therefore, the demand of each trader is
                                           1
                                 x =         [hs s + hη0 η 0 − p (hz + hs + hη0 )]                          (A.5)
                                           ρ

We assume a random supply u of shares (equivalently noise traders) so the equilibrium con-
dition is

                                                      nx = u                                                (A.6)

and we get the equilibrium price
                                                                                       ρ
                                     (hz + hs + hη0 ) p = hs s + hη0 η 0 −               u.                 (A.7)
                                                                                       n
Next we want to understand what the manager learns. Since she knows η 0 she can observe
                                                     ρ                ρ
                                      s0 = s −          u = z + s −     u                                  (A.8)
                                                    nhs              nhs




                                                               39
Therefore her information set is in fact {η, s0 } and she sets

                                  k?                 hη η + hs0 s0
                              γ      = E [z| Im ] =                ,                                         (A.9)
                                  k                 hz + hη + hs0

where
                                                     1                         hs
                           hs0 =                          2         =         ρ 2
                                                                                           .               (A.10)
                                      σ2s   +        ρ
                                                                σu2       1+     n
                                                                                      σu2
                                                     nhs


To compute the efficiency of the economy as in (13), we substitute (6) and (A.8) into (A.9)
and obtain
                                                                       
                                                                   ρ
                                   (hη + hs ) z + hη η + hs s − nhs u
                                           0                0

                    E [ z| Im ] =                                         ,          (A.11)
                                                hz + hη + hs0

and so aggregate efficiency is

                              (hη + hs0 )2 σz2 + hη + hs0
                                                                                                
                                                                                    hη + hs0
          Var (E [ z| Im ]) =                             =                                          h−1
                                                                                                      z .   (A.12)
                                  (hz + hη + hs0 )2                              hz + hη + hs0

We can thus state

Proposition A.1. Aggregate efficiency is increasing in internal information hη , external
information hs , and uncertainty h−1
                                  z .

Proof. Recall from (13) that aggregate efficiency is Var (E [ z| Im ]). The proof follows by
substituting (A.10) into (A.12) and taking derivatives.
   The informativeness of prices, on the other hand, depends on all the noises. We have
                                                        ρ
                   (hz + hs + h0 ) p = hs s + h0 η 0 −    u                                                 (A.13)
                                                        n
                                                                                ρ
                                       = (hs + h0 ) z + hs s + h0 (η + η0 ) − u                          (A.14)
                                                                                n
so observing the price is equivalent to observing
                             
                       hz                   hs            hη0                      ρ
       π =      1+          0
                                p = z+            s +          (η + η0 ) −               u (A.15)
                    hs + h               hs + hη0      hs + hη0               (hs + hη0 ) n

and we have
                                                                   hπ π
                                        E [z| p] =                       ,                                  (A.16)
                                                                 hπ + hz




                                                           40
where
                                                     1                            (hs + hη0 )2
        hπ =                                                               =              ρ2 2
                                                                                                   . (A.17)
                 Var          hs
                                      +
                                             hη0                      ρ
                                                     (η + η0 ) − h +h n u    hs +  hη 0 +
                                                                                            n2 σ u
                           hs +hη0 s       hs +hη0                ( s η0 )

The predicted variance of cash flows (z) from prices (FPE) is
                                                                                     
                                            hs         hη0                     ρ
                                hπ z + hs +hη0 s + hs +hη0 (η + η ) − (hs +hη0 )n u 
                                                                     0

       Var (E [z| p]) = Var                                                            (A.18)
                                                       hπ + hz                          

                                 hπ
                           =          h−1 .                                                         (A.19)
                               hπ + hz z
So FPE depends on internal information and disclosure via hη0 , on RPE via hs and on noise
trading. As for RPE, we have
                                                                                 
                         0 0                      0          hη + hs0        hη
         Var (E [ z| η, η , s ]) − Var (E [z| η, η ]) =                 −           h−1
                                                                                     z . (A.20)
                                                          hz + hη + hs0   hz + hη

We have the following comparative statics:
Proposition A.2. All else equal,
  (i) an increase in hs leads to an increase in aggregate efficiency, price informativeness
      (FPE), and revelatory price efficiency (RPE);
 (ii) an increase in hη leads to an increase in aggregate efficiency, an increase in the predicted
      variance of cash flows from investment, and, if disclosure is positive, to an increase in
      FPE but not RPE; and
(iii) an increase in hη0 , holding hη constant, only leads to an increase in FPE.
Proof. The results follow by taking derivatives in the expressions for aggregate efficiency,
(A.12), FPE, (A.19), and RPE, (A.20). For the predicted variance of cash flows from invest-
ment, in this model it is equal to aggregate efficiency because investment is proportional to
the conditional expectation of cash flows based on the manager’s information.
   Proposition A.2 formalizes Prediction 1 in Section 2.
Free entry There are several ways to capture changes in information technology. We can
simply assume that signals become more informative, as in the privious proposition. Or we
can solve for equilibrium learning and assume the cost of information decreases. We can do
this for both managers and traders. In the case of traders, for instance, we can pin down n
with a free entry condition. The utility of the informed trader is
                                                                            2
                                                           hs s+hη0 η 0
                                                         
                                             0
                              1 (E [z − p| η , s])2
                                                       1 hz +hs +hη0    − p
                     U =                    0
                                                    =              1           .      (A.21)
                             2ρ Var [ z| η , s]       2ρ      hz +hs +h 0      η



                                                          41
Substituting for the price from (A.13), we get
                                                          ρ
                                                              2
                                                          n
                                                            u
                                       U =                            .                               (A.22)
                                                2ρ (hz + hs + hη0 )

So expected utility of becoming an informed trader is

                                                        ρσu2        1
                                    E [U ] =                           .                              (A.23)
                                                 2 (hz + hs + hη0 ) n2

Let ψ be the cost of becoming informed. Then in equilibrium E [U ] = ψ and we have
                                     s
                                        1        ρσu2
                               n =                           .                     (A.24)
                                        ψ 2 (hz + hs + hη0 )

The number of traders who enter depends on the cost of information, the amount of noise
trading, and the signal precisions.35 This shows how a lower cost of information increases
RPE and how we can tease it out from RPE. These predictions map into the framework we
presented in Section 2.

B      Price informativeness over time, robustness
Table A.I shows the estimates of our cross-sectional regressions (16) for 2009, the last year
for which we have data at the five-year horizon. We focus on horizons of one, three, and five
years. As Table A.I, the coefficient of market prices is positive and statistically significant.
It is also increasing with horizon from 0.039 at the one-year horizon to 0.061 at the five-year
horizon. The coefficient on current earnings is also positive and significant coefficient. As
Figure A.1 shows, the coefficient on current earnings on typically declines with horizon. The
year 2009 is somewhat unusual since it coincides with the trough of the Great Recession. This
is why the one-year coefficient on current earnings is lower than in other years.
    Figure A.1 plots the average coefficients from our cross-sectional forecasting regressions
(16) by horizon. The format of the figure follows Figure 2. Like the coefficients on prices, the
coefficients on earnings are slightly higher in the second half of the sample, but since the cross-
sectional standard deviation of earnings is the same (see Figure 1), the predicted variation of
future earnings from current earnings is flat over our sample. Unlike the coefficients on prices,
the coefficients on earnings are decreasing in horizon. The long-horizon earnings coefficient is
about 0.6, indicating a quasi-permanent effect. These results support the view that current
earnings are relatively more informative at short horizons whereas prices are relatively more
informative at long horizons. They thus provide further motivation for focusing on price
informativeness at longer horizons.
    Figure A.2 replicates the analysis in Section 4.1 under a number of variations. In the
first variation, we replace the market value of equity M with the sum of the market value
  35
    We note that in this simple model disclosure increases entry because it is assumed that disclosure is only
observed by informed traders and not noise traders. We could make an alternative assumption that disclosure
reduces noise trading so this is not a robust prediction.


                                                     42
of equity and the book value of long-term debt D in calculating the valuation ratio in the
forecasting regressions 16. This ensures that our measure is not picking up changes in the
cross-sectional relationship between firm leverage and future earnings. As the first column
of Figure A.2 shows, price informativeness continues to increase at the three-and five-year
horizon even when we adjust for debt.
    The remaining columns of Figure A.2 show robustness to alternative measures of firm cash
flows. In the main text we use EBIT because it is most widely available and because it is
the focus of market analysts. Here we consider EBITDA, net income, and cash flow from
operations (CFO) as alternatives. In the case of EBITDA and net income the resulting price
informativeness series evolve very similarly as with EBIT. In the case of CFO, data is only
available following the promulgation of FASB rule 95 in 1987. This makes it hard to assess
trends but we note that the series using CFO are similar to those using the other measures.

C    Beyond the S&P 500
Table A.II presents summary statistics for the universe of firms. Compared to the S&P
500, these firms are smaller, less profitable, and have lower market valuation ratios. They
also exhibit much greater uncertainty as indicated by their idiosyncratic volatility and cross-
sectional dispersion of profitability at all horizons. More importantly, this dispersion has
increased between the first and second halves of our sample. For instance, the dispersion of
current earnings to assets has nearly doubled. The average level of profitability has also fallen
from 9% of total assets to -0.6%. The drop in the median is smaller, from 10.2% to 6.1%,
indicating increased left-skewness. Indeed, many of these firms have consistently negative
earnings.
     Next, we replicate the analysis from Section 4.1 for firms beyond the S&P 500. The results
are presented in Figure A.3 and Table A.III. The top two panels of Figure A.3 show that the
two groups differ greatly on observable characteristics. From the top left panel, uncertainty has
increased drastically among all firms as suggested by the increase in their earnings dispersion.
This dispersion has grown from about the same level as for S&P 500 firms in 1960 to about
four times as high by 2000. From the top right panel, there has been a parallel rise in the
dispersion of market valuations among all firms versus a steady, much less pronounced rise
among S&P 500 firms.
     The upswings in the dispersion series for all firms correspond to the growth of NASDAQ
in the late 1970s and 80s and the dot-com boom in the 1990s. (Indeed, if we remove NASDAQ
firms from the sample the changes are a lot less pronounced.) Both episodes are associated
with a large inflow of younger, smaller, and more uncertain firms (see Fama and French 2004).
Therefore, the sample of all firms has seen large compositional shifts that imply it is not
comparable over time. For S&P 500 firms, there is no evidence of such changes. In particular,
their earnings dispersion is virtually constant over the whole fifty-year period.
     To see the effects of the compositional changes among all firms, we can look at our infor-
mativeness measures, which are shown in the bottom two panels of Figure A.3 (the middle
two panels show the forecasting coefficients). In contrast to S&P 500 firms whose price infor-
mativeness has risen, for the set of all firms it appears to have declined. The decline occurs
in the same years as the rise in the dispersion measures in the top panels. This suggests that
it is indeed due to changing firm composition.

                                               43
    Interestingly, the apparent decline is more pronounced at the short horizon. As Table A.III
shows, one-year informativeness for all firms falls by a highly significant 73% from the 1960s
to the 2000s, whereas five-year informativeness falls by an insignificant 17% (at three years
the drop is 60%). Recall from Table II that for S&P 500 firms one-year informativeness is flat,
whereas the increase at five years is about 50%. Thus, for both samples there is a comparable
relative improvement at the long end. This suggests that the one-year informativeness series
helps to tease out the confounding compositional changes.

D    Tests for a structural break in price informativeness
In this section we examine the evidence for a structural break in price informativeness. The
adoption of Regulation Fair Disclosure in 2000 and the passage of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act in
2002 are likely candidates. These reforms had a large impact on firms’ disclosure requirements.
Another potentially important reform is decimalization which occurred in 2001. If the observed
increase in price informativeness is due to changes in disclosure, then these reforms should
lead to detectable changes in our price informativeness series. More broadly, we ask whether
there is evidence of a structural break at any point in our sample.
    To test for structural breaks, we first form the null hypothesis that price informativeness
has increased linearly over our sample from 1960 to 2014. Specifically, we run a regression
of price informativeness at each horizon (shown in Figure 3) on a constant and a linear time
trend. We normalize the linear time trend to zero in 1960 and one in 2014. This allows us
to interpret the constant as the value of price informativeness in 1960 and the sum of the
constant and slope coefficient as the value of price informativeness in 2014. The results are in
Table A.IV. The coefficients on the time trend are positive and significant. The point estimate
is that the one-year informativeness series is only about 30% higher in 2014 than 1960, while
the three- and five-year informativeness series are 62% and 85% higher, respectively.
    Next, we run a Supremum Wald test for an unknown break point in the coefficients from
the regression on a linear time trend. This test calculates a Wald statistic for the hypothesis
that the intercept and slope of this regression are different before and after each year in our
sample. It then reports the year with the highest Wald statistic and a p-value that takes into
account the search over all years. The results are below the regression estimates in Table
A.IV. The most likely break point years differ by horizon and none has a p-value below 10%
(the lowest p-value is for the five-year series in 1980).
    Since the test for an unknown break point has relatively low power, we also perform tests
for known break points in 2000 (Reg. FD), 2001 (decimalization), and 2002 (Sarbanes-Oxley).
The results are also reported in Table A.IV. The p-values are again high, the lowest (0.15) is
for the three-year price series in 2002.
    Overall, we find no evidence of a structural break point in our price informativeness series.
Rather, informativeness has been increasing steadily throughout our fifty-year sample. This
makes it less likely that the increase is driven by changes in disclosure requirements which are
discrete in nature.




                                               44
                                                       Table I. Summary statistics
     Means, medians, and standard deviations of key variables, S&P 500 sample. Market capitalization is from CRSP in millions
     of dollars as of the end of March. Total assets, research and development (R&D), capital expenditure (CAPX), and earnings
     (EBIT) are from Compustat in millions of dollars as of the end of the previous fiscal year. All quantities are adjusted for
     inflation using the GDP deflator (= 100 in 2010). Next, log (M/A) is the log-ratio of market cap to assets, R&D/A is R&D
     over assets, CAP X/A is CAPX over assets, E/A is EBIT over assets, and E (t + h) /A, h = 1, 3, 5, is earnings in year t + h over
     assets in year t. All ratios are winsorized at the 1% level. Idiosyncratic volatility is the standard deviation of returns over the
     last twelve months after subtracting the market return. Share turnover is volume divided by shares outstanding. Institutional
     share is the fraction of shares held by institutional investors (from 13-F filings). Option listings is an indicator variable for
     whether a firm has options trading on the CBOE. The sample consists of S&P 500 non-financial firms, 1960 to 2014.
                                               Full sample                       1960-1985                        1986-2014
                                       Mean     Median          SD      Mean     Median         SD        Mean     Median        SD
       Market Capitalization          10,420       3,213     28,027      3,793     1,481     10,562      17,043      6,796    37,032
       Total Assets                   11,113       3,931     30,449      5,304     2,194     13,434      16,384      6,426    39,324
       R&D                               390          90        996        164        54        403         529        133     1,205




45
       CAPX                              744         224      1,978        512       145      1,656         943        315     2,198
       Earnings                        1,101         402      2,750        597       233      1,713       1,544        646     3,348

       log (M/A)                      -0.166      -0.197      0.879     -0.383     -0.410     0.824       0.032      0.037     0.881
       R&D/A                           0.038       0.024      0.044      0.029      0.020     0.028       0.044      0.026     0.050
       CAP X/A                         0.071       0.060      0.050      0.080      0.070     0.051       0.063      0.052     0.047
       E/A                             0.116       0.107      0.075      0.120      0.110     0.073       0.113      0.104     0.077
       E(t + 1)/A                      0.124       0.111      0.087      0.127      0.113     0.083       0.122      0.108     0.090
       E(t + 3)/A                      0.139       0.117      0.115      0.140      0.119     0.106       0.139      0.114     0.123
       E(t + 5)/A                      0.155       0.123      0.145      0.155      0.126     0.131       0.155      0.118     0.159

       Idiosyncratic volatility        0.075       0.066      0.040      0.071     0.064      0.033       0.079      0.068     0.045
       Share turnover                  0.098       0.049      0.146      0.031     0.020      0.038       0.164      0.109     0.180
       Institutional share             0.635       0.651      0.207      0.429     0.446      0.172       0.668      0.685     0.193
       Option listings                 0.635       1.000      0.481      0.259     0.000      0.438       0.895      1.000     0.307
       Firm-year obs.                            24,701                           12,350                           12,351
                        Table II. Price informativeness over time
Time series regressions of price informativeness by horizon. Price informativeness is cal-
culated as in formula (17) using estimates from the cross-sectional forecasting regressions
(16). The resulting price informativeness series are shown in Figure 3. For this table we
regress the time series of price informativeness at a given horizon h = 1, 3, 5 years on a set
of indicator variables corresponding to each decade in our sample. Since our sample ends in
2014, there are no five-year price informativeness estimates for the period 2010–2014. We
report Newey-West standard errors with 5 lags in parentheses. The sample consists of S&P
500 non-financial firms from 1960 to 2014.
                                           Price informativeness (×100)
              Horizon h (years):        h=1          h=3          h=5

              Constant                    2.001***     3.111***     4.123***
                                         (0.059)      (0.184)      (0.111)

              1970–79                     0.020        0.707*      -0.106
                                         (0.092)      (0.417)      (0.378)
              1980–89                     0.405**      1.075***     1.874***
                                         (0.197)      (0.332)      (0.134)
              1990–99                     0.413*       1.406***     1.489***
                                         (0.240)      (0.331)      (0.397)
              2000–09                     0.503***     1.561**      2.143***
                                         (0.185)      (0.583)      (0.311)
              2010–14                     0.314        0.840***
                                         (0.288)      (0.253)

              R2                           12.2%        19.5%        53.3%
              Obs.                           54           52           50




                                             46
                                                 Table III. Market prices and investment
     Time series regressions of the predicted variation of investment from prices by horizon. The predicted variation of investment
     from prices is calculated as bt,h × σt (log M/A) where bt,h is the forecasting coefficient of prices (log M/A) in regression (19) and
     σt (log M/A) is the cross-sectional standard deviation of log M/A. The resulting predicted variation of investment from prices
     series are shown in Figure 4. For this table we regress the predicted variation series at a given horizon h = 1, 3, 5 years on a
     set of indicator variables corresponding to each decade in our sample. Since our sample ends in 2014, there are no five-year
     predicted variation estimates for the period 2010–2014. We report Newey-West standard errors with 5 lags in parentheses. The
     sample consists of S&P 500 non-financial firms from 1960 to 2014. Data on R&D starts in 1972, hence the omitted category for
     R&D is 1970–79.
                                                       Predicted variation of investment from prices (×100)
                                                           R&D                                   CAPX
                Horizon h (years):        h=1            h=3          h=5              h=1          h=3          h=5

                Constant                    0.134***       0.379***    0.636***         0.942***      1.867***     2.206***
                                           (0.027)        (0.076)     (0.153)          (0.212)       (0.357)      (0.325)




47
                1970–79                                                                -0.325        -0.238       -0.244
                                                                                       (0.232)       (0.396)      (0.353)
                1980–89                     0.153***       0.669***    0.908***         0.411         1.209**      1.930***
                                           (0.048)        (0.091)     (0.160)          (0.250)       (0.541)      (0.610)
                1990–99                     0.147          0.779**     0.920***        -0.166         0.630        0.813**
                                           (0.088)        (0.287)     (0.249)          (0.216)       (0.470)      (0.337)
                2000–09                     1.028***       1.264***    1.761***        -0.266        -0.911**     -0.903**
                                           (0.097)        (0.127)     (0.298)          (0.302)       (0.370)      (0.344)
                2010–14                     0.401***       1.166***                    -0.453*       -0.455
                                           (0.040)        (0.077)                      (0.226)       (0.365)

                R2                           63.7%          50.6%       51.0%            24.9%         46.8%        64.3%
                Obs.                           42             40          38               54            52           50
                           Table IV. Market prices and returns
Time series regressions of the predicted variation of returns from prices by horizon. The
predicted variation of returns from prices is calculated as bt,h × σt (log M/A) where bt,h is the
forecasting coefficient of prices (log M/A) in regression (20) and σt (log M/A) is the cross-
sectional standard deviation of log M/A. The resulting series are shown in Figure 5. For
this table we regress the predicted variation series at a given horizon h = 1, 3, 5 years on a
set of indicator variables corresponding to each decade in our sample. Since our sample ends
in 2014, there are no five-year estimate for the period 2010–2014. We report Newey-West
standard errors with 5 lags in parentheses. The sample consists of S&P 500 non-financial
firms from 1960 to 2014.
                                            Predicted variation of returns
                                                 from prices (×100)
               Horizon h (years):        h=1           h=3          h=5

               Constant                   -3.214***    -8.712*** -11.101***
                                          (0.274)      (0.907)    (2.162)

               1970–79                    -1.197       -0.884        -4.449
                                          (0.983)      (3.054)       (4.081)
               1980–89                     0.395        4.686**       5.894*
                                          (0.607)      (1.787)       (3.416)
               1990–99                     1.172**      3.416**       4.592
                                          (0.502)      (1.371)       (2.888)
               2000–09                    -6.421*      -3.947        -4.987
                                          (3.196)      (6.322)       (9.293)
               2010–14                     2.491***     5.189***
                                          (0.371)      (0.934)

               R2                           23.2%         13.6%        14.4%
               Obs.                           54            52           50




                                               48
                                                     Table V. Aggregate efficiency
     Time series regressions of the predicted variation of earnings from investment by horizon. The predicted variation of earnings
     from investment is calculated as σt (bt,h log R&D/A + ct,h log CAP X/A) where bt,h and ct,h are the forecasting coefficient of
     R&D and CAPX in regression (21). We also chow results for R&D only (ct,h = 0). The resulting predicted variation series
     are shown in Figure 6. For this table we regress the predicted variation series at a given horizon h = 1, 3, 5 years on a set of
     indicator variables corresponding to each decade in our sample. Since our sample ends in 2014, there are no five-year estimate
     for the period 2010–2014. We report Newey-West standard errors with 5 lags in parentheses. The sample consists of S&P 500
     non-financial firms from 1960 to 2014.
                                                    Predicted variation of earnings from investment (×100)
                                                       R&D only                         R&D and CAPX
                Horizon h (years):       h=1           h=3          h=5             h=1          h=3         h=5

                Constant                  0.438***       0.911***    1.299***         0.678***    1.243***     1.700***




49
                                         (0.111)        (0.260)     (0.207)          (0.057)     (0.205)      (0.225)

                1980–89                  -0.018          0.192       0.596            0.283**     0.600        1.018***
                                         (0.189)        (0.473)     (0.361)          (0.124)     (0.409)      (0.299)
                1990–99                   0.227*         0.533*      0.396            0.287*      0.646**      0.559**
                                         (0.121)        (0.299)     (0.344)          (0.159)     (0.290)      (0.245)
                2000–09                   0.146          0.540       0.992*           0.386       0.587**      0.907***
                                         (0.149)        (0.495)     (0.520)          (0.270)     (0.252)      (0.389)
                2010–14                  -0.032         -0.431                       -0.014      -0.421
                                         (0.235)        (0.299)                      (0.202)     (0.265)

                R2                           5.2%         10.0%       15.0%             7.3%       13.2%        20.2%
                Obs.                          42            40          38               42          40           38
            Table VI. Institutional ownership and price informativeness
Time series regressions of the difference in price informativeness between firms with high
and low institutional ownership, using the median institutional share in each year as the
cutoff. Price informativeness is obtained separately for each group by running the forecasting
regressions (16) and calculating the product of the forecasting coefficient and the standard
deviation of market prices, bt,h × σt (log M/A). The resulting price informativeness series are
shown in Figure 7. For this table we regress the difference in price informativeness between
the high and low institutional share groups at a given horizon h = 1, 3, 5 years on a set of
indicator variables corresponding to each decade in our sample. Since our sample ends in
2014, there are no five-year price informativeness estimates for the period 2010–2014. We
report Newey-West standard errors with 5 lags in parentheses. The sample consists of all
non-financial firms from 1980 to 2014 when institutional ownership data is available.
                                            Price informativeness (×100)
                                         high − low institutional ownership
               Horizon h (years):       h=1           h=3          h=5

               Constant                   2.526***     2.842***      2.376***
                                         (0.304)      (0.123)       (0.255)

               1990–99                    0.805**      1.996***      2.981***
                                         (0.387)      (0.309)       (0.452)
               2000–09                    0.700        1.401***      1.623**
                                         (0.522)      (0.331)       (0.650)
               2010–14                   -0.249        2.040***
                                         (0.312)      (0.129)
               R2                          22.6%        49.6%         56.3%
               Obs.                          33           31            29




                                              50
                 Table VII. Option listings and price informativeness
Time series regressions of the difference in price informativeness between firms with and
without option listings. Price informativeness is obtained separately for each group by run-
ning the forecasting regressions (16) and calculating the product of the forecasting coefficient
and the standard deviation of market prices, bt,h × σt (log M/A). The resulting price infor-
mativeness series are shown in Figure 8. For this table we regress the difference in price
informativeness between the listed and unlisted groups at a given horizon h = 1, 3, 5 years
on a set of indicator variables corresponding to each decade in our sample. Since our sample
ends in 2014, there are no five-year price informativeness estimates for the period 2010–2014.
We report Newey-West standard errors with 5 lags in parentheses. The sample consists of
S&P 500 non-financial firms from 1973 to 2014 (the CBOE began listing firms in 1973).
                                            Price informativeness (×100)
                                               listed − unlisted firms
               Horizon h (years):        h=1          h=3           h=5

               Constant                   -0.873***    -1.491***    -1.623***
                                          (0.162)      (0.446)      (0.390)

               1980–89                     0.682**      1.111**      0.573
                                          (0.285)      (0.498)      (0.780)
               1990–99                     1.335***     2.136**      2.188
                                          (0.294)      (0.906)      (1.601)
               2000–09                     1.077***     2.455***     2.445**
                                          (0.376)      (0.759)      (0.961)
               2010–14                     1.217***     1.810***
                                          (0.199)      (0.457)

               R2                           22.0%        21.7%        13.0%
               Obs.                           41           39           37




                                              51
                                Table VIII. Growth options, turnover, and price informativeness
     Time series regressions of the difference in price informativeness between value and growth firms (first three columns) and
     between high-turnover and low-turnover firms (last three columns). Growth (value) firms are defined as those with a high (low)
     valuation ratio (log M/A) using the median valuation ratio in each year as the cutoff. High- (low-) turnover firms are defined as
     those with a high (low) monthly share turnover using the median share turnover in each year as the cutoff. Price informativeness
     is obtained separately for each group by running the forecasting regressions (16) and calculating the product of the forecasting
     coefficient and the standard deviation of market prices, bt,h × σt (log M/A). The resulting price informativeness series are shown
     in Figures 9 and 10. For this table we regress the difference in price informativeness between growth and value firms and between
     high- and low-turnover firms at a given horizon h = 1, 3, 5 years on a set of indicator variables corresponding to each decade in
     our sample. Since our sample ends in 2014, there are no five-year price informativeness estimates for the period 2010–2014. We
     report Newey-West standard errors with 5 lags in parentheses. The sample consists of S&P 500 non-financial firms from 1960
     to 2014.
                                                                  Price informativeness (×100)
                                                Growth − value firms                 High − low turnover firms
                Horizon h (years):        h=1          h=3           h=5             h=1          h=3           h=5




52
                Constant                    0.847**      2.591***     3.813***         1.298***     2.012***      2.109**
                                           (0.403)      (0.393)      (0.315)          (0.464)      (0.634)       (0.802)

                1970–79                     0.031       -0.521       -1.574***        -0.683       -0.057        -0.186
                                           (0.395)      (0.535)      (0.437)          (0.475)      (0.648)       (1.068)
                1980–89                     0.862*       0.837        1.599*          -0.614       -2.294**      -2.646*
                                           (0.442)      (0.584)      (0.800)          (0.500)      (0.920)       (1.568)
                1990–99                     1.588***     2.987***     3.029***         0.227        0.560         0.375
                                           (0.450)      (0.586)      (0.497)          (0.561)      (0.776)       (0.849)
                2000–09                     0.759*       0.867        1.465**         -0.199       -0.832        -0.584
                                           (0.449)      (0.730)      (0.676)          (0.506)      (0.960)       (0.942)
                2010–14                     0.136        0.484                        -0.593       -2.064***
                                           (0.457)      (0.474)                       (0.599)      (0.651)

                R2                           40.5%        36.4%        49.3%            13.1%        23.6%         17.9%
                Obs.                           54           52           50               54           52            50
             Table A.I. Example cross-sectional regression from 2009
We report a sample cross-sectional forecasting regression (16) for the year 2009, the last year
for which we have data at the five-year forecasting horizon:
                                                                  
   Ei,2009+h                           Mi,2009               Ei,2009
             = a2009,h + b2009,h log             + c2009,h             + ds2009,h 1si,2009 + i,2009,h ,
    Ai,2009                            Ai,2009               Ai,2009

where E is earnings (EBIT), A is total assets, M is market cap, and 1s is an indicator variable
for sector s. Standard errors are clustered at the industry level (two-digit SIC code). Note
however that these standard errors are not used in subsequent analysis since we use the time
series variation in the estimates to form standard errors in our time series regressions (this
is equivalent to a Fama-Macbeth regression). The sample consists of S&P 500 non-financial
firms for 2009.
                                                         E2009+h /A2009
                Horizon h (years):          h=1            h=3            h=5

                Constant                      0.044          0.134***      0.094**
                                             (0.032)        (0.036)       (0.037)

                log M2009 /A2009              0.039***       0.058***      0.061***
                                             (0.008)        (0.009)       (0.010)
                E2009 /A2009                  0.454***       0.481***      0.461***
                                             (0.100)        (0.127)       (0.163)

                Sector F.E.                     Yes            Yes           Yes

                R2                             62.9%          50.4%         37.9%
                Obs.                            424            423           420




                                                  53
                                               Table A.II. Summary statistics, all firms
     Means, medians, and standard deviations of key variables, all firms. Market capitalization is from CRSP in millions of dollars
     as of the end of March. Total assets, research and development (R&D), capital expenditure (CAPX), and earnings (EBIT)
     are from Compustat in millions of dollars as of the end of the previous fiscal year. All quantities are adjusted for inflation
     using the GDP deflator (= 100 in 2010). Next, log (M/A) is the log-ratio of market cap to assets, R&D/A is R&D over assets,
     CAP X/A is CAPX over assets, E/A is EBIT over assets, and E (t + h) /A, h = 1, 3, 5, is earnings in year t + h over assets in
     year t. All ratios are winsorized at the 1% level. Idiosyncratic volatility is the standard deviation of returns over the last twelve
     months after subtracting the market return. Share turnover is volume divided by shares outstanding. Institutional share is the
     fraction of shares held by institutional investors (from 13-F filings). Option listings is an indicator variable for whether a firm
     has options trading on the CBOE. The sample consists of non-financial firms, 1960 to 2014.
                                                Full sample                       1960-1985                        1986-2014
                                        Mean     Median          SD       Mean     Median       SD         Mean    Median         SD
        Market Capitalization           1,611        124      10,283        795         90    4,430        2,106        153    12,545
        Total Assets                    1,893        165      11,499      1,297        172    6,114        2,200        161    13,452
        R&D                                59          4         371         33          2      178           69          4       421




54
        CAPX                              125          8         748        117         10      718          129          7       762
        Earnings                          170         10       1,041        134         16      753          188          8     1,159

        log (M/A)                      -0.198      -0.216      1.066     -0.475     -0.513    0.972       -0.057     -0.052     1.084
        R&D/A                           0.078       0.031      0.127      0.035      0.018    0.059        0.094      0.042     0.141
        CAP X/A                         0.070       0.048      0.072      0.084      0.062    0.075        0.064      0.042     0.070
        E/A                             0.027       0.076      0.217      0.092      0.102    0.137       -0.006      0.061     0.242
        E(t + 1)/A                      0.052       0.080      0.197      0.106      0.106    0.137        0.025      0.065     0.217
        E(t + 3)/A                      0.088       0.084      0.218      0.129      0.110    0.170        0.066      0.068     0.237
        E(t + 5)/A                      0.119       0.087      0.252      0.151      0.114    0.210        0.100      0.070     0.271

        Idiosyncratic volatility        0.140      0.112       0.111      0.117      0.098    0.077        0.153      0.123     0.124
        Share turnover                  0.107      0.049       0.238      0.036      0.021    0.052        0.139      0.074     0.279
        Institutional share             0.398      0.344       0.307      0.234      0.148    0.250        0.419      0.376     0.308
        Option listings                 0.529      1.000       0.499      0.131      0.000    0.337        0.664      1.000     0.472
        Firm-year obs.                           211,984                           80,561                           131,423
                Table A.III. Price informativeness over time, all firms
Time series regressions of price informativeness by horizon for all firms. Price informativeness
is calculated as in (17) using estimates from the cross-sectional forecasting regressions (16).
The resulting price informativeness series are shown in Figure A.3. We then regress the
time series of price informativeness at a given horizon h = 1, 3, 5 years on a set of indicator
variables corresponding to each decade in our sample. Since our sample ends in 2014, there
are no five-year price informativeness estimates for the period 2010–2014. We report Newey-
West standard errors with 5 lags in parentheses. The sample consists of all non-financial
firms from 1960 to 2014.
                                            Price informativeness (×100)
               Horizon h (years):        h=1          h=3           h=5

               Constant                    2.526***     3.813***     4.982***
                                          (0.214)      (0.644)      (0.807)

               1970–79                     0.305        0.711        0.854
                                          (0.220)      (0.709)      (0.978)
               1980–89                    -1.276***    -1.188*      -0.317
                                          (0.274)      (0.654)      (0.868)
               1990–99                    -1.902***    -1.882***    -0.466
                                          (0.221)      (0.679)      (0.980)
               2000–09                    -1.944***    -1.907**     -0.852
                                          (0.277)      (0.759)      (0.880)
               2010–14                    -1.854***    -2.266***
                                          (0.292)      (0.653)

               R2                           81.8%        61.3%        19.3%
               Obs.                           54           52           50




                                              55
          Table A.IV. Tests for a structural break in price informativeness
We test for structural breaks in the evolution of price informativeness over time. Price
informativeness is calculated as in formula (17) using estimates from the cross-sectional
forecasting regressions (16). The resulting series are shown in Figure 3. For this table
we regress each series on a constant and a linear time trend. The linear time trend is
normalized to 0 in 1960 and 1 in 2014, hence the constant can be interpreted as the value
of price informativeness in 1960 and the sum of the constant and the slope coefficient can
be interpreted as the value of price informativeness in 2014. Newey-West standard errors
with 5 lags are reported in parentheses. We then run a Supremum Wald test for a break
in the estimated coefficients at an unknown break date and a Wald test for a break in
the estimated coefficients in 2000, 2001, and 2002 (the adoption years of Regulation Fair
Disclosure, decimalization, and the Sarbanes-Oxley Act). For each test we report the Wald
statistic and associated p-value. For the test for an unknown break point we also report the
year with the highest break point likelihood. The sample consists of S&P 500 non-financial
firms from 1960 to 2014.
                                                     Price informativeness (×100)
      Horizon h (years):                           h=1         h=3         h=5

      Constant                                      1.976***    3.140***    3.755***
                                                   (0.097)     (0.254)     (0.224)

      Time trend                                    0.605***    1.940***    3.190***
                                                   (0.224)     (0.451)     (0.343)

      R2                                            8.74%      18.93%      43.01%
      Obs.                                            54          52          50

      Test for an unknown break point:
      Highest likelihood break point                1996        1974        1980
      Supremum Wald statistic (χ2 )                4.548       3.767       8.799
      p-value                                      0.633       0.767       0.152

      Test for a known break point in 2000:
      Wald statistic (χ2 )                         0.830       2.059       0.454
      p-value                                      0.660       0.358       0.797

      Test for a known break point in 2001:
      Wald statistic (χ2 )                         1.741       0.878       0.021
      p-value                                      0.419       0.645       0.989

      Test for a known break point in 2002:
      Wald statistic (χ2 )                         0.678       3.762       1.076
      p-value                                      0.712       0.152       0.584



                                              56
                              Figure 1. Summary statistics
The sample consists of non-financial firms in the S&P 500 index from 1960 to 2014. Each
panel shows medians (red line) and 10th to 90th percentile range (gray shading). log M/A is
the log ratio of market capitalization to total assets. E/A is EBIT over assets. R&D/A and
CAP X/A are research and development and capital expenditure over assets. All quantities
are adjusted for inflation.

                 log M/A                                          E/A




                 R&D/A                                         CAP X/A




                                            57
       Figure 2. Average price informativeness by horizon and sub-sample
This figure shows average price informativeness calculated from the cross-sectional forecast-
ing regressions (16):

          Ei,t+h /Ai,t = at,h + bt,h log (Mi,t /Ai,t ) + ct,h (Ei,t /Ai,t ) + dst,h 1si,t + i,t,h ,

where M is market cap, A is total assets, E is earnings (EBIT), and 1s is a sector (one-digit
SIC code) indicator variable. We run a separate regression for each year t = 1960, . . . , 2014
and horizon h = 1, . . . , 5. Price informativeness for year t and horizon h is bt,h ×σt (log M/A).
The horizontal axis represents horizon h. The P     solid red line shows price informativeness at
                                                 1    2014
horizon h averaged over the full sample, i.e. 55      t=1960 bt,h × σt (log M/A). The dashed black
line is for the first half, 1960 to 1985, and the dash-dotted blue line is for the second half,
1986 to 2014. The sample consists of S&P 500 non-financial firms from 1960 to 2014.

                                                          1
                                                              P
                    Average price informativeness         T       t bt,h   × σt (log M/A)




                                                     58
                                             Figure 3. Price informativeness over time
     Results from the cross-sectional forecasting regressions (16):

                                  Ei,t+h /Ai,t = at,h + bt,h log (Mi,t /Ai,t ) + ct,h (Ei,t /Ai,t ) + dst,h 1si,t + i,t,h ,

     where M is market cap, A is total assets, E is earnings (EBIT), and 1s is a sector (one-digit SIC code) indicator variable.
     We run a separate regression for each year t = 1960, . . . , 2014 and horizon h = 1, 3, 5 (for h = 5 the last available estimate is
     for 2009). The coefficients bt,h are plotted inside a 95% confidence interval. Price informativeness is bt,h × σt (log M/A). The
     marginal R2 is the difference between the full-regression R2 and the R2 from a regression that omits log M/A. The sample
     consists of S&P 500 non-financial firms from 1960 to 2014.

                  Coefficients bt,h                   Price informativeness bt,h × σt (log M/A)                                Marginal R2




59
                        Figure 4. Market prices and investment
The predicted variation of investment from prices calculated from the cross-sectional fore-
casting regressions (19):
                                                                      
    R&Di,t+h                        Mi,t            R&Di,t            Ei,t
                = at,h + bt,h log          + ct,h            + dt,h          + est,h 1si,t + i,t,h ,
       Ai,t                         Ai,t             Ai,t             Ai,t

where M is market cap, A is total assets, R&D is research and development spending, E
is earnings (EBIT), and 1s is a sector (one-digit SIC code) indicator variable. We run the
same regressions for CAPX (capital expenditure). We run a separate regression for each
year t = 1960, . . . , 2014 and horizon h = 1, 3, 5 (for h = 5 the last available estimate is for
2009). Informativeness of prices for investment is bt,h × σt (log M/A). The sample consists
of S&P 500 non-financial firms from 1960 to 2014. Data on R&D starts in 1972.

              Predicted variation of investment from prices bt,h × σt (log M/A)
                     R&D                                                CAPX




                                                 60
                                               Figure 5. Market prices and returns
     The predicted variation of returns from prices calculated from the cross-sectional return predictability regressions (20):

                      log Ri,t→t+h = at,h + bt,h log (Mi,t /Ai,t ) + ct,h (R&Di,t /Ai,t ) + dt,h (Ei,t /Ai,t ) + est,h 1si,t + i,t,h ,

     where log Rt→t+h is the log return from t to t + h, M is market cap, A is total assets,E is earnings (EBIT), and 1s is a sector
     (one-digit SIC code) indicator variable. We run a separate regression for each year t = 1960, . . . , 2014 and horizon h = 1, 3, 5 (for
     h = 5 the last available estimate is for 2009). The predicted variation of returns from prices (solid red lines) is bt,h ×σt (log M/A).
     We also plot price informativeness (the predicted variation of earnings from prices) for comparison (dashed black lines). The
     sample consists of S&P 500 non-financial firms from 1960 to 2014.

                                          Predicted variation of returns from prices bt,h × σt (log M/A)
                       h=1                                                   h=3                                                   h=5




61
                              Figure 6. Aggregate efficiency
The predicted variation of earnings from investment calculated from the forecasting regres-
sions (21):
                                                                        
  Ei,t+h                      R&Di,t                CAP Xi,t            Ei,t
          = at,h + bt,h log            + ct,h log              + dt,h          + est,h 1si,t + i,t,h ,
   Ai,t                        Ai,t                   Ai,t              Ai,t

where R&D is research and development, CAPX is capital expenditure, M is market cap, A
is total assets,E is earnings (EBIT), and 1s is a sector (one-digit SIC code) indicator variable.
We run a separate regression for each year t = 1972, . . . , 2014 and horizon h = 1, 3, 5 (for
h = 5 the last available estimate is for 2009). The predicted variation of earnings from
investment (solid red lines) is σt (bt,h log R&D/A + ct,h log CAP X/A). We also plot a linear
time trend (dashed black lines). The sample consists of S&P 500 non-financial firms from
1972 to 2014 (R&D data is not available prior to 1972).

                        Predicted variation of earnings from investment
                   R&D only                                       R&D and CAPX




                                                  62
                                    Figure 7. Institutional ownership and price informativeness
     We compare price informativeness for firms with high and low levels of institutional ownership, using the median institutional
     share in each year as the cutoff. The left panel plots the average institutional share for firms in each group. Price informativeness
     is obtained separately for each group by running the forecasting regressions (16) and calculating the product of the forecasting
     coefficient and the standard deviation of market prices, bt,h × σt (log M/A). The sample consists of all non-financial firms from
     1980 to 2014 (institutional ownership data is not available before 1980).

                                                                       Price informativeness by institutional share
                Institutional share

                                                                    h=3                                          h=5




63
                    Figure 8. Option listings and price informativeness
We compare price informativeness for firms with and without option listings. Price informa-
tiveness is obtained separately for each group by running the forecasting regressions (16) and
calculating the product of the forecasting coefficient and the standard deviation of market
prices, bt,h × σt (log M/A). The sample consists of S&P 500 non-financial firms from 1973 to
2014 (the CBOE began listing firms in 1973).

                        Price informativeness by institutional share

                    h=3                                           h=5




                                             64
                 Figure 9. Growth options and price informativeness
We compare price informativeness for firms with high and low valuation ratios, using the
median value of the valuation ratio log M/A in each year as the cutoff. We refer to high-
valuation firms as growth firms and low-valuation firms as value firms. Price informativeness
is obtained separately for each group by running the forecasting regressions (16) and calcu-
lating the product of the forecasting coefficient and the standard deviation of market prices,
bt,h × σt (log M/A). The sample consists of S&P 500 non-financial firms from 1960 to 2014.

                        Price informativeness by level of valuation

        Low valuation (value firms)                    High valuation (growth firms)




                                             65
                                           Figure 10. Liquidity and price informativeness
     We compare price informativeness for firms with high and low levels of share turnover, using the median turnover in each year
     as the cutoff. The left panel plots the average log turnover for firms in each group. Price informativeness is obtained separately
     for each group by running the forecasting regressions (16) and calculating the product of the forecasting coefficient and the
     standard deviation of market prices, bt,h × σt (log M/A). The sample consists of S&P 500 non-financial firms from 1960 to 2014.

                                                                          Price informativeness by turnover
                   Log turnover

                                                                   h=3                                         h=5




66
   Figure A.1. Average cross-sectional coefficients by horizon and sub-sample
This figure shows average coefficients calculated from the cross-sectional forecasting regres-
sions (16):

          Ei,t+h /Ai,t = at,h + bt,h log (Mi,t /Ai,t ) + ct,h (Ei,t /Ai,t ) + dst,h 1si,t + i,t,h ,

where M is market cap, A is total assets, E is earnings (EBIT), and 1s is a sector (one-digit
SIC code) indicator variable. We run a separate regression for each year t = 1960, . . . , 2014
and horizon h = 1, . . . , 5. We report average of the coefficients bt,h for prices and ct,h for
earnings. The horizontal axis represents horizonPh. The solid red line     shows coefficients at
                                                 1   2014          1
                                                                     P2014
horizon h averaged over the full sample, i.e. 55 t=1960 bt,h and 55 t=1960 ct,h . The dashed
black line is for the first half, 1960 to 1985, and the dash-dotted blue line is for the second
half, 1986 to 2014. The sample consists of S&P 500 non-financial firms from 1960 to 2014.

         Coefficients on prices bt,h                              Coefficients on earnings ct,h




                                                     67
                                           Figure A.2. Price informativeness, robustness
     We report price informativeness under several variations. Price informativeness is calculated by running the forecasting regres-
     sions (16) and taking the product of the forecasting coefficient and the standard deviation of market prices, bt,h × σt (log M/A).
     In the first column, we add the book value of debt in calculating the valuation ratio (that is we use M + D instead of M ). In
     the second column, we use EBITDA instead of EBIT to measure earnings. In the third and fourth columns we use net income
     and cash flow from operations (CFO). The sample consists of S&P 500 non-financial firms from 1960 to 2014 (CFO is only
     available after the introduction of FASB rule 95 in 1987).
            Adjusting for debt                   EBITDA                        Net income              Cash flow from operations




68
                      Figure A.3. Price informativeness, all firms
Earnings dispersion σt (E/A), valuation dispersion σt (log M/A), coefficients bt,h , and price
informativeness bt,h × σt (log M/A) from the forecasting regressions (16), run separately for
S&P 500 firms and all firms between 1960 and 2014. The dispersion series are measured as
the cross-sectional standard deviations in E/A and log M/A in a given year.
       Earnings dispersion σt (E/A)                   Valuation dispersion σt (log M/A)




                                      Coefficients bt,h
         Three-year horizon h = 3                         Five-year horizon h = 5




                         Price informativeness bt,h × σt (log M/A)
         Three-year horizon h = 3                         Five-year horizon h = 5




                                             69
