NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ESTIMATING HABIT FORMATION IN VOTING
Thomas Fujiwara
Kyle C. Meng
Tom Vogl
Working Paper 19721
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19721

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2013

We thank seminar participants at U.C. Davis and University of Toronto for comments; James Campbell,
Wolfram Schlenker, and James Snyder for sharing data; and Sarah Weltman for excellent research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Thomas Fujiwara, Kyle C. Meng, and Tom Vogl. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Estimating Habit Formation in Voting
Thomas Fujiwara, Kyle C. Meng, and Tom Vogl
NBER Working Paper No. 19721
December 2013
JEL No. D72,P16
ABSTRACT
We estimate habit formation in voting—the effect of past on current turnout—by exploiting transitory
voting cost shocks. Using county-level data on U.S. presidential elections from 1952-2012, we find
that precipitation on current and past election days reduces voter turnout. Our estimates imply that
a 1-point decrease in past turnout lowers current turnout by 0.7-0.9 points. Consistent with a dynamic
extension of the Downsian framework, current precipitation has stronger effects following previous
rainy elections. Further analyses suggest that this habit formation operates by reinforcing the intrinsic
satisfaction associated with voting.

Thomas Fujiwara
Department of Economics
Princeton University
357 Wallace Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
fujiwara@princeton.edu
Kyle C. Meng
Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
444 Robertson Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544
kmeng@princeton.edu

Tom Vogl
Department of Economics
Princeton University
363 Wallace Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
tvogl@princeton.edu

1

Introduction

Voter turnout is persistent: a citizen who votes today is more likely to vote in the future (Brody
and Sniderman 1977). Although this pattern is widespread, its mechanisms are poorly understood.
On the one hand, an individual may repeat her decision to turn out or abstain because her benefits
and costs of voting are stable over time. On the other, persistence in turnout may be due to habit
formation, in which the mere act of voting today increases the likelihood of future voting, holding
constant voters’ characteristics. Distinguishing habit formation from turnout persistence in general
is critical for the design of policies aimed at boosting political participation. A large degree of habit
formation could alter the cost-benefit analysis of voter participation programs such as get-out-thevote campaigns, mandatory voting, paid election days, and improved access to polls. Furthermore,
evidence of habit formation as an important source of turnout persistence would inform the relative
impacts such programs have on citizens of different ages.1
Despite these important consequences, efforts to empirically disentangle habit formation from
other channels of persistence have met difficulty, for at least two reasons. First, the task requires
a source of variation in turnout that is uncorrelated with other baseline determinants of the voting
decision. Second, even if such variation exists, it can identify habit formation only if it has no
direct effect on the future determinants of voter turnout. We address this empirical challenge by
exploiting unexpected and transitory shocks to voting costs due to precipitation on election day.
Following previous studies documenting that rain decreases turnout (Gomez et al. 2007; Hansford
and Gomez 2010; Fraga and Hersh 2011), our test for habit formation amounts to asking whether
election-day precipitation decreases voter turnout not only in the current election but also during
future elections. Because precipitation on election day affects future turnout only through its impact
on current voting, we are able to isolate the effect of habit formation. Our main estimates imply that
a 1 percentage point decrease in past turnout lowers current turnout by 0.7-0.9 percentage points.
To ground the analysis conceptually, we present a theoretical framework for habit formation
based on a dynamic extension of the Downsian “calculus of voting” model. In the framework,
precipitation is a transitory shock to the cost of voting, propagated through time because the current
1
Taking this argument even further, Lodge and Birch (2012) propose to “make electoral participation compulsory
for first-time voters only”, since “introducing an obligation for new electors to turn out once would ... go a significant
way toward breaking the habit of non-voting” and “could have a substantial and lasting impact on turnout.”

1

turnout decision affects the utility of voting in future elections. We use the framework to clarify
what is required to identify habit formation, and we discuss why election-day precipitation fits such
requirements, not only because it is orthogonal to voters’ characteristics, but also because it is
unexpected (not leading voters and other agents to adapt their behavior prior to election day) and
transitory (affecting current but not future voting costs).
Matching daily weather data with county-level U.S. presidential election returns from 1952
to 2012, we find that both current and lagged election-day precipitation reduce voter turnout. All
our models include year fixed effects, county fixed effects, and county-specific trends, allaying concerns about unobserved heterogeneity or confounding trends. We provide a series of robustness and
falsification tests in support of our interpretation that the effect of lagged rainfall is due to habit
formation. First, turnout shows no relation to precipitation on the day of the next presidential
election. Second, turnout shows no relation to precipitation two weeks after both the current and
previous election day. These results strengthen our claim that only precipitation that fell precisely
on the previous election day matters. Third, the effects of both current and lagged precipitation are
stronger in rural areas, where the costs of inclement weather are likely greater.
Because our analysis is conducted at the county level, our estimates may incorporate both
the individual effect of habit formation and any additional effects due to social interactions between
elections. Indeed, a comparison of our results with existing estimates of (individual) persistence in
voting behavior suggests a county-level social multiplier (Glaeser and Scheinkman 2002) as large
as 0.4, implying that for every percentage point increase in turnout resulting from individual habit
formation, county average turnout rises 1.4 percentage points. We check the plausibility of this social
multiplier following the approach of Glaeser et al. (2003): by running ordinary least squares (OLS)
regressions of current on past turnout at different levels of aggregation. The OLS results imply
a social multiplier of the same magnitude, which—identification concerns notwithstanding—lends
plausibility to our main results.
We further explore the mechanisms driving habit formation in voting decisions, testing an
additional prediction from our theoretical framework: that past shocks to the cost of voting increase
the sensitivity of voter turnout to current cost shocks. Indeed, our results show that precipitation has
a greater effect on current turnout if the previous election was rainy. Drawing on several additional
analyses, we also argue that our main result is unlikely to be driven by persistent changes in voting
2

costs (including automatic de-registration of non-voters), by updates to voters’ beliefs about their
probability of being pivotal, or by changes in voters’ preferences over election outcomes. As a
consequence, the results suggest that past voting experiences reinforce the expressive utility citizens
gain from the act of voting: that is to say, the consumption benefit of voting.
By documenting habit formation in voting, the paper relates to three strands in the literature.
First, a large number of studies document that individuals who voted in the past are more likely
to vote in the future, suggesting that this association reflects habit formation (e.g., Brody and Sniderman 1977; Plutzer 2002). However, these studies typically do not attempt to disentangle habit
formation from persistence in the costs and benefits of voting.2 Notable exceptions include Gerber et
al. (2003) and Meredith (2009), who exploit plausibly exogenous variation in past voting to identify
the persistent effects of shocks to turnout. Gerber et al. carry out a randomized get-out-the-vote
intervention, while Meredith implements a regression discontinuity design based on age thresholds
for voter eligibility. We discuss these results in the context of our conceptual framework, highlighting that they require additional assumptions—which do not necessarily hold—to be interpreted as
evidence of habit formation.3 Specifically, both treatments may directly affect the determinants
of future turnout even if an individual did not vote in the current election. We explain why the
assumptions are more natural in the case of a transitory and unexpected shock in the cost of voting,
such as precipitation.
Second, the paper speaks to the literature on the formation of political preferences generally,
especially research establishing how actions feed back into tastes and beliefs.4 Also exploiting daily
precipitation, Madestam et al. (2013) and Madestam and Yanagizawa-Drott (2011) use rainfall
on Tax Day and Independence Day to estimate the effect of participating in Tea Party protests
and independence day celebrations on political preferences and behavior.5 Other shocks also have
2

Two papers address this issue using instrumental variables methods that rely on debatable identifying assumptions.
Using a panel of voters, Green and Shachar (2000) estimate models where past turnout affects current turnout, including
a specification where past turnout is predicted using lagged demographic controls and opinions. Denny and Doyle (2009)
estimate similar models using the number of locations a respondent lived while age 16-23 as an instrument for voting
in their first eligible election.
3
Franklin and Hoboldt (2011) show that European voters whose first eligible election is a (low-turnout) European
Parliament election are less likely to vote in subsequent national elections, and Atkinson and Fowler (2013) report that
the occurrence of saint’s day fiestas depress turnout in both current and future Mexican elections. Similarly to Gerber
et al. and Meredith, these papers require additional assumptions to justify a habit formation interepretion.
4
Another relevant series of papers tests for habit formation in consumption (Heien and Durham 1991; Dynan 2000).
5
Other authors have used weather shocks to estimate the effect of race riots on urban development in the U.S.
(Collins and Margo 2007) and of political protests on policy changes in France (Huet-Vaughn 2013).

3

persistent effects; for example, Kaplan and Mukand (2011) show that citizens registered to vote short
after the September 11, 2001 are more likely to be registered as Republicans even half a decade after
the terrorist attacks. In research that speaks to possible psychological mechanisms underlying our
results, Mullainathan and Washington (2009) show that the act of voting for a candidate leads to
improved opinions of that candidate, consistent with cognitive dissonance theory. Many of their
arguments regarding the choice of candidate can apply to our study of the turnout decision.
Third, and perhaps more importantly, our results add empirical evidence to a recent theoretical literature exploring aggregate turnout when past voting experiences influence future voter
participation. Building on an earlier paper by Kanazawa (1998), Bendor et al. (2003) model the
behavior of voters who guide their turnout with rules of thumb over past turnout decisions and
election outcomes. Their model predicts substantial equilibrium turnout, even in large electorates,
thus providing a potential solution to the paradox that citizens vote in large numbers despite having
little chance of individually swinging the election. While our framework differs from their model
(which does not include a “calculus of voting”), our results corroborate some assumptions in their
theory. Given our focus on the development of voting habits, our results lend particular support to
Fowler’s (2006) extension of their theory to incorporate habitual voters who always turn out. These
theories offer a promising direction toward the understanding of mass voter turnout, which social
scientists have so far struggled to explain (see Feddersen 2004), even going so far as to call it “the
paradox that ate rational choice” (Fiorina 1990). Our documentation of habit formation in voting
provides an empirical basis for that theoretical project.

2

Motivation: Age Patterns in Voting

To motivate our interest in habit formation, Figure 1 displays U.S. federal election turnout as a
function of age using data from the Current Population Survey (CPS) Voter Supplement, 1980-2010.
The figure presents two panels, one including all ages from 18 to 80 and one focusing on the first
decade of voter eligibility. Both panels plot age-specific means and local linear regressions with
bandwidths of 2 years. Two aspects of the age patterns are suggestive of habit formation.
In Panel A, which spans the lifecycle, turnout increases monotonically in age through the
late 60s, at which point it gradually declines, perhaps due to the onset of old-age disability. This
4

pattern is striking because the opportunity cost of time—wages, employment, childrearing—follows
a similar age profile. Hence, over most of the lifecycle, turnout increases with age despite a rising
cost of voting.6 The natural implication is that the perceived benefits of voting increase with age
more rapidly than does the opportunity cost of time. Although this rising perceived benefit of voting
has several potential explanations, habit formation may play an important role.
In fact, one can glean some evidence of habit formation from these age profiles alone. To
highlight this evidence, Panel B of Figure 1 zooms in on ages 18-27, separating the scatter plot by
previous presidential election eligibility.7 The scatter plots display clear jumps in turnout from age
19 to age 20 in midterm elections and from age 21 to age 22 in presidential elections, exactly matching
the age pattern of eligibility for one previous presidential election. Similar jumps are evident at the
age cutoffs for eligibility for two previous presidential elections: 24 in midterm elections and 26 in
presidential elections. The four jumps average 2.1 (S.E. = 0.7) percentage points. Since presidential
elections tend to involve high turnout, these discontinuous increases in age-specific turnout suggest
habit formation: past voting experiences increase the likelihood of future voting. The evidence is
similar to that of Meredith (2009), who studies age patterns in voting using more finely-grained age
data from California. However, as we discuss below, although it suggests habit formation, it requires
additional assumptions—which may fail to hold—to be interpreted as the effect of past eligibility
from the effect of past voting per se.

3

Habit Formation in a Downsian Framework

We consider habit formation in a dynamic extension to the “calculus of voting” framework of Downs
(1957), Tullock (1967), and Riker and Ordershook (1968, 1973). Citizen i has probability Pit of
being the pivotal voter in period t’s election: with probability Pit , her preferred candidate wins if
and only if she votes. She obtains benefit Bit if her preferred candidate wins the election in period t,
regardless of whether she voted, and also enjoys direct utility Dit from the act of voting, regardless
of the election outcome. The product Pit Bit is commonly known as the “instrumental utility” of
voting, representing the expected policy payoff from the act of voting. In contrast, Dit is known
6

One possibility is that voters learn how to minimize the costs of voting—faster transportation to the polls, more
practical times to vote—as they age. But this argument is difficult to square with the fact that turnout rises with age
even in late middle age, when individuals have been eligible to vote for more than two decades.
7
All birth cohorts in Figure 1, Panel B, became eligible to vote at age 18 under the 26th Amendment of 1971.

5

as the “expressive utility” of voting, representing intrinsic satisfaction or “warm glow” (Andreoni
1989) from carrying out a civic duty. The citizen incurs cost Cit from voting, also regardless of the
election outcome. All four terms are positive, so she votes if and only if:8

Pit Bit + Dit ≥ Cit

(1)

Denote the voting decision as Vit , which equals 1 if the citizen votes, 0 otherwise.

3.1

Identifying Habit Formation

For our purposes, “habit formation” means that the act of voting today, holding constant voters’
characteristics, affects voting decisions in the future. Our central contribution is to separate “habit
formation” from “persistence” in general, which can be explained by serial correlation in the benefits
and costs of voting. For instance, those with constantly high levels of Bit or Dit turn out often,
while those with low levels of these variables will rarely vote. A regression of current turnout on its
lagged values is thus a poor test of habit formation, since persistent unobserved heterogeneity may
explain any serial correlation in voting.
To identify whether Vi,t−1 affects Vit , we wish to take advantage of a transitory lagged shock
ξi,t−1 to one of the terms of the model. The shock must satisfy:

{Pit , Bit , Dit , Cit } |Vi,t−1 ⊥ξi,t−1

(2)

which states that, conditional on the voting decision in period t − 1, the shock is independent of
Pit , Bit , Dit , and Cit . Assumption (2) is similar in spirit to the exclusion restriction in a standard
instrumental variables setup, implying that ξi,t−1 affects period t voting only through its effect on
period t − 1 voting and not by directly affecting Pit , Bit , Dit , or Cit . Under this assumption, an
association between ξi,t−1 and Vit provides reduced-form evidence of habit formation.
Note that even if ξit is independent of the baseline benefits and costs of voting before the
realization of the shock, it may not satisfy assumption (2). For example, consider a randomized
intervention that encouraged citizens to vote in period t − 1. Randomization guarantees that the
8

Technically, the citizen is indifferent between voting and abstaining when expression (1) holds with equality. To
simplify the exposition, we assume throughout that the citizen votes in this situation.

6

intervention is independent of baseline benefits and costs. But depending on its nature, the intervention may directly influence a citizen’s sense of civic duty or cost of voting for many periods into
the future. In this case, ξit affects Vi,t+1 , but not necessarily solely through Vit .
Two important contributions to the literature on voting persistence fit this characterization.
In the first, Green et al. (2003) report the results of a randomized trial of a get-out-the-vote (direct
mail and canvassing) campaign conducted in New Haven, CT, prior to the general election of 1998.
They find higher turnout in the treatment group in both the 1998 general election and the 1999
local election, which they interpret as the effect of habit formation. However, in our framework,
this interpretation requires the assumption that the campaign had no direct lasting effect on the
benefits or costs of voting. Although plausible, this assumption is far from certain. For example,
if the campaign raised voters’ perceived benefit of voting, and this effect lasted more than a year,
then assumption (2) would be violated. A similar logic applies to Meredith (2009), who uses data
from California to compare the voting behavior of those whose 18th birthday was just before the
2000 general election to those who turned 18 just after. This approach is similar to ours in Figure 1,
Panel B, except that it uses more finely-grained age data on a less generalizable sample. Meredith
estimates that those barely eligible to vote in 2000 are more likely to vote in 2004, which he wishes
to interpret as evidence that past voter participation affects current voter participation. But this
interpretation requires the assumption that experiencing a presidential campaign while eligible to
vote has no persistent direct effects on a citizen’s tastes and costs. Here again, the assumption
is debatable. As Meredith notes, citizens who know they will be eligible to vote may pay more
attention to media coverage and campaign messages than those who know they will not be eligible.
Because those turning 18 around election day are likely to be high school students, they may also
pay more attention to school-based efforts to increase civic engagement. If exposure to these sources
of information has persistent effects on the perceived benefits and costs of voting, then assumption
(2) is violated.
As an alternative approach to identifying habit formation in voting, we exploit a transitory
shock to the cost of voting: election-day precipitation. Four important characteristics of this shock
justify our choice. First, as we show below (and as previous research has established), precipitation
reduces contemporaneous voter turnout. Second, it is outside of the control of voters, candidates,
or any other political agent and is orthogonal to the baseline benefits and costs of voting, before
7

the realization of the shock. Third, it is transient and thus affects contemporaneous voting costs
without having a direct effect on future voting costs. Fourth, net of the year fixed effects, county
fixed effects, and county-specific trends we include in our econometric model (see Section 5 for
details), the remaining variation in precipitation is extremely difficult to predict long in advance.
Given this difficulty, voters and candidates are unlikely to modify their behavior leading up to an
election in anticipation of a precipitation shock. We emphasize this point in light of our discussion
of Meredith’s (2009) results: if a shock to voting costs can be predicted well in advance, voters may
adapt their consumption of political information in the period leading up to the election, which may
lead to a violation of assumption (2).
At the same time, we note a potential exclusion restriction violation in the case of precipitation.
The unpleasantness of voting on a rainy day may influence the affective state that voters associate
with the act of voting. In this case, the positive act of voting on a rainy day (rather than the negative
act of not voting on a rainy day) may reduce future voting propensity, so that an effect of lagged
precipitation does not imply habit formation. However, this hypothesis requires that voters fail to
fully attribute the unpleasantness to bad weather and instead (partially) ascribe it to voting. Given
that most voters have experienced many rainy days in the past, such error is likely to be minimal.

3.2

Modeling Habit Formation

Although the mere identification of habit formation is our central contribution, we also propose and
test a specific mechanism through which it occurs. Specifically, we hypothesize that habit formation
operates primarily through the accumulation of the expressive utility of voting. In a setup similar to
Becker and Murphy’s addictive goods model (1988), we specify Dit as a stock variable that increases
with past acts of voting:
Dit = Di,t−1 + αVi,t−1

(3)

where α > 0 captures the extent to which past acts of voting increase the utility flow from future
acts of voting.9 A possible psychological micro-foundation for equation (3) is cognitive dissonance
theory (Festinger 1957). In our context, this theory implies that a citizen would adapt her tastes
regarding the importance of voting to create a consonance between actions and preferences: the act
9

A richer model could also incorporate the effects of past voting on Pit , Bit , and Cit , leading to other channels
through which habit formation may occur. In Section 8, we present evidence supporting our focus on Dit .

8

of voting would cause her to think that voting is a valuable contribution and an important duty.10 A
citizen enters the electorate with initial value Di0 , drawn from a population distribution; later values
of Dit reflect her stock of civic duty or attachment to the democratic process, which is endogenous
to past acts of voting. If changes in Pit , Bit , and Cit from t − 1 to t are unrelated to the voting
decision in t − 1, then this accumulation in Dit implies that the act of voting in period t − 1 increases
the likelihood of voting in period t.
To draw attention to the accumulation framework’s implications for our empirical work, we
focus on its predictions for voter behavior following cost shocks. These predictions require a slightly
h

i

more precise setup. To this end, let ξit be a cost shock on 0, ξ , and let C̃it be the cost of voting
prior to the cost shock, so that Cit = C̃it + ξit . Combining terms, let Ũit = Pit Bit + Dit − C̃it be the
baseline utility from voting, before the realization of the cost shock. Assume that ξit is independent
of Ũit and that changes in Pit , Bit , and Cit do not depend on Vis for s < t. Within this setup, we
highlight three testable predictions.
The first prediction—which follows directly from our assumption of Dit depending on past
turnout—is that current and past cost shocks negatively affect turnout. To see this, note that a
citizen votes if and only if Ũit ≥ ξit . Some citizens are infra-marginal; those with Ũit < 0 will
never vote in period t or in any period thereafter, while those with Ũit ≥ ξ are sure to vote in
period t and for all subsequent periods. We refer to these citizens as never-voters and alwaysh

voters, respectively. But so long as marginal citizens exist—i.e., so long as Ũit ∈ 0, ξ



for some

citizens—then Pr [Vit = 1|ξit , ξi,t−1 ] decreases in ξit . Furthermore, because voting in period t − 1
increases Dit , Pr [Vit = 1|ξit , ξi,t−1 ] also decreases in ξi,t−1 . As a result, the framework implies that
both current and lagged precipitation decrease voter turnout.
The framework also gives rise to a second prediction, involving the interaction of current and
lagged cost shocks: a higher draw of ξi,t−1 increases the sensitivity of Pr [Vit = 1|ξit , ξi,t−1 ] to ξit . To
h



establish this result, we focus on citizens who are marginal in period t − 1, with Ũi,t−1 ∈ 0, ξ . For
a citizen of this type, a sufficiently large cost shock ξi,t−1 keeps her from voting in period t − 1, so
that in the following period, Ũit is smaller than it would have been following a rain-free election.
As a result, the minimum cost shock required to keep the citizen from voting in period t is smaller
10

Mullainathan and Washington (2009) also study the role of cognitive dissonance in voting, but they focus on the
choice of candidate, instead of the turnout choice.

9

than it would have been following a rain-free election. In other words, large shocks prevent marginal
individuals from becoming less marginal in the next election. So the framework predicts that larger
lagged precipitation shocks make turnout more sensitive to current precipitation shocks.
A third prediction, which matches Figure 1 but is not relevant to our main empirical work
below, is that turnout rises with age if the distributions of Pit , Bit , and C̃it are stationary. Citizens
h



who are marginal in period 0—i.e., those with Ũi0 ∈ 0, ξ —will gradually become always-voters
in subsequent periods, while those who are initially infra-marginal will remain infra-marginal in all
periods. Hence, the framework provides one explanation for why the young vote less than the old.
Even so, it is unlikely to be the sole explanation. In Figure 1, turnout rises with age even across ages
that do not differ in exposure to federal elections: for instance, 18 and 19 year-olds. 19 year-olds are
more likely to vote than 18 year-olds even though citizens of both ages have been exposed to exactly
one federal election. While these youths may differ in exposure to local elections, other factors may
also play a role in their different turnout rates.
Throughout this discussion, we have assumed that Dit does not depreciate over time. One can
incorporate depreciation by rewriting equation (3) as Dit = (1 − δ) Di,t−1 + αVi,t−1 , where δ ∈ (0, 1)
is the depreciation rate. This modification does not change the framework’s main prediction: that
turnout decreases in both current and past cost shocks. But it does complicate the second and third
predictions above, regarding the interaction of current and past cost shocks and the age profile of
turnout. Both these predictions hold, however, if the depreciation rate δ is sufficiently small relative
to the habit formation coefficient α.

4

Data

Implementation of our empirical strategy requires consideration of spatial scales when combining
weather and voting turnout data. Mid-latitude precipitation systems, as observed over the United
States, can have characteristic lengths anywhere between 2 and 1,000 km. Thus, the spatial shapes
of precipitation systems do not fit naturally onto political boundaries. This insight yields three
particular requirements for our data. First, the turnout data must be at the lowest political unit
available, to reduce measurement error in the spatially-averaged precipitation variable. Second, the
pixel resolution of the raw precipitation data must be fine enough to guarantee that most political
10

units cover at least one pixel. Finally, because daily precipitation may be spatially correlated, the
precipitation data must have the broadest geographical coverage, to guarantee a sufficient number
of independent observations for a given day.
For politics data, we use county-level presidential election returns for the years 1952-2012 to
generate two variables of interest: voter turnout, which we define as the ratio of votes to eligible
voters, and the Republican vote share.11 For weather, we acquire data with the highest spatial
and temporal resolution available for the continental United States. Daily precipitation data for
the continental United States for days before, on, and after election day from 1948-2012 come from
the NOAA Climate Prediction Center’s Unified Gauge-Based Analysis of Precipitation. This source
provides pixel-level data at a 0.25 degree by 0.25 degree (or roughly 17 mile by 17 mile) resolution,
which we aggregate to the county level using area weights.12 In addition to data on politics and
weather, we also draw on several county demographic and socio-economic covariates from the U.S.
Census: racial composition, age structure, median income, and population density.13
Table 1 provides means, standard deviations, and several quantiles for the variables in our
analysis. Voter turnout averages at 58 percent, with a fairly symmetric distribution ranging from a
10th percentile of 42 to a 90th percentile of 76. The Republican vote share, too, is fairly symmetrically
distributed around a mean of 55. In contrast, the precipitation distribution is right-skewed, with
a median of 0, a mean of 2.5 millimeters, and a 90th percentile of 7.1 millimeters.14 Elections are
therefore usually free of precipitation, and when precipitation does occur, it is typically minor.

5

Empirical Strategy

In our main regression specification, we estimate turnout as a function of current and lagged electionday precipitation, a year fixed effect, a county fixed effect, and a county-specific linear time trend.
11

We obtained county-level vote totals for 1948-2000 from James Snyder, which we supplemented for years 2004-2012
using David Leip’s Atlas of U.S. Presidential Elections. We obtained estimates of the number of eligible voters from
Genzkow et al. (2011) for the years 1952-2004, which we supplemented with our own estimates using similar methods
(based on interpolated data from the U.S. Decennial Census) for the years 2008 and 2012. Because the denominator of
the turnout rate is estimated with error, estimated turnout rises above 100 in 0.24% of the observations. We include
these observations in the reported analyses, but the results are unchanged if we omit them or top-code turnout at 100.
12
We validated our constructed weather data against historic weather station data from Weather Underground.
Results are similar if we use deviations from long-term norms rather than levels.
13
We obtained these covariates from Haines (2010) and the website http://quickfacts.census.gov/.
14
The American Meteorological Society (http://glossary.ametsoc.or/wiki/rain) defines rain as “light” when it falls
at a rate of 2.5 millimeters per hour or less and “heavy” when it falls at a rate of more than 7.6 millimeters per hour.

11

For county c in election year t:

turnoutct = β0 precipct + β1 precipc,t−1 + τt + ηc + λc t + εct

(4)

Note that t − 1 corresponds to the previous election, four years earlier. To assess the robustness
of this specification, we perform three checks. First, we gauge the sensitivity of the coefficients on
election-day precipitation to the inclusion of the vector of covariates listed in the bottom panel of
Table 1, and to the inclusion of higher-order county-specific trends. Second, we run placebo tests by
including measures of precipitation two weeks after election day, as well as precipitation on future
election days. Third, we verify the stability of the results to outliers by using subsamples that omit
all observations from a single state or a single year.
In all analyses, we cluster standard errors at the state level, thus allowing for arbitrary error
covariance across counties in a state over any period of time.15 A combination of two factors make
this wide cluster definition appropriate. First, precipitation is spatially correlated. Second, both
the design of the electoral college and the bundling of presidential and state-level elections induce
correlated turnout incentives across counties within a state. To document these facts, we regress
both turnout and precipitation on a year fixed effect, a county fixed effect, and a county-specific
trend, and we map the residuals for an example year, 2004, in Figure 2. Precipitation residuals are
clustered over large areas, while turnout residuals tend to cluster within state borders. Maps for
other years, displayed in in Appendix Figure 1, show similar patterns.
This reduced-form regression is instructive, but our focus on habit formation leads to interest
in identifying an auto-regressive model:

turnoutct = ρturnoutc,t−1 + νct

(5)

As we discussed in Section 3.1, OLS regression does not identify this model. However, if we redefine
the error term as νct ≡ τt + ηc + ci t + εct (as in equation (4)), then we can use estimates of β0 and
β1 to compute an estimate of the causal parameter ρ: ρ̂ =

β̂1
β̂0

converges in probability to ρ.16 This

15
Our conclusions remain unchanged when we use Conley’s (1999) non-parametric estimator for standard errors
allowing for arbitrary spatial dependence in a 1500 km radius.
16
One concern with this approach is that inter-county migration may bias downward β̂1 and ρ̂. Molloy et al. (2011)
report 5-year cross-county migration rates of almost 20 percent, although over half of these flows are within-state.

12

ratio can be seen as an instrumental variables (IV) estimator for ρ, in which lagged precipitation
serves as an instrument for lagged turnout. We estimate its variance using the delta method.
Two aspects of this estimator merit further discussion. First, as with other IV estimators, it
requires the monotonicity assumption that turnout weakly decreases in precipitation for all units
in our sample. If our unit of observation were the individual, this assumption might not hold. For
individuals who enjoy outdoor leisure activities or work in industries like construction or tourism,
the time cost of voting may fall on rainy days. Alternatively, individuals who particularly dislike
congestion at the polls might vote only in rainy elections, which they anticipate will have low turnout.
However, we study counties, not people, and the monotonicity assumption is more likely to hold at
the county level. Second, our estimator does not necessarily identify the degree of habit formation
at the individual level. In the presence of social interaction effects—for example if people speak to
their neighbors about a positive voting experience—the aggregate ρ for the county may be larger
than the individual-level habit formation parameter. We return to this issue when we discuss the
magnitudes of our results in Section 7.
Building on the main regression specification, we also estimate two models with interactions.
First, guided by the theory, we fit a model with the interaction of current and lagged precipitation:

turnoutct = β0 precipct + β1 precipc,t−1 + γprecipct · precipc,t−1 + τt + ηc + λc t + εct

(6)

The theoretical framework predicts that γ should be negative; lagged precipitation shocks increase
the sensitivity of turnout to contemporaneous precipitation shocks. Second, we interact precipitation
with county demographic and socio-economic characteristics, Xct :
0 θ
turnoutct = β0 precipct + β1 precipc,t−1 + Xct

(7)

0 γ + precip
0
+precipct Xct
0
c,t−1 Xct γ1 + τt + ηc + λc t + εct

The theory does not have specific predictions for these interactions, but they are instructive for
assessing which citizens respond to precipitation and which citizens are habit forming.
Because counties in the same state share weather patterns, we expect little bias from migration. Indeed, when we run
our regressions at the state level instead of the county level, our conclusions do not change.

13

6

Results

This section presents our main findings. We first demonstrate that precipitation on election day
adversely affects contemporaneous voter turnout. This result is robust to a number of modeling
choices and placebo tests. Next, we show that precipitation on election day has a strong persistent
effect on turnout in subsequent presidential elections, and we confirm the framework’s prediction
that contemporaneous and lagged precipitation interact. To conclude the section, we explore how the
effects of contemporaneous and lagged precipitation vary across several demographic characteristics.

6.1

Effect of Contemporaneous Precipitation on Turnout

For the equivalent of a “first stage” estimate, Table 2 focuses on the contemporaneous effect of
election-day precipitation on voter turnout. In Column (1), we estimate equation (4) with no lags
and find a statistically significant coefficient implying that a 1 millimeter increase in precipitation
decreases voter turnout by 0.07 percentage points. Column (2) shows that the linear model used
in Column (1) is reasonable by estimating a semi-parametric model using dummy variables for
increasing bins of precipitation. With just one exception, each successive increase in precipitation is
associated with a further decrease in turnout. Relative to the omitted category of 0 millimeters, an
intense election-day storm with rainfall totaling more than 20 millimeters causes turnout to fall by
2 percentage points.
As a falsification exercise, we test whether precipitation before and after election day affected
election turnout. In Column (3), we include linear terms for the precipitation 7 and 14 days before
and after election day. Among these four terms, precipitation 14 days after election day provides the
cleanest placebo test, for two reasons. First, precipitation before election day can in theory affect
turnout; afterward, it cannot. Second, counties with large areas may experience the same precipitation system within a one week period as precipitation migrates over the county. This lag structure
may induce significant estimates for placebo tests close to election day, given the nonlinearity of
precipitation systems. Despite this feature of the data, all four placebo coefficients are substantially smaller and less significant than the main effect. Three are statistically insignificant, while
precipitation one week after election day is marginally significant at the 8 percent level.17 Overall,
17

As mentioned above, the single significant placebo coefficient may be explained by the different spatial scales of
precipitation systems and counties. In unreported analyses, we drop all counties with areas above 1000 sq. km. and

14

the evidence in Table 1 points to a robust effect of election-day precipitation on contemporaneous
turnout. For conciseness (and the reasons we described above), we focus on the 14-days-after placebo
check in subsequent analyses.

6.2

Effect of Lagged Precipitation on Turnout

Table 3 shows that the turnout effects of precipitation persist to future elections. Column (1)
estimates equation (4), with both contemporaneous and lagged precipitation terms. Both coefficients
are statistically significant at the 1% level, with turnout falling 0.08 and 0.07 percentage points per
millimeter of contemporaneous and lagged precipitation, respectively. This finding changes little
with the addition of county-level covariates in column (2).18 In both columns, the implied habit
formation parameter ρ is roughly 0.9, implying that a 1 percentage point rise in period t − 1 turnout
increases period t turnout by 0.9 percentage points. This estimate of habit formation in voter turnout
is substantially larger than existing estimates in the literature, a matter we discuss in Section 7.
The implied habit formation coefficient changes similarly little in columns (3)-(6), which include various combinations of placebos, leads, and lags. As a placebo check, columns (3) and (4)
add contemporaneous and lagged precipitation two weeks after election day to columns (1) and
(2), respectively. Neither placebo is significantly associated with turnout, and the coefficients on
election-day precipitation are little changed. In columns (5) and (6), we add the lead and second lag
of election-day precipitation. The lead serves as another falsification exercise: future election-day
precipitation does not affect current turnout. Also of interest is the coefficient on twice-lagged precipitation, which is significantly negative, as the theoretical framework would predict. The magnitudes
of the coefficients are unsteady, but the implied estimate of ρ—which we calculate by averaging the
ratio of the t coefficient to the t − 1 coefficient and the ratio of the t − 1 coefficient to the t − 2
coefficient—falls only slightly, to 0.8.19 Notes also that column (6) shows small and insignificant
coefficients on all leads and lags of precipitation two weeks after election day.
We conduct two further robustness checks for these main results. First, Appendix Table 1
find no significant placebo coefficients for that subsample.
18
Our estimates are also unaffected by controlling for temperature (using data from Schlenker and Roberts 2009).
19
Following the discussion in Section 5, both ratios are consistent estimators for ρ. If turnout were really an
autoregressive process of order 1 (AR-1), we could also use a third estimator: the square root of the ratio of the t
coefficient to the t − 2 coefficient. However, equation (3) implies that voting in period t − 2 affects the probability of
voting in period t even if an individual does not vote in period t, so the process is not AR-1.

15

reports estimates from specifications with county-specific trends of different orders. With quadratic
or cubic trends, the results are of a similar magnitude and significance level, suggesting that linear
trends are sufficiently flexible. The trends are important, however; when we omit them altogether,
the results become unstable. Second, Appendix Figure 2 checks that no single state or year is
influential. In 49 estimations that leave out a single state (48 continental states plus Washington,
DC) and 16 estimations that leave out a single year, the point estimates and significance levels of
β0 , β1 , and ρ vary little. We conclude that the results are not driven by outliers.
In the last two columns of Table 3, we verify the theoretical framework’s prediction that a past
precipitation shock increases the sensitivity of turnout to a contemporaneous precipitation shock.
In estimates of equation (6) in columns (7) and (8), the coefficient on the interaction of current and
lagged precipitation is significantly negative. Again, when column (8) uses precipitation two weeks
after election day as a placebo, neither the main effects nor the interaction effect are significant. In
magnitude, the interaction effect is 12 percent of the main effect of contemporaneous precipitation.
To illustrate, consider the effects of an intense storm with rainfall totaling 1 inch (roughly the 98th
percentile of the precipitation distribution). If the previous election was rain-free, then the storm
reduces turnout by 1.4 percentage points. If the previous election had a similar storm, then the
current storm reduces turnout by 1.6 percentage points.

6.3

Heterogeneity

Who responds to current and lagged precipitation? Our aggregated data do not allow a detailed
exploration of this question, but the demographic and socio-economic covariates from the U.S. Census
can help shed some light. Table 4 reports estimates of equation (7), which interacts these covariates
with contemporaneous and lagged precipitation.20 For comparison, column (1) repeats the main
estimate of equation (4) from Table 3 (column 1).
Table 4’s most noteworthy result, shown in column (5), is that the effects of lagged and
contemporaneous precipitation are weaker in counties with high population density. The main
effects and interactions imply that at the 10th percentile of population density, a millimeter of current
or lagged precipitation reduces turnout by 0.13 percentage points, while at the 90th percentile of
20
We enter each pair of interactions into a separate regression because the results become noisy and uninformative
when we include all of them in the same regression. We believe this problem arises because the interpolation of all the
covariates between census years induces correlated measurement errors.

16

population density, a millimeter of current or lagged precipitation reduces turnout by 0.04 to 0.06
percentage points. This finding matches the conventional wisdom that inclement weather imposes
greater costs on rural voters than on their urban counterparts, due to their longer distances from
the polls and their access to fewer modes of transportation.
Also interesting in Table 4 is the finding that the interactions with county’s over-65 population
share are of opposite sign. Although the coefficients on these interactions are not individually
significant, the difference between them is significant at the 6 percent level. Because the interaction
with contemporaneous precipitation has a positive coefficient and that with lagged precipitation
has a negative coefficient, we can infer that counties with more sizable elderly populations are less
sensitive to contemporaneous precipitation and more sensitive to lagged precipitation. Recalling
our theoretical framework, one interpretation is that the elderly are predominantly always-voters
or never-voters, but that the few who are marginal are especially sensitive to precipitation shocks.
Consequently, older citizens as a group appear to be especially habit-forming.

7

Assessing Magnitudes

This section discusses the magnitude of our results in the context of prevailing studies in the literature. In interpreting the variation across studies, we pay particular attention to the possible role of
spillovers due to social interactions.

7.1

Comparison with Previous Research

We estimate a habit formation parameter ρ between 0.7 and 0.9. By comparison, Gerber et al.
(2003) place their persistence parameter at 0.5 in their get-out-the-vote experiment, while Meredith
(2009) estimates persistence to be 0.075 using a regression discontinuity design based on voting
age restrictions. In Section 3.1, we described why our strategy to identify habit formation differs
from previous efforts to capture general persistence in voting, but the biases we discussed there are
unlikely to explain why our estimates exceed the others by so much. Here, we propose other possible
explanations for the different magnitudes of our estimates.
Meredith’s estimate is an order of magnitude smaller than both Gerber et al.’s and ours,
but his study design identifies a different estimand that is likely to be small. In both Gerber
17

et al.’s context and our own, always-voters exist, such that the estimation strategies identify the
local average treatment effect for marginal voters (the compliers). In contrast, Meredith strategy
does not allow for always-voters; individuals just short of their 18th birthdays cannot vote under
any circumstance. As a result, Meredith effectively recovers a treatment-on-the-treated persistence
parameter that averages the effect of past on present voting for voters who, were they eligible to
vote, would be both marginal and infra-marginal. The effect is zero for infra-marginal voters, which
justifies Meredith’s small (though statistically significant) estimate.
The fact that our estimate exceeds that of Gerber et al. presents a greater puzzle. We
discuss four possible explanations. First, as discussed in the next subsection, our empirical strategy
may pick up interpersonal spillovers due to social interactions following election day; Gerber et al.’s
design does not. Second, Gerber et al. ran their get-out-the-vote campaign just before a low-stakes
midterm election and collected follow-up data on a local election one year later.21 The effect of
voting in a low-stakes midterm election on voting in a subsequent local election may be smaller than
the persistent effects of turnout for presidential elections . Third, the sub-populations induced to
vote may differ between the two studies. Gerber et al.’s estimate applies to residents of New Haven
whereas our study covers the entire country.22 Finally, Gerber et al. lost 14 percent of their sample
to follow-up. Although attrition was evenly distributed across control and treatment groups, the
attriters in the treatment group may have differed in unobservable ways from the attriters in the
control group, which would undermine the study design.

7.2

Spillovers and Social Interactions

Individuals may induce others to vote in the future by sharing past voting experiences (Nickerson
2008; Gerber et al. 2008; Bond et al. 2012; DellaVigna et al. 2013). Such social interactions can
produce spillovers, implying that our county-level estimate of habit formation captures the combined
effects of individual-level habit formation and social interactions.
Formally, let b denote the effect of a unit of precipitation on an individual’s probability of
turnout, and let r be the individual effect of past on current turnout. These parameters are potentially distinct from the corresponding county-level parameters in Section 3, β0 and ρ. Our objective
21
In the 1998 midterm election, both federal races that involved New Haven (the site of Gerber et al.’s study) were
decided by margins of more than 30 points.
22
Also note that the Gerber et al. experiment is specific to 1998-1999, while we study 1952-2012.

18

is to understand the mapping between r and ρ. In the absence of social interactions, these parameters are the same. However, in the presence of (positive) social interactions, part of the effect of
past precipitation on turnout operates through social interactions, such that ρ exceeds r (Case and
Katz 1991; Glaeser and Scheinkman 2002). Following Glaeser and Scheinkman’s (2002) approach,
we define a county-level social interactions parameter θ ∈ [0, 1) as follows: an individual’s likelihood of voting increases by θ percentage points for every 1 percentage point increase in the average
turnout of other residents of her county. We take θ to capture social interactions occurring after
the current election day and before the next, which allows us to write the effects of current and
lagged precipitation as β0 = b and β1 =
parameter ρ =

r 23
1−θ .

br
1−θ ,

respectively, making the county-level habit formation

Hence, the strength of social interactions between election days determines

the relationship between the individual- and county-level habit formation parameters.24
Unfortunately, little evidence exists on the size of θ. Even if we had individual-level data, we
could not distinguish r from ρ using our estimation strategy because precipitation varies at a spatially
aggregate level and thus produces estimates that include the effects of social interactions. However,
if we take the individual-level persistence parameter from Gerber et al. (2003) as a benchmark for
individual habit formation, we can recover a value for θ. Although we have already noted that their
parameter may not map cleanly onto r, it is nonetheless an average of individual-level persistence
parameters for a group of marginal voters, making it a useful benchmark. Combined with our
baseline estimate of ρ at 0.89, their estimate of r at 0.51 implies θ = 0.43.
Is this value for θ reasonable? As a way to gauge its plausibility, we compare it with the social
interactions parameter implied by individual and county-level associations of past and current voting,
which we estimate in Table 5. In columns (1)-(3), we use self-reported individual turnout from the
1972-1984 CPS to estimate an autoregressive panel model of current on past presidential election
turnout, with varying demographic, geographic, and temporal controls. Across various specifications,
we find an individual level persistence parameter of approximately 0.5. Combined with our main
county-level habit formation estimate of 0.89, this estimate implies θ = 0.44. However, autoregressive
23
These derivations use the fact that there is a large number of voters in each county (Glaeser and Scheinkman
2002). As a refinement, we could also assume that social interactions have short- and long-run components, θS and
θL , with the former term capturing interactions during the current election day (hence creating a multiplier for current
precipitation). The comparison between county and individual level effects would thus depend on the ratio of these
parameters. Since this refinement is not essential ot our dicussion, we omit it to simplify notation.
24
Glaeser et al. (2003) study the conditions under which the ratio between aggregate and individual estimates pins
down the social multiplier parameter.

19

estimates of ρ may be biased for reasons we already noted. In columns (4)-(7) of Table 5, we
estimate a similar autoregressive panel model of county-level presidential election turnout, leading
to a persistence parameter of roughly 0.8. If the individual and county-level estimates shown in
Table 5 are biased by the same proportion, then the ratio between the individual and county-level
coefficients provides an unbiased estimate of θ. Indeed, the coefficients presented in Table 5 imply
θ = 0.38. Remarkably, all these exercises yield similar estimates for θ, around 0.4.

8

Alternative Explanations for Habit Formation in Voting

Although our habit formation framework provides a compelling explanation for the dependence of
current on past turnout through an accumulation in expressive utility, the Downsian model suggests
other possible mechanisms as well. Recall from equation (1) that a citizen i votes if and only
if Pit Bit + Dit ≥ Cit . We have hypothesized that only Dit depends on past voting experiences.
Conceivably, any of the framework’s other three terms could also depend on past voting experiences.
In this section, we explore this possibility for each additional term of the framework but conclude
that our habit formation framework best matches the data. We begin with Pit and then consider
Bit and Cit in turn. The section concludes by discussing why partisan politics (a factor outside the
Downsian model) is unlikely to play a major role.

8.1

Political Efficacy (P )

In one theory with relevance for our results, past voting experiences shape citizens’ sense of external
political efficacy (Campbell et al. 1954): the degree to which they believe their actions to affect
political outcomes. A citizen with limited understanding of the electoral system may learn over time
about her probability of being pivotal. Suppose she takes that probability to be time-invariant, so
that Pit represents her latest estimate of the probability, based on her experiences with the electoral
system. Under Bayesian updating, Pit increases after voting for the winner or not voting while
supporting the loser, and it decreases after voting for the loser or not voting while supporting the
winner. Consistent with this this logic, Kanazawa (1998) and Bendor et al. (2003) posit reducedform behavioral models in which voting for the winner increases future turnout, while voting for the
loser decreases future turnout.
20

Even without further analyses, existing evidence suggests that this theory falls short of explaining our results. First, on a conceptual note, the theory is inconsistent with rational expectations
and most forms of forward-looking behavior. Under such assumptions, voters would use all available information about the probability of being pivotal, to which their past voting experiences are
not relevant. Second, an explanation based on political efficacy needs to confront the fact that the
objective value of Pit is virtually zero. Either very small variations in this probability have large
consequences, or voters have unrealistic priors for their pivotalness. Third, although the theory may
predict more positive updating than negative updating—by design, more voters support the winner
than the loser—narrowly-decided elections should result in little habit formation on average because
voters who supported the winner are of roughly the same number as voters who supported the loser.
Contrary to this prediction, our estimates of ρ are large even though most presidential elections
during our sample period were decided by margins of less than 10 points.25
We can also test this theory’s divergent predictions for voting for the winner and voting for
the loser. To do so, Table 5 interacts contemporaneous and lagged precipitation with measures of
whether a county is politically aligned with the winner or loser of the previous election. To avoid
issues of endogeneity, we use a county’s Republican vote share two elections ago to ascertain its
partisan leaning. We define two new terms for Table 5. A county is “partisan” if its Republican vote
share in t − 2 was in the top or bottom 10 percent of the vote share distribution, and a county is
“aligned” if it is both “partisan” and politically aligned with the winner in t − 1. A dry day increases
the likelihood of voting for the winner in aligned counties and increases the likelihood of voting for
the loser in counties that are partisan but not aligned. Therefore, in the following model for turnout
in county c at time t:
turnoutct = β0 precipct + β1 precipc,t−1 + θp partisanc,t−2 + θa alignedc,t−1
+γ0p (partisanc,t−2 × precipct ) + γ1p (partisanc,t−2 × precipc,t−1 )
+γ0a (alignedc,t−1 × precipct ) + γ1a (alignedc,t−1 × precipc,t−1 )

(8)

+γ0r (Rwinnert−1 × precipct ) + γ1r (Rwinnert−1 × precipc,t−1 )
+τt + ηc + λc t + εct
25
In unreported results, the coefficient on lagged rainfall did not vary with the national margin of victory in the
previous election.

21

we expect non-aligned counties to have less pronounced effects of lagged precipitation than nonpartisan counties (γ1p > 0); aligned counties to have more pronounced effects of lagged precipitation
than non-aligned counties (γ1a < 0); and aligned counties to have less-pronounced effects of lagged
precipitation than non-partisan counties (γ1a +γ1p < 0). In equation (8), we also control for whether a
Republican won the previous election (Rwinnert−1 ) because alignedc,t−1 is essentially an interaction
between partisanc,t−2 and Rwinnert−1 .
Estimates of equation (8), shown in column (1) of Table 5, fail to fully confirm these predictions. Although counties aligned with the winner of the last election exhibit the strongest effects of
lagged precipitation (both γ1a and γ1a + γ1p are negative), we find no evidence that counties aligned
with the loser are different from non-partisan counties (γ1p is not significantly different from zero). In
other words, widespread voting for the winner raises future county turnout, but widespread voting
for the loser does not decrease it. While this finding may speak to the psychology of habit formation,
it does not support a model in which citizens learn about their probability of being pivotal.
A potential concern with regression specification (8) is that the inclusion of partisanc,t−2
violates the strict exogeneity assumption required for fixed effects estimation, due to a relationship
between turnout and vote shares.26 To address these concerns, column (3) uses an alternative
measure of partisanc,t−2 , based on the Republican vote share predicted by a county’s demographic
and socio-economic characteristics. Specifically, we run a regression of the Republican vote share
on the white population share, the over-65 population share, log median household income, log
population density, an indicator for location in the South, and—because of the South’s unique
politics over the second half of the twentieth century—interactions of the South indicator with all
other covariates.27 Using the predicted values from this regression, we define a county as partisan if
its predicted vote share is in the top or bottom 10 percent of the predicted vote share distribution.
Because this measure of partisanship is a generated regressor, standard errors are block-bootstrapped
at the state level. The magnitudes of the coefficients change somewhat, but the conclusion remains
unchanged: aligned counties exhibit a high degree of habit formation, but dis-aligned counties are
not significantly different from non-partisan counties.
26

After one controls for year fixed effects, county fixed effects, and county-specific trends, the data show no relationship between turnout and vote shares. We return to this issue below.
27
The results are not substantively different in specifications that omit the interactions of the South indicator with
other covariates.

22

To explore the robustness of the vote-for-the-winner effect, columns (2) and (4) control more
flexibly for underlying partisanship. Instead of including the “partisan” term and its interactions,
these models distinguish between heavily Republican and heavily Democratic areas. This alternative
specification cannot test for average differences between partisan and non-partisan counties, but it
can estimate the excess sensitivity of aligned counties relative to dis-aligned counties (equivalent to
γ1a in equation(8)). The coefficient on the interaction of “aligned” with lagged precipitation remains
significantly negative.
Notably, the asymmetry of our findings—aligned counties exhibit a higher degree of habit
formation, but dis-aligned counties do not significantly differ from non-partisan counties—lends
additional support to the importance of social interactions. Without social interactions, even if
habit formation were asymmetric at the individual level—so that voting for the winner raised future
voting propensity, but voting for the loser had no effect—county-level estimation would still exhibit
symmetry. Specifically, dis-aligned counties contain fewer voters who support the winner than nonpartisan counties, which in turn contain fewer such voters than aligned counties. As a result,
one would still expect to find greater habit formation in non-partisan counties than in dis-aligned
counties. But the data do not confirm this prediction. One potential explanation is that spillovers
from social interactions are especially pronounced in areas with fervent political beliefs following a
victorious election. More generally, the county-level asymmetry likely reflects some form of social
interactions in voting decisions.

8.2

Instrumental Utility (B)

A separate explanation for our results involves the strength of citizens’ political preferences. If
the act of voting causes an individual i to care more about political outcomes or to develop more
polarized political preferences, then past voting could affect current voting through Bit , the benefit
to the individual if her preferred candidate wins. An effect of past voting on Bit is consistent with
Mullainathan and Washington’s (2009) finding that, due to cognitive dissonance in the choice of
candidates, the act of voting causes a citizen to further improve her opinion of her chosen candidate.
However, if citizens have objective beliefs about the probability of being pivotal, then any effect on
Bit will likely have limited consequences for the voting decision because it will be multiplied by a
number approaching zero.
23

Additionally, we can leverage the fact that Bit is multiplied by Pit to test whether accumulation
in Bit can explain our results. To this end, we extend our framework to:

Pit (Bi,t−1 + αB Vt ) + (Di,t−1 + αD Vt ) ≥ Cit

(9)

where we now allow separate accumulation terms in Bit and Dit , as captured by αB and αD .
While the distinction between Bt and Dt is clear in our framework, empirically separating the two
mechanisms may be difficult. The act of voting may lead a citizen to change her tastes regarding
political participation; the distinction is whether these tastes take the form of instrumental value
(caring about the outcome) or expressive value (caring about voting). If Bit accumulates (αB >
0), then evidence of habit formation will be stronger when Pit is high. Our test thus introduces
interactions between precipitation and state-level voter pivotalness, in the following specification:
turnoutct = β0 precipct + β1 precipc,t−1 + θpivotalct

(10)

+γ0 (pivotalct × precipct ) + γ1 (pivotalct × precipc,t−1 ) + τt + ηc + λc t + εct
The static Downsian framework predicts θ > 0 and γ0 > 0: a higher likelihood of being pivotal
increases turnout and offsets the negative effects of precipitation on election day. If the act of voting
in the previous period increases Bit , we should also observe γ1 < 0. To construct a measure for
pivotalct , we use the forecasting model developed by Campbell (1992) and extended in Campell et
al. (2006) to obtain an ex ante (before precipitation) predicted state-level Democratic vote share
for elections from 1952-2004. The predicted Democratic vote share and its forecast uncertainty
determine the probability that a randomly drawn voter will hold the tie-breaking vote for a given
state in a given election year.28
Table 6, which estimates equation (10), shows no evidence of a role for the probability of being
pivotal. To ensure sample selection is not affecting our results, column (1) re-estimates our main
specification for the sample of election days from 1952-2004 for which we have a measure of state-level
pivotalness. The implied ρ of 0.72 is not statistically distinct from our main sample result presented
in Table 3. The rest of the table tests for the role of pivotalness. Column (2) estimates equation
We use Campbell et al.’s (2006) model to predict the Democratic vote share, dˆst for state sand election year t.
The probability of a randomly drawn voter breaking a state-level tie is (1/Nst )φ dˆst − 0.5/σ̂st , where φ (·) is the
standard normal density function, σ̂st is the standard deviation of dˆst , and Nst is the number of registered voters. Our
conclusions do not change if we use predicted closeness rather than predicted pivotalness.
28

24

(10) using a continuous measure of state-level pivotalness, and none of the estimated parameters
of interest are statistically significant.29 At the same time, the effects of uninteracted current and
lagged precipitation, which now capture the effects of habit formation when Pit = 0 and can be due
solely to accumulations in Dit , remain statistically significant. The implied ρ from accumulations in
Dit alone is 0.65, a number within the uncertainty of our main result in column (1) of Table 3. In
column (3), we explore an alternative specification by constructing a indicator for observations with
the pivotal probabilities exceeding the sample median. We again find no evidence of accumulation
in in Bit . Altogether, Table 6 suggests that habit formation is likely operate through accumulation
in the expressive and not instrumental value of voting.

8.3

Voting Costs (C)

The final term of the Downsian framework, Cit , may also play a role: past experience with voting
may lower the future cost of voting. This mechanism has two potential sources, one personal and
one institutional. As an example of personal costs, voters must occasionally incur informational
“fixed costs:” learning the location of the polling station and the best way to get there. They may
also be uncertain of how much time the act of voting takes; if they are risk averse, they will become
more likely to vote once they learn the true opportunity cost of voting. While this hypothesis is
plausible, it is unlikely to be the only mechanism driving our results. First, if informational fixed
costs matter, one would expect the lagged effect of rainfall to be smaller in counties with older
populations (whose voters have more experience going to the polls), which is not the case in our
data. Second, individuals who cast a vote for the winner are more likely to form habits, which is
difficult to reconcile with a model in which voting lowers informational costs. In other words, if
habit formation were mediated entirely by voting costs, then reduction of future voting costs would
have to be particularly salient in partisan counties, only when the preferred candidate wins. We can
think of little reason why learning about location, for example, would interact with ex post election
results in such a manner.
On the institutional side, state and county election offices have at various points implemented
laws that purge inactive voters from the registration rolls. These laws varied substantially (both
29

The point estimates and standard errors for both the interacted and uninteracted pivotal coefficients are large
because the probability of being pivotal is typically on the order of 10−4 percent.

25

across and within states) with regard to the frequency of the purges and the number of elections a
voter must miss to be purged (Mitchell and Wlezien 1995). After the 1993 National Voter Registration Act (NVRA), automatic purges of non-voters has ceased in all states. Nonetheless, while they
were in effect, these laws could produce “habit formation,” as we have defined it. Non-voters in several consecutive elections would lose their registration, raising the cost of future voting and making
them less likely to vote again. However, these laws are unlikely to explain our results. First, the
purging of inactive voters from the voter rolls has no obvious connection to the vote-for-the-winner
effects reported in Table 5, as there is no reason purging would vary by county partisanship with timing that matches the identity of the election winner. Second, to further test the importance of these
laws in our results, we re-estimated our main specification using only the states and elections with no
automatic purging of non-voters. Specifically, for every presidential election year, we used The Book
of the States 30 to code whether, in a given year, a state made registration “subject to cancellation
for failure to vote at certain specified intervals.” Restricting the estimation of 4 to counties in states
that had no automatic purging of non-voters at election t yields results very similar to those from
our main specification (Column 1, Table 3).31 This result is consistent with previous findings that
the turnout effects of purging non-voters are negligible (Wolfinger and Rosenstone 1980, Mitchell
and Wlezien 1995).32
Note that we have only discussed costs incurred immediately prior to the act of voting. Longerterm costs, like voter registration or learning about party platforms, precede the realization of the
precipitation shock. Given the difficulty of predicting deviations from trend long in advance, they
are also not amenable to adjustment in anticipation of the precipitation shock.

8.4

What Role for Politics?

Until now, the discussion has treated the voter as an isolated individual, rather than as a participant
in an interactive political process. But actions by political elites may play a role, especially in light of
30

Available at http://knowledgecenter.csg.org/kc/content/book-states-archive-1935-2009.
Volumes of The Book of the States from before 1960 do not report on automatic purging, so these estimates use
only the 1960-2012 elections. 48% of observations in this period are from state-elections without automatic purging
(20,799 observations). After 1993, the NVRA has abolished automatic purging of voters, and hence all observations
from the 1996 election and afterward enter the estimation. In this subsample, the effect of current precipitation on
turnout is -0.069 (S.E. = 0.032), while the effect of lagged precipitation is -0.069 (S.E. = 0.039), implying a ρ of 1.01
(S.E. = 0.33).
32
Mitchel and Wlezien (1995) argue that efforts to repeal purge laws “serve to keep people on the rolls who are not
very likely to vote.”
31

26

existing evidence that rain-induced decreases in turnout have a partisan bias, benefitting Republicans
(Gomez, Hansford, and Krause 2007; Hansford and Gomez 2010). If precipitation shocks affect
election outcomes, and if incumbents are especially empowered to manipulate voter turnout, then
the persistent effects of precipitation shocks may have a political explanation.
Several pieces of evidence suggest that such political explanations are not the primary mechanism. First, in unreported results, the effect of lagged precipitation did not vary with the party of
the incumbent or with an indicator for whether the incumbent was running for re-election. Second,
regional variation in the effects of precipitation, reported in Table 6, is at odds with theories in which
lagged precipitation matters because it changes the party in power. Precipitation decreases turnout
in both the South and the Non-South, but it has divergent effects on the Republican vote share:
decreasing it in the South, increasing it elsewhere. Our main findings are not due to precipitation
advantaging a party that has outsized sway over voter turnout.

9

Conclusion

Social scientists have repeatedly documented that voting behavior is persistent, but they have struggled to isolate the mechanism driving this empirical regularity. This paper identifies the effects of
habit formation, in which the act of voting today directly affects future turnout, as a causal channel
for explaining turnout persistence. We use transitory and unexpected voting cost shocks due to
election-day precipitation to estimate these effects, finding that a 1 percentage point decrease in current turnout reduces future turnout by 0.7-0.9 percentage points. Additional analyses motivated by
a dynamic Downsian framework suggest that this effect is unlikely to be driven by persistent changes
in voting costs, by the updating of voter beliefs over the probability of being pivotal, or by changes
in voters’ perceived benefits from election outcomes. The weight of our evidence suggests that habit
formation occurs through an accumulation in the expressive value citizens gain from voting.
45 years have passed since Riker and Ordeshook (1968) introduced the Dit term to the Downsian model as a solution to the paradox of voter turnout. Although many have accepted the idea
that voters get consumption value from the act of voting, the precise form of this consumption value
and the way it develops have remained elusive. We hope our finding of habit formation in voting
furthers interest in the underlying psychological and social determinants of the intrinsic value voters
27

place on the act of voting, as well as in the design of policies encouraging voter participation. As
Feddersen (2004) suggests, our evidence of habit formation should also help inform political economy
models of strategic voter mobilization and suppression.

28

References
Andreoni, J. (1989). “Giving with Impure Altruism: Applications to Charity and Ricardian Equivalence.” Journal of Political Economy 97(6): 1447-1458.
Atkinson, M.D., and A. Fowler. (2002). “Social Capital and Voter Turnout: Evidence from Saint’s
Day Fiestas in Mexico.” British Journal of Political Science 46: 838-855.
Becker, G.S., and K.M. Murphy. (1988). “A Theory of Rational Addiction.” Journal of Political
Economy 96(4): 675-700.
Bendor, J., D. Diermeier, and M. Ting. (2003). “A Behavioral Model of Turnout.” American
Political Science Review 97(2): 261-280.
Brody, R.A., and P.M. Sniderman. (1977). “From Life Space to Polling Place: The Relevance of
Personal Concerns for Voting Behavior.” British Journal of Political Science 7(3): 337-360.
Bond, R.M., C.J. Fariss, J.J. Jones, A.D. Kramer, C. Marlow, J.E. Settle, and J.H. Fowler. (2012).
“A 61-Million-Person Experiment in Social Influence and Political Mobilization.” Nature 489(7415):
295-298.
Campbell, J. E. (1992). “Forecasting the Presidential Vote in the States.” American Journal of
Political Science 35(2): 386-407.
Campbell, J.E., S. Ali, and F. Jalalzai. (2006). “Forecasting the Presidential Vote in the States,
1948-2004.” Journal of Political Marketing 5(1-2): 33-57.
Case, A.C., and L.F. Katz. (1991). “The Company You Keep: The Effects of Family and Neighborhood on Disadvantaged Youths.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 3705.
Collins, W.J., and R.A. Margo. (2007). “The Economic Aftermath of The 1960s Riots in American
Cities: Evidence from Property Values.” Journal of Economic History 67(4): 849-883.
Conley, T.G. (1999). “GMM Estimation with Cross Sectional Dependence.” Journal of Econometrics
92(1): 1-45.
DellaVigna, S., J. List, U. Malmendier, and G. Rao (2013). “Voting to Tell Others.” Mimeo, U.C.
Berkeley.
Denny, K., and O. Doyle. (2009). “Does Voting History Matter? Analysing Persistence in Turnout.”
American Journal of Political Science 53(1): 17-35.
Downs, A. (1957). An Economic Theory of Democracy. New York: Harper Collins.
Dynan, K.E. (2000). “Habit Formation in Consumer Preferences: Evidence from Panel Data.”
American Economic Review 90(3): 391-406.
Feddersen, T.J. (2004). “Rational Choice Theory and the Paradox of not Voting.” Journal of
Economic Perspectives 18(1): 99-112.
29

Festinger, L. (1957). A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance. Evanston, IL: Row, Peterson.
Fiorina, M. (1990). “Information and Rationality in Elections.” In J. Ferejohn and J. Kuklinski,
eds., Information and Democratic Processes. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
Fraga, B., and E. Hersh. (2010). “Voting Costs and Voter Turnout in Competitive Elections.”
Quarterly Journal of Political Science 5(4): 339-356.
Franklin, M.N., and S.B. Hobolt. (2011). “The Legacy of Lethargy: How Elections to the European
Parliament Depress Turnout.” Electoral Studies 30(1): 67-76.
Gerber, A.S., D.P. Green, and C.W. Larimer. (2008). “Social Pressure and Vote Turnout: Evidence
from a Large-Scale Field Experiment.” American Political Science Review 102(1): 33-48.
Gerber, A.S., D.P. Green, and R. Shachar. (2003). “Voting May Be Habit-Forming: Evidence From
a Randomized Field Experiment.” American Journal of Political Science 47(3): 540-550.
Gentzkow, M., J.M. Shapiro, and M. Sinkinson. (2011). “The Effect of Newspaper Entry and Exit
on Electoral Politics.” American Economic Review 101(7): 2980-3018.
Glaeser, E. and J.A. Scheinkman. (2002). “Nonmarket Interactions.” In Advances in Economics and
Econometrics: Theory and Applications: Eighth World Congress (Vol. 1). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Glaeser, E.L., B.I. Sacerdote, and J.A. Scheinkman. (2003). “The Social Multiplier.” Journal of the
European Economic Association, 1(2-3): 345-353.
Green, D.P., and R. Shachar. (2000). “Habit Formation and Political Behaviour: Evidence Of
Consuetude in Voter Turnout.” British Journal of Political Science 30(4): 561-573.
Gomez, B.T., T.G. Hansford, and G.A. Krause. (2007). “The Republicans Should Pray for Rain:
Weather, Turnout, And Voting in U.S. Presidential Elections.” Journal of Politics 69(3): 649-663.
Haines, M.R. (2010). Historical, Demographic, Economic, and Social Data: The United States,
1790-2002. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research.
Hansford, T.G., and B.T. Gomez. (2010). “Estimating the Electoral Effects of Voter Turnout.”
American Political Science Review 104(2): 268-288.
Heien, D., and C. Durham. (2003). “A Test of the Habit Formation Hypothesis Using Household
Data.” Review of Economics and Statistics 73(2): 189-199.
Huet-Vaughn, E. (2013). “Quiet Riot: The Causal Effect of Protest Violence.” Mimeo, U.C. Berkeley.
Kanazawa, S. (1998). “A Possible Solution to the Paradox of Voter Turnout.” Journal of Politics
60: 974-995.
Kaplan, E., and S. Mukand. (2011). “The Persistence of Political Partisanship: Evidence from
9/11.” Mimeo, University of Maryland.
30

Lodge, G., and S. Birch. (2012). “The Case for Compulsory Voting.” New Statesman. Online:
http://www.newstatesman.com/blogs/politics/2012/04/case-compulsory-voting.
Madestam, A., D. Shoag, S. Veuger, and D. Yanagizawa. (Forthcoming). “Do Political Protests
Matter? Evidence from the Tea Party Movement.” Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Madestam, A., and D. Yanagizawa-Drott. (2012). “Shaping the Nation: The Effect of Fourth of
July on Political Preferences and Behavior in the United States.” Mimeo, Harvard University.
Meredith, M. (2009). “Persistence in Political Participation.” Quarterly Journal of Political Science
4(3): 187-209.
Mitchell, G.E., and C. Wlezien. (1995). “The Impact of Legal Constraints on Voter Registration,
Turnout, and The Composition of The American Electorate.” Political Behavior 17(2): 179-202.
Molloy, R., C.L. Smith, and A. Wozniak. (2011). “Internal Migration in the United States.” Journal
of Economic Perspectives 25(3): 173-96.
Mullainathan, S., and E. Washington. (2009). “Sticking with Your Vote: Cognitive Dissonance and
Political Attitudes.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1(1): 86-111.
Nickerson, D.W. (2008). “Is Voting Contagious? Evidence from Two Field Experiments.” American
Political Science Review 102(1): 49-57.
Plutzer, E. (2002). “Becoming a Habitual Voter: Inertia, Resources, and Growth in Young Adulthood.” American Political Science Review 96(1): 41-56.
Riker, W.H., and P.C. Ordeshook. (1968). “A Theory of the Calculus of Voting.” American Political
Science Review 62(1): 25-42.
Riker, W.H., and P.C. Ordeshook. (1973). An Introduction to Positive Political Theory. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Schlenker, W. (2009). “Nonlinear Temperature Effects Indicate Severe Damages to U.S. Crop Yields
under Climate Change.” Proceedings from the National Academy of Science 106(37): 15594-8.
Tullock, G. (1967). Toward a Mathematics of Politics. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Wolfinger, R., and S. Rosenstone. (1980). Who Votes? New Haven: Yale University Press.

31

Figure 1: Age Patterns in Voting, CPS Voter Supplement 1980-2010
Panel A: All Ages

Panel B: Ages 18-27

Note: Scatter plots are age-specific rates, while curves are local linear regressions with a
bandwidth of 2 years.

32

Figure 2: Precipitation and Turnout Residuals, 2004

Note: Residuals from regressions of precipitation (mm) and turnout on year and county fixed effects and county trends. See Appendix
Figure 1 for more years.

33

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics
Mean
(1)

Std. Dev.
(2)

10
(3)

25
(4)

Percentiles
50th
(5)

Politics
Voter turnout
Republican vote share

58.4
55.3

13.6
14.2

41.8
36.6

49.4
46.3

58.3
56.1

67.4
65.2

75.8
72.9

Weather
Precipitation on election day (mm)

2.5

6.6

0.0

0.0

0.0

1.4

7.1

th

th

75th
(6)

90th
(7)

Demographics
% white
87.8
15.8
64.2
82.3
95.0
98.6
% over 65
13.2
4.4
7.8
10.1
12.8
15.9
Log median household income (2012 $)
10.6
0.3
10.2
10.4
10.6
10.8
Log population density (people/sq. mile)
3.6
1.6
1.5
2.8
3.6
4.5
Note: The sample includes 49,524 county-year observations, based on presidential elections from 1952-2012 in 3,108 counties.

34

99.7
19.0
11.0
5.6

Table 2: Effect of Contemporaneous Precipitation on Turnout
(1)
(2)
Linear model
Bin model
Precip. 2 wks before election day, t
Precip. 1 wk before election day, t
Precip. on election day, t

-0.069
[0.024]***

Precip. 1 wk after election day, t
Precip. 2 wks after election day, t

(4,8] mm precip. on election day, t

(3)
Placebo
0.029
[0.022]
-0.025
[0.023]
-0.065
[0.023]***
-0.039
[0.022]*
-0.034
[0.036]

-0.654
[0.332]*
-0.436
[0.466]
-1.508
[0.512]***
-1.817
[0.667]***
-2.003
[0.862]**

(8,12] mm precip. on election day, t
(12,16] mm precip. on election day, t
(16,20] mm precip. on election day, t
(20,95] mm precip. on election day, t

Number of county-years
49,524
49,524
49,524
Number of counties
3108
3108
3108
Election years
1952-2012
1952-2012
1952-2012
Note: Dependent variable is voter turnout (0-100). Brackets contain standard errors clustered at the state level.
All regressions include year and county fixed effects and county trends. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01
35

Table 3: Effect of Contemporaneous and Lagged Precipitation on Turnout
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Precip. on election day, t+1
-0.028
-0.027
[0.027]
[0.035]
Precip. on election day, t
-0.078
-0.070
-0.077
-0.068
-0.113
-0.110
[0.026]*** [0.025]*** [0.025]*** [0.024]*** [0.040]*** [0.037]***
Precip. on election day, t-1
-0.070
-0.065
-0.068
-0.063
-0.116
-0.112
[0.025]*** [0.024]** [0.023]*** [0.022]*** [0.045]** [0.041]***
Precip. on election day, t-2
-0.061
-0.057
[0.025]**
[0.023]**
(Precip., t)*(Precip., t-1)
Precip. 2 wks. after election day, t+1
Precip. 2 wks. after election day, t

-0.029
[0.038]
-0.018
[0.044]

Precip. 2 wks. after election day, t-1

-0.021
[0.026]
-0.008
[0.039]
-0.008
[0.048]
-0.036
[0.034]

-0.025
[0.032]
-0.018
[0.039]

Precip. 2 wks. after election day, t-2
(Precip. 2 wks. after, t)
*(Precip. 2 wks. after, t-1)
Implied ρ

(7)

(8)

-0.058
[0.027]**
-0.058
[0.024]**

-0.056
[0.026]**
-0.055
[0.023]**

-0.007
[0.002]***

-0.007
[0.002]***

-0.032
[0.021]
-0.022
[0.030]

0.007
[0.005]
0.89
[0.28]***

0.93
[0.31]***

0.88
[0.28]**

0.92
[0.32]***

0.78
[0.14]***

0.77
[0.14]***

Number of county-years
49,524
49,524
49,524
49,524
43,300
43,300
49,524
49.524
Number of counties
3,108
3,108
3,108
3,108
3,108
3,108
3,108
3,108
Election years
1952-2012 1952-2012 1952-2012 1952-2012 1956-2008 1956-2008 1952-2012 1952-2012
County covariates?
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
Note: Dep. var. is voter turnout (0-100). Brackets contain SEs clustered at the state level. All regressions include year fixed & county FE and
county trends. County covariates: white pop. share, over-65 pop. share, log median income, log pop. density. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01

36

Table 4: Heterogeneity in the Effects of Contemporaneous and Lagged Precipitation
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Precip. on election day, t
-0.078
-0.195
-0.115
-1.374
-0.152
[0.026]***
[0.119]
[0.053]**
[0.685]***
[0.041]***
Precip. on election day, t-1
-0.070
-0.195
-0.041
-0.618
-0.159
[0.025]***
[0.124]
[0.037]
[0.493]
[0.044]***
(% white)*(Precip., t)
0.0015
[0.0013]
(% white)*(Precip., t-1)
0.0015
[0.0013]
(% over 65)*(Precip., t)
0.0034
[0.0026]
(% over 65)*(Precip., t-1)
-0.0024
[0.0018]
(Log median income)*(Precip., t)
0.123
[0.064]*
(Log median income)*(Precip., t-1)
0.052
[0.046]
(Log pop. density)*(Precip., t)
0.017
[0.006]***
(Log pop. density)*(Precip., t-1)
0.021
[0.007]***
Number of county-years
49,524
49,524
49,524
49,524
49,524
Number of counties
3,108
3,108
3,108
3,108
3,108
Note: Dependent variable is voter turnout (0-100). Sample includes presidential elections from 1952-2012.
Brackets contain standard errors clustered at the state level. All regressions include year and county
fixed effects, county trends, and the main effects of any demographic variables included in the
interaction terms. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01
37

Turnout in last election

Number of observations
Election years

Table 5: Persistence in Voter Turnout, Individuals versus Counties
Individuals (CPS 1972-1984)
Counties
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.48
0.51
0.46
0.83
0.82
0.78
[0.01]***
[0.01]***
[0.01]***
[0.01]***
[0.02]***
[0.03]***
315,970
1972-1984

315,970
1972-1984

Covariates?
No
Year FE?
No
State-group/state FE?
No
County FE?
No
Note: Dependent variable is voter turnout (0-100). * p

315,970
1972-1984

49,524
1952-2012

Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
< 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01

(7)
0.69
[0.04]***

49,524
1952-2012

49,524
1952-2012

49,524
1952-2012

Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
No
Yes

Individual analysis: Brackets contain SEs clustered at the state-group level. The analysis uses 23 state-groups instead of 50 states
because the 1976 CPS does not contain state identifiers. In the subsample from other years, results were identical in estimations with
clustering or fixed effects at the state, rather than state-group, level. Covariates include education level, age, age squared, gender,
and race.
County analysis: Brackets contain SEs clustered at the state level. Covariates include white pop. share, over-65 pop. share, log
median income, and log pop. density.

38

Table 6: Role of County Partisanship and Alignment with the Winner
Actual partisanship
Predicted partisanship
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Precip. on election day, t
-0.071
-0.064
-0.055
-0.058
[0.023]*** [0.023]***
[0.027]**
[0.027]**
Precip. on election day, t-1
-0.044
-0.045
-0.037
-0.041
[0.028]
[0.029]
[0.026]
[0.028]
(Aligned, t-1) × (Precip., t)
0.002
0.085
0.173
0.180
[0.058]
[0.083]
[0.141]
[0.196]
(Aligned, t-1) × (Precip., t-1)
-0.123
-0.131
-0.180
-0.180
[0.064]*
[0.062]**
[0.069]***
[0.080]**
(Partisan, t-2) × (Precip., t)
0.036
-0.202
[0.036]
[0.068]***
(Partisan, t-2) × (Precip., t-1)
0.021
0.029
[0.037]
[0.063]
(Heavily Dem., t-2) × (Precip., t)
-0.104
-0.194
[0.047]**
[0.069]***
(Heavily Dem., t-2) × (Precip., t-1)
0.005
0.020
[0.040]
[0.078]
(Heavily Rep., t-2) × (Precip., t)
-0.070
-0.217
[0.063]
[0.171]
(Heavily Rep., t-2) × (Precip., t-1)
0.057
0.081
[0.035]
[0.074]
(Rep. winner, t-1) × (Precip., t)
-0.011
-0.004
0.029
0.029
[0.038]
[0.035]
[0.038]
[0.040]
(Rep. winner, t-1) × (Precip., t-1)
-0.057
-0.055
-0.068
-0.062
[0.052]
[0.053]
[0.053]
[0.054]
Aligned, t-1
2.84
2.50
2.55
2.35
[0.95]***
[1.05]**
[1.33]*
[1.42]
Partisan, t-2
-1.42
0.024
[0.37]***
[0.75]
Heavily Dem., t-2
-1.53
-0.36
[0.53]***
[0.89]
Heavily Rep., t-2
-0.64
0.40
[0.66]
[0.90]
Sum of coefs. on (Aligned, t-1)×(Precip, t-1)
and (Partisan, t-2) × (Precip., t-1)
Number of county-years
Number of counties

-0.102
[0.043]**
46,329
3,108

-0.151
[0.071]**
46,329
3,108

46,329
3,108

46,329
3,108

Note: Dep. var. is voter turnout (0-100). Sample includes presidential elections from 1956-2012. Brackets
contain standard errors clustered at the state level: asymptotic in cols. (1)-(2), block bootstrapped in cols.
(3)-(4). All regressions include year and county FE and county trends. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01

39

Table 7: Precipitation, Turnout, and Vote Shares, Regional Comparison
Full sample
Non-South
South
Turnout
Rep. share
Turnout
Rep. share
Turnout
Rep. share
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
-0.078
-0.022
-0.084
0.078
-0.040
-0.077
Precip. on election day, t
[0.026]***
[0.027]
[0.039]***
[0.028]***
[0.030]
[0.034]**
-0.041
-0.039
0.014
-0.066
-0.047
-0.070
Precip. on election day, t-1
[0.025]***
[0.034]
[0.011]***
[0.023]
[0.026]**
[0.034]
49,441
26,918
26,917
22,606
22,524
Number of county-years
49,524
3108
1685
1685
1423
1423
3108
Number of counties
Note: Dependent variable is voter turnout (0-100). Brackets contain standard errors clustered at the state level. All regressions
include year and county fixed effects and county trends. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01

40

Appendix Figure 1: Precipitation and Turnout Residuals, Selected Years

(continued on next page…)

41

(continued from previous page…)

Note: Residuals from regressions of precipitation (mm) and turnout on year and county fixed effects, and county-specific trends.

42

Appendix Figure 2: Leave-One-Out Checks
Panel A: Leave Out One State

Panel B: Leave Out One Year

Note: Each estimate is based on a sample that omits the state or year on the x-axis. Dots are
coefficients; bars are 95% CIs. Light gray horizontal lines represent full-sample estimates.
43

Appendix Table 1: Higher-Order County-Specific Trends
(1)
(2)
(3)
Precip. on election day, t
-0.011
-0.078
-0.062
[0.030]
[0.026]***
[0.023]***
Precip. on election day, t-1
0.016
-0.070
-0.057
[0.021]
[0.025]***
[0.021]***

(4)
-0.063
[0.023]***
-0.057
[0.021]***

Implied ρ

-1.43
[4.81]

0.89
[0.28]***

0.92
[0.32]***

0.91
[0.32]***

Number of county-years
Number of counties
Trend order

49,524
3,108
0

49,524
3,108
1

49,524
3,108
2

49,524
3,108
3

Note: Brackets contain standard errors clustered at the state level. All regressions include year fixed
effects and county fixed effects. The sample includes all presidential elections from 1952 to 2012.
* p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01

44

