                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             MANAGING THE FAMILY FIRM:
                            EVIDENCE FROM CEOS AT WORK

                                       Oriana Bandiera
                                        Renata Lemos
                                         Andrea Prat
                                       Raffaella Sadun

                                     Working Paper 19722
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w19722


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                         December 2013, Revised August 2017




We would like to thank Marianne Bertrand, Nick Bloom, Deepak Hegde, Luis Garicano, Lakshmi
Iyer, Daniel Paravisini, Damon Phillips, Antoinette Schoar, Scott Stern, John Van Reenen,
DanielWolfenzon, Chris Woodruff, Julie Wulf, and participants at seminars in Bocconi,
Columbia, Duke, Frankfurt, Georgia Tech, Harvard, Helsinki, LBS, LSE, Mannheim, Michigan,
MIT, Munich, Northwestern, Queens Business School, Stanford, AEA, EEA, EARIE and NBER
Summer Meetings for useful comments. Anjali Reina and Tanya Bijlani from the HBS India
Research Center have been particularly important in the development of the project. Kashyap
Shah has provided excellent research assistance. We would like to thank Columbia Business
School, Harvard Business School, the International Growth Center, and the Kauffman Foundation
for their financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2013 by Oriana Bandiera, Renata Lemos, Andrea Prat, and Raffaella Sadun. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Managing the Family Firm: Evidence from CEOs at Work
Oriana Bandiera, Renata Lemos, Andrea Prat, and Raffaella Sadun
NBER Working Paper No. 19722
December 2013, Revised August 2017
JEL No. M1,M12,M5

                                        ABSTRACT

We present evidence on the labor supply of CEOs, and on whether family and professional CEOs
differ on this dimension. We do so through a new survey instrument that allows us to codify
CEOs’ diaries in a detailed and comparable fashion, and to build a bottom-up measure of CEO
labor supply. The comparison of 1,114 family and professional CEOs reveals that family CEOs
work 9% fewer hours relative to professional CEOs. Hours worked are positively correlated with
firm performance, and differences between family and non-family CEOs account for
approximately 18% of the performance gap between family and non-family firms. We investigate
the sources of the differences in CEO labor supply across governance types by exploiting firm
and industry heterogeneity, and quasi-exogenous meteorological and sport events. The evidence
suggests that family CEOs value–or can pursue–leisure activities relatively more than
professional CEOs.

Oriana Bandiera                               Andrea Prat
London School of Economics                    Columbia Business School
o.bandiera@lse.ac.uk                          3022 Broadway, Uris 624
                                              New York, NY 10027-6902
Renata Lemos                                  andrea.prat@columbia.edu
World Bank
1850 I Street NW                              Raffaella Sadun
Washington, DC 20433                          Harvard Business School
and Center for Economic Performance           Morgan Hall 233
London School of Economics                    Soldiers Field
rlemos@worldbank.org                          Boston, MA 02163
                                              and NBER
                                              rsadun@hbs.edu
1        Introduction
The debate over the desirability of the separation between firm ownership and control is as old as
the firm itself. Should firms be led by their owners or by professional managers? One of the main
arguments in favor of owners is that they have more at stake, and are thus expected to exert more
e↵ort at work. This is the standard prediction of the principal-agent model, as owners are residual
claimants over the income generated by the business and hence are motivated to succeed, other
things equal. The argument against is that, simply put, other things are not equal. For example,
CEOs with a significant ownership stake on the firm are likely to be wealthier than professional
CEOs–if leisure is a normal good, they may therefore demand more leisure.1 Equivalently, owner
CEOs may be able to pursue private interests at the expense of other stakeholders (Shleifer and
Vishny (1989))–if the pursuit of private interests crowds out activities that are beneficial to the
firm, this will also result in less managerial e↵ort. These factors may lead to owner CEOs being
less motivated to work hard relative to non-owners.
        Family CEOs–i.e. managers with a majority ownership stake in the firm, who have either
founded the firm, or inherited the firm from the original founders–are a primary example of owner
CEOs and are widely present in both developed and developing countries (Caselli and Gennaioli
(2013), LaPorta et al. (1999)). In this paper, we explore di↵erences between family and professional
CEOs (i.e., non family affiliated CEOs) in one basic metric of e↵ort: the number of hours they
work. We do so using a new survey instrument, which allows us to codify the diaries of 1,114 CEOs
of manufacturing firms across six countries: Brazil, France, Germany, India, the United Kingdom
and the United States. To measure the labor supply of CEOs, we reconstruct their time diaries
via daily phone interviews over the course of one week. We ask respondents (the CEOs themselves
or their personal assistants) to list sequentially all activities in their diaries longer than fifteen
minutes and to report details of those activities. This methodology allows us to build an accurate
bottom-up estimate of how much time CEOs allocate to business activities. Our methodology is
inspired by Mintzberg (1973) celebrated analysis of the work week of five CEOs, extended to large
random samples.2
   We find that there is substantial variation in the number of hours CEOs devote to work activities:
the average CEO in our sample spends 52 hours per week (10.4 hours per day) at work, while CEOs
in the bottom quartile work on average 44.2 hours per week, and those in the top quartile work
    1
     For example, Holtz-Eakin et al. (1993) show that large inheritances reduce labor force participation and labor
supply.
   2
     “Shadowing” exercises are common in the management literature but typically cover a handful of observations.
To the best of our knowledge, the most extensive CEO time use study is still Mintzberg (1973) seminal work, which
comprises five CEOs. The largest observational dataset on top executives known to us –Kotter (1999)– includes 15
general managers. The largest time use study of managerial personnel we are aware of is Luthans (1988), which
covers 44 mostly middle managers. Some surveys ask large numbers of CEOs general questions about their aggregate
time use (e.g. McKinsey (2013), but they are not based on an analysis of their agendas for a specific time period.
Karolyi and Liao (2015) collect data on the time spent by CEOs and CFOs in investor relations activities at 800
firms in 59 countries.


                                                        2
on average 58.5 hours per week. When we divide CEOs between family and professional CEOs–i.e.
managers who do not have significant ownership stakes in the firm–we find a large di↵erence in
hours worked: family CEOs, who account for 41% of our sample, record 6 fewer hours per week
relative to professional CEOs.
      Are these di↵erences correlated with firm performance, and in particular with di↵erences in
firm performance between family and professional CEOs? To answer this question, we match the
CEO survey with accounting data. We show three related facts. First, CEO hours worked are
positively and significantly correlated with firm performance: a one standard deviation change in
CEO hours worked is associated with a 8% increase in firm productivity. Second, firms run by
family CEOs are on average less productive (and profitable) than firms run by professional CEOs.
Third, di↵erences in CEO hours worked account for up to 18% of the performance gap between
family and professional CEOs.
      We develop a simple model of CEO labor supply to study why family and professional CEOs
vary in their e↵ort at work. The model illustrates that the observed cross sectional di↵erences in
hours worked across CEOs may depend on both di↵erences in the marginal product of CEO e↵ort
across governance types–i.e. di↵erences in CEO or firm characteristics that may make it uniquely
optimal for family CEOs to work fewer hours–and di↵erences in the CEO taste for leisure.
      We assess the empirical relevance of these two alternative sources of variation by examining
whether the gap in hours worked between family and professional CEOs can be accounted for by
observable industry, firm and CEO characteristics which are likely to a↵ect the marginal product of
CEO e↵ort. The data suggest that these factors do not fully account for di↵erences in hours worked
between family and professional CEOs. Once we include the full set of firm, CEO, and industry
controls, family CEOs still work 9% fewer hours than their professional counterparts. Importantly,
we observe that professional CEOs who run family firms work as much as their counterparts in
non-family firms, suggesting that the di↵erence in hours worked is not due to family ownership per
se.
      We then turn to analyze whether the di↵erence in behavior observed in the data are consistent
with heterogeneous preferences for leisure across CEOs. We do so by exploiting a key insight
provided by the model: if family CEOs choose to work fewer hours because they put a higher
weight on leisure relative to firm performance, then factors a↵ecting the opportunity cost of leisure
(or, symmetrically, the marginal cost of e↵ort) across all CEOs should have a greater impact on
family CEOs. To implement the empirical strategy suggested by the model, we study whether
the di↵erence in hours worked by family and professional CEOs varies with factors a↵ecting the
opportunity cost of leisure across firms, and across days of work. We use two alternative measures to
proxy for di↵erences in the opportunity cost of leisure across firms: firm size and the competitiveness
of the industry in which the firm operates. The opportunity cost of leisure is likely to be higher in




                                                  3
larger firms, as CEOs’ e↵ort a↵ects a larger volume of activity.3 The opportunity cost of leisure is
also likely to be higher in more competitive industries conditional on firm size, since competition
lowers the probability of survival and increases the importance of managerial e↵ort to keep the firm
in business. We show that the di↵erence in hours worked between family and professional CEOs is
significantly smaller in larger firms and in firms active in more competitive industries. Furthermore,
for two countries in our sample, India and Brazil, we are also able to measure variation in the
opportunity cost of labor across days, using daily variation in rainfall and the broadcasting of
popular sport events (Premier League cricket matches in India and State Football League matches
in Brazil). In this sub-sample, the di↵erence between family and professional CEOs is significantly
larger on days when torrential rains or popular sport matches increase the marginal cost of e↵ort.
       Taken together, these results are consistent with the notion that family CEOs have di↵erent
preferences for leisure relative to professional CEOs. We speculate that the heterogeneity in pref-
erences across CEOs could be related to wealth e↵ects–namely, by the fact that family CEOs may
be wealthier than professional CEOs thanks to their ownership stake in the firm–and investigate
this hypothesis by exploiting cross country di↵erences in inheritance laws facilitating the intergen-
erational concentration of wealth.
       While the cross sectional nature of our data limits our ability to make causal statements about
the relationship between CEO hours worked and firm performance, the evidence is consistent with
the idea that family CEOs may be willing to trade-o↵ profits for other non-monetary benefits of
control, such as the ability to enjoy more leisure (Demsetz and Lehn (1985), Bandiera et al. (2015)).
Our findings complement the observation that family CEOs are less likely to adopt managerial best
practices (Bloom and Van Reenen (2007), Lemos and Scur (2017)) and are characterized by a
management style that is less conducive to shareholder value maximization (Mullins and Schoar
(2013)). In line with these literatures, our time use analysis shows that the incentives arising from
having a higher stake in the firm may be o↵set by other factors that induce less e↵ort on the part
of the CEOs. More broadly, our research illustrates one channel through which CEOs may a↵ect
firm performance (Bertrand and Schoar (2003), Kaplan et al. (2012), Malmendier and Tate (2005),
Malmendier and Tate (2009), Schoar and Zuo (2011)). Finally, the paper is related to the strand
of work emphasizing the importance of preferences in explaining di↵erences in managerial e↵ort
(Bertrand and Mullainathan (2003), Malmendier and Tate (2009)).
       The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our sampling and data collection method-
ology, together with the characteristics of CEOs and their firms. Section 3 discusses di↵erences in
hours worked across family and professional CEOs, as well as the relationship between firm perfor-
mance and CEO hours worked. Section 4 provides a simple model of CEO labor supply to guide
the empirical analysis. Section 5 estimates the di↵erence between family and professional CEOs
   3
     This is analogue to the “scale of operations” e↵ect discussed in Mayer (1960), which has been used to explain
how small di↵erences in ability can produce large di↵erences in pay when more able CEOs work for larger firms, see
e.g. Tervio (2008).



                                                        4
and implements the empirical strategy suggested by the model to interpret the observed di↵erences.
Section 6 concludes.


2        The Labor Supply of CEOs: Measurement
2.1       The CEO Time Use Survey
To measure CEOs’ labor supply, we created a survey instrument that keeps track of the activities
undertaken by executives on a daily basis.4 We use this instrument to collect information for
a sample of CEOs over one work week. While titles may di↵er across countries (e.g. Managing
Director in the UK), we always interview the highest-ranking authority in charge of the organization
who has executive powers and reports to the board of directors. For brevity we refer to them as
CEOs in what follows.
        The survey collects information on all the activities lasting 15 minutes or longer in the order
they happened during the day, with their starting and ending time and other activity details. Our
main measure of CEO labor supply is the sum of time devoted to work activities over the week.
To compare our diary measure with the standard recall measure used in other time use surveys,
we also asked CEOs to estimate the hours they worked during the same week. Figure A.1 in the
Appendix shows a screenshot of the survey tool.5
        The data was collected by a team of enumerators we hired for this purpose through daily phone
calls with the Personal Assistant (PA) of the CEO, or with the CEO himself (43% of the cases),
over a week randomly chosen by us. On day one of this week, the enumerator called in the morning
and gathered detailed information on all the activities planned in the CEO diary for the day.
The enumerator then called again in the evening to gather information on the actual activities
undertaken by the CEO (including those that were not originally included in the planned agenda),
and the activities planned for the following day. On subsequent days, the enumerator called in the
evening, again to collect data on the actual activities undertaken during the day, and the planned
schedule for the next day.6 On the last day of the data collection, the analysts also interviewed the
CEO to validate the activity data (if collected through his PA) and to collect information on the
characteristics of the CEO and of the firm, including firm ownership and organizational structure.
    4
     A similar version of the survey was first used in a small scale study of about 100 Italian CEOs. See Bandiera
et al. (2012) for details.
   5
     The survey tool can be found online at www.executivetimeuse.org.
   6
     For 70% of the CEOs in our sample, the work week consisted of 5 days. The remaining 30% of the CEOs also
reported to work during the weekend (21% for 6 days and 9% for 7 days). Analysts were instructed to call the CEO
after the weekend to retrieve data on Saturdays and Sundays.




                                                        5
Sampling frame

The survey covers CEOs in six of the world’s ten largest economies: Brazil, France, Germany, India,
the United Kingdom and the United States. For comparability, we chose to focus on established
market economies and opted for a balance between high and middle-low income countries. The
sampling frame was drawn from ORBIS, an extensive commercial data set produced by the company
Bureau Van Dijk that contains company accounts for more than 200 million companies around the
world. To maintain comparability of performance data, we restricted the sample to manufacturing
firms. We then selected firms with available sales and employment data.7 This yielded a sample of
6,527 firms in 32 two-digits SIC industries that we randomly assigned to di↵erent analysts to call
to seek the CEOs’ participation.
       We were able to interview 1,131 CEOs, a response rate of 17%. This figure is at the higher end
of response rates for CEO surveys, which range between 9% and 16% (Graham et al. (2015)). Of
the interviewed CEOs, 17 were later dropped from the sample because of low data quality (typically
because the time use data covered less than 4 days of the week). Our final sample thus comprises
of 1,114 CEOs, of which there are 282 in Brazil, 115 in France, 125 in Germany, 356 in India, 87
in the UK and 149 in the US.
       The selection analysis in Table A.1 in the Appendix shows that respondents have on average
lower log sales (coefficient -0.071, standard error 0.011). However, we do not find any significant se-
lection e↵ect on performance variables, such as sales over employees and return on capital employed
(ROCE).

Measurement concerns

Two measurement concerns are of note. First, we are able to measure only the activities that the
CEO is willing to report. The sign of the bias this creates is ambiguous. CEOs might indeed be
prone to overestimate the hours they work, e.g. by coding time spent in personal activities as work.
At the same time, we will not pick up activities that take place out of business hours unless they
are recorded in the CEO diary. To the extent that the CEO labor supply data is estimated with
error, this would create attenuation bias on the estimates.
       Second, a week of detailed activity data might not be enough to capture typical CEO behavior.
The allocation of time across activities might just be a reflection of high frequency shocks to the
marginal cost or marginal product of time across CEOs. If so, the time use data would capture the
relevance of these shocks, rather than explicit managerial choices. If this were true, however, we
would expect little similarity in the way time is allocated within the week by the same CEO (i.e.
we would not see any within week autocorrelation in CEO time use). In contrast, we find a high
degree of autocorrelation in the average number of hours worked during the week by the CEOs.
   7
    We went from a random sample of 11,500 firms to 6,527 eligible ones after screening for firms for which we were
able to find CEO contact details and were still active. The sample construction is described in detail in the Appendix.


                                                          6
A simple regression of the number of log(hours worked) on day t on the same variable measured
on day t     1 delivers a coefficient of .40, statistically significant at the 1% level. In addition, CEO
fixed e↵ects explain 25% of the variance observed in the daily time use data.
       Finally, at the end of the survey week, we ask CEOs to rank whether the week could be
considered “representative” of their usual work activity on a scale 1-10. Reassuringly, we observe
substantial heterogeneity in hours worked even if we restrict the sample to the 63% of CEOs who
score the survey week as highly representative (i.e. a score of 8, 9 or 10 out of 10). This is at
odds with the hypothesis that all observed variation is due to transitory shocks rather than actual
di↵erences in behavior.

Ownership

In our sample, 57% of the firms are owned by a family, 23% by disperse shareholders, 9% by private
individuals, and 7% by private equity.8 Family CEOs are CEOs who belong to the family that owns
the firm, and account for 41% of the sample. Of these, 329 (30% of the sample) are descendants of
the original founders, and 126 (11%) are the founders themselves.9 Detailed information of family
ownership, which we were able to collect for a subsample of firms,10 shows that the family firms
in our sample tend to have a very concentrated ownership structure: families own on average 64%
of the shares (66% at the median), and in 70% of the firms the family owns more than 50% of the
shares.
       Professional CEOs are CEOs who have no family bond with the owners of the firm. These
account for 59% of the sample. Just over a quarter of them (16% of the sample) manage firms that
are owned by a family. Later this will allow us to separate the e↵ect of family ownership from the
e↵ect of family CEOs.11 43% of the firms are listed on the stock market.

2.2      CEOs at Work: Basic Summary Statistics
Figure 1 shows the distribution of hours worked during the week using the diary method, namely
the sum of the duration of all the activities the CEO undertakes while at work. The average CEO
in our sample spends 52 hours per week (10.4 hours per day) at work, while CEOs in the bottom
   8
      The classification assigns ownership to the largest shareholder with at least 25.01% of the shares. We classify a
firm as being owned by dispersed shareholders if no single entity, family or person owns at least 25.01% of the shares.
    9
      In the robustness checks we investigate whether the main results vary between founders and descendants CEOs
and find them to follow a very similar behavior.
   10
      We gathered detailed ownership data for 324 of the total sample of 493 firms owned by a family or a founder.
The 169 firms for which this data could not be retrieved are primarily (116) private firms located in Brazil, for which
the detailed ownership information could not be found neither in Orbis nor via manual web searches. The remaining
firms are located in France (3), Germany (5), India (38), UK (2) and US (5).
   11
      The shares owned by the family are significantly higher (70% vs. 62%, di↵erence significant at the 1% level) when
the firm is family owned, but run by a professional CEO. Further details on our ownership measures are provided in
the Appendix.




                                                          7
                        Figure 1 -1:
                       Figure     Weekly
                                     CEO hoursweekly
                                               worked, diary
                                                        hoursmeasure
                                                                 worked, diary measure




                                .1
                                .08
                                  .06
                           Fraction
                                .04
                                .02
                                0




                                        20   Weekly40hours worked - Diary
                                                                     60 measure      80      100
                                                   Weekly hours worked - Diary measure

Notes: The graph showsNotes: The graph shows
                       the histogram          the weekly
                                        of total  histogram of total
                                                          hours      weekly(built
                                                                 worked     hours worked (built from
                                                                                  from actual    diary data) by a sample of
1114 CEOs.               actual diary data) by a sample of 1114 CEOs.



quartile work on average 44.2 hours per week and those in the top quartile work on average 58.5
hours per week.
       Figure 2 compares the diary measure with a recall measure that we obtained by asking CEOs
to estimate the number of hours worked at the end of the week.12 Three points are of note. First,
the distribution of the recall measure exhibits considerable bunching at round numbers, e.g. 26%
of the sample CEOs report working 50 hours, while the diary measure shown in Figure 1 exhibits
no bunching, i.e. no more than 1.5% of the sample take the same value. Second, the diary and the
recall measures are positively correlated, but the correlation is well below 1–regressing the recall
measure on the diary measure yields a coefficient of .50, significantly di↵erent from 1 with p-value
equal to 0.00. Third, the recall measure is larger than the diary measure for half of the CEOs whose
diary measure is below the mean, but only for 16% of the CEOs whose diary measure is above the
mean. Thus, the noise in the recall measure is not orthogonal to the actual hours recorded in the
diary–CEOs who work fewer hours are equally likely to over- or under estimate their hours worked
while those who work longer hours tend to underestimate it. Taken together, these comparisons
suggest that the bottom up estimate of CEO labor supply employed in the remainder of the paper
is likely to provide more meaningful and objective information on CEO hours worked than more
commonly used recall measures of labor supply.13
  12
     The sample included in this analysis excludes India since we did not collect recall time use in the first wave of
the survey.
  13
     Robinson et al. (2011)discuss the impact of recollection biases in recall methods relative to the time-diary method.
This notwithstanding, the diary method may still fail to capture some activities or still allow respondents to overes-
timate the time they devote to other activities, so that the hours of work recorded in our survey should be seen as



                                                                8
                FigureFigure'2')'Weekly'hours'worked')'Recall'vs.'Diary'Measure
                        2: CEO weekly hours worked, diary and recall measure




                                              100
                           Weekly hours worked - Recall measure
                             20        40     0  60       80




                                                                  20       40              60              80   100
                                                                       Weekly hours worked - Diary measure


Notes: The graph shows the linear regression of total weekly hours worked (CEO estimates recorded at the end of
                       Notes: The graph shows the linear regression of total weekly hours worked (CEO
the data collection week) and actual hours worked (built from diary data) for a sample of 758 CEOs (all CEOs in
                         estimates recorded at the end of the data collection week) and actual hours
sample excluding India, worked
                        where the
                               (builtrecall
                                       from question
                                            diary data)was
                                                        fornot asked).of 758 CEOs (all CEOs in sample
                                                            a sample
                         excluding9India,9where9the9recall9question9was9not9asked).

    Table A.3 shows that total weekly hours worked are similar across countries and above 50 hours
per week on average (or above 9.8 hours a day) across all countries except India, where the average
number of hours worked across all CEOs is significantly lower (46 weekly hours, or 8.8 hours a day).
Overall, country fixed e↵ects are jointly significant at the 1% level and account for about 14% of
the variation in total hours worked observed in the data. In contrast, industry fixed e↵ects–while
being jointly significant at the 1% level–account for only 3% of the overall cross sectional variation
in total hours worked. In the main analysis we rely primarily on within country, within industry
comparisons of CEO hours worked across di↵erent governance types.


3     The Labor Supply of CEOs: Family vs. Professional CEOs
3.1     Di↵erences in Hours Worked
Figure 3 plots the distribution of weekly hours worked by family and professional CEOs as they
appear in the raw data. While there is a wide heterogeneity in hours worked across both types of
CEOs, the distribution of hours worked by family CEOs is entirely shifted to the left relative to
professional CEOs. This is the main stylized fact documented in this paper.
    Table 1 provides some additional summary statistics to better qualify the nature of this di↵er-
ence. The first and second rows report the recall and diary measures of hours worked described

a proxy of actual work hours. See Aguiar et al. (2012) for a comprehensive review of the growing literature in the
economics of time use.


                                                                                     9
Figure 3: CEO hours worked: di↵erences between family and professional CEOs in
               Figure'3')'Weekly'hours'worked,'Family'and'Professional'CEOs
the raw data




                            .04
                            .03
                            .02
                            .01
                            0




                                  20             40                60                80          100
                                                           Total hours worked
                                                   Weekly9hours9worked9B9Diary9measure9
                                                   Family CEOs              Professional CEOs


Notes: The graph shows the kernel distribution of total weekly hours worked (built from actual diary data) by a
                          Notes: The graph shows the kernel distribution of total weekly hours worked
sample of 1114 CEOs, of(built
                         whichfrom458 classified
                                   actual         as ”family
                                          diary data)         CEOs”,
                                                      by a sample of 1114and 656of classified
                                                                          CEOs,    which 458 as   ”professional CEOs”.
                                                                                              classified
                          as9"family9CEOs",9and96569classified9as9"professional9CEOs".

earlier. By both measures family CEOs work fewer hours, but importantly the di↵erence is much
larger (6.2 vs 3.6 hours) when we use the diary measure, as family CEOs tend to overestimate their
time at work while professional CEOs underestimate it.14
       The di↵erence remains stable (6.8 hours) when we only count work activities (that is dropping
travel time and personal time) that last longer than 15 minutes. The di↵erence between governance
types is due to two factors. Family CEOs start working later in the morning–at 9.16AM vs. 8.31AM
for professional managers–and devote a larger share of time to personal activities during business
hours (12.3% vs 8.6%).

3.2      Hours Worked and Firm Performance
The data shows a large statistically significant di↵erences in hours worked across CEOs, but are
these di↵erences interesting from an economic perspective? To provide some evidence on this point,
we examine three related issues. First, are there are performance di↵erences between family and
professional CEOs? Second, do CEO hours worked correlate with firm performance? And, finally,
to what extent do di↵erences in CEO hours worked account for the performance gap between family
and professional CEOs?
       To examine these questions, we match the CEO survey data with firm-level accounting data
  14
   Note that the recall measure is more prone to be biased by systematic misreporting (Robinson et al. (2011)).
Therefore, this finding allays the possible concern that the di↵erence in hours worked between family and professional
CEOs may be driven by professional CEOs intentionally overstating their e↵ort at work.



                                                                 10
                                      Table
                Table 1 - Summary Statistics      1: Di↵erences in time use between family and professional CEOs
                                                                                                               (1)                (2)                 (3)                      (4)

                CEO Use of Time                                                                                All           Family CEOs      Professional CEOs         Difference (3)-(2)
                                                                                                                                                                           (T-statistic)
                Total weekly hours worked - recall measure                                                    51.719            49.147              52.749                  3.602***
                                                                                                             (10.105)          (10.727)             (9.665)                    (4.46)
                Total weekly hours worked - diary measure                                                     52.009            48.378              54.543                  6.165***
                                                                                                             (11.026)          (10.504)            (10.674)                   (9.55)
                Total weekly hours worked excluding activities < 15 mins, personal & travel                   41.439            37.415              44.249                  6.834***
                                                                                                             (10.035)           (9.740)             (9.258)                  (11.87)
                Number of days at work                                                                         5.356             5.303               5.393                   0.0898*




11
                                                                                                              (0.695)           (0.639)             (0.729)                   (2.13)
                Beginning of work day (hour)                                                                   8.826             9.260               8.524                  -0.736***
                                                                                                              (1.161)           (1.213)             (1.019)                 (-10.96)
                End of work day (hour)                                                                        18.270            18.239              18.291                   0.0511
                                                                                                              (1.566)           (1.383)             (1.682)                   (0.54)
                Share of time spent in personal activities                                                     0.101             0.123               0.086                 -0.0379***
                                                                                                              (0.099)           (0.113)             (0.084)                  (-6.42)
                Number of Observations                                                                         1114               458                 656


     Notes: The table
             Notes: Theshows   summary
                        table shows      statistics
                                    summary statistics (means,   standard
                                                       (means, standard     deviation
                                                                        deviation        in parentheses
                                                                                  in parentheses               columns
                                                                                                 in columnsin1-3;          1-3;
                                                                                                                  differences   di↵erences
                                                                                                                              and t-statistic in and t-statistic
                                                                                                                                                 parentheses      in parentheses
                                                                                                                                                             in column              in column
                                                                                                                                                                       4) of CEO time
     4) of timeuse,
                useCEO
                    forcharacteristics,
                        the sample firm   and industry
                                        CEOs. Family level
                                                       CEOsdataare   the sample
                                                                for those  who CEOs.
                                                                                own Family
                                                                                     the firm
                                                                                           CEOsorare those who
                                                                                                   belong  to the
                                                                                                               ownfamily    or belong
                                                                                                                   the firmthat ownstothe
                                                                                                                                        thefirm.
                                                                                                                                            familyAll  owns the firm.
                                                                                                                                                  thatvariables       All
                                                                                                                                                                 collected in the
                variables in Panel A, B and C collected in the CEO time use survey. Import penetration = ln(import/production) in the firm ISIC REV3 industry, computed by averaging
     CEO timeOECD  survey.
              use STAN data relative to the 2006–2008 time period (last available year for all countries) across France, Germany, US and UK at the industry level. Lerner index of
                competition = (1-profit/sales) in the firm 3 digit SIC industry computed , as in Aghion et al. (2005), by averaging firm level data in ORBIS relative to the 2008-2012 time
                period across Brazil, France, Germany, India, US and UK at the industry level.
extracted from the Bureau Van Dijk’s ORBIS database. This database provides digitized and
comparable company accounts covering very large samples of private and publicly listed firms.15
We start by considering firm productivity as a proxy for firm performance (Syverson (2011)), and
estimate by OLS a basic production function of the form:
                                                                              0
                             yit = ↵F F am + ↵l lit + ↵k kit + ↵h hi +            Zit + uit                        (1)

where yit are sales, lit is labor, kit capital of firm i at time t and lower case letters denote natural
logarithms. CEO log hours worked are denoted by hi . We restrict the analysis to the years in
which the manager we interviewed had the role of CEO, and for each firm we keep the three most
recent years prior to the survey year to avoid selection on CEOs with longer tenure. We include
year and country by industry (at the two digit SIC level) dummies throughout, as well as a set of
interview noise controls to control for measurement error in the time use variables,16 and cluster
the standard errors by firm throughout the table.
       The results of this analysis are shown in Table 2. Column 1 shows that firms run by family CEOs
in our sample are on average less productive than those run by professional CEOs. The di↵erence
in log sales controlling for employment and capital between firms run by family CEOs and those
run by professional managers is -0.190 log points (standard error 0.071), which translates in a 20%
productivity gap with firms run by professional CEOs.17 The coefficient on capital and employment
are both precisely estimated and within the expected range of magnitude (0.336, standard error
0.031 for capital and 0.555, standard error 0.041 for labor).
       Column 2 shows that hours worked by the CEO are correlated with performance. The asso-
ciation between hours worked and productivity is positive and precisely estimated: a 10% change
in weekly hours worked is associated with a 3.3% increase in labor productivity.18 Furthermore,
  15
      See the Appendix for details.
  16
      The noise controls include: a dummy to denote if the time use data was recorded by the PA; 55 interviewer
dummies; a dummy to denote CEOs who formally report to an executive Chairman; 29 interview week dummy; a
self reported score given by the CEO to rank the representativeness of the week and a dummy to denote weeks with
a national or religious holiday. As expected, these controls improve the precision of the estimates of the coefficient
on CEO hours worked, but the results are robust to their exclusion. To the extent that our measures reflect time use
shocks that hit in that particular week or biases in reporting time use that are orthogonal to yearly firm outcomes,
the estimated coefficient on CEO hours worked will be biased towards zero.
   17
      This result is in line with previous research on family run firms by Morck et al. (1988), Smith and Amoako-
Adu (1999), Pérez-González (2006), and Bennedsen et al. (2007). Anderson and Reeb (2003), in contrast, report
that public firms with a large block held by an individual or family on average are assigned higher values by public
shareholders. However, it is worth noting that the positive e↵ect of family ownership documented in Anderson and
Reeb (2003) tapers o↵ from shares of family ownership of 30% and above, and turns negative at about 60%. Since,
as discussed earlier, the share of family ownership in the family firms in our sample is very high (66% at the median),
the two sets of results are in fact consistent with each other. The results di↵er to some extent from Villalonga and
Amit (2006a), in that we find a negative correlation between firm performance and family control even when the
CEO is a founder (in Villalonga and Amit (2006a), the negative e↵ect of family CEOs emerged only for second
generation CEOs and onwards). A possible reason for this discrepancy stands in the fact that our sample includes a
large fraction of private firms in six countries, while Villalonga and Amit (2006a) focus on listed US firms only.
   18
      For comparison, a one standard deviation change in capital would be associated with a 46% increase in produc-
tivity, while a standard deviation change in log CEO hours worked would result in an increase by 8%.



                                                          12
the inclusion of CEO hours worked reduces the coefficient on the family CEO dummy by 18%,
suggesting that the di↵erence in hours worked account for almost a fifth of the productivity gap.
       We repeat the exercise using the Olley and Pakes (1996) estimator of productivity in columns
3 and 4, finding consistent results: firms run by family CEO are on average less productive than
firms run by professional CEO, di↵erences in CEO hours worked are positively associated with
productivity, and account for about 20% of the productivity gap between family and professional
CEO firms. Columns 5 and 6 reveal a similar pattern when we use profits per employee as a metric
of firm performance, and Tobin’s Q in columns 7 and 8, which is available for the subset of listed
firms in the sample. In Appendix Table A.4 we report similar results using inputs rather than
outputs as dependent variables (log investments and log average wages).
       Overall, these findings show the presence of a significant relationship between the CEO owning,
or being part of the family that owns the firm, working fewer hours, and worse firm performance.
The evidence of a positive correlation between CEO e↵ort and firm performance is–to the best
of our knowledge–novel.19 One possible interpretation of this finding is that CEO e↵ort is a rel-
evant managerial input in production, and that di↵erences in hours worked between family and
professional CEOs may be one of the causal factors behind the performance di↵erences between
family and professional CEO firms. Unfortunately, however, the direction of causality behind these
relationships cannot be pinned down using cross-sectional data. For example, CEO hours worked
may have no direct e↵ect of firm performance, but more productive firms might demand more CEO
e↵ort, or unobservably more productive firms may be more likely to hire CEOs who happen to work
longer hours.20
  19
     Pencavel (2014) examines the correlation between hours of work and productivity among munition workers.
  20
     Note that unobserved heterogeneity across firms may also a↵ect the estimation of the coefficient ↵F in Equation
1 (i.e., the coefficient on the family CEO dummy). Bennedsen et al. (2007), for example, show that correcting for
the endogeneity and omitted variable concerns in the choice of a family CEO leads to a large reduction in the ↵F
coefficient, i.e. the appointment of a family CEO is more likely when unobserved firm performance is expected to
improve. Extrapolating their results to our sample, this would imply that the OLS coefficient on ↵F shown in Table 2
may be upward biased. While this hypothesis is certainly plausible, three pieces of evidence alleviate the endogeneity
concerns about ↵F in our sample. First, the magnitude of the productivity gap between family and professional
CEOs estimated with OLS is very similar to the one obtained using the Olley Pakes estimator of productivity, which
takes into consideration endogeneity biases in the production function estimation. Second, we are able to observe firm
performance before the CEO was appointed (363 firms) and, in this subsample, we do not find evidence of di↵erential
pre-appointment trends in performance between family and professional CEOs, even when focusing on professional
CEOs replacing a family CEO (see Appendix Table A.5). Third, if unobserved productivity were positively correlated
with CEO hours, including it as an additional regressor in Equation 1 would lead to a further decrease in the ↵F
coefficient, which is opposite to what we observe in Table 2. On a related note, we also considered whether the
reduction of the coefficient ↵F when CEO hours worked are included in the production function could be driven by
systematic di↵erences in reporting biases between family and professional CEOs. Two pieces of evidence, however,
suggest that mismeasurement does not systematically vary across governance types. First, the correlation between
actual and self-reported hours is not statistically di↵erent across governance types (the coefficient on the regression
of log perceived hours worked on log actual hours worked is 0.54 (se 0.07) for family CEOs and 0.49 (se 0.04) for
professional CEOs, and the di↵erence is not significant). Second, we examined whether family and professional CEOs
varied in terms of the representativeness of the week chosen for the data collection using a self-reported measure that
we collect from the CEO when reviewing the data. This variable is also not statistically di↵erent across family and
professional CEOs.



                                                          13
                                              Table 2: CEO hours worked and firm performance
                                                   (1)                (2)       (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)           (7)               (8)

      Dependent1variable                                 Log(sales)         Olley1Pakes1TFP1residual    Profits1per1Employee                Tobin's1Q


      Family1CEO                               !0.190***        !0.155**    !0.257***    !0.203***     !2.565**        !2.039      !0.373**       !0.332**
                                                 (0.071)         (0.074)      (0.073)      (0.077)      (1.235)       (1.269)       (0.152)        (0.155)
      Log(Hours1worked)                                         0.338**                   0.584***                    4.682*                       0.517*
                                                                 (0.140)                   (0.183)                    (2.467)                      (0.303)
      Log(Employment)                           0.555***        0.549***                                 !0.432        !0.562      0.247***       0.237***
                                                 (0.041)         (0.041)                                (0.452)       (0.466)       (0.072)        (0.070)
      Log(Capital)                              0.336***        0.333***                                                           !0.093**       !0.096**




14
                                                 (0.031)         (0.031)                                                            (0.044)        (0.043)
      Observations                                1415            1415         1383         1383         1722          1722           856            856
      Number1of1firms                              617             617         603          603          720           720            313            313


     Notes: *significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. All columns estimated by OLS (standard errors under coefficient clustered by
     firm). The variable ”CEO Hours Worked” is the log of the total hours the CEO devoted to work activities lasting more than 15 minutes (excluding travel)
     during the survey week. The dependent variable in columns 1 and 2 is log sales; in columns 3 and 4, the Olley Pakes (1996) estimator of productivity; in
     columns 5 and 6, profits per employee; in columns 7 and 8, Tobin’s Q. Accounting data run between 2007 and 2013. Each column includes a full set of
     country by 2 digits SIC and year dummies. We include only years in which the CEO was in office in all columns, and allow for a maximum of three years
     of accounts for each firm (3 most recent years with non missing data in ORBIS). All columns include the following noise controls include: a dummy to
     denote case in which the time use data was recorded by the CEO’s Personal Assistant; 55 interviewer dummies; a dummy to denote CEOs who formally
     report to an executive Chairman; 29 interview week dummy; a self reported score given by the CEO to rank the representativeness of the week and a
     dummy to denote weeks with a national or religious holiday.
         In what follows we abstract completely from the challenge of estimating the causal e↵ect of
CEO e↵ort on firm performance. Instead, we focus on a more specific question, which is: taking it
as a given that the variation in CEO e↵ort will to some extent reflect firm specific characteristics,
including di↵erences in firm performance, is there any role left for individual CEO preferences in
explaining the di↵erence in hours worked across CEOs? In particular, is it possible that family
CEOs may have a di↵erent preference for leisure relative to professional CEOs? In the next section
we present a simple model to guide the empirical investigation of these questions.


4         A Simple Model of CEO Labor Supply
The model contains two main elements: a production function that depends on CEO work time,
as mediated by a) the characteristics of the CEO and the firm and; b) CEO preferences. Time
allocated to an activity is taken as a proxy for CEO attention which, as in Geanakoplos and Milgrom
(1991), is akin to a factor of production and matches the empirical model in equation (1).
         Starting with technology, the performance of a firm is given by:
                                                                   1 2
                                       ygs = y gs + (ag + bs ) hgs  h                                         (2)
                                                                   2 gs
where g 2 {F, P } indicate the type of CEO–family or professional–and s 2 {L, H} denotes a binary
state of the world, to be discussed later. Firm performance–ygs –depends on the number of hours
that the CEO works, hgs . The marginal e↵ect of a CEO hour depends on his type (ag ), and the
state of the world (bs ). The negative quadratic term captures the idea that the marginal return of
CEO time is decreasing. Firm performance may also depend directly on the CEO type and on the
state of the world through y gs .
         Note that the only restriction that our formulation imposes, by having additive ag and bs rather
than a generic ags , is that the identity of the CEO does not interact directly with the state of the
world in determining the marginal e↵ect of CEO time on performance. In the model, we do not
take a stand on whether performance is innately higher or lower in firms run by family CEOs or
professional CEOs: y F s can be greater or smaller than y P s . We also remain agnostic as to whether
the return to CEO time is higher or lower for family compared to professional CEOs: aF can be
greater or smaller than aP . For example, the marginal productivity of a professional CEO might
be di↵erent from that of a family CEO because the family CEO can delegate more easily to other
family members who are more likely to work for the firm.
         CEO utility depends on the performance of the firm and on the cost of spending time at work:

                                                 ugs = cg y    ds hgs ,

where cg represents the relative weight of firm performance and work hours in the preference of a
CEO of type g;21 and ds captures the possibility that the cost of e↵ort, or the opportunity cost of
    21
         Di↵erences in cg may be innate to the CEO or compensation related. For example, di↵erent governance types


                                                          15
leisure, depends on the state of the world common across all CEOs.22
   In this simple set-up, given technology and preferences, the number of hours maximizing CEO
payo↵ is derived as:
                                                              ds
                                            h⇤gs = ag + bs                                                (3)
                                                              cg
   Equation (3) illustrates the primary identification challenge we face in a cross sectional setting,
and that were briefly discussed in Section 3.2. Namely, di↵erences between the hours worked
by family and professional CEOs can be due to either di↵erences in firm or CEO characteristics
that vary across governance types and determine the marginal product of CEO’s hours (ag ) or by
di↵erences in the relative weight the CEO assigns to firm performance (cg ).
   The model, however, also provides a key insight that can be used to identify at least the sign
of the di↵erence between cF and cP . More specifically, factors that a↵ect the opportunity cost of
leisure/marginal cost of e↵ort ds to the same extent for both CEO types can be used to identify
di↵erences in managerial preferences (i.e. whether cg e↵ectively di↵ers across CEOs). To see this,
suppose that the cost of e↵ort is higher (or the opportunity cost of leisure lower) in state H than
in state L (dH > dL ). In this case, we can show that, even if a change in the state of the world may
a↵ect the marginal productivity of CEO work through bs , the sign of the di↵erence-in-di↵erences
depends on the preference parameter cg only:

Proposition 1. The di↵erence in di↵erence in hours worked over CEO type and state of the world
has the same sign as the di↵erence in the preference parameter of family CEOs and professional
CEOs. Formally, if dH >dL then h⇤P H          h⇤F H > h⇤P L   h⇤F L if and only if cP >cF .23

   Intuitively, if preferences are the same across CEOs, and the di↵erence between family and
professional CEOs is solely driven by the marginal product of CEO time ag , an increase in the
marginal cost of e↵ort ds that a↵ects both types equally should make both types reduce hours
worked to the same extent, leaving their di↵erence constant. By the same logic, if the di↵erence in
hours worked across CEOs instead increases with ds , this is consistent with the idea that family
CEOs have a stronger preference for leisure relative to firm performance.
   We take this approach to the data in the next section.
may be associated with di↵erences in performance-related pay.
  22                                                            c
     Note that the utility function can be rewritten as ugs = dgs y hgs . Therefore, the parameter ds captures
di↵erences in the trade-o↵ between firm performance and leisure.
  23
     Proof. Given the optimal h and the assumption that dH >dL ,
                                                                  h                   i
                          sign [h⇤F L h⇤F H (h⇤N L h⇤N H )] = sign dcH dL
                                                                       cF
                                                                            dH
                                                                            cN
                                                                                + cdN
                                                                                    L
                                  h ⇣         ⌘          i           F
                                       1    1
                          = sign      cN   cF
                                                (dH dL ) = sign [cN cF ]




                                                     16
5         Why do Family CEOs Work Less than Professional Managers?
5.1        The Role of Firm, CEO and Industry Characteristics
In line with earlier work (e.g. Pérez-González (2006)), family CEOs are di↵erent in other dimensions
besides how long they work. This is shown in Table 3, Panels A, B and C. Panel A shows that
family and professional CEOs have similar demographics: the average CEO is 51 years old and
96% of CEOs are men. However, the share of family CEOs with a college degree and/or an MBA is
significantly lower relative to professional managers (90% vs. 94% for a college degree, p-value <.1,
and 43% vs 63% for an MBA degree, p-value<.01). Family CEOs are also less likely to have worked
abroad (39% vs. 54% , p-value<.01) and more likely to have longer tenure both as CEOs (16 vs 7
years, p-value<.01) and in other positions with the same firm (23 vs 13 years, p-value<.01).
         Panel B shows that the average firm has 1,571 employees and that family CEOs manage smaller
firms (1,037 vs 1,945 employees, p-value>.1). 24% of the sample firms are part of foreign multina-
tionals, and these are less likely to be managed by family CEOs (19% vs 28%, p-value<.01). The
organization of the firm also di↵ers: family CEOs have fewer direct reports (7.4 vs 8, p-value<.05)
and are also less likely to have a COO (18% vs 31%, p-value<.01), while they are much more likely
to have their o↵springs in executive positions within the firm (.24 sons and .10 daughters vs. .005
and .006, p-values<.01).
         Finally, Panel C describes the external environment in which these firms operate. 57% of the
sample firms are located in emerging economies (India or Brazil), with this number being higher
for firms led by family CEOs (78% vs 43%, p-value<.01). The sample firms are distributed across
32 di↵erent two digits SIC sectors, the largest of which, SIC 28 (Chemicals and Allied Products),
accounts for 13% of the firms. The distribution of family and professional CEOs are generally
balanced across sectors. We reject the null that the sector dummies do not predict CEO type only
for 4 out of the 32 sectors, three of which account for less than 2% of the sample each. Family
and professional CEOs also face a similar level of product market competition, as measured by
the Lerner Index, which is defined as (1-profit/sales) calculated as the average across the entire
population of firms in Orbis in the sample countries for the 5 years preceding the data collection,
and is specific to the firm three digit industry (Aghion et al. (2005)). We obtain similar results when
we use the degree of import penetration as a proxy for product market competition, measured as
the share of total imports relative to domestic production in the industry in which the firm operates,
also aggregated up at the industry level.24
    To assess the relevance of these factors in accounting for the gap in hours worked between family
and professional CEOs, we estimate an empirical version of equation (3), i.e.:

                                  hijc = ↵F F ami + Ci + Fi +           jc   + "ijc                              (4)
    24
    See Section A.3 in the Appendix for more information on the construction of the Lerner and the import penetration
variables.



                                                         17
Table 3: Family and professional CEOs: di↵erences in manager and firm characteristics
                                                                                                (1)         (2)           (3)            (4)

                                                                                                                      Professional    Difference
  Panel A. CEO characteristics                                                                  All     Family CEOs      CEOs            (3)-(2)
                                                                                                                                     (T-statistic)
  Age                                                                                         50.930      50.562         51.187         0.625
                                                                                              (8.458)     (9.738)        (7.425)        (1.21)
  Male (=1 if CEO is male)                                                                     0.961       0.950          0.970        0.0197
                                                                                              (0.193)     (0.219)        (0.172)        (1.68)
  College degree (=1 if CEO has a college degree)                                              0.925       0.904          0.939        0.0351*
                                                                                              (0.264)     (0.295)        (0.239)        (2.19)
  MBA (=1 if CEO has been awarded an MBA)                                                      0.548       0.430          0.631        0.201***
                                                                                              (0.498)     (0.496)        (0.483)        (6.76)
  Tenure as CEO (number of years)                                                             10.298      15.586          6.602       -8.984***
                                                                                              (9.550)    (10.514)        (6.677)      (-17.40)
  Tenure in firm (number of years)                                                            17.116      22.862         13.119       -9.742***
                                                                                             (11.597)    (10.497)       (10.611)      (-15.11)
  Experience abroad (=1 if CEO has had worked experience abroad)                               0.482       0.393          0.544        0.151***
                                                                                              (0.500)     (0.489)        (0.498)        (5.02)
  CEO holds positions in other firms (=1 if CEO hold managerial positions in other firms)      0.418       0.456          0.392       -0.0646*
                                                                                              (0.494)     (0.499)        (0.489)       (-2.15)

  Panel B. Firm characteristics

  Domestic or Foreign Multinational (=1 if firm is owned by a foreign or domestic MNE)          0.242      0.188       0.280         0.0927***
                                                                                               (0.429)    (0.391)     (0.450)           (3.57)
  Number of Employees                                                                         1571.051   1036.575    1945.432           908.9
                                                                                            (10127.428) (3660.922) (12837.271)          (1.47)
  Firm age                                                                                     49.185     43.295      53.320           10.02***
                                                                                              (45.360)   (31.940)    (52.412)             (3.64)
  Listed status                                                                                 0.432      0.544       0.354          -0.190***
                                                                                               (0.496)    (0.499)     (0.478)            (-6.41)
  Number of CEO direct reports                                                                  7.775      7.389       8.044           0.656**
                                                                                               (3.774)    (3.979)     (3.604)           (2.86)
  COO (=1 if COO exists)                                                                        0.259      0.177       0.317           0.140***
                                                                                               (0.439)    (0.382)     (0.466)           (5.32)
  Number of sons in management positions                                                        0.103      0.245       0.005          -0.240***
                                                                                               (0.304)    (0.430)     (0.068)         (-14.04)
  Number of daughters in management positions                                                   0.043      0.096       0.006         -0.0900***
                                                                                               (0.203)    (0.295)     (0.078)          (-7.45)
  Data collected through the CEO personal assistant                                             0.428      0.373       0.466          0.0931**
                                                                                               (0.495)    (0.484)     (0.499)           (3.10)

  Panel C. External Environment

  Located in emerging economies (=1 if India or Brazil)                                        0.573       0.779         0.428       -0.351***
                                                                                              (0.495)     (0.415)       (0.495)        (-12.43)
  Lerner Index                                                                                 1.227       1.225         1.229       0.00337
                                                                                              (0.412)     (0.419)       (0.408)         (0.13)
  Import Penetration                                                                           0.614       0.638         0.597        -0.0406
                                                                                              (0.566)     (0.623)       (0.523)        (-1.12)
  Number of Observations                                                                       1114         458           656


Notes: The table shows summary statistics (means, standard deviation in parentheses in columns 1-3; di↵erences
and t-statistic in parentheses in column 4) of CEO characteristics, firm and industry level data for the sample CEOs.
Family CEOs are those who own the firm or belong to the family that owns the firm. All variables in Panel A and B
collected in the CEO time use survey. Import penetration = ln(import/production) in the firm ISIC REV3 industry,
computed by averaging OECD STAN data relative to the 2006–2008 time period (last available year for all countries)
across France, Germany, US and UK at the industry level. Lerner index of competition = (1-profit/sales) in the firm
3 digit SIC industry computed, as in Aghion et al. (2005), by averaging firm level data in ORBIS relative to the
2008-2012 time period across Brazil, France, Germany, India, US and UK at the industry level.
                                                                         18
 Where hijc is the log of total weekly hours worked by CEO i in industry j in country c, F ami

equals 1 if firm i is owned by a family and the CEO belongs to the family, while F ami = 0 if
firm i is led by a professional CEO regardless of ownership status, C, F are vectors of CEO and
firm characteristics,    jc   are industry by country fixed e↵ects. We examine the extent to which the
magnitude and the significance of the coefficient ↵F is a↵ected by the inclusion of these controls
(robust standard errors are reported in parenthesis under the coefficients).
       The results are shown in Table 4. Column 1 shows that the unconditional di↵erence between the
hours worked of family and professional CEOs is 16% (0.18 log points). Column 2 shows that one
third of this di↵erence is due to di↵erences across countries, namely CEOs in emerging economies
record fewer hours and family CEOs are more likely to be located there (more details on country
di↵erences are shown in Table A.3). Adding country by 2 digit SIC industry fixed e↵ects reduces
the di↵erence from 16% to 11%.
       Column 3 shows that older CEOs work fewer hours (coefficient on log CEO age is -0.165,
significant at the 1% level). While proxies for CEO skills (college degree dummy, MBA dummy,
and an indicator to denote CEOs with work experience abroad) are all positively but only weakly
correlated with hours worked. The inclusion of these additional controls leaves the coefficient on
the family CEO dummy unchanged.
       In Column 4 we examine the association between industry and firm characteristics and CEO
hours worked by including a set of variables likely to a↵ect the magnitude and the complexity of
CEO workload such as firm size (in terms of employees), firm age and a dummy denoting firms that
are either domestic or foreign multinationals to capture the possibility of extended working hours
due to the necessity of managing across di↵erent time zones. Among these variables, only firm size
is positively and significantly correlated with CEO hours worked. A 10% increase in firm size is
associated with a 0.25% increase in CEO hours worked.25 Overall, however, industry fixed e↵ects,
CEO and firm characteristics explain a small portion of the di↵erence in hours worked between
family and professional CEOs, which remains unchanged in magnitude even when these additional
controls are included.
       Column 5 controls for firm organizational features, i.e. the number of CEO direct reports, a
dummy to denote the presence of a COO, and the number of sons and/or daughters employed in
senior managerial positions. These variables are of particular interest for our purposes, since they
di↵er systematically between firms managed by family and professional CEOs–as shown in Table
3–and may at the same time significantly shape overall the demands on CEO time.26 Di↵erences in
  25
     For a subsample of firms, we were able to build alternative measures of firm size based on accounting data using
information of firm level sales. We also investigated whether the di↵erences in hours worked could be accounted
for di↵erent growth rates–rather than levels–of sales. We found similar results, namely that CEO hours worked are
higher in larger firms, but that does not account for the di↵erences between family and professional CEOs. CEO
hours worked are positively but not significantly correlated with the growth rate of firm sales, and the inclusion of
the variable does not a↵ect the family CEO dummy (see Appendix Table A.7 for details).
  26
     For example, the presence of other family members in top managerial positions may facilitate the distribution of



                                                         19
Table 4: Di↵erences in hours worked between family and professional CEOs controlling
forTable&2&(&Family&vs.&Professional&CEOs&(&Cross&sectional&differences&in&Hours&Worked
     CEO, industry and firm characteristics
                                                            (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)             (6)           (7)
   Dependent&Variable                                                                        Log(Hours&Worked)

   Family&CEO                                           !0.180***    !0.111***     !0.106***    !0.102***     !0.088***    !0.088***     !0.078***
                                                        (0.015)        (0.018)       (0.020)      (0.019)       (0.020)      (0.020)       (0.021)
   Family&Ownership,&External&CEO                                                                                                           0.029
                                                                                                                                           (0.019)
   CEO&holds&positions&in&other&firms                                                 0.022        0.016         0.018        0.014         0.014
                                                                                     (0.015)      (0.015)       (0.015)      (0.015)       (0.015)
   Log(CEO&age)                                                                    !0.165***    !0.181***     !0.138***    !0.143***     !0.147***
                                                                                     (0.043)      (0.043)       (0.045)      (0.045)       (0.045)
   Log(1+CEO&tenure&in&firm)                                                          !0.004       !0.007        !0.007       !0.006        !0.006
                                                                                     (0.010)      (0.011)       (0.010)      (0.011)       (0.011)
   CEO&holds&College&degree                                                           0.052        0.044         0.041       0.054*         0.053
                                                                                     (0.032)      (0.033)       (0.033)      (0.033)       (0.033)
   CEO&holds&MBA&degree                                                               0.011        0.006         0.007        0.006         0.006
                                                                                     (0.018)      (0.018)       (0.017)      (0.018)       (0.018)
   CEO&has&study/work&experience&abroad                                               0.016        0.006         0.004        !0.003        !0.002
                                                                                     (0.016)      (0.016)       (0.016)      (0.017)       (0.016)
   Log(Employment)                                                                               0.025***      0.021***     0.024***      0.024***
                                                                                                  (0.007)       (0.007)      (0.007)       (0.007)
   Log(Firm&age)                                                                                   0.006         0.004        0.003         0.003
                                                                                                  (0.010)       (0.010)      (0.011)       (0.011)
   MNE                                                                                             0.029         0.024       0.033*        0.033*
                                                                                                  (0.020)       (0.020)      (0.019)       (0.019)
   Listed                                                                                          !0.033        !0.032       !0.009        !0.005
                                                                                                  (0.022)       (0.023)      (0.024)       (0.024)
   Number&of&CEO&direct&reports                                                                                0.007***     0.006***      0.006***
                                                                                                                (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.002)
   COO&exists                                                                                                    !0.009       !0.018        !0.017
                                                                                                                (0.019)      (0.020)       (0.020)
   Number&of&sons&in&management&positions                                                                      !0.049**    !0.060***     !0.060***
                                                                                                                (0.022)      (0.021)       (0.021)
   Number&of&daughters&in&management&positions                                                                   0.004        !0.013        !0.013
                                                                                                                (0.029)      (0.029)       (0.029)
   Data&collected&through&the&CEO&personal&assistant                                                                          !0.001        !0.000
                                                                                                                             (0.017)       (0.017)
   R(squared                                              0.118        0.212         0.229        0.245         0.256         0.347         0.348
   Number&of&firms                                        1,114        1,114         1,114        1,114         1,114         1,114         1,114
   Country*Industry&dummies                                 n            y             y            y             y              y             y
   Noise&controls                                           n            n             n            n             n              y             y
   Notes: *significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. All columns estimated by OLS (robust standard errors in parenthesis). The
Notes:
  variable*significant at 10%;
           "CEO Hours Worked"      **logsignificant
                              is the                   at 5%;
                                          of the total hours the ***  significant
                                                                 CEO devoted       atactivities
                                                                             to work   1%. All        columns
                                                                                                lasting more thanestimated   by OLS travel)
                                                                                                                  15 minutes (excluding (robust
   during theerrors
standard      survey in
                      week. The variable "CEO
                        parenthesis).      TheHours Worked”CEO
                                               variable    ! RecallHours
                                                                   Measure" is the log of
                                                                         Worked”       is the
                                                                                           thetotal
                                                                                                loghours the total
                                                                                                    of the   CEO devoted
                                                                                                                   hourstothe
                                                                                                                           work activities
                                                                                                                              CEO          as
                                                                                                                                      devoted
   recalled by the CEO at the end of the survey week. Family CEO=1 for those who own the firm or belong to the family that owns the firm, and 0
to work activities lasting more than 15 minutes (excluding travel) during the survey week. Family CEO=1 for those
   otherwise. Industry dummies are 33 two digits SIC codes. Noise controls include: a dummy to denote if the time use data was recorded by the
whoPA;own    the firm dummies;
       55 interviewer  or belong     to the to
                                  a dummy    family
                                                denotethat
                                                       CEOsowns    the firm,
                                                             who formally      andto 0anotherwise.
                                                                           report                    Family 29
                                                                                         executive Chairman;  Ownership,     External
                                                                                                                interview week    dummy; CEO=1
                                                                                                                                           a self
forreportedZscoreZgivenZbyZtheZCEOZtoZrankZtheZrepresentativenessZofZtheZweekZandZaZdummyZtoZdenoteZweeksZwithZaZnationalZorZreligiousZholiday.
     professional CEOs working in firms owned by a family, and 0 otherwise. Industry dummies are 33 two digits
SIC codes. Noise controls include: a dummy to denote if the time use data was recorded by the PA; 55 interviewer
dummies; a dummy to denote CEOs who formally report to an executive Chairman; 29 interview week dummy; a
self reported score given by the CEO to rank the representativeness of the week and a dummy to denote weeks with
a national or religious holiday.




                                                                          20
organizational structure are indeed correlated with CEO hours worked. Namely, CEOs who have a
larger number of direct reports work longer hours, while those whose sons hold senior management
positions in the firm work fewer hours. Di↵erences in organizational structure reduce the coefficient
on family CEOs by 2 percentage points, but this remains economically and statistically significant.
    Column 6 further probes the result to the inclusion of the set of interview noise controls included
in the production function results in Table 2 to proxy for systematic di↵erences in measurement
error across CEO types. Reassuringly, the inclusion of these controls leaves the magnitude and
the significance of the family CEO dummy unchanged. We also note that there is no correlation
between the identity of the survey respondent (the PA or the CEO himself) and hours worked,
which allays concerns that PAs have more limited information or that CEOs who choose to report
their own time use overstate hours worked.27
    Since 16% of the sample firms are owned by a family and managed by a professional CEO we
can separately identify the e↵ect of family CEOs from the e↵ect of family ownership. Column 7
shows that professional CEOs working in firms owned by a founder or a family are statistically
indistinguishable from other professional CEOs. This finding is important, as it suggests that the
di↵erences in hours worked between family and professional CEOs are not due to factors related to
family ownership per-se, but are tightly linked to the presence of a family affiliated manager.

Robustness Checks

Table A.6 in the Appendix shows a battery of robustness checks, including expressing CEO hours
worked in levels, using a negative binomial regressions to take into account the count nature of the
hours data, estimating the regression separately for developing (Brazil and India) and developed
(France, Germany, UK and US) economies, and the first wave of the survey (which focused on India
exclusively) and the second wave of the survey (in which all the other countries were covered). The
magnitude and significance of the family CEO dummy are remarkable stable across methods and
samples.
    Finally, in Appendix Tables A.8 and A.9 we explore whether the results vary when we consider
first and second generation family CEOs separately, i.e. founders separately from descendants.
Table A.8 shows that, unconditionally, founders work 1.3 fewer hours per week relative to profes-
sional CEOs, but they are also are older, less educated, have longer tenure and are mostly located
CEO workload across a team of trusted managers (Bloom et al. (2013)). These organizational decisions may clearly
also be endogenous to CEO e↵ort.
  27
     The coefficient remains stable at .088 even if we include all the other noise controls but we remove the variable
capturing the identity of the respondent. To address measurement issue concerns, we also replicated the analysis
using a recall measure of hours worked, rather than the actual diary based measure. This is because, with significant
reporting biases, we would expect the di↵erence in hours worked between family and professional CEOs to be larger
when using the recall measure, which is easier to manipulate. In contrast with this hypothesis, we find that the
estimated di↵erence in hours worked between family and professional CEOs is smaller when we use the recall measure.
This is consistent with the fact that–as shown in Table 1–family CEOs are more likely to overstate hours worked
relative to professional CEOs.



                                                         21
in emerging economies. Once all observable characteristics are controlled for, Columns 5 and 6 in
Table A.9 show that both founder and descendant CEOs affiliated with the owning family work
9% fewer hours than professional CEOs.28

Summary

Taken together, the evidence presented so far does not support the idea that the firm or managerial
characteristics a↵ecting the marginal product of CEO time–ag in the terminology of the model–are
the sole drivers of the observed di↵erences in hours worked across CEOs. First, the correlation
between any of these variables and hours worked is an order of magnitude smaller than the e↵ect
of CEO type. Second, di↵erences in CEO and firm observable characteristics, including family
ownership, explain only about half of the di↵erence in total hours between family and professional
CEOs.29
       The remaining gap in hours worked might be due to other unobservable di↵erences that are
specific to family firms, but only when managed by family CEOs, and/or to di↵erences in the
preferences of the CEOs. We attempt to disentangle these two potential sources of variation in
Section 5.2 below.

5.2      CEO Preferences
Heterogeneity across Firms

Proposition 1 of the model suggests that di↵erences in managerial preferences across CEOs should
result in di↵erential responses with respect to variations in the opportunity cost of leisure common
across across all CEOs. We investigate this idea by examining two factors that should a↵ect the
CEO opportunity cost of leisure: firm size and the level of competition the firm is exposed to.
       In both cases, the intuition is straightforward. The opportunity cost of leisure is likely to be
higher in larger firms because the CEO controls a larger volume of activity. Therefore, the marginal
hour of leisure deprives more people of the input of the CEO, and each decision not taken during
that hour has larger monetary value. This is akin to the “scale of operations” e↵ect (Mayer (1960)).
Symmetrically, the opportunity cost of leisure is likely to be higher in more competitive settings,
because the baseline probability of survival is lower, and CEO e↵ort is more likely to be essential
to keep the firm in business. The marginal hour of leisure can make the di↵erence between firm
death and survival in competitive industries while its consequences are less dire for firms that are
sheltered from competition.
  28
      While it is important to notice that the founders managed firms in our sample are not start-ups (the average
founder has been managing his firm for 22 years), the finding that founder and descendant CEOs behave similarly
is in line with recent findings that both adopt worse managerial practices (Bloom and Van Reenen (2007)) and that
they share a similar business philosophy and firm governance (Mullins and Schoar (2013)).
   29
      To see this, compare the coefficient on the family CEO dummy in Table 4, Column 1 with the one in Column 7.



                                                       22
   Table 5 reports the estimates of

                  hijc = ↵F F ami + F ami ⇤ Xij + Xij + Ci ' + Fi +         jc   + "ijc             (5)

   where Xij is a measure of firm i size, or a measure of competition in industry j, and all
other variables are as defined above. Proposition 1 makes clear that, under the assumption that
the opportunity cost of leisure is higher in larger firms and in more competitive industries, the
di↵erence in di↵erence parameter      has the same sign as the di↵erence in preferences between
professional and family CEOs. Namely, > 0 implies that, compared to family CEOs, professional
CEOs put more weight on firm performance relative to leisure.
   In Table 5 we use two measures of firm size, number of employees and revenues, and two measures
of competition, the Lerner index and import penetration, both defined at the industry (SIC 3
and ISIC Rev1, respectively) level. The estimates in columns 1 to 4 reveal a consistent picture:
when the opportunity cost of leisure is higher, the di↵erence in hours worked between family and
professional CEOs is smaller. The estimates of        are positive and statistically di↵erent from zero
for all four measures, and the magnitudes are economically meaningful. The di↵erence between
family and professional CEOs is 12% (11%) in firms at the 10th percentile of the distribution of log
employment (log sales) but only 4% (5%) in firms at the 90th percentile of the same distribution.
Thus, family CEOs in large firms work almost as much as their professional counterparts, while
those in small firms work significantly less. Likewise, the di↵erence between family and professional
CEOs is 10% in low competition industries at the 10th percentile of the Lerner (import penetration)
index but only 5% in high competition industries at the 90th percentile. These magnitudes are
almost identical when we consider import penetration as an alternative proxy for competition.
   In light of Proposition 1, the estimates with respect to size and competition are consistent
with a scenario in which family CEOs put lower weight on firm performance relative to leisure,
that is cP > cF . However, an observationally equivalent explanation is that there is a distribution
of preferences for leisure among family CEOs, and variation in the opportunity cost of leisure at
the firm or industry level determines sorting, so that leisure-loving family CEOs are only found in
small firms and low-competition industries. In this case, leisure-loving family CEOs drop out rather
than working longer hours, although note that di↵erences in preferences still explain di↵erences in
hours worked. The next subsection exploits variation in the cost of e↵ort across days to shed light
on whether family and professional CEOs adjust their hours di↵erently in response to exogenous
shocks.

Heterogeneity across Days

For the two largest of our sample countries–India and Brazil– we are able to exploit shocks a↵ecting
the cost of CEO e↵ort during our sample week. In these two countries, the data collection period
coincided with intense rainfall days (especially in India, in which it overlapped with the onset and


                                                 23
   Table 3 - Difference in difference estimates I
                                            Table 5: Firm Size and Competition
                                                                   (1)                    (2)                       (3)                   (4)
                                                                                                Log(Hours Worked)
   Dependent Variable

   Family CEO                                                  -0.298***              -0.292***               -0.167***               -0.123***
                                                                 (0.078)                (0.093)                 (0.043)                 (0.030)
   Log(Employment)                                                0.011                0.020**                 0.024***                0.026***
                                                                 (0.008)                (0.009)                 (0.007)                 (0.006)
   Family CEO*Log(Employment)                                   0.034***
                                                                 (0.012)
   Log(Sales)                                                                            -0.001
                                                                                        (0.008)
   Family CEO*Log(Sales)                                                                0.021**
                                                                                        (0.009)
   Lerner index                                                                                                 0.028
                                                                                                               (0.017)
   Family CEO*Lerner index                                                                                     0.059**
                                                                                                               (0.026)
   Family CEO*Import Penetration (OECD)                                                                                                0.044**
                                                                                                                                       (0.018)
   R-squared                                                     0.353                   0.357                  0.350                   0.276
   Number of firms                                               1,107                   1,089                  1,020                   1,006
   Country by Industry dummies                                     y                       y                      n                       n
   Country dummies                                                 n                       n                      y                       y
   Industry dummies                                                n                       n                      y                       y
   CEO characteristics                                             y                       y                      y                       y
   Firm characteristics                                            y                       y                      y                       y
   Noise controls                                                  y                       y                      y                       y

  Notes:*significant
Notes:   *significant atat
                         10%; ** significant
                           10%;              at 5%; ***
                                  ** significant        significant
                                                     at 5%;         at 1%. All columns
                                                              *** significant          estimated
                                                                                  at 1%.         by OLS. estimated
                                                                                           All columns   In all columnsby
                                                                                                                        robust
                                                                                                                          OLS. standard errors
                                                                                                                                  The variable
  under coefficient clustered by 3 digits SIC codes. The variable "CEO Hours Worked" is the log of the total hours the CEO devoted to work
”CEO   Hours Worked” is the log of the total hours the CEO devoted to work activities lasting more than 15 minutes
   activities lasting more than 15 minutes (excluding travel) during the survey week. Family CEO=1 for those who own the firm or belong to the
(excluding
  family thattravel)
              owns theduring   the
                       firm, and   survey week.
                                 0 otherwise.        Family
                                              All columns     CEO=1
                                                          include countryfor
                                                                          andthose  who
                                                                              industry   own as
                                                                                       dummis, thewell
                                                                                                   firm   or belong
                                                                                                       as CEOand firm to  the familyand
                                                                                                                       characteristics, that
  noisethe
owns    controls.
           firm,Industry
                  and 0 dummies are 33
                         otherwise.    two digits
                                     Lerner       SIC codes.
                                              index          CEO characteristics
                                                       of competition            are a dummy to denote
                                                                         = (1-profit/sales)      in theCEOs
                                                                                                        firmholding
                                                                                                              threea digit
                                                                                                                     managerial
                                                                                                                           SIC orindustry
                                                                                                                                   board
   position in another firm, the log of CEO age, the log of one plus number of years CEO has been employed in the firm, a dummy to denote
computed,   as in Aghion et al. (2005), by averaging firm level data in ORBIS relative to the 2008-2012 time period
  CEOs holding a college degree, a dummy to denote CEOs holding an MBA or equivalent degree, a dummy to denote CEO that have worked or
  studied
across    abroad.
       Brazil,    Firm characteristics
               France,   Germany, are     the log
                                       India,  USofand
                                                    one UK
                                                        plus firm age,industry
                                                             at the    a dummy level.
                                                                               to denote foreignpenetration
                                                                                      Import     or domestic multinationals, the number of
                                                                                                              = ln(import/production)
in people reporting
   the firm   ISICdirectly
                    REV3toindustry,
                           the CEO, a dummy to denote
                                      computed        whether the OECD
                                                  by averaging    firm employs
                                                                          STAN a COO, the relative
                                                                                   data   number ofto
                                                                                                    CEO's
                                                                                                      thesons and daughters
                                                                                                           2006–2008    timeholding
                                                                                                                              period
   a managerial position in the same firm. Noise controls include: a dummy to denote cases in which the time use data was recorded by the
(last available
   CEO's          year for 55allinterviewer
         Personal Assistant;      countries)   acrossa France,
                                            dummies;   dummy toGermany,
                                                               denote CEOsUS
                                                                          whoand  UKreport
                                                                              formally at the industry
                                                                                           to an executivelevel (the 29linear
                                                                                                           Chairman;            term
                                                                                                                         interview
is week dummy;
   omitted     a self
           as is      reportedcollinear
                  perfectly    score givenwith
                                           by thetwo
                                                  CEOdigits
                                                      to rankSIC
                                                              the representativeness
                                                                   dummies, also of    the weekas
                                                                                     included   andcontrols).
                                                                                                    a dummy toAll
                                                                                                               denote weeks with
                                                                                                                  columns        a
                                                                                                                            include
   national or religious holiday. Import penetration = Log(import/production) in the firm ISIC REV3 industry, computed by averaging OECD STAN
country and industry dummies, as well as CEO and firm characteristics, and noise controls. Industry dummies are
   data relative to the 2006–2008 time period (last available year for all countries) across France, Germany, US and UK at the industry level.
33 Lerner
    two digits
          index ofSIC   codes. =CEO
                    competition           characteristics
                                   (1-profit/sales) in the firmare   a dummy
                                                                3 digit           to computed
                                                                        SIC industry  denote CEOs       holding
                                                                                               , as in Aghion et al.a(2005),
                                                                                                                      managerial     or board
                                                                                                                             by averaging         position
                                                                                                                                          firm level data
   in ORBIS relative to the 2008-2012   time period   across Brazil, France, Germany,  India, US and  UK at the
in another firm, the log of CEO age, the log of one plus number of years CEO has been employed in the firm, a   industry  level.

dummy to denote CEOs holding a college degree, a dummy to denote CEOs holding an MBA or equivalent degree, a
dummy to denote CEO that have worked or studied abroad. Firm characteristics are the log of one plus firm age, a
dummy to denote foreign or domestic multinationals, the number of people reporting directly to the CEO, a dummy
to denote whether the firm employs a COO, the number of CEO’s sons and daughters holding a managerial position
in the same firm. Noise controls include: a dummy to denote cases in which the time use data was recorded by the
CEO’s Personal Assistant; 55 interviewer dummies; a dummy to denote CEOs who formally report to an executive
Chairman; 29 interview week dummy; a self reported score given by the CEO to rank the representativeness of the
week and a dummy to denote weeks with a national or religious holiday. Robust standard errors in columns 1 and
2. Standard errors are clustered at the three digit SIC level in column 3, and at the ISIC REV3 industry level in
column 4.


                                                                           24
early development of the monsoon rainfall season) and with popular sports tournaments (cricket
in India and soccer in Brazil). These events a↵ect the cost of e↵ort on some days but not on
others and, crucially, a↵ect both family and non family CEOs in the sample. These features of
the shocks provide enough variation to identify whether CEOs display a di↵erential reaction to the
same exogenous shocks.
       Extreme rainfall disrupts local transportation in urban areas (where most of the CEOs in our
sample are located), adding delays and inconveniences that increase the cost of e↵ort. We obtain
rainfall data for all the major weather stations in India and Brazil for the period in which the
data was collected, as well as for previous months. We classify a day as having extreme rain if its
deviation from the driest month in the year preceding the survey (May 2011 in India and July 2012
in Brazil) falls in the upper third of the station level distribution of the same variable. By this
measure, 403 CEOs out of 597 CEOs (or 67% of the sample) experience extreme rain at least once
during the survey week.30
       The second quasi-natural experiment we exploit is the happening of important sport matches,
cricket in India and soccer in Brazil. These sports are extremely popular in these countries, and
the cost of e↵ort is likely to be higher during a match for an average individual, including CEOs.
For this test, we take advantage of the fact that our data collection partially overlapped with key
events: the playo↵s, semifinals and finals of a major cricket tournament, the Indian Premier League
(IPL), in India; and popular soccer matches played by top teams in the 2013 State Football League
in Brazil.31 For both countries, we collect data on the timing of these matches and classify a day
to have a sport event if one is scheduled on the day. Since only 100 CEOs across the two countries
are exposed to at least one match during the survey week, this test will inherently have less power
than the earlier test to identify CEOs’ responses.
       For this analysis, we use total hours of work at the daily level (since this is the frequency at
which the shocks occur) to estimate the following specification:


                   hid = ↵F F ami + Xd + F ami ⇤ Xd + Ci ⇢ + Fi ' + Si + Ii ⌘ + "id                              (6)

where hid is one plus the log of daily hours worked by CEO i on day d, F ami = 1 if CEO i belongs
to the owning family as defined above, Xd = 1 if day d has extreme rainfall in Columns 1-4 and a
sport match in Columns 5-8 and C, F, S, I are vectors of CEO, firm, and industry characteristics as
defined in equation 4; standard errors are clustered at the firm and date level across all regressions.
The coefficient of interest is      , the parameter measuring whether family and professional CEOs
react di↵erently to shocks increasing the marginal cost of e↵ort.
       The results of this estimation are shown in Table 6. Column 1 restricts the sample to Indian
  30
    See the Appendix for details on the construction of the rain shock variable.
  31
    In Brazil, since the data collection did not overlap with finals or semi-finals we focus on matches played by the
top 30 teams (as measured by fanbase size). See the Appendix for details.




                                                         25
firms, and replicates our baseline specification controlling for the extreme rain dummy. The di↵er-
ence in hours worked between family and professional CEOs is in line with earlier estimates (8%),
while the coefficient on extreme rain is negative, but not significant. In column 2 we include the
interaction family CEO*rain. This shows that family CEOs reduce their hours on a rainy day
significantly more than professional CEOs (coefficient -0.066, standard error 0.030). Columns 3
and 4 show that also in Brazil family CEOs are much more likely to react to rain shocks relative to
professional CEOs. The coefficient is also negative and significant at the 10% level, with a similar
magnitude (coefficient -0.071, standard error 0.041). The results are similar when we pool the
                                                                                      32
sample across the two countries (see column 1 in Appendix Table A.10).
       According to the model, the di↵erential reaction to common shocks identifies the sign of the
di↵erence in preferences if and only if the cost shock (rain) a↵ects all CEOs equally regardless
of firm governance. This assumption fails if factors correlated with firm governance type a↵ect
the e↵ect of rain shocks on the marginal cost or the marginal product of CEO time, namely
cov("id ,F ami ⇤ Raind ) 6= 0. For example, firms run by family CEOs might have characteristics that
make them more prone to be disrupted by rain (e.g., if they are more likely to have old machinery
or bad maintenance processes). To test the robustness of the results to these factors, in Appendix
Table A.10 we augment the specification with additional CEO and firms controls and interactions
between rain and state, and between industry, CEO and firm characteristics. Reassuringly, the
inclusion of these interactions does not generally a↵ect the magnitude and precision of the di↵erence
in di↵erence estimate allaying the concern that this captured unobservables at the firm day level.33


       We turn to sport events in columns 5 to 8. Since the sport matches we consider are generally
held in the evenings, we focus on the afternoon hours (after 1pm in India and after 3pm in Brazil),
which we expect to be more a↵ected by the shocks. Even in this case, family CEOs are more likely
to reduce their hours in concomitance of sport events relative to days with no sport event, in both
India and Brazil. This reduction is also larger relative to professional CEOs, who appear to be
una↵ected by the “shock”–the           coefficients is, respectively -0.141 and -0.276, both significant at
the 5%. Appendix Table A.11 allows for a rich set of interactions between sport events and CEO,
firm, industry and state characteristics. The magnitude of the             coefficient is generally stable across
                                       34
these more flexible specifications.
  32
     We checked in more detail whether this result was driven by professional CEOs increasing their hours during
rainy days, rather than family CEOs reducing their hours. The results are driven entirely by family CEOs working
fewer hours while professional CEOs hours worked remain stable on a rainy day.
  33
     Across the experiments, the coefficient retains a similar magnitude but turns insignificant when we include the
set of CEO characteristics interacted with the rain dummy.
  34
     Similar to the rain regressions, across the experiments, the coefficient retains a similar magnitude but turns
insignificant when we include the set of CEO characteristics interacted with the rain dummy.




                                                        26
      Table&4&(&Difference&in&difference&estimates&II
                                                                    Table 6: Response to rain and sport events
                                                                        (1)        (2)       (3)            (4)                             (5)         (6)            (7)          (8)
      Dependent&Variable                                                  Log(1+&Hours&Worked)&(&Day&Level&                              Log(1+Hours&Worked)&(&Day&Level&(&Game&Hours&Only&
      Sample                                                          India       India     Brazil       Brazil                            India       India          Brazil       Brazil

      Family&CEO                                                   !0.089***         !0.060*       !0.067**        !0.051*                 !0.052            !0.045            !0.033            !0.012
                                                                     (0.029)         (0.036)        (0.027)        (0.029)                 (0.036)           (0.036)           (0.042)           (0.044)
      Rain                                                           !0.017           0.028          0.007          0.034
                                                                     (0.023)         (0.024)        (0.024)        (0.026)
      Rain*Family&CEO                                                               !0.066**                       !0.071*
                                                                                     (0.030)                       (0.041)
      Sport&event                                                                                                                          !0.059             0.028            !0.114            !0.003
                                                                                                                                           (0.064)           (0.080)           (0.118)           (0.097)
      Sport&event*Family&CEO                                                                                                                                !0.141**                            !0.276**
                                                                                                                                                             (0.063)                             (0.133)
      R(squared                                                       0.163           0.165          0.406           0.407                 0.120              0.121             0.268             0.272
      Observations                                                    1640            1640           1380            1380                  1640               1640              1380              1380
      Number&of&firms                                                  317             317            280             280                   317                317               280               280




27
     Notes:
       Notes:*significant
               *significant atat 10%;
                                   10%; ** **significant
                                               significantatat5%;5%;******  significant
                                                                         significant      at 1%.
                                                                                      at 1%.   This This
                                                                                                    table table   is based
                                                                                                           is based    on dayonlevel
                                                                                                                                  daydata     data collected
                                                                                                                                       levelcollected     from CEOsfrominCEOs      in Brazil
                                                                                                                                                                           Brazil and    India. and   India. All
                                                                                                                                                                                                 All columns
       estimated    by  OLS.  Standard      errors under    coefficient  are  clustered   by  firm, date  and   state  in columns    1!4, and   by   firm
     columns estimated by OLS. Standard errors under coefficient are clustered by firm and date in all columns. The dependent variable in columns 1-4 is theand  date  in  columns    5!8.  The   dependent
       variable
     log         in columns
          of 1 plus    the total1!4hours
                                      is thethe   of 1 plus
                                              log CEO         the total
                                                         devoted     to work      the CEO devoted
                                                                         hoursactivities              to work
                                                                                             lasting more        activities
                                                                                                              than    15 minutes     more than 15
                                                                                                                            lasting (excluding          minutes
                                                                                                                                                    travel)        (excluding
                                                                                                                                                              during    the survey        during
                                                                                                                                                                                travel)day.    The      survey
                                                                                                                                                                                                   thedependent
       day. The dependent variable in columns 5!8 is the log of 1 plus the total hours the CEO devoted to work activities lasting more than 15 minutes (excluding travel)
     variable in columns 5-8 is the log of 1 plus the total hours the CEO devoted to work activities lasting more than 15 minutes (excluding travel) during
       during hours potentially affected by the sport event (1pm!7pm in India and 3pm!9pm in Brazil). Family CEO=1 for those who own the firm or belong to the family
     hours   potentially
       that owns   the firm,a↵ected       by the sport
                               and 0 otherwise.      "Rain"event   (1pm-7pm
                                                             is a dummy           in India
                                                                            denoting   intense     3pm-9pm
                                                                                             andrainfall        in Brazil).
                                                                                                         (relative   to May inFamily
                                                                                                                                India andCEO=1
                                                                                                                                            to July inforBrazil)
                                                                                                                                                            thoseinwho
                                                                                                                                                                    the area
                                                                                                                                                                          ownandthedayfirm   or belong
                                                                                                                                                                                          where    the CEO toisthe
     family   that   owns   the   firm,    and  0 otherwise.     ”Rain”    is  a  dummy    denoting    intense    rainfall  (relative   to May     in   India  and
       located (data measured by the closest weather station, matched to the zipcode of the CEO activities for the day). "Sport event" is a dummy denoting that anand to July   in  Brazil)    in  the  area
       Indian
     day       Premier
           where   the CEOLeague is playoff,
                                    locatedsemifinal      or final game
                                                (data measured       by thewasclosest    on the day
                                                                                 playedweather     station,    India sample,
                                                                                                      for thematched      to the and  that a soccer
                                                                                                                                   zipcode    of the match
                                                                                                                                                         CEO activities
                                                                                                                                                                including atforleast
                                                                                                                                                                                  theoneday).of top  Brazilian
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ”Sport    event”
       team  was   played   on  the   day  for the  Brazil sample.    Industry   dummies    are  19 two  digits  SIC  codes.  Firm  characteristics     are
     is a dummy denoting that an Indian Premier League playo↵, semifinal or final game was played on the day for the India sample, and that a soccer match   the  log of one  plus  firm   age,  a dummy     to
       denote foreign or domestic multinationals, the number of people reporting directly to the CEO, a dummy to denote whether the firm employs a COO, the number
     including at least one top Brazilian team was played on the day for the Brazil sample. Industry dummies are two digits SIC codes. Firm characteristics
       of CEO's sons and daughters holding a managerial position in the same firm. CEO characteristics are a dummy to denote CEOs holding a managerial or board
     are
       position
          the login of  one plus
                    another    firm,firm
                                       theage,
                                            log of dummy
                                                 a CEO  age, tothedenote    foreign
                                                                    log of one   plusor  domestic
                                                                                      number         multinationals,
                                                                                                 of years  CEO has been   the
                                                                                                                            employed
                                                                                                                               number in     people
                                                                                                                                          ofthe  firm,reporting
                                                                                                                                                         a dummy to   directly
                                                                                                                                                                         denotetoCEOs
                                                                                                                                                                                    the holding
                                                                                                                                                                                           CEO, aadummycollege to
     denote   whether      the  firm    employs    a COO,     the  number      of  CEO’s   sons   and  daughters      holding   a  managerial     position
       degree, a dummy to denote CEOs holding an MBA or equivalent degree, a dummy to denote CEO that have worked or studied abroad. Noise controls include: a in  the  same   firm.    CEO     characteristics
       dummy
     are        to denote
          a dummy       to denote
                               casesCEOsin which   the time
                                               holding         use data was
                                                         a managerial            recorded
                                                                            or board    position
                                                                                            by theinCEO's
                                                                                                      anotherPersonal
                                                                                                                  firm, Assistant;
                                                                                                                         the log of15    interviewer
                                                                                                                                       CEO    age, thedummies;            dummy
                                                                                                                                                           log of onea plus         to denote
                                                                                                                                                                               number              CEOs
                                                                                                                                                                                            of years   CEOwhohas
       formally
     been   employed
                  reportintothe    executive
                              an firm,          Chairman;
                                           a dummy           interview
                                                       to denote     CEOs week    dummies;
                                                                              holding   a college    reported
                                                                                              a selfdegree,      score given
                                                                                                              a dummy      to denote
                                                                                                                               by the CEOs
                                                                                                                                        CEO toholding
                                                                                                                                                  rank theanrepresentativeness
                                                                                                                                                                 MBA or equivalent      of the
                                                                                                                                                                                            degree,
                                                                                                                                                                                                 weekaanddummya
       dummy_to_denote_weeks_with_a_national_or_religious_holiday.
     to denote CEO that have worked or studied abroad. Noise controls include: a dummy to denote cases in which the time use data was recorded by the
     CEO’s Personal Assistant; interviewer dummies; a dummy to denote CEOs who formally report to an executive Chairman; interview week dummies; a
     self reported score given by the CEO to rank the representativeness of the week and a dummy to denote weeks with a national or religious holiday.
Mechanisms

Taken together, the results in this section are consistent with the idea that the leisure-performance
tradeo↵ di↵ers between family and professional CEOs or, in the terminology of our model, cP >cF .
    While our data does not allow us to fully investigate the reasons behind the heterogeneity in the
preference for leisure across CEOs, a candidate explanation consistent with our results is that these
di↵erences may be related to wealth di↵erentials. Namely, family CEOs are likely to be wealthier
than professional CEOs, since they own the firms they lead. If leisure is a normal good, this would
result in di↵erences in the leisure-performance tradeo↵ across CEOs.
    To investigate this idea, we examine whether the di↵erences in the hours worked by family
CEOs vary according to cross-country di↵erences in inheritance laws–the results of this analysis are
presented and discussed in Appendix Table A.12. These laws are interesting from our perspective,
since they create variation in wealth concentration (Ellul et al. (2010)), such that more permissive
laws favor the concentration of wealth in the hands of the individual designated to inherit the control
of the family business. Other things equal, we therefore expect family CEOs to be wealthier in
countries where the maximal share of transmissible wealth is larger, and the di↵erence between
family and professional CEOs to be larger.
    In line with this hypothesis, we find that the di↵erence in hours worked between family and
professional CEOs is increasing in the share of wealth that can be bequeathed to a single heir.
To the extent that wealth concentration is correlated with wealth di↵erentials between owners and
managers, the result provides some indicative evidence that labor supply di↵erences may be a↵ected
by wealth di↵erences.
    Another observationally equivalent explanation is that family and professional CEOs have simi-
lar preferences for leisure, but are subject to di↵erent performance-related incentives. For example,
the compensation of family CEOs may be less sensitive to firm performance, or they may attribute
a lower probability to the event of being fired for underperformance.
    In absence of detailed data on CEO wealth and or firm level incentive policies, we cannot distin-
guish between these two alternative channels. We note, however, that both mechanisms–combined
with the productivity results presented in Table 2–imply that potential profit opportunities may
be lost in the pursuit of private benefits of control.


6    Conclusion
This paper shows evidence of a significant di↵erence in behavior between family and professional
CEOs, i.e. family CEOs tend to work fewer hours relative to professional managers. The di↵erence
between the two types of governance is not entirely accounted for by observable di↵erences in firm,
CEO and industry characteristics, and is larger when the opportunity cost of leisure is smaller.
These patterns are consistent with the predictions of a simple model with heterogeneous preferences


                                                  28
for leisure between family and professional CEOs.
   The data also reveals a strong correlation between CEO hours and firm performance. While
no causal inference can be made, di↵erences in hours worked can account for almost a fifth of the
productivity di↵erence between family and professional CEOs. The behavioral di↵erence is hence a
potential candidate to account for at least some of the performance di↵erential between family and
non-family firms documented in the literature (Morck et al. (1998), Villalonga and Amit (2006b),
Pérez-González (2006), Bennedsen et al. (2007), Bertrand et al. (2008), Bertrand (2009)).
   The question that follows naturally is: why don’t family CEOs delegate to professionals who
are willing to work longer hours, so to enjoy both more leisure and higher profits? One possibility
is that family CEOs are unable to delegate due to costly contract enforcement and the subsequent
perceived risk of expropriation on the part of non-family affiliated CEOs (Shleifer and Wolfenzon
(2002)). As documented in the earlier literature (Burkart et al. (2003), Durnev and Kim (2005),
Doidge et al. (2007)), this hypothesis is consistent with observed cross country di↵erences in family
controlled firms. Consistently with these findings, even in our limited cross country sample, we find
that the share of family CEOs is significantly higher in developing countries, where governance is
typically more problematic.
   The evidence presented in this paper highlights the importance of how corporate leaders allocate
their limited attention. Attention is a scarce resource, particularly so at the top of the organization.
The allocation of time reflects the allocation of attention, which in turns depends on the strategic
priorities of the CEO. The importance for e↵ective corporate leaders of aligning their own time
management to their goals has been a cornerstone of leadership theories for many years (Drucker
(1966)). According to Simon (1976), “attention is the chief bottleneck in organizational activity, and
the bottleneck becomes narrower and narrower as we move to the tops of organizations.” Attention
constraints at the top feature prominently in economic models of organizational hierarchies, which
study how managers should allocate this resource optimally. This study documents di↵erences in
attention allocation at the top, but does not identify the channel through which they may a↵ect
firm performance. Halac and Prat (2016) model the e↵ects of attention misallocation on the quality
of management and the engagement of the workforce. Future research should investigate this and
other possible channels for this e↵ect.
   Finally, our paper provides suggestive evidence that di↵erences in wealth may have an e↵ect
of managerial labour supply. This finding raises a public finance question. Would an increase in
taxation that a↵ects the owners of family firms bring about an increase in productive efficiency?
Such taxation might include an inheritance tax, a wealth tax, or a reduction in the various forms
of exemptions that family firms enjoy in many parts of the world. We leave these questions for
future work.




                                                  29
References
Aghion, P., Bloom, N., Blundell, R., Griffith, R., and Howitt, P. (2005). Competition and Innova-
  tion: an Inverted-U Relationship. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(2):701–728.

Aguiar, M., Hurst, E., and Karabarbounis, L. (2012). Recent Developments in the Economics of
  Time Use. Annual Review of Economics, 4(1):373–397.

Anderson, R. C. and Reeb, D. (2003). Founding-family ownership, corporate diversification, and
  firm leverage. Journal of Law and Economics, 46(2):653–84.

Bandiera, O., Guiso, L., Prat, A., and Sadun, R. (2012). What Do CEOs Do? CEP Discussion
  Papers dp1145, Centre for Economic Performance, LSE.

Bandiera, O., Guiso, L., Prat, A., and Sadun, R. (2015). Matching Firms, Managers, and Incentives.
  Journal of Labor Economics, 33(3):623 – 681.

Bennedsen, M., Nielsen, K. M., Perez-Gonzalez, F., and Wolfenzon, D. (2007). Inside the Family
  Firm: The Role of Families in Succession Decisions and Performance. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 122(2):647–691.

Bertrand, M. (2009). CEOs. Annual Review of Economics, 1(1):121–150.

Bertrand, M., Johnson, S., Samphantharak, K., and Schoar, A. (2008). Mixing family with business:
  A study of Thai business groups and the families behind them. Journal of Financial Economics,
  88(3):466–498.

Bertrand, M. and Mullainathan, S. (2003). Enjoying the Quiet Life? Corporate Governance and
  Managerial Preferences. Journal of Political Economy, 111(5):1043–1075.

Bertrand, M. and Schoar, A. (2003). Managing with Style: The E↵ect of Managers on Firm Policies.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(4):1169–1208.

Bloom, N., Eifert, B., Mahajan, A., McKenzie, D., and Roberts, J. (2013). Does Management
  Matter? Evidence from India. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(1):1–51.

Bloom, N., Sadun, R., and VanReenen, J. (2012). The Organization of Firms Across Countries.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(4):1663–1705.

Bloom, N. and Van Reenen, J. (2007). Measuring and Explaining Management Practices Across
  Firms and Countries. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(4):1351–1408.


                                                 30
Burkart, M., Panunzi, F., and Shleifer, A. (2003). Family Firms. Journal of Finance, 58(5):2167–
  2202.

Cameron, A. C., Gelbach, J. B., and Miller, D. L. (2008). Bootstrap-Based Improvements for
  Inference with Clustered Errors. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(3):414–427.

Caselli, F. and Gennaioli, N. (2013). Dynastic Management. Economic Inquiry, 51(1):971–996.

Demsetz, H. and Lehn, K. (1985). The Structure of Corporate Ownership: Causes and Conse-
  quences. Journal of Political Economy, 93(6):1155–1177.

Doidge, C., Andrew Karolyi, G., and Stulz, R. M. (2007). Why do countries matter so much for
  corporate governance? Journal of Financial Economics, 86(1):1–39.

Drucker, P. (1966). The E↵ective Executive. New York: Harper and Row.

Durnev, A. and Kim, E. H. (2005). To Steal or Not to Steal: Firm Attributes, Legal Environment,
  and Valuation. Journal of Finance, 60(3):1461–1493.

Ellul, A., Pagano, M., and Panunzi, F. (2010). Inheritance Law and Investment in Family Firms.
  American Economic Review, 100(5):2414–2450.

Geanakoplos, J. and Milgrom, P. (1991). A theory of hierarchies based on limited managerial
  attention. Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, 5(3):205–225.

Gennaioli, N., Porta, R. L., de Silanes, F. L., and Shleifer, A. (2013). Human Capital and Regional
  Development. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(1):105–164.

Graham, J. R., Harvey, C. R., and Puri, M. (2015). Capital allocation and delegation of decision-
  making authority within firms. Journal of Financial Economics, 115(3):449–470.

Halac, M. and Prat, A. (2016). Managerial Attention and Worker Performance. American Economic
  Review, 106(10):3104–32.

Holtz-Eakin, D., Joulfaian, D., and Rosen, H. S. (1993). The Carnegie Conjecture: Some Empirical
  Evidence. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108(2):413–435.

Kaplan, S. N., Klebanov, M. M., and Sorensen, M. (2012). Which CEO Characteristics and Abilities
  Matter? The Journal of Finance, 67(3):973–1007.

Karolyi, A. and Liao, R. C. (2015). The economic consequences of investor relations: A global
  perspective. mimeo.

Kaufmann, D., Kraay, A., and Mastruzzi, M. (2010).          The worldwide governance indicators:
  Methodology and analytical issues. Technical report, World Bank Policy Research Working
  Paper No. 5430.

                                                31
Kotter, J. P. (1999). John Kotter on What Leaders Really Do. Harvard Business School Press,
  Boston.

LaPorta, R., Lopez-De-Silanes, F., and Shleifer, A. (1999). Corporate Ownership Around the
  World. Journal of Finance, 54(2):471–517.

Lemos, R. and Scur, D. (2017). All in the family? ceo succession and firm organization. Oxford
  University mimeo.

Luthans, F. (1988). Successful vs. E↵ective Real Managers. Academy of Management Executive,
  2(2):127–132.

Malmendier, U. and Tate, G. (2005). CEO Overconfidence and Corporate Investment. Journal of
  Finance, 60(6):2661–2700.

Malmendier, U. and Tate, G. (2009). Superstar CEOs. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  124(4):1593–1638.

Mayer, T. (1960). The distribution of ability and earnings. The Review of Economics and Statistics,
  42(2):189–195.

McKinsey (2013). Making time management the organization’s priority. McKinsey Quarterly.

Mintzberg, H. (1973). The Nature of Managerial Work. Harper & Row., New York.

Morck, R., Shleifer, A., and Vishny, R. W. (1988). Management ownership and market valuation:
  An empirical analysis. Journal of Financial Economics, 20(1-2):293–315.

Morck, R. K., Stangeland, D. A., and Yeung, B. (1998). Inherited Wealth, Corporate Control and
  Economic Growth: The Canadian Disease. NBER Working Papers 6814, National Bureau of
  Economic Research, Inc.

Mullins, W. and Schoar, A. (2013). How do CEOs see their Role? Management Philosophy and
  Styles in Family and Non-Family Firms. NBER Working Papers 19395, National Bureau of
  Economic Research, Inc.

Olley, G. S. and Pakes, A. (1996). The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommunications
  Equipment Industry. Econometrica, 64(6):1263–1297.

Pencavel, J. (2014). The Productivity of Working Hours. IZA Discussion Papers 8129, Institute
  for the Study of Labor (IZA).

Pérez-González, F. (2006). Inherited Control and Firm Performance. American Economic Review,
  96(5):1559–1588.


                                                32
Robinson, J., Martin, S., Glorieux, I., and Minnen, J. (2011). The overestimated workweek revisited.
  Monthly Labor Review.

Schoar, A. and Zuo, L. (2011). Shaped by Booms and Busts: How the Economy Impacts CEO
  Careers and Management Styles. NBER Working Papers 17590, National Bureau of Economic
  Research, Inc.

Shleifer, A. and Vishny, R. W. (1989). Management entrenchment : The case of manager-specific
  investments. Journal of Financial Economics, 25(1):123–139.

Shleifer, A. and Wolfenzon, D. (2002). Investor protection and equity markets. Journal of Financial
  Economics, 66(1):3–27.

Simon, H. (1976). Administrative Behavior. New York, NY, The Free Press.

Smith, B. F. and Amoako-Adu, B. (1999). Management succession and financial performance of
  family controlled firms. Journal of Corporate Finance, 5(4):341–368.

Syverson, C. (2011). What Determines Productivity? Journal of Economic Literature, 49(2):326–
  65.

Tervio, M. (2008). The Di↵erence That CEOs Make: An Assignment Model Approach. American
  Economic Review, 98(3):642–68.

Villalonga, B. and Amit, R. (2006a). How do family ownership, control and management a↵ect
  firm value? Journal of Financial Economics, 80(2):385–417.

Villalonga, B. and Amit, R. (2006b). How do family ownership, control and management a↵ect
  firm value? Journal of Financial Economics, 80(2):385–417.




                                                33
 Appendix Tables and Figures - Not for Publication
A      Data Appendix
A.1     The Time Use Survey
A.1.1     Survey Management
The time use survey took place in two stages, both led by the same project manager: in the Spring
of 2011 a team of fifteen enumerators and two supervisors based in Mumbai collected data on
India, while the rest of the countries were covered in a second survey wave in the Spring of 2013
by a team of forty enumerators and six supervisors based at the London School of Economics.
To ensure comparability, we adopted the same protocol and retained the same project manager
across both waves. The enumerators were typically graduate students (often MBAs) recruited
specifically for this project. All enumerators were subject to a common intensive training on the
survey methodology for three days at the beginning of the project, plus weekly team progress
reviews and one to one conversations with their supervisors to discuss possible uncertainties with
respect to the classification of the time use data. Each interview was checked o↵ at the end of the
week by a supervisor, who would make sure that the data was complete in every field, and that the
enumerator had codified all the activities according to the survey protocol. Each enumerator ran
on average thirty interviews, with an average of three interviews per week to ensure data quality.
    Each enumerator was allocated a random list of about 120 companies, was in charge of calling
up the numbers of his or her list to convince the CEO to participate in the survey, and collecting
the time use data in the week allocated to the CEO.
    We actively monitored and coached the enumerators throughout the project, which intensified
their persistence in chasing the CEOs and getting them to participate. We also o↵ered the CEOs
a personalized analysis of their use of time (which was sent to them in January 2012 to the Indian
CEOs and in June 2014 to the rest of the countries) to give them the ability to monitor their time
allocation, and compare it with peers in the industry.

A.1.2     Sampling Frame
The sampling frame was randomly drawn from ORBIS, an extensive commercial data set that
contains company accounts for several millions of companies around the world. Our sampling
criteria were as follows. First, we restricted the sample to manufacturing and additionally kept
firms that were classified as “active” in the year prior to the survey (2010 in India and 2012 for the
other countries) and with available recent accounting data.35 These conditions restricted our sample
to 11,500 firms. Second, we further restricted the sample to companies for which we could find
CEOs contact details. To gather contact information we hired a team of research assistants based
in Mumbai, London and Boston who verified the CEOs names and found their phone numbers and
emails. This restricted the sample to 7,744 firms. Of these, 907 later resulted not to be eligible
for the interviews upon the first telephonic contact (the reasons for non eligibility included recent
  35
    For the Indian sample, we also restricted the sample to firms headquartered in the fifteen main Indian states.
This excluded firms located in Assam, Bihar, Chandigarh, Chhattisgarh, Dadra, Daman and Diu, Goa, Himachal
Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Jharkhand, Orissa and Uttarakhand, each of which accounts for less than 3% of
Indian GDP.



                                                       34
Figure'A1'*'Survey'screenshot   Figure A.1: Survey Instrument




                                             35
  Table&A1&)&&Selection                    Table A.1: Selection Analysis
                                          (1)                         (2)                 (3)                  (4)
  Sample                                  All                         All                 All                  All
  Dependent&Variable                               Dummy=1&if&CEO&participated
  Country=Brazil                       0.677***                   0.695***             0.655***             0.559*
                                        (0.074)                    (0.075)              (0.079)             (0.288)
  Country=France                       0.210***                   0.256***               0.143              0.562**
                                        (0.073)                    (0.074)              (0.104)             (0.221)
  Country=Germany                        0.115                     0.194**              0.152*              0.476**
                                        (0.072)                    (0.078)              (0.082)             (0.222)
  Country=India                        0.658***                    0.699**             1.227***              0.672
                                        (0.247)                    (0.272)              (0.371)             (0.425)
  Country=UK                           /0.178**                    /0.139*             /0.153**              0.088
                                        (0.074)                    (0.074)              (0.077)             (0.218)
  Log(Sales)                                                     /0.071***
                                                                   (0.011)
  Log(Sales/Employees)                                                                   /0.018
                                                                                        (0.030)
  ROCE                                                                                                        0.000
                                                                                                             (0.001)
  Number&of&firms                        6256                       5993                 4090                 3492
   Notes: *significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. All columns estimated by probit (marginal
Notes: *significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. All columns estimated by probit (marginal
   effects reported, robust standard errors under coefficient). The dependent variable in all columns is a dummy=1 if
e↵ects  reported,
   the CEO         robust in
             participated  standard  errors
                             the survey. Theunder   coefficient).
                                              selection regressionThe  dependent
                                                                   is run         variable
                                                                          on the latest    in all year
                                                                                        available columns   is a dummy=1
                                                                                                       of accounting data. if
theAllOcolumnsOincludeO2OdigitsOSICOindustryOdummies.
    CEO participated in the survey. The selection regression is run on the latest available year of accounting data.
All columns include 2 digits SIC industry dummies.


bankruptcy or the company not being in manufacturing), and 310 were never contacted because
the project ended before this was possible. The final number of eligible companies was thus 6,527,
with median yearly sales of $53,000,000. Of these, we were able to secure an interview with 1,131
CEOs, although 17 CEOs dropped out before the end of the data collection week and were thus
removed from the sample before the analysis was conducted.
    The selection analysis in Table A.1 shows that firms in the final sample have on average slightly
lower log sales relative to the sampling frame (coefficient 0.071, standard error 0.011). However,
we do not find any significant selection e↵ect on performance variables, such as labor productivity
(sales over employees) and return on capital employed (ROCE).

A.2      Firm Data
A.2.1      Accounts
Accounting data were all drawn from ORBIS for all countries. The main exception is India, where
employment figures are typically not published in the public accounts. Therefore, we gathered this
information from the survey questionnaire.
    In the regressions shown in Table 2 we restrict the sample to the three most recent years in the
interval running from 2007 to 2011 in India and 2008 to 2012 for the rest of the sample, and use
only years in which the CEO was in office. The summary statistics for this sample are shown in
Table A.2.




                                                             36
               Table&A8&)&Accounting&Data&)&Summary&Statistics
                            Table A.2: Accounting Data: Summary Statistics
                                                  Mean             Standard&       Number&of&firms&
                                                                   Deviation        with&available&
                                                                                     information
               Number&of&Employees                1764.67           9287.85              617
               Sales                            336642.30         2076857.00             617
               Capital                           78335.56         466065.10              617
               Profits&per&Employee                10.06             16.43               720
               Tobin's&Q                            1.06              1.11               313
               Investment                        12150.15          73855.30              697
               Wages                             57256.50         476536.40              563

               Notes:
Notes: This table     All data
                    reports    drawn
                             the     from ORBIS,
                                 summary          averages
                                           statistics      across
                                                      of the       the 3 years
                                                             accounting    dataof used
                                                                                  accounting  data2used
                                                                                       in Table     and A.4. All data
               in Table  X (only years in which  the  CEO
is expressed in real 2005 ’000 US$, except for Tobin’s Q.  was  in  office are included). All  variables
               expressedQinQUS$.QAccountingQdataQrunQbetweenQ2007QandQ2013.

A.2.2     Ownership
Ownership data is collected in interviews with the CEOs and independently checked using several
Internet sources (e.g. The Economic Times of India, Bloomberg, etc.), information provided on
the company website and supplemental phone interviews. We define a firm to be owned by an
entity if this controls more than 25.01% of the shares; if no single entity owns at least 25.01% of
the share the firm is labeled as “Dispersed shareholder”. Family firms are defined as those where
a family (combined across all family members, all second generation relative to the founder or
beyond) are the largest shareholders. Founder firms are defined as those where the original founder
of the company is the largest shareholder. For both family 2nd generation and founder firms, we
distinguish between cases in which a family firm or the founder are also CEOs of the company, in
contrast to cases in which a professional manager (i.e. a person not affiliated with the founder or
the family) has been nominated CEO. In the analysis we combine founder CEO and family, 2nd
generation CEOs in a single category (41% of the sample). The omitted category in all regressions
includes family or founder owned firms with professional CEOs (16.2%), dispersed shareholders
(22.5%), government (0.8%), private equity/venture capital (7.5%), private individuals who are
not founders or heirs to the founders of the company (9.3%). In 2.7% of the sample, the firm was
owned by joint venture with equal split of the ownership shares.

A.3     Industry Data
Our industry classification is the US SIC (1987). Each firm is allocated to each main two digit
sector based on sales. We have 32 distinct two digit industries, and at least two companies for all
of these industries except 4 (0.4% of the sample of firms).
    The Lerner index of competition is constructed following Aghion et al. (2005) as the mean of
(1-profit/sales) in the entire database excluding the firm itself for every three digit SIC industry,
using accounting data relative to the six countries in our sample (data averaged between 2006 and
2010 for India and between 2008 and 2012 for the rest of the countries).
    The import competition measure is built as real industry imports divided by industry sales,
using STAN data produced by the OECD. The measure is obtained by taking averages across all
countries in our sample for which the industry measures were available (France, Germany, UK and


                                                         37
US). The years used to build this measures are 2006 to 2008, i.e. the latest years for which the
data was produced using the ISIC REV3 classification (the coverage of the countries included in
our sample declines dramatically in the data produced using the ISIC REV4 classification).

A.4     Shocks
A.4.1     Rain Shocks
The climate data was extracted on 12/08/2011 from http://www7.ncdc.noaa.gov/CDO/cdodata.cmd.
The data was merged with station coordinates (latitude and longitude), and these were in turn used
to merge the data with the time use dataset using the date and zipcode of each of the activities
recorded in the data (data matched with the closest station, distance computed by generating the
vertical and horizontal distance using the latitude and longitude points and applying Pythagoras).
    In India, the expected arrival of the Monsoons is around June 1st , starting from the southwestern
coast of Kerala, and gradually covering the entirety of India by July 15th . Therefore, for the
Indian sample the definition of days of intense rain is based on the comparison of the daily rainfall
precipitation with the average precipitation in the pre-Monsoon month of May for the same station.
We first compute a variable measuring for each day between June 1st and July 31st the change in
precipitation relative to the average May values for the same station. We then define a variable
“Extreme Rain” which takes value one if the change in rainfall lies in the third tercile of the overall
distribution computed using data across all stations in the sample. Finally, we match the CEO time
use information with the rainfall data of the closest weather station by using the modal (manually
collected) zip code of the activities undertaken by the CEO during the week. We use the same
approach in Brazil, but in this case we use as a reference the month of July of the year prior to
the survey (2012), which is on average the driest month for the São Paulo region,36 where 44.4%
of the firms in the Brazilian sample are located.
    The rainfall measure can be constructed for 597 CEOs in the sample. 32% of the CEO-day
observations are classified as days of intense rain. 403 CEOs out of 597 CEOs (of which 215
family and 188 professional CEOs) experience extreme rain at least once during the survey week.
363 CEOs in the sample (186 family CEOs and 177 professional CEOs) have at least one day of
extreme rain and one day of non-extreme rain during the sample week.

A.4.2     Sport Events
For the Indian sample, we use data on the 2011 Indian Premier League (IPL) Cricket tournament.
We focus on four games: two playo↵s (Royal Challengers vs. Chennai Super Kings, played on
5/25/2011) and Mumbai Indians vs. Kolkata Knight Riders, played on 5/25/2011), one semi-final
for the 3rd and 4th place (Royal Challengers vs. Mumbai Indians, played on 5/27/2011) and the
final (Chennai Super Kings vs. Royal Challengers (played on 5/28/2011). For the Brazilian sample,
we use data on soccer matches played in the 2013 State Football Leagues. We focus on matched
played by the top 30 teams (as measured by fanbase size).37 These teams are located in the states
of Bahia, Ceará, Goiás, Minas Gerais, Pará, Paraná, Pernambuco, Rio de Janeiro, Rio Grande do
  36
     https://weather-and-climate.com/average-monthly-Rainfall-Temperature-Sunshine,sao-paulo,Brazil
  37
     The source for the soccer match data is Resultados.com (http://www.resultados.com/futebol/brasil/). The source
for fanbase data is a survey conducted by Pluri Stochos Pesquisas e Licenciamento Esportivo between November 2012
and February 2013. A total of 21,049 people were interviewed.



                                                        38
Sul, Santa Catarina, and São Paulo. The State Football League matches started in January and
ended in May 2013, which coincided with the timing of our data collection.
    The sport events dummy is constructed for 597 CEOs, 6% of the CEO-day observation are
classified as days with a sport event. 100 CEOs out of 597 CEOs (of which 46 family and 54
professional CEOs) experience a day with a sport event and a day without a sport event during
the survey week.

A.5    Wealth and the Demand for Leisure
While it is intuitive that the average family CEO, who owns a sizable share of the firm, may
be wealthier than the average professional CEOs, who owns a small share of the firm (if any),
a test of the hypothesis requires comparing the di↵erence in hours worked at di↵erent levels of
wealth di↵erentials. Measuring personal wealth via surveys is notoriously difficult and we have no
information, let alone a plausible source of variation, on the CEOs’ wealth.
    Instead, we approach this question using as a proxy for wealth di↵erentials between family and
professional CEOs exploiting cross-country di↵erences in inheritance laws compiled by Ellul et al.
(2010), which provide a country-specific measure of the largest share of the family wealth that can
be bequeathed to a single heir. Intuitively, more permissive laws favor the concentration of wealth
in the hands of the individual designated to inherit the control of the family business. Other things
equal, we therefore expect family CEOs to be wealthier in countries where the maximal share of
transmissible wealth is larger.
    The variable “Max % of inheritable wealth” used in Table A.12 measures the largest share of the
estate that in each country a testator can bequeath to a single child in presence of a surviving spouse
and two siblings (Ellul et al show that the median number of children of firm owners is estimated to
be two across almost all countries where this could be calculated). We use the measure published
on Table 1, column 4 of the paper for all countries except for India. The measure proposed for
India by Ellul et al is based on the Indian Succession Act, which applies to all non Hindu and
non Muslim citizens. Since the vast majority (81%) of the Indian family firms in our sample are
organized as Hindu United Family (HUF) organizations, we refer instead to the Hindu Succession
Act (1956) which stipulates that the head of a HUF family firm must bequeath his share of the
firm in equal parts to all members of the HUF. Since there must be at least two members in a
HUF and we do not know the number of family members, we take 0.5 to be the upper bound of
the inheritance share. Results are robust to assuming there are three surviving members hence the
maximal share is 0.33.
    To test whether this results in larger di↵erences in hours worked between family and professional
CEOs we estimate:
                  hijc = ↵F ami + F ami ⇤ (Sc      S̄) + Ci ' + Fi +    j   + ⌘c + "ijc          (A.1)

    where Sc is the largest admissible inheritance share in country c and S̄ is the sample mean.
Standard errors are clustered at the country level and bootstrapped using the wild bootstrapping
technique proposed by Cameron et al. (2008) given the small number of clusters. The coefficient of
interest is , the interaction between the family CEO dummy and the inheritance share variable.
Under the assumption that the latter proxies for family CEOs wealth, the hypothesis that the
demand for leisure is increasing in wealth implies < 0. We scale Sc in deviation from its sample
mean, so that the coefficient on the family CEO dummy ↵ measures the di↵erence between family


                                                  39
and professional CEOs at the mean values of Sc . Sc ranges from .5 (France and India) to 1 (UK
and US).
    Column 1, Table A.12 reports the estimates of (A.1). We find < 0 and precisely estimated.
Its magnitude implies that going from an average share of .69 to the highest share of 1 increases
the di↵erence in hours worked by .07 log points, 79% of the mean e↵ect. In other words, family
CEOs located in countries with the average level of the inheritance variable work 9% fewer hours
than professional CEOs; those in countries with the highest level of the inheritance variable work
16% fewer hours than professional CEOs.
    The inheritance variable may capture other country specific factors di↵erent from wealth con-
centration, which may also a↵ect the labor supply of family CEOs. For example, di↵erences in the
quality of contract enforcement may a↵ect the ability to delegate control to a professional CEO
(Bloom et al. (2013)) and, therefore, the selection of family CEOs (intuitively, when delegation is
feasible all family CEOs who have a higher marginal utility of leisure should delegate to hard work-
ing professionals and enjoy the extra profits these generate, while the only family CEOs who choose
not to delegate should work as hard as professional CEOs). In Columns 2-5 of Table A.12 we check
the robustness of the results to estimate (A.1) using di↵erent proxies of contract enforcement in lieu
of S. Column 2 uses regional GDP, a country specific measure of the level of development (Gennaioli
et al. (2013)), which is presumably correlated with the quality of contractual enforcement. Column
3 uses cross-country di↵erences in the rule of law and Column 4 uses regional variation in the level
of generalized trust, which we take as a proxy for the ease to manage incomplete contracts (Bloom
et al. (2012)).38 As above, we scale these variables in deviation from their sample means.
    None of the interactions with these country-specific measures are significant. Finally, Column 5
includes together all the interactions between the family CEO dummy and all the proxies of contract
enforcement, plus the interaction with the inheritance law variable discussed in the previous section.
The latter remains of a similar magnitude and statistically significant at the 10% level.

A.6     Additional Tables Referenced in the Text




  38
     The Rule of Law measure captures perceptions of the extent to which agents have confidence in and abide by
the rules of society, and in particular the quality of contract enforcement, property rights, the police, and the courts,
as well as the likelihood of crime and violence. Estimate gives the country’s score on the aggregate indicator, in
units of a standard normal distribution, i.e. ranging from approximately -2.5 to 2.5. and is drawn from Kaufmann
et al. (2010). Data on regional GDP per capita is drawn from Gennaioli et al. (2013). The measure is expressed in
PPP constant 2005 international dollars. Data on regional trust has been calculated from the World Values Survey
(WVS). The WVS is a cross-country project coordinated by the Institute for Social Research of the University of
Michigan. Each wave carries out representative surveys of the basic values and beliefs of individuals in a large cross-
section of countries. The questionnaire contains answers to specific questions about religion and social attitudes,
including several question on generalized and specific trust (e.g. trust in the family, government etc.), as well as
detailed information on the social and education background of the respondents (age, income, and education). The
key question we use is the standard one: “Generally speaking, would you say that most people can be trusted or
that you can’t be too careful in dealing with people?”. The WVS data can be downloaded from the WVS website
(www.worldvaluessurvey.org). For the purposes of our analysis, we pool together four successive waves of data
collection (1981–1984, 1989–1993, 1994–1999 and 1999–2004), and we use only individual entries with information
on the respondents’ region of residence. We compute the regional level of trust by taking the simple average over all
observations available for the region across all WVS waves (see Bloom et al. (2012) for further details).


                                                           40
                                              Table A.3: Summary Statistics - Country Level
   Table&A3&)&Summary&Statistics&by&Country&(means)
                                                                                      Brazil   France      Germany        India         UK           US          Total

   Panel&A.&Time&use

   Total&weekly&hours&worked&)&recall&measure                                         50.26    50.81        52.11         n.a..        52.08        54.97        51.72
   Total&weekly&hours&worked&)&diary&measure                                          52.60    58.30        55.88        46.27         54.40        55.09        52.01
   Total&weekly&hours&worked&excluding&activities&<&15&mins,&personal&&&travel        40.80    47.02        46.69        35.94         44.31        45.41        41.44
   Number&of&days&at&work                                                              5.29     5.21         5.54         5.25          5.52         5.61         5.36
   Beginning&of&work&day&(hour)                                                        8.51     8.19         8.58         9.80          8.45         8.03         8.83
   End&of&work&day&(hours)                                                            18.13    18.92        18.19        18.57         17.89        17.60        18.27
   Share&of&time&spent&in&personal&activities                                          0.14     0.09         0.05         0.10          0.07         0.09         0.10

   Panel&B.&CEO&characteristics

   Age                                                                                51.90    49.53        49.26        50.61         49.02        53.47        50.93
   Male                                                                                0.97     0.96         0.93         0.99          0.94         0.93         0.96
   College&degree                                                                      0.91     0.92         0.94         0.96          0.84         0.91         0.92
   MBA                                                                                 0.63     0.60         0.85         0.41          0.47         0.48         0.55
   Tenure&as&CEO&                                                                     11.39     7.12         7.85        12.82          7.00         8.57        10.30
   Tenure&in&firm                                                                     19.34    12.29        14.98        19.11         14.16        15.29        17.12
   Experience&abroad                                                                   0.55     0.56         0.69         0.33          0.59         0.42         0.48
   CEO&holds&positions&in&other&firms                                                  0.34     0.35         0.58         0.47          0.40         0.38         0.42

   Panel&C.&Firm&Characteristics

   Domestic&or&Foreign&Multinational                                                  0.17      0.24        0.48         0.17          0.32        0.32         0.24
   Number&of&Employees                                                               1185.64   730.21      4942.14      1224.86       486.78      1559.61      1571.05
   Number&of&CEO&direct&reports                                                       6.60      8.54        9.50         7.79          7.93        7.85         7.77
   COO                                                                                0.19      0.19        0.42         0.05          0.74        0.54         0.26
   Number&of&sons&in&management&positions                                             0.08      0.01        0.03         0.22          0.06        0.04         0.10
   Number&of&daughters&in&management&positions                                        0.05      0.03        0.00         0.07          0.01        0.03         0.04
   Data&collected&through&the&CEO&personal&assistant                                  0.56      0.40        0.58         0.35          0.34        0.31         0.43
   %&of&Family&Firms                                                                  0.41      0.14        0.31         0.67          0.17        0.21         0.41

   Panel&D.&Industry&Characteristics

   Lerner&Index                                                                        1.18     1.18         1.19         1.34          1.16         1.16        1.23
   Import&Penetration                                                                  0.63     0.56         0.66         0.66          0.48         0.58        0.61
   ln(GDP&per&Capita),&region                                                          9.22    10.30        10.36         8.03         10.39        10.65        9.36
   Rule&of&Law,&country                                                               .0.29     1.41         1.64         0.09          1.67         1.55        0.62
   Trust,&region                                                                       0.06     0.22         0.35         0.39          0.35         0.42        0.28
   Max&%&Inheritance,&country                                                          0.67     0.66         0.67         0.50          1.00         1.00        0.68
   Notes: The table shows summary statistics (means, standard deviation in parentheses in columns 1.3; differences and t.statistic in parentheses in column 4) of CEO time
Notes:   The
  use, CEO     table shows
           characteristics, firm andsummary
                                     industry levelstatistics    (means,
                                                    data for a sample of 1114standard
                                                                              CEOs in Brazildeviation    in (N=115),
                                                                                             (N=282), France parentheses
                                                                                                                     Germany in columns
                                                                                                                             (N=125),         1-3; di↵erences
                                                                                                                                      India (N=356),               and
                                                                                                                                                     UK (N=87) and US
   (N=149). All variables in Panel A, B and C collected in the CEO time use survey. Import penetration = ln(import/production) in the firm ISIC REV3 industry, computed by
t-statistic   in parentheses in column 4) of CEO time use, CEO characteristics, firm and industry level data for a sample
   averaging OECD STAN data relative to the 2006–2008 time period (last available year for all countries) across France, Germany, US and UK at the industry level. Lerner
of index
    1114of CEOs
           competition
                    in =Brazil
                        (1.profit/sales) in the firm
                                  (N=282),           3 digit SIC(N=115),
                                                   France        industry computed , as in Aghion
                                                                             Germany              et al. (2005),
                                                                                             (N=125),            by averaging
                                                                                                             India    (N=356),firm level
                                                                                                                                      UK data(N=87)
                                                                                                                                              in ORBIS relative
                                                                                                                                                          andtoUS
                                                                                                                                                                the (N=149).
                                                                                                                                                                    2008.2012
   time^period^across^Brazil,^France,^Germany,^India,^US^and^UK^^at^the^industry^level.
All variables in Panel A, B and C collected in the CEO time use survey. Import penetration = ln(import/production)
in the firm ISIC REV3 industry, computed by averaging OECD STAN data relative to the 2006–2008 time period
(last available year for all countries) across France, Germany, US and UK at the industry level. Lerner index of
competition = (1-profit/sales) in the firm 3 digit SIC industry computed, as in Aghion et al. (2005), by averaging
firm level data in ORBIS relative to the 2008-2012 time period across Brazil, France, Germany, India, US and UK at
the industry level.




                                                                                          41
                             Table A.4: CEO hours worked and firm inputs

                                                       (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)
              Dependent-variable                       Log(Investments)            Log(Wages)


              Family-CEO                            !0.779***    !0.671***   !0.446***    !0.387***
                                                      (0.233)      (0.247)     (0.128)      (0.133)
              Log(Hours-worked)                                    0.902*                  0.675**
                                                                   (0.507)                  (0.307)
              Log(Employment)                       0.878***      0.852***    0.925***     0.905***
                                                     (0.104)       (0.104)     (0.045)      (0.047)
              Log(Capital)

              Observations                             697          697         1735         1735
              Number-of-firms                          404          404         563          563


Notes: *significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. All columns estimated by OLS (standard
errors under coefficient clustered by firm). The variable ”CEO Hours Worked” is the log of the total hours the CEO
devoted to work activities lasting more than 15 minutes (excluding travel) during the survey week. The dependent
variable in columns 1 and 2 is log investments; in columns 3 and 4, log average wages.. Accounting data run between
2007 and 2013. Each column includes a full set of country by 2 digits SIC and year dummies. We include only years
in which the CEO was in office in all columns, and allow for a maximum of three years of accounts for each firm
(3 most recent years with non missing data in ORBIS). All columns include the following noise controls include: a
dummy to denote case in which the time use data was recorded by the CEO’s Personal Assistant; 55 interviewer
dummies; a dummy to denote CEOs who formally report to an executive Chairman; 29 interview week dummy; a
self reported score given by the CEO to rank the representativeness of the week and a dummy to denote weeks with
a national or religious holiday.




                                                        42
             Table R3 - Pre appointment trends
                                         Table A.5: Pre-Appointment Trends
                                                                        (1)         (2)        (3)            (4)
             Dependent Variable                                                       Log(Sales)

             Log(Employment)                               0.758*** 0.811*** 0.714*** 0.745***
                                                            (0.080)  (0.080)  (0.102)  (0.116)
             Log(Capital)                                                    0.152*** 0.117**
                                                                              (0.041)  (0.046)
             Trend                                          -0.006    0.007    0.002    0.040
                                                            (0.008)  (0.087)  (0.008)  (0.141)
             Trend*Family CEO                                0.000    0.011   -0.020   -0.006
                                                            (0.021)  (0.019)  (0.019)  (0.019)
             Trend*Professional CEO replacing a family CEO            0.027             0.024
                                                                     (0.028)           (0.031)
             R-squared                                       0.978    0.982    0.984    0.984
             Observations                                    1206      895      953      738
             Number of firms                                  363      266      271      208
             Firm fixed effects                                y        y        y        y

           Notes: *significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. All columns estimated by OLS (standard
Notes: *significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. All columns estimated by OLS (standard
           errors under coefficient clustered by firm). The dependent variable in all columns is log sales in the years
errors under coefficient clustered by firm). The dependent variable in all columns is log sales in the years preceding
           preceding the CEO appointment, up to 5 years before appointment. All columns include firm fixed effects. Family
the CEO appointment,     up to
           CEO=1 for those   who5 own
                                   yearsthe
                                          before  appointment.
                                            firm or  belong to the All  columns
                                                                    family        include
                                                                            that owns        firm and
                                                                                       the firm,   fixed  e↵ects. Family
                                                                                                       0 otherwise. Family CEO=1 for
           Ownership,
those who own          External
                the firm        CEO=1 for
                           or belong   to professional
                                           the familyCEOs
                                                        thatworking
                                                              owns inthe
                                                                      firms  owned
                                                                          firm,    by 0a family,
                                                                                 and             and 0 otherwise.
                                                                                          otherwise.    Family Ownership, External
CEO=1 for professional CEOs working in firms owned by a family, and 0 otherwise.




                                                                43
     Table&A4&)&Family&vs.&Professional&CEOs&)&Additional&Robustness&Tests
                                                                 Table A.6: Robustness Checks
                                                               (1)               (2)            (3)       (4)                (5)                (6)               (7)
     Experiment                                              Baseline          Levels        Negative&Restrincting& Restricting&sample& First&survey&wave& Second&survey&
                                                                                             binomial
                                                                                                    sample&to&Brazil&    to&France,&       (India&only)      wave&(Brazil,&
                                                                                                        &&India       Germany,&UK&and&                     France,&Germany,&
                                                                                                                             US                               UK&and&US)
     Dependent&Variable                                     Log(Hours&                                 Log(Hours&        Log(Hours&         Log(Hours&        Log(Hours&
                                                                          Hours&Worked Hours&Worked
                                                             Worked)                                    Worked)           Worked)            Worked)           Worked)

     Family&CEO                                             !0.088***        !3.104***       !0.080***         !0.079***           !0.095**            !0.065**            !0.098***
                                                              (0.020)          (0.776)         (0.017)           (0.022)            (0.039)             (0.031)              (0.026)
     CEO&holds&positions&in&other&firms                        0.014            0.347           0.011             0.023               0.005             0.044*                 0.005
                                                              (0.015)          (0.571)         (0.013)           (0.018)            (0.025)             (0.024)              (0.019)
     Log(CEO&age)                                           !0.143***        !5.180***       !0.135***         !0.138***           !0.171**            !0.172**             !0.134**
                                                              (0.045)          (1.785)         (0.039)           (0.053)            (0.082)             (0.069)              (0.059)
     Log(1+CEO&tenure&in&firm)                                 !0.006           !0.121          !0.002            !0.001              0.002              !0.004               !0.003
                                                              (0.011)          (0.409)         (0.009)           (0.013)            (0.017)             (0.020)              (0.013)
     CEO&holds&College&degree                                 0.054*          2.300**         0.058**             0.048               0.007              0.061                 0.046
                                                              (0.033)          (1.135)         (0.026)           (0.039)            (0.052)             (0.050)              (0.039)
     CEO&holds&MBA&degree                                      0.006            0.358           0.008             !0.018              0.031              0.012                 0.006
                                                              (0.018)          (0.666)         (0.015)           (0.022)            (0.028)             (0.027)              (0.023)
     CEO&has&study/work&experience&abroad                      !0.003           0.024           0.003             0.014              !0.031              !0.017               !0.000
                                                              (0.017)          (0.626)         (0.014)           (0.021)            (0.027)             (0.030)              (0.021)
     Log(Employment)                                         0.024***         0.930***        0.022***          0.029***              0.015            0.027***              0.022**
                                                              (0.007)          (0.282)         (0.006)           (0.008)            (0.012)             (0.010)              (0.010)
     Log(Firm&age)                                             0.003            0.055           0.002             0.002              !0.002              !0.026                0.011
                                                              (0.011)          (0.418)         (0.009)           (0.016)            (0.014)             (0.022)              (0.012)
     MNE                                                      0.033*           1.251*          0.029*             0.041               0.039             0.071*                 0.016
                                                              (0.019)          (0.755)         (0.016)           (0.026)            (0.031)             (0.037)              (0.024)
     Listed&                                                   !0.009           !0.400          !0.013            0.056             !0.056*              0.038                !0.016
                                                              (0.024)          (1.000)         (0.020)           (0.035)            (0.032)             (0.084)              (0.026)
     Number&of&CEO&direct&reports                            0.006***         0.258**         0.006***          0.011***              0.002            0.009**               0.005*
                                                              (0.002)          (0.102)         (0.002)           (0.003)            (0.003)             (0.004)              (0.003)
     COO&exists                                                !0.018           !0.637          !0.014            !0.042              0.013              !0.019               !0.014
                                                              (0.020)          (0.784)         (0.016)           (0.029)            (0.027)             (0.055)              (0.021)
     Number&of&sons&in&management&positions                 !0.060***        !2.022***       !0.058***          !0.057**          !0.160***              !0.023            !0.179***
                                                              (0.021)          (0.726)         (0.018)           (0.023)            (0.061)             (0.024)              (0.046)
     Number&of&daughters&in&management&positions               !0.013           !0.863          !0.018            !0.031              0.038              !0.040                0.029
                                                              (0.029)          (1.044)         (0.025)           (0.032)            (0.071)             (0.039)              (0.041)
     Data&collected&through&the&CEO&personal&assistant         !0.001           !0.096          !0.003            !0.009              0.014              0.009                !0.004
                                                              (0.017)          (0.652)         (0.014)           (0.020)            (0.026)             (0.027)              (0.021)
     R)squared                                                 0.347            0.360                             0.351               0.163              0.249                 0.268
     Number&of&firms                                           1,114            1,114          1,114               638                 476                356                   758
     Country&by&Industry&dummies                                  y                y             y                   y                  y                   y                    y
     Noise&controls                                               y                y             y                   y                  y                   y                    y

     Notes: *significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. All columns estimated by OLS (robust standard errors in parenthesis), except for column 3, estimated using a
   negative*significant
Notes:      binomial regression.
                              atThe10%;
                                    dependent
                                          ** variable is the log ofat
                                              significant           the5%;
                                                                       total hours
                                                                              ***thesignificant
                                                                                     CEO devoted to at
                                                                                                    work1%.
                                                                                                        activitiesAll
                                                                                                                  lastingcolumns
                                                                                                                          more than 15estimated
                                                                                                                                       minutes (excluding
                                                                                                                                                      bytravel)
                                                                                                                                                          OLS   during the
                                                                                                                                                                    (robust
     survey week in columns 1 and 4!6, while the level of hours worked is used incolumns 2 and 3. Family CEO=1 for those who own the firm or belong to the family that owns the firm,
standard    errors
   and 0 otherwise.    in parenthesis),
                    Industry dummies are 33 twoexcept       for column
                                                digits SIC codes.            3, include:
                                                                  Noise controls estimated
                                                                                         a dummy using
                                                                                                 to denoteaif the
                                                                                                              negative      binomial
                                                                                                                  time use data            regression.
                                                                                                                                was recorded                  The dependent
                                                                                                                                             by the PA; 55 interviewer dummies;
     a dummy to denote CEOs who formally report to an executive Chairman; 29 interview week dummy; a self reported score given by the CEO to rank the representativeness of the
variable  is the log of the total hours the CEO devoted to work activities lasting more than 15 minutes (excluding
   weekUandUaUdummyUtoUdenoteUweeksUwithUaUnationalUorUreligiousUholiday.
travel) during the survey week in columns 1 and 4-6, while the level of hours worked is used in columns 2 and 3.
Family CEO=1 for those who own the firm or belong to the family that owns the firm, and 0 otherwise. Industry
dummies are 33 two digits SIC codes. Noise controls include: a dummy to denote if the time use data was recorded
by the PA; 55 interviewer dummies; a dummy to denote CEOs who formally report to an executive Chairman; 29
interview week dummy; a self reported score given by the CEO to rank the representativeness of the week and a
dummy to denote weeks with a national or religious holiday.




                                                                                             44
   Table&R2&)&Additional&results&using&Sales&and&Capital&as&Proxies&for&firm&size
                    Table A.7: Additional Results Using Firm Sales and Capital as Controls
                                            (1)            (2)           (3)          (4)       (5)                 (6)           (7)            (8)
   Dependent&Variable                                                               Log(Hours&Worked)

   Family&CEO                           !0.084*** !0.085*** !0.079*** !0.079*** !0.079*** !0.076*** !0.076*** !0.072***
                                          (0.022)   (0.022)   (0.024)   (0.024)   (0.019)   (0.020)   (0.021)   (0.021)
   Log(Employment)                      0.032*** 0.032*** 0.030*** 0.030*** 0.026*** 0.018** 0.025*** 0.015*
                                          (0.008)   (0.008)   (0.009)   (0.009)   (0.007)   (0.008)   (0.008)   (0.009)
   Sales&1&Year&Growth&Rates                         0.037
                                                    (0.048)
   Sales&3&Year&Growth&Rates                                             0.029
                                                                        (0.019)
   Log(Sales)                                                                               0.010*
                                                                                            (0.006)
   Log(Capital)                                                                                               0.012***
                                                                                                                (0.005)
   R)squared                               0.349     0.349     0.402     0.403     0.349     0.351     0.372     0.376
   Number&of&firms                          876       876       700       700      1076      1076       890       890

  Notes: *significant
Notes:   *significant at 10%; ** significant
                          at 10%;            at 5%; *** significant
                                     ** significant      at 5%; at***
                                                                    1%. significant
                                                                        All columns estimated
                                                                                      at 1%.byAll
                                                                                              OLS (robust
                                                                                                  columns standard errors in by
                                                                                                              estimated      parenthesis). The
                                                                                                                                 OLS (robust
   variable "Hours Worked" is the log of the total hours the CEO devoted to work activities lasting more than 15 minutes (excluding travel) during
standard errors in parenthesis). The variable ”Hours Worked” is the log of the total hours the CEO devoted to work
   the survey week. Family CEO=1 for those who own the firm or belong to the family that owns the firm, and 0 otherwise. The variables Sales 1 Year
activities
   and Saleslasting    more than
             3 Years measure,          15 minutes
                                 respectively,        (excluding
                                               the average  log 1 andtravel)    duringrate
                                                                       3 years growth    the  survey
                                                                                           of sales,     week.
                                                                                                     in all       Family
                                                                                                            available        CEO=1the
                                                                                                                      years preceding  forsurvey.
                                                                                                                                            thoseLog(Sales)
                                                                                                                                                   who own
theand  Log(Capital)
     firm  or belong measure   the average
                          to the     familylog  of these
                                              that   ownsvariables in levels,
                                                             the firm,     andaveraged across all available
                                                                                 0 otherwise.               years preceding
                                                                                                   The variables       Salesthe
                                                                                                                              1 survey. All columns
                                                                                                                                 Year and     Sales include
                                                                                                                                                     3 Years
   the same set of controls used in Table 4, column 6. Industry dummies are 33 two digits SIC codes. Noise controls include: a dummy to denote if
measure, respectively, the average log 1 and 3 years growth rate of sales, in all available years preceding the survey.
   the time use data was recorded by the PA; 55 interviewer dummies; a dummy to denote CEOs who formally report to an executive Chairman; 29
Log(Sales)     anddummy;
   interview week     Log(Capital)       measure
                              a self reported        the average
                                              score given by the CEOlog     of these
                                                                        to rank        variables in levels,
                                                                                the representativeness            averaged
                                                                                                         of the week           across
                                                                                                                      and a dummy       all available
                                                                                                                                    to denote           years
                                                                                                                                               weeks with a
preceding    the survey. All columns include the same set of controls used in Table 4, column 6. Industry dummies are
   national[or[religious[holiday.
33 two digits SIC codes. Noise controls include: a dummy to denote if the time use data was recorded by the PA; 55
interviewer dummies; a dummy to denote CEOs who formally report to an executive Chairman; 29 interview week
dummy; a self reported score given by the CEO to rank the representativeness of the week and a dummy to denote
weeks with a national or religious holiday.




                                                                            45
   Table A5 - Summary Statistics (means, standard deviation in parentheses except for columns 5-7)
                                           Table A.8: Founder and Family CEOs: Summary Statistics
                                                                                       (1)               (2)                (3)                 (4)                (5)                 (6)                (7)

                                                                                       All         Founder CEOs      Family CEOs (2nd Professional CEOs Difference (4)-(2) Difference (4)-(3) Difference (2)-(3)
                                                                                                                       generation
   Panel A. Use of Time                                                                                                 onwards)
                                                                                                                                                           (T-statistic)      (T-statistic)      (T-statistic)
   Total weekly hours worked - recall measure                                        51.719            49.371             49.038            52.749          3.711***            3.378**            -0.333
                                                                                    (10.105)          (12.452)            (9.826)           (9.665)           (4.07)            (2.65)             (-0.21)
   Total weekly hours worked - diary measure                                         52.009            47.445             48.740            54.543          5.804***           7.098***             1.294
                                                                                    (11.026)          (10.714)           (10.415)          (10.674)           (8.12)            (6.88)             (1.18)
   Total weekly hours worked excluding activities < 15 mins, personal & travel       41.439            35.805             38.039            44.249          6.210***           8.444***            2.234*
                                                                                    (10.035)          (10.410)            (9.410)           (9.258)           (9.88)            (9.24)             (2.21)
   Number of days at work                                                             5.356             5.211              5.339             5.393           0.0539             0.182**             0.128
                                                                                     (0.695)           (0.570)            (0.662)           (0.729)           (1.13)            (2.67)             (1.94)
   Beginning of work day (hour)                                                       8.826             9.225              9.273             8.524          -0.749***          -0.701***           0.0483
                                                                                     (1.161)           (1.271)            (1.192)           (1.019)         (-10.28)            (-6.82)            (0.38)
   End of work day (hours)                                                           18.270            18.008             18.329            18.291           -0.0387             0.283             0.321*
                                                                                     (1.566)           (1.713)            (1.223)           (1.682)           (-0.37)           (1.73)             (2.24)
   Share of time spent in personal activities                                         0.101             0.144              0.115             0.086         -0.0299***         -0.0585***          -0.0286*
                                                                                     (0.099)           (0.121)            (0.109)           (0.084)           (-4.76)           (-6.67)            (-2.44)

   Panel B. CEO characteristics

   Age                                                                               50.930            55.367             48.693              51.187            2.494***           -4.180***           -6.674***
                                                                                     (8.458)           (7.392)            (9.908)             (7.425)             (4.42)             (-5.83)            (-6.91)
   Male                                                                               0.961             0.984              0.936               0.970             0.0331*            -0.0149            -0.0480*
                                                                                     (0.193)           (0.125)            (0.244)             (0.172)             (2.47)             (-0.93)            (-2.12)
   College degree                                                                     0.925             0.852              0.924               0.939             0.0148            0.0875***            0.0727*
                                                                                     (0.264)           (0.357)            (0.265)             (0.239)             (0.88)             (3.45)              (2.38)
   MBA                                                                                0.548             0.297              0.482               0.631            0.149***           0.334***            0.185***
                                                                                     (0.498)           (0.459)            (0.500)             (0.483)             (4.53)             (7.22)              (3.63)
   Tenure as CEO                                                                     10.298            21.211             13.398               6.602            -6.796***          -14.61***           -7.813***
                                                                                     (9.550)          (10.223)            (9.802)             (6.677)           (-12.79)           (-20.50)             (-7.56)
   Tenure in firm                                                                    17.116            24.320             22.291              13.119            -9.171***          -11.20***            -2.030
                                                                                    (11.597)           (9.928)           (10.672)            (10.611)           (-12.74)           (-11.03)             (-1.86)
   Experience abroad                                                                  0.482             0.227              0.458               0.544             0.0866*           0.318***            0.231***
                                                                                     (0.500)           (0.420)            (0.499)             (0.498)             (2.57)             (6.76)              (4.64)
   CEO holds positions in other firms                                                 0.418             0.445              0.461               0.392            -0.0688*            -0.0535             0.0153
                                                                                     (0.494)           (0.499)            (0.499)             (0.489)            (-2.07)             (-1.13)             (0.29)

   Panel C. Firm characteristics

   Domestic or Foreign Multinational                                                  0.242             0.109              0.218               0.280             0.0623*           0.171***            0.109**
                                                                                     (0.429)           (0.313)            (0.414)             (0.450)             (2.11)            (4.11)              (2.69)
   Firm age                                                                          49.185            50.116             25.766              53.320              3.204            27.55***            24.35***
                                                                                    (45.360)          (34.696)           (11.117)            (52.412)             (1.00)            (5.92)              (7.78)
   Listed                                                                             0.432             0.579              0.453               0.354            -0.225***          -0.0995*             0.126*
                                                                                     (0.496)           (0.495)            (0.500)             (0.478)            (-6.89)            (-2.14)             (2.43)
   Number of Employees                                                              1571.051           633.701           1192.091            1945.432             753.3             1311.7               558.4
                                                                                  (10127.428)        (1165.430)         (4240.615)         (12837.271)            (1.04)            (1.15)              (1.46)
   Number of CEO direct reports                                                       7.775             6.594              7.697               8.044              0.347            1.450***            1.103**
                                                                                     (3.774)           (2.863)            (4.299)             (3.604)             (1.34)            (4.30)              (2.68)
   COO                                                                                0.259             0.180              0.176               0.317            0.141***            0.137**           -0.00393
                                                                                     (0.439)           (0.385)            (0.381)             (0.466)             (4.77)            (3.13)              (-0.10)
   Number of sons in management positions                                             0.103             0.438              0.170               0.005            -0.165***          -0.433***          -0.268***
                                                                                     (0.304)           (0.498)            (0.376)             (0.068)           (-10.91)           (-21.34)             (-6.22)
   Number of daughters in management positions                                        0.043             0.156              0.073               0.006           -0.0666***          -0.150***          -0.0835**
                                                                                     (0.203)           (0.365)            (0.260)             (0.078)            (-6.05)            (-9.52)             (-2.74)
   Data collected through the CEO personal assistant                                  0.428             0.406              0.361               0.466             0.106**            0.0602             -0.0456
                                                                                     (0.495)           (0.493)            (0.481)             (0.499)             (3.18)            (1.25)              (-0.91)

   Panel D. External Environment




   Located in emerging economies (=1 if India or Brazil)                             0.573              0.844              0.755              0.428             -0.326***          -0.415***           -0.0892*
                                                                                    (0.495)            (0.365)            (0.431)            (0.495)            (-10.18)            (-9.02)             (-2.07)
   Lerner Index                                                                      1.227              1.186              1.240              1.229              -0.0112            0.0426              0.0538
                                                                                    (0.412)            (0.322)            (0.450)            (0.408)              (-0.38)            (1.05)             (1.16)
   Import Penetration                                                                0.614              0.602              0.651              0.597              -0.0536           -0.00465             0.0490
                                                                                    (0.566)            (0.632)            (0.621)            (0.523)              (-1.36)           (-0.08)             (0.70)
   Number of Observations                                                            1114                128                330                656                  986               784                 458


 Notes: TheThe
Notes:     table shows summary
                   table       statistics (means,
                            shows          summarystandard deviation in parentheses
                                                             statistics             in columns 1-3;
                                                                               (means,              differences anddeviation
                                                                                               standard             t-statistic in parentheses in column 4) of CEO time
                                                                                                                                       in parentheses               in use, CEO characteristics,
                                                                                                                                                                        columns         1-3;firmdi↵erences
                                                                                                                                                                                                 and industry
   level data for a sample of 1114 CEOs). All variables in Panel A, B and C collected in the CEO time use survey. Import penetration = ln(import/production) in the firm ISIC REV3 industry, computed by averaging
  OECDt-statistic
and      STAN data relativein
                            to the 2006–2008 time period
                                 parentheses             in(last available year
                                                             column           4)for of
                                                                                    all countries)
                                                                                          CEOacross time France, Germany,
                                                                                                              use,    CEO US andcharacteristics,
                                                                                                                                 UK at the industry level. Lerner index of
                                                                                                                                                               firm        competition
                                                                                                                                                                         and           = (1-profit/sales)
                                                                                                                                                                                 industry         levelin the firm 3 digit
                                                                                                                                                                                                           data      for a
  SIC industry computed , as in Aghion et al. (2005), by averaging firm level data in ORBIS relative to the 2008-2012 time period across Brazil, France, Germany, India, US and UK at the industry level.
sample of 1114 CEOs). All variables in Panel A, B and C collected in the CEO time use survey. Import penetration
= ln(import/production) in the firm ISIC REV3 industry, computed by averaging OECD STAN data relative to the
2006–2008 time period (last available year for all countries) across France, Germany, US and UK at the industry
level. Lerner index of competition = (1-profit/sales) in the firm 3 digit SIC industry computed , as in Aghion et al.
(2005), by averaging firm level data in ORBIS relative to the 2008-2012 time period across Brazil, France, Germany,
India, US and UK at the industry level.


                                                                                                          46
   Table&A6&)&Founders&vs.&Descendants&vs.&Professional&CEOs&)&Cross&sectional&differences&in&Hours&Worked
                                Table A.9: Founder and Family CEOs: Hours Worked
                                                             (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)           (7)

   Dependent&Variable                                                                        Log(Hours&Worked)
   Family&CEO&(2nd&generation&onwards)                   !0.162***     !0.094***    !0.097*** !0.096*** !0.087***            !0.085***    !0.077***
                                                           (0.017)       (0.019)      (0.021)     (0.021)     (0.021)          (0.021)      (0.022)
   Founder&CEO                                           !0.228***     !0.160***    !0.128*** !0.115*** !0.090***            !0.095***    !0.088***
                                                           (0.026)       (0.027)      (0.029)     (0.029)     (0.031)          (0.029)      (0.031)
   Family&Ownership,&External&CEO                                                                                                          0.041**
                                                                                                                                            (0.020)
   Founder&Ownership,&External&CEO                                                                                                           !0.021
                                                                                                                                            (0.044)
   CEO&holds&positions&in&other&firms                                                  0.022         0.016        0.018         0.014        0.014
                                                                                      (0.015)       (0.015)      (0.015)       (0.015)      (0.015)
   Log(CEO&age)                                                                     !0.154***     !0.174***    !0.138***     !0.141***    !0.144***
                                                                                      (0.044)       (0.044)      (0.045)       (0.045)      (0.046)
   Log(1+CEO&tenure&in&firm)                                                           !0.005        !0.007       !0.007        !0.006       !0.005
                                                                                      (0.010)       (0.011)      (0.010)       (0.011)      (0.010)
   CEO&holds&College&degree                                                            0.051         0.043        0.041        0.054*       0.055*
                                                                                      (0.032)       (0.033)      (0.033)       (0.032)      (0.033)
   CEO&holds&MBA&degree                                                                0.010         0.006        0.007         0.006        0.005
                                                                                      (0.018)       (0.018)      (0.017)       (0.018)      (0.018)
   CEO&has&study/work&experience&abroad                                                0.014         0.005        0.004         !0.003       !0.004
                                                                                      (0.016)       (0.016)      (0.016)       (0.017)      (0.017)
   Log(Employment)                                                                                 0.025***     0.021***      0.024***     0.023***
                                                                                                    (0.007)      (0.007)       (0.007)      (0.007)
   Log(Firm&age)                                                                                     0.005        0.004         0.002        0.001
                                                                                                    (0.010)      (0.010)       (0.011)      (0.011)
   MNE                                                                                               0.029        0.024        0.033*       0.032*
                                                                                                    (0.020)      (0.020)       (0.019)      (0.019)
   Listed                                                                                            !0.032       !0.032        !0.009       !0.004
                                                                                                    (0.022)      (0.023)       (0.024)      (0.024)
   Number&of&CEO&direct&reports                                                                                 0.007***      0.006***     0.006***
                                                                                                                 (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.002)
   COO&exists                                                                                                     !0.009        !0.018       !0.017
                                                                                                                 (0.019)       (0.020)      (0.020)
   Number&of&sons&in&management&positions                                                                       !0.049**     !0.059***    !0.058***
                                                                                                                 (0.023)       (0.022)      (0.022)
   Number&of&daughters&in&management&positions                                                                    0.004         !0.013       !0.012
                                                                                                                 (0.029)       (0.029)      (0.029)
   Data&collected&through&the&CEO&personal&assistant                                                                            !0.000       0.002
                                                                                                                               (0.016)      (0.017)
   R)squared                                               0.123        0.214         0.230        0.244         0.255          0.347        0.348
   Number&of&firms                                         1,114        1,114         1,114        1,114         1,114          1,114        1,114
   Test&Family&CEO&(2nd&gen)=&Founder&CEO,&p)value         0.0209       0.0187        0.2966       0.5161        0.9169        0.7167       0.6866
   Country&by&Industry&dummies                                n            y             y            y             y              y            y
   Noise&controls                                             n            n             n            n             n              y            y

Notes: *significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. All columns estimated by OLS (robust
   Notes: *significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. All columns estimated by OLS (robust standard errors in parenthesis). The
standard    errors
   variable "CEO   in parenthesis).
                 Hours                 The
                       Worked" is the log     variable
                                          of the         ”CEO
                                                 total hours     Hours
                                                             the CEO    Worked”
                                                                     devoted to workisactivities
                                                                                       the loglasting
                                                                                                 of the total
                                                                                                      more thanhours  the CEO
                                                                                                                15 minutes        devoted
                                                                                                                           (excluding travel) to
  during
work     the survey
     activities     week. The
                 lasting  morevariable
                                 than"Start(End)
                                       15 minutesof the Day" denotes
                                                     (excluding      the hour
                                                                 travel)      at which
                                                                          during   the the CEO reported
                                                                                        survey          to start(end)
                                                                                                week. The     variablethe”Start(End)
                                                                                                                          work!day. The of
   variable "Share time spent in personal activities" denotes the share of hours reported by the CEO as dedicated to leisure activities during working
thehours.
    Day” Family
           denotesCEOthe hour
                      (2nd      at whichfor
                           generation)=1  thethose
                                               CEO whoreported
                                                         own the to
                                                                 firmstart(end)
                                                                       or belong tothe
                                                                                     thework-day.    The variable
                                                                                         family that owns  the firm but”Share  time
                                                                                                                         have not    spentit in
                                                                                                                                  founded
   themselves, and 0 otherwise. Founder CEO=1  for those  who own  the  firm or belong to the family that owns  the firmand
personal activities” denotes the share of hours reported by the CEO as dedicated to leisure activities during working       have  founded it
   themselves, and 0 otherwise. Industry dummies are 33 two digits SIC codes. Noise controls include: a dummy to denote if the time use data was
hours. Family CEO (2nd generation)=1 for those who own the firm or belong to the family that owns the firm but
  recorded by the PA; 55 interviewer dummies; a dummy to denote CEOs who formally report to an executive Chairman; 29 interview week
  dummy;
have      a self reported
     not founded          score given by
                     it themselves,      the 0CEO
                                       and        to rank theFounder
                                               otherwise.    representativeness
                                                                       CEO=1offor
                                                                                the those
                                                                                    week and
                                                                                          whoa dummy to denote
                                                                                                own the        weeks
                                                                                                         firm or     with to
                                                                                                                 belong   a national or
                                                                                                                             the family
   religiousYholiday.
that  owns the firm and have founded it themselves, and 0 otherwise. Industry dummies are 33 two digits SIC codes.
Noise controls include: a dummy to denote if the time use data was recorded by the PA; 55 interviewer dummies; a
dummy to denote CEOs who formally report to an executive Chairman; 29 interview week dummy; a self reported
score given by the CEO to rank the representativeness of the week and a dummy to denote weeks with a national or
religious holiday.
                                                                          47
                                                   Table A.10: Rain - Robustness Checks
                                                                                    (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)             (5)          (6)
               Dependent/Variable                                                                       Log(1+CEO/Hours/Worked)/R/Day/Level/

               Experiment                                                        Baseline       Include/       Include/       Include/     Include/     Include/
                                                                                               CEO*rain/      firm*rain/     org*rain/ industry*rain/ state*rain/
                                                                                             interactions   interactions   interactions interactions interactions


               Family/CEO                                                         !0.053**     !0.064***      !0.052**      !0.057**      !0.055**     !0.052**
                                                                                   (0.022)       (0.024)       (0.022)       (0.022)       (0.023)      (0.024)
               Dummy=1/if/extreme/rain                                              0.030        !0.311        0.140*         0.022       !0.210**       0.000
                                                                                   (0.019)       (0.272)       (0.084)       (0.031)       (0.082)      (0.000)
               Dummy=1/if/extreme/rain/*/Family/CEO                              !0.069***       !0.035      !0.071***      !0.057**     !0.070***     !0.058**
                                                                                   (0.023)       (0.028)       (0.024)       (0.025)       (0.025)      (0.029)
               Dummy=1/if/extreme/rain/*/Log(CEO/age)                                            0.128*
                                                                                                 (0.071)
               Dummy=1/if/extreme/rain/*/Log(1+CEO/tenure/in/firm)                              !0.042**
                                                                                                 (0.019)
               Dummy=1/if/extreme/rain/*/CEO/College                                             !0.080
                                                                                                 (0.062)
               Dummy=1/if/extreme/rain/*CEO/studied/worked/abroad                                 0.014
                                                                                                 (0.026)
               Dummy=1/if/extreme/rain/*/CEO/works/for/other/firms                               !0.011
                                                                                                 (0.038)
               Dummy=1/if/extreme/rain/*/CEO/MBA                                                  0.022
                                                                                                 (0.030)
               Dummy=1/if/extreme/rain/*/Log(Employment)                                                       !0.006
                                                                                                               (0.012)
               Dummy=1/if/extreme/rain/*/Log(Firm/age)                                                         !0.025
                                                                                                               (0.023)
               Dummy=1/if/extreme/rain/*/MNE                                                                    0.056
                                                                                                               (0.037)
               Dummy=1/if/extreme/rain/*Number/of/direct/reports                                                              !0.000
                                                                                                                             (0.004)
               Dummy=1/if/extreme/rain/*COO/exists                                                                            0.033
                                                                                                                             (0.031)
               Dummy=1/if/extreme/rain/*Sons/in/Management                                                                    !0.024
                                                                                                                             (0.027)
               Dummy=1/if/extreme/rain/*Daughters/in/Management                                                               !0.023
                                                                                                                             (0.055)
               Log(Employment)                                                   0.014**        0.014**        0.016**      0.015**         0.014*     0.018**
                                                                                  (0.007)       (0.007)        (0.008)       (0.007)       (0.007)      (0.007)
               Log(Firm/age)                                                       0.007          0.006          0.013        0.007         0.008        0.002
                                                                                  (0.014)       (0.015)        (0.017)       (0.014)       (0.015)      (0.015)
               MNE                                                                 0.040*       0.040*           0.023        0.039*        0.040*       0.040*
                                                                                  (0.021)       (0.022)        (0.024)       (0.021)       (0.022)      (0.024)
               Number/of/direct/reports                                          0.007**        0.006**        0.006**        0.006*      0.007**      0.007**
                                                                                  (0.003)       (0.003)        (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.003)      (0.003)
               COO/exists                                                          !0.027        !0.027         !0.028       !0.038*        !0.027       !0.029
                                                                                  (0.017)       (0.017)        (0.017)       (0.020)       (0.018)      (0.019)
               Number/of/sons/in/management                                        !0.006        !0.007         !0.007        0.003         !0.006       !0.010
                                                                                  (0.018)       (0.017)        (0.018)       (0.019)       (0.018)      (0.019)
               Number/of/daughters/in/management                                   !0.040        !0.040        !0.043*        !0.032       !0.044*      !0.047*
                                                                                  (0.026)       (0.025)        (0.025)       (0.026)       (0.026)      (0.028)
               CEO/works/for/other/firms                                           !0.002         0.002         !0.002        !0.002        !0.001       0.006
                                                                                  (0.021)       (0.026)        (0.021)       (0.022)       (0.023)      (0.023)
               Log(CEO/age)                                                       !0.090*      !0.137**        !0.088*       !0.091*       !0.091*     !0.115**
                                                                                  (0.048)       (0.055)        (0.048)       (0.048)       (0.047)      (0.049)
               Log(1+CEO/tenure/in/firm)                                           !0.005         0.008         !0.006        !0.006        !0.005       !0.001
                                                                                  (0.011)       (0.014)        (0.011)       (0.011)       (0.011)      (0.012)
               College/degree                                                    0.063**       0.084***        0.064**      0.064**       0.059**        0.048
                                                                                  (0.026)       (0.031)        (0.026)       (0.027)       (0.027)      (0.036)
               Dummy/CEO/MBA                                                       !0.011        !0.018         !0.010        !0.011        !0.010       !0.017
                                                                                  (0.016)       (0.020)        (0.017)       (0.016)       (0.017)      (0.017)
               CEO/studied/worked/abroad                                           0.022          0.015          0.021        0.022         0.022        0.020
                                                                                  (0.015)       (0.018)        (0.015)       (0.015)       (0.016)      (0.018)
               Constant                                                          2.238***      2.376***       2.183***      2.250***      2.361***     2.404***
                                                                                  (0.258)       (0.281)        (0.260)       (0.255)       (0.256)      (0.246)
               RRsquared                                                           0.255         0.257          0.256         0.256         0.260        0.277
               Observations                                                         3020          3020           3020          3020          3020         3020
               Number/of/firms                                                      597            597            597           597           597          597
               Industry/dummies                                                       y              y              y            y             y            y
               Noise/controls                                                         y              y              y            y             y            y
               Test/Rain+Family/CEO*Rain=0/(pRvalue)                                0.06           0.19           0.41         0.25          0.00         0.04
               Test/joint/significance/of/Rain*CEO/characteristics/(pRvalue)                       0.17
               Test/joint/significance/of/Rain*/firm/characteristics/(pRvalue)                                  0.34
               Test/joint/significance/of/Rain*/org/characteristics/(pRvalue)                                                 0.71
               Test/joint/significance/of/Rain*Industry/interactions/(pRvalue)                                                              0.00
               Test/joint/significance/of/Rain*State/interactions/(pRvalue)                                                                              0.00



Notes: *significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. See Table 6 for details.


                                                                                          48
                                           Table A.11: Sport Events - Robustness Checks
              Table&A7b&)&Response&to&Cricket&Shocks&by&Ownership&&)&Robustness

                                                                                    (1)           (2)          (3)             (4)           (5)             (6)
              Dependent&Variable                                                              Log(1+Hours&Worked)&)&Day&Level&)&Sport&event&Hours&Only&

              Experiment                                                         Baseline        Include&        Include&      Include&      Include&      Include&
                                                                                               CEO*event&     firm*event&    org*event& industry*even state*event&
                                                                                              interactions   interactions   interactions t&interactions interactions


              Family&CEO                                                            !0.026       !0.032        !0.025          !0.028        !0.024          !0.023
                                                                                   (0.027)       (0.027)       (0.027)        (0.027)       (0.027)         (0.031)
              Sport&event                                                           !0.056        0.728       0.410***         !0.131        0.210        !1.206***
                                                                                   (0.065)       (0.900)       (0.156)        (0.111)       (0.208)         (0.178)
              Sport&event&*&Family&CEO                                           !0.158***       !0.126       !0.174**       !0.175**      !0.173**        !0.206**
                                                                                   (0.061)       (0.080)       (0.076)        (0.082)       (0.075)         (0.091)
              Sport&event&*&Log(CEO&age)                                                         !0.087
                                                                                                 (0.226)
              Sport&event&*&Log(1+CEO&tenure&in&firm)                                          !0.121***
                                                                                                 (0.038)
              Sport&event*College                                                                 0.073
                                                                                                 (0.135)
              Sport&event*CEO&studied/worked&abroad                                              !0.149
                                                                                                 (0.124)
              Sport&event&*&CEO&works&for&other&firms                                           !0.307**
                                                                                                 (0.134)
              Sport&event&*&CEO&MBA                                                              !0.078
                                                                                                 (0.102)
              Sport&event&*&Log(Employment)                                                                   !0.099**
                                                                                                               (0.041)
              Sport&event&*&Log(Firm&age)                                                                       0.039
                                                                                                               (0.057)
              Sport&event&*&MNE                                                                                 0.102
                                                                                                               (0.151)
              Sport&event&*Number&of&direct&reports                                                                            0.001
                                                                                                                              (0.015)
              Sport&event&*COO                                                                                               0.251**
                                                                                                                              (0.112)
              Sport&event&*Sons&in&Management                                                                                  !0.004
                                                                                                                              (0.141)
              Sport&event&*Daughters&in&Management                                                                             0.036
                                                                                                                              (0.085)
              Log(Employment)                                                        0.008        0.010        0.014*          0.009        0.010           0.013
                                                                                    (0.008)     (0.008)        (0.008)        (0.008)      (0.008)         (0.008)
              Log(Firm&age)                                                          0.031        0.032          0.030         0.029        0.029          0.035*
                                                                                    (0.021)     (0.021)        (0.022)        (0.021)      (0.021)         (0.021)
              MNE                                                                    0.037        0.035          0.033         0.038        0.033           0.027
                                                                                    (0.033)     (0.032)        (0.032)        (0.033)      (0.033)         (0.035)
              CEO&works&for&other&firms                                              0.000       !0.000          0.000         0.000        !0.000          !0.000
                                                                                    (0.004)     (0.004)        (0.004)        (0.004)      (0.004)         (0.004)
              Log(CEO&age)                                                           !0.026      !0.030         !0.029         !0.044       !0.028          !0.032
                                                                                    (0.029)     (0.028)        (0.029)        (0.028)      (0.030)         (0.031)
              Log(1+CEO&tenure&in&firm)                                              0.004        0.006          0.003         0.005        0.002           !0.006
                                                                                    (0.019)     (0.018)        (0.018)        (0.018)      (0.020)         (0.022)
              College&degree                                                         !0.052      !0.057         !0.055         !0.056       !0.055          !0.054
                                                                                    (0.037)     (0.038)        (0.037)        (0.039)      (0.038)         (0.041)
              Dummy&CEO&MBA                                                         !0.050*      !0.032        !0.051*        !0.051*       !0.045          !0.039
                                                                                    (0.028)     (0.028)        (0.028)        (0.029)      (0.028)         (0.030)
              Did&the&Executive&study&or&worked&abroad?                              0.016        0.006          0.016         0.013        0.013           !0.015
                                                                                    (0.056)     (0.058)        (0.057)        (0.056)      (0.059)         (0.061)
              Number&of&direct&reports                                               !0.018      !0.008         !0.017         !0.015       !0.017          !0.016
                                                                                    (0.016)     (0.016)        (0.016)        (0.016)      (0.017)         (0.017)
              COO&exists                                                           0.096**      0.098**        0.097**       0.094**      0.090**          0.081*
                                                                                    (0.043)     (0.044)        (0.043)        (0.044)      (0.045)         (0.046)
              Number&of&sons&in&management                                           !0.024      !0.025         !0.026         !0.021       !0.025          !0.027
                                                                                    (0.022)     (0.022)        (0.023)        (0.022)      (0.023)         (0.025)
              Number&of&daughters&in&management                                      !0.005       0.004         !0.003         !0.007       !0.003          !0.001
                                                                                    (0.022)     (0.023)        (0.022)        (0.022)      (0.023)         (0.025)
              Constant                                                             1.042***    0.971***       1.002***       1.034***     0.891***        0.994***
                                                                                    (0.344)     (0.345)        (0.349)        (0.345)      (0.317)         (0.326)
              R)squared                                                              0.213       0.220          0.216          0.215        0.221           0.236
              Observations                                                            3020        3020           3020           3020         3020            3020
              Number&of&firms                                                         597          597            597            597          597             597
              Industry&dummies                                                          y            y              y             y            y               y
              Noise&controls                                                            y            y              y             y            y               y
              Test&Sport&event+Family&CEO*Sport&event=0&(p)value)                     0.01         0.50           0.16          0.09         0.83            0.00
              Test&joint&significance&of&&Sport&Event*CEO&characteristics&(p)value)                0.00
              Test&joint&significance&of&&Sport&Event*&firm&characteristics&(p)value)                           0.04
              Test&joint&significance&of&&Sport&Event*org&&characteristics&(p)value)                                           0.22
              Test&joint&significance&of&&Sport&Event*Industry&interactions&(p)value)                                                        0.00
              Test&joint&significance&of&Sport&&Event*State&interactions&(p)value)                                                                          0.00



Notes: *significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. See Table 6 for details.


                                                                                          49
  Table 6 - Wealth Concentration, Development and Contract Enforcement
                                                  Table A.12: The Role of Wealth
                                                             (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)
  Dependent Variable
                                                                                         Log(Hours Worked)
  Family CEO                                             -0.093***          -0.089***          -0.089***          -0.087***          -0.090***
                                                           (0.024)            (0.023)            (0.023)            (0.023)            (0.023)
  Family CEO*Max % of inheritable wealth,
  country                                                 -0.229**                                                                    -0.399*
                                                           (0.118)                                                                    (0.208)
  ln(GDP), region                                                              0.043                                                    0.020
                                                                              (0.031)                                                 (0.034)
  Family CEO*ln(GDP), region                                                  -0.018                                                    0.030
                                                                              (0.019)                                                 (0.048)
  Family CEO*Rule of Law, country                                                                -0.008                                 0.008
                                                                                                 (0.025)                              (0.062)
  Trust, region                                                                                                    -0.171              -0.144
                                                                                                                   (0.174)            (0.194)
  Family CEO*Trust, region                                                                                          0.074               0.066
                                                                                                                   (0.121)            (0.214)
  R-squared                                                 0.349              0.346             0.345              0.345               0.349
  Observations                                              1114               1114              1114               1114                1114
  Country and Industry dummies                                y                  y                 y                  y                   y
  CEO characteristics                                         y                  y                 y                  y                   y
  Firm characteristics                                        y                  y                 y                  y                   y
  Noise controls                                              y                  y                 y                  y                   y

 Notes:*significant
Notes:  *significant atat10%;
                          10%;** **
                                 significant at 5%;
                                    significant   at***
                                                     5%;significant at 1%. Allatcolumns
                                                          *** significant               estimated
                                                                                  1%. All columns byestimated
                                                                                                     OLS. In all columns
                                                                                                                  by OLS.standard errors
                                                                                                                           In all columns
  under coefficient are clustered by country (wild cluster bootstrap, Webb 6 point distribution). The variable "CEO Hours Worked" is
standard
  the log oferrors  under
              the total    coefficient
                        hours          are clustered
                              the CEO devoted  to workby country
                                                       activities    (wild
                                                                  lasting  cluster
                                                                          more than bootstrap,  Webb 6 point
                                                                                    15 minutes (excluding travel) distribution).  The
                                                                                                                  during the survey
  week. Family
variable ”CEO  CEO=1 for Worked”
                 Hours   those who is
                                    own
                                      thethelog
                                              firm
                                                 of or belong
                                                     the totaltohours
                                                                 the family
                                                                       the that
                                                                            CEO owns the firm,
                                                                                  devoted   to and
                                                                                               work0 otherwise.
                                                                                                      activities Industry
                                                                                                                  lasting dummies
                                                                                                                          more than
15are 33 two (excluding
   minutes   digits SIC codes. CEO during
                          travel)  characteristics are a week.
                                          the survey     dummyFamily
                                                               to denote CEOs holding
                                                                      CEO=1           a managerial
                                                                               for those  who own  or the
                                                                                                      board  position
                                                                                                          firm        in another
                                                                                                                or belong   to the
  firm, the log of CEO age, the log of one plus number of years CEO has been employed in the firm, a dummy to denote CEOs holding
family that owns the firm, and 0 otherwise. Industry dummies are 33 two digits SIC codes. CEO characteristics are
  a college degree, a dummy to denote CEOs holding an MBA or equivalent degree, a dummy to denote CEO that have worked or
a studied
  dummyabroad.to denote
                     Firm CEOs     holdingarea the
                           characteristics      managerial
                                                    log of one orplusboard     position
                                                                       firm age,  a dummy in to
                                                                                              another
                                                                                                 denote firm,
                                                                                                         foreignthe  log of CEO
                                                                                                                  or domestic         age, the log
                                                                                                                                multinationals,  the of
  number
one         of peopleofreporting
     plus number                  directly
                          years CEO     hastobeen
                                              the CEO,  a dummy
                                                    employed       intothe
                                                                         denote
                                                                            firm,whether
                                                                                   a dummy  the firm  employsCEOs
                                                                                                 to denote     a COO,holding
                                                                                                                        the number    of CEO's
                                                                                                                                 a college     sons a
                                                                                                                                            degree,
  and daughters
dummy     to denoteholding
                       CEOs  a managerial
                                holding an position
                                             MBAinorthe     same firm.degree,
                                                         equivalent       Noise controls
                                                                                   a dummy include:  a dummy
                                                                                                to denote   CEOto denote   cases worked
                                                                                                                    that have     in which or
                                                                                                                                           thestudied
                                                                                                                                               time
  use data was recorded by the CEO's Personal Assistant; 55 interviewer dummies; a dummy to denote CEOs who formally report to
abroad. Firm characteristics are the log of one plus firm age, a dummy to denote foreign or domestic multinationals,
  an executive Chairman; 29 interview week dummy; a self reported score given by the CEO to rank the representativeness of the
the  number
  week          of people
         and a dummy          reporting
                         to denote   weeksdirectly    to the orCEO,
                                            with a national               a dummy
                                                                  religious            to denote
                                                                             holiday. The   variable whether
                                                                                                      "Max % ofthe    firm employs
                                                                                                                 inheritable  wealth" isa aCOO,
                                                                                                                                            countrythe
  specific of
number     measure
               CEO’staken
                        sonsfrom
                               andEllul et al (2010)
                                     daughters         for allacountries,
                                                   holding        managerial except  for Indiainwhere
                                                                                  position              the measure
                                                                                                  the same             is set tocontrols
                                                                                                              firm. Noise         0.50 to take  into a
                                                                                                                                          include:
  account   the fact that  the vast majority  of family  firms  in  our  sample  are  organized   as  Hindu Undivided
dummy to denote cases in which the time use data was recorded by the CEO’s Personal Assistant; 55 interviewer            Family  organizations (see
  main text for more details). The variables ln(GDP), region" and "Rule of Law, country" are taken from Gennaioli et al (2013). The
dummies;      a dummy
  variable "Trust,         to denote
                    region"is  computed CEOs
                                           usingwho    formally
                                                  respondent        report
                                                                level         to anthe
                                                                        data from     executive
                                                                                        World ValuesChairman;     29 interview
                                                                                                         Survey and    measures the week
                                                                                                                                       % ofdummy;
                                                                                                                                             people a
  responding "Yes" to the question “Generally speaking, would you say that most people can be trusted or that you can’t be too
self reported    score  given   by  the CEO     to  rank   the   representativeness       of  the  week   and  a  dummy      to  denote   weeks   with
  careful in dealing  with  people?”.
a national or religious holiday. The variable ”Max % of inheritable wealth” is a country specific measure taken from
Ellul et al (2010) for all countries, except for India where the measure is set to 0.50 to take into account the fact
that the vast majority of family firms in our sample are organized as Hindu Undivided Family organizations (see
main text for more details). The variables ln(GDP), region” and ”Rule of Law, country” are taken from Gennaioli et
al (2013). The variable ”Trust, region”is computed using respondent level data from the World Values Survey and
measures the % of people responding ”Yes” to the question “Generally speaking, would you say that most people can
be trusted or that you can’t be too careful in dealing with people?”.




                                                                         50
