                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 CAN NON-INTEREST RATE POLICIES STABILIZE HOUSING MARKETS? EVIDENCE
                   FROM A PANEL OF 57 ECONOMIES

                                          Kenneth N. Kuttner
                                            Ilhyock Shim

                                         Working Paper 19723
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19723


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2013




We are grateful for comments by seminar participants at the Bank for International Settlements, Williams
College, the RBA-BIS Conference on Property Markets and Financial Stability in Sydney and the
Money, Macro and Finance Conference 2013 in London. We thank Claudio Borio, Frank Packer and
Peter Pedroni for helpful suggestions and Bilyana Bogdanova, Marjorie Santos, Jimmy Shek and Agne
Subelyte for their excellent research assistance. The views presented here are solely those of the authors
and do not necessarily represent those of the Bank for International Settlements or the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Kenneth N. Kuttner and Ilhyock Shim. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Can Non-Interest Rate Policies Stabilize Housing Markets?
Evidence from a Panel of 57 Economies
Kenneth N. Kuttner and Ilhyock Shim
NBER Working Paper No. 19723
December 2013
JEL No. G21,G28,R31

                                              ABSTRACT

Using data from 57 countries spanning more than three decades, this paper investigates the effectiveness
of nine non-interest rate policy tools, including macroprudential measures, in stabilizing house prices
and housing credit. In conventional panel regressions, housing credit growth is significantly affected
by changes in the maximum debt-service-to-income (DSTI) ratio, the maximum loan-to-value ratio,
limits on exposure to the housing sector and housing-related taxes. But only the DSTI ratio limit has
a significant effect on housing credit growth when we use mean group and panel event study methods.
Among the policies considered, a change in housing-related taxes is the only policy tool with a discernible
impact on house price appreciation.


Kenneth N. Kuttner
Department of Economics
Williams College
Schapiro Hall
24 Hopkins Hall Drive
Williamstown, MA 01267
and NBER
kenneth.n.kuttner@williams.edu

Ilhyock Shim
Bank for International Settlements
Representative Office for Asia and the Pacific
78th floor, Two IFC, Central, Hong Kong
ilhyock.shim@bis.org
1    Introduction

Following the housing boom and bust of the mid-2000s, the drawbacks of relying on interest rates
alone to ensure financial stability have become increasingly clear. As documented elsewhere,
the quantitative impact of interest rates on house prices is economically significant but not large
enough to achieve a meaningful degree of restraint.1 An interest rate hike of sufficient size to
meaningfully dampen house price growth would therefore run the risk of causing a recession.
As Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke (2010) put it, monetary policy is a “blunt tool” for
stabilizing housing markets.2 Moreover, countries with exchange rate targets (either explicit or
implicit) lack the freedom to use the interest rate as a policy tool.
     The recognition of interest rates’ limitations has left policymakers searching for other policy
tools to tame housing and other asset markets, either independently or as a complement to interest
rate policy. A great deal of attention has been focused on non-interest rate policies, such as reserve
requirements and maximum loan-to-value (LTV) ratios, which have been on high and growing
demand in many economies. Given the central role of the housing market in the recent crises, it
is no surprise that many of these policies are aimed squarely at reining in the housing sector. The
critical question is whether these non-interest rate tools really work in modulating house prices and
housing credit growth.
     This paper is closely related to the rapidly expanding literature on macroprudential policy,
whose overarching goal is to limit systemic risk in the financial system as a whole.3 The two main
objectives of macroprudential policy are, first, to promote the resilience of the financial system by
mandating higher levels of liquidity, capital and collateralization; and second, to restrain the build-
up of financial imbalances by slowing credit and asset price growth. This paper deals with the
second of these two objectives, focusing specifically on imbalances in the housing market. At the
same time, it looks at a broad range of policy actions, not just those traditionally associated with
macroprudential regulation. These include changes in taxes and subsidies affecting the housing
    1 SeeKuttner (2014) and the references contained therein.
    2 Partly
           for this reason, many macroeconomists have argued that the interest rate should not be used to address such
developments (e.g. Bernanke & Gertler (1999), Blanchard et al. (2010), Galı́ (2013), Ito (2010), Posen (2006) and
Svensson (2010)). Others have argued that there is a role for interest rate policy in ensuring financial stability (e.g.
Borio (2011), Eichengreen et al. (2011), King (2013), Mishkin (2011), Stein (2013) and Woodford (2012)).
   3 See IMF-BIS-Financial Stability Board (2011) for a more complete discussion of macroprudential policy.




                                                           1
market, and other actions, such as changes in reserve requirements, that are not explicitly justified
by macroprudential objectives. We therefore refer to the policies in our paper as credit and housing-
related tax policies, rather than as narrowly-defined macroprudential tools.
   A growing body of research has documented the use of tools other than the short-term interest
rate in various countries and examined their effectiveness in damping credit growth and house
prices. Among the first was Hilbers et al. (2005), who documented that ten of the 18 central and
eastern European (CEE) countries responded to house price booms with regulatory policy actions.
In the same vein, Crowe et al. (2011) found that out of 36 countries that had experienced real
estate booms, 24 had responded with policy measures intended dampen the property market.
   Focusing on six countries in Latin America, Tovar et al. (2012) showed that macroprudential
policy in general, and reserve requirements in particular, had a moderate but transitory impact on
private bank credit growth in the region. More recent work on the CEE economies by Vandenbuss-
che et al. (2012) found that certain types of macroprudential policies, including capital adequacy
ratios and non-standard liquidity measures, influenced house price inflation. And taking an inter-
national perspective, Borio & Shim (2007) documented 12 types of macroprudential policy actions
taken by 18 European and Asian countries going back as far as 1988. Their event study analysis
showed that macroprudential measures reduced credit growth by 4 to 6 percentage points in the
years immediately following their introduction, while house prices decelerated in real terms by 3
to 5 percentage points.
   Lim et al. (2011) used data from a survey conducted by the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
in 2010 to document that 40 of the 49 countries surveyed had taken (broadly defined) macropruden-
tial measures in the preceding 10 years. Using panel regression analysis, they found that a variety
of macroprudential tools, including reserve requirements, dynamic provisioning, maximum LTV
ratios, maximum debt-service-to-income (DSTI) ratios and limits on foreign currency lending had
measurable effects on the growth rate or cyclicality of private sector credit and leverage.
   Taking a disaggregated approach, Claessens et al. (2013) analyzed the use of macroprudential
policy aimed at reducing vulnerabilities in individual banks in both advanced and emerging mar-
ket economies, using a sample of about 2,300 banks in 48 countries and macroprudential policy
measures documented by Lim et al. (2011). They showed that policy measures such as maximum


                                                 2
LTV and DSTI ratios and limits on foreign currency lending are effective in reducing leverage,
asset and non-core to core liabilities growth during booms, and that few policies help stop declines
in bank leverage and assets during downturns.
     This paper’s goal is to provide a systematic assessment of the efficacy of credit and housing-
related tax policies on housing credit and house prices. The analysis uses a new dataset on the
usage of nine of these policy types by 60 countries over a period going as far back as 1980, making
it the most comprehensive study to date in terms of both scope and time span. While in some
respects similar to Lim et al. (2011), our focus is on housing credit and house prices rather than
overall private sector credit. Our study employs three different empirical approaches as a check on
the results’ robustness.4 The main findings are, first, that the maximum DSTI ratio is the policy
tool that most consistently affects housing credit growth, with a typical policy tightening slowing
housing credit growth by roughly 4 to 7 percentage points over the following four quarters. Second,
the evidence suggests that an increase in housing-related taxes can slow the growth of house prices,
although this finding is somewhat sensitive to the choice of econometric method.
     The plan of the paper is as follows. Section 2 describes each of the nine policies analyzed
and sketches a theoretical framework illustrating the channels through which the policies operate.
Section 3 describes the data used in the analysis, focusing on the key characteristics of the policy
action dataset. Section 4 describes the econometric methods and reports the results. Section 5
concludes.

2    The operation of credit and housing-related tax policies

The purpose of this section is, first, to provide some specifics on how these policies operate in
practice; and second, to present bare-bones theoretical frameworks to illuminate the conditions
necessary for certain types of policies to be effective and the reasons why the effect of policies
might vary between countries.
    4 Thispaper builds on Kuttner & Shim (2012), which explored a similar set of issues. The present paper uses a
significantly expanded version of the policy action dataset used in the earlier work and brings additional econometric
methods to bear on the analysis.




                                                          3
2.1     General credit policies

The three policies in this category are reserve requirements, liquidity requirements and limits on
credit growth. All apply to the banking system. Because none of the three is aimed specifically
at the housing sector, we refer to them collectively as general credit policies. They might also be
characterized as non-interest rate monetary policy tools.
      Reserve requirements compel banks to hold at least a fraction of their liabilities as liquid re-
serves. These are normally held either as reserve deposits at the central bank or as vault cash. The
regulation generally specifies the size of required reserves according to the type of deposits (e.g.
demand, savings or time deposits), their currency of denomination (domestic or foreign currency)
and their maturity.
      Liquidity requirements are typically in the form of a minimum ratio of highly liquid assets, such
as government securities and central bank paper, to certain types of liabilities. These are prudential
regulations whose main objective is to ensure a bank’s ability to withstand cash outflows under
stress. The main difference between liquidity and reserve requirements is that the former requires
the bank to keep funds at the central bank whereas the latter oblige them to hold liquid marketable
securities. The two policies are very similar in terms of their economic effect, as both influence
the volume of funds available for lending to the private sector by imposing constraints on the
composition of banks’ balance sheets.
      Finally, limits on the expansion of private sector credit are sometimes imposed during lending
booms. This may take the form of a numerical ceiling on the rate of credit growth per month or
year, or a maximum amount of the increase in lending per month or per quarter. Another aspect of
those policies is a set of penalties on violating the specified limit.

A deposit-dependent bank

The starting point for modelling banks’ loan supply is the profit-maximizing choice of balance
sheet composition. Profits for a bank whose sole source of funds consists of reservable demand
deposits would be
                                       Π = rL · L + rR · R − rD · D                                 (1)




                                                    4
where L, R and D are loans, reserves and demand deposits, and rL , rR and rD are the corresponding
interest rates.5
    If banks hold some fixed regulatory mandated share ψ of deposits as reserves, the expression
for profits can be written as
                                          Π = [rL − rD − ψ(rL − rR )]D .                                                 (2)
                                                         | {z }
                                                         reserve tax
And since L = (1 − ψ)D, profits can be also expressed as a function of L,


                                    Π = [rL − rD − ψ(rL − rR )](1 − ψ)−1 L .                                             (3)


For simplicity, we assume that the reserve requirement constraint holds with equality.6
    If interest rates were exogenous, then the supply of loans would be perfectly elastic: for Π > 0
the bank would supply an infinite amount of funds, and zero if Π < 0. The supply curve would
be a horizontal line at rL = (1 − ψ)−1 (rD − ψrR ). An increase in ψ shifts the supply curve up, as
would a decrease in rR .
    Equilibrium requires either that rD is an increasing function of D, or that rL is a decreasing
function of L. One way to determine the equilibrium is to have a downward-sloping loan demand
curve. In this model, households demand a greater amount of housing loans to support more con-
sumption of housing services only when the loan rate rL decreases. This can be rationalized in a
utility-maximizing model with declining marginal utility in the consumption of housing services.
Note that there is nothing “special” about banks in this model. Reserve requirements affect equi-
librium L only if one assumes that banks are the only source of finance, or that at least some subset
of households are bank-dependent.
    Another way to obtain a downward-sloping loan demand curve is to assume that the agency
costs associated with lending are a function of leverage, and hence L. Increases in the interest rate
rL have the effect described above, but by decreasing the value of collateral, they also increase
   5 The   model omits capital for simplicity’s sake.
   6 Banking   systems differ greatly across countries in the degree to which reserve requirements are binding. As of
April 2012, the Korean banking system held virtually no excess reserves, while that of the Philippines held only 4.6
billion pesos ($100 million). Until the quantitative easing policies that began in 2008, the US banking system held only
a trivial amount of excess reserves. In contrast, the figure for Thailand is 2 trillion baht ($45 billion), the equivalent to
almost one fifth of GDP.


                                                             5
information costs. This drives a wedge between the lending rate and the cost of funds, the essence
of the broad credit channel or “financial accelerator.” If so, then the increase in agency costs
brought on by an increase in rL reduces lending to affected households. Of course, for this to have
an aggregate effect requires that the unconstrained households do not just step in and fill the gap
in housing purchases left by the reduction in spending by the constrained households.
    A third way to obtain an equilibrium is to assume that rD is an upward-sloping function of
D. One way is to relax the assumption that the reserve requirement is always binding. It would
be possible, for example, to assume a loss function that penalizes deviations from target level of
reserves. Lending reduces the desired level of reserves, which is costly. Also, attracting deposits
requires getting households to save more, which requires a higher rD .
    To summarize, in this framework changes in reserve requirements will affect housing credit
only if:

   1. Some subset of households is bank-dependent for whatever reason (by flatly assuming it or
      by motivating it in a model with agency costs).

   2. The reduction in credit demand coming from constrained borrowers is not offset by bor-
      rowing by unconstrained borrowers. This would be true if the marginal product of firms’
      investment projects were declining (as in the neoclassical model) or if unconstrained bor-
      rowers had a downward-sloping demand for housing (this ties into the model of household
      utility maximization).

   3. Some share of any change in total bank lending is manifested in changes in housing credit.

A bank with non-reservable funding sources

The banking model sketched above is unrealistic to the extent that banks rely on non-reservable
funding sources that allow them to increase lending without being constrained by reserve require-
ments. This is highly relevant to the United States, where total bank reserves fell from $30 billion
in 1994 to $10 billion in 2006, even as commercial bank credit grew from $3 trillion to $7 trillion.
The same issue would arise if lending were securitized and removed from banks’ balance sheets,
as was the bulk of housing credit in the United States during the boom.
    The banking model can be made more realistic by allowing banks to raise funds through reserv-

                                                 6
able demand deposits, DD, and non-reservable certificates of deposit, CD. Profits are now given
by
                              Π = rL · L + rR · R − rDD · DD − rCD ·CD .                         (4)

Since L = (1 − ψ)DD +CD, profits can be also expressed as a function of L and DD,


                       Π = (rL − rCD )L + (rCD − rDD )DD − ψ(rCD − rR )DD .                      (5)


For simplicity, assume that DD is fixed and that CD is the marginal source of funding. The loan
supply curve would then be a horizontal line at rL = rCD . As in the case without non-reservable
funding, one way to obtain an equilibrium in the loan market is to assume downward-sloping loan
demand curve.
      Another way to obtain an equilibrium is to assume an upward-sloping supply of non-reservable
CDs, which would translate into an upward-sloping loan supply curve. This assumption also makes
it possible for reserve requirements to affect loan supply. An increase in ψ would reduce the
supply of funds coming from DD, and given L, this would require an increase in CD. If the supply
of CDs is upward-sloping (perhaps because it increases the agency costs associated with banks’
borrowing), then this would raise banks’ cost of funds and shift the loan supply curve upward.
      To summarize, if banks can obtain non-reservable funding, then in addition to the three condi-
tions enumerated previously, we have to assume that

     4. The supply curve for non-reservable funding is upward-sloping.

2.2    Targeted credit policies

A second category of credit policies encompasses those intended specifically to limit the growth of
housing credit. These include the imposition of a maximum LTV or DSTI ratio, both of which af-
fect households’ demand for housing credit. Supply-side tools are also used to restrain the volume
of housing credit supplied by the banking system. These include the imposition of limits on ex-
posure to the housing sector, the adjustment of risk weights applied to housing loans and changes
in provisioning requirements. Since these five types of measures are also intended to limit banks’
and households’ exposure to risk, they might also be referred to as prudential policy tools.


                                                  7
2.2.1   Demand-side policy instruments

In order to slow housing loan growth and build up buffers within banks against potential losses
from housing loans, national authorities often either impose a maximum LTV ratio applied to home
mortgages or lower the pre-existing maximum. The authorities may also prohibit certain types of
housing loans, which is equivalent to applying a zero LTV ratio. For example, when housing
markets were overheating in 2012, the Chinese authorities prohibited banks from making loans to
purchase second or third houses and also barred foreigners and non-residents from borrowing from
banks to purchase houses.
    Another frequently used way of restricting the excessive provision of housing credit is to limit
the DSTI ratio (or debt service ratio) applied to the borrowing of home buyers. Typically, reg-
ulators specify a certain percentage of the borrower’s monthly income as the maximum monthly
repayment on a bank loan. Less frequently, limits to the loan amount can be expressed as a mul-
tiple of household income (i.e. maximum debt-to-income ratio) or regulators can limit the mini-
mum debt-repayment-to-debt ratio. Alternatively, authorities can lengthen the maximum maturity
of mortgage contracts or introduce preferential interest rates for mortgage loans, thus easing the
repayment burden for mortgage borrowers. All such measures are classified as “other lending
criteria.”
    A simple two-period utility maximizing model can be used to shed light on the impact of
demand-side credit instruments. Households choose between consumption today, consumption
tomorrow, and the quantity of housing:

                                                  1
                                  max u(c1 ) +       u(c2 ) + v(h)                               (6)
                                  c1 ,c2 ,h      1+ρ

such that
                                           1       p2 h         1
                            c1 + p1 h +       c2 ≤      + y1 +     y2 .                          (7)
                                          1+r      1+r         1+r
In the context of an overlapping generations model, period 1 would represent the early part of the
life cycle in which households purchase a home (for a price p1 ), and period 2 represents retirement
in which households draw down housing equity in order to finance consumption (i.e. they sell the
house for a price p2 ).

                                                  8
      The two first-order conditions are the usual consumption Euler equation,

                                                             1+r 0
                                                u0 (c1 ) =       u (c2 )                                                 (8)
                                                             1+ρ

and                                                              −1
                                            0          r−π
                                          u (c1 ) = p1                   v0 (h) .                                        (9)
                                                       1+r
The term in square brackets is the user cost of home ownership and π is the expected rate of house
price appreciation.7
      Alternatively, the household could pay rent R to obtain housing services in periods 1 and 2, in
which case the first-order condition would be


                                                u0 (c1 ) = R−1 v0 (h) .                                                (10)


Equations 9 and 10 together imply that if households are unconstrained, then in equilibrium, rent
and user cost will be equal.
      Combining the first-order conditions with the budget constraint will yield a downward-sloping
demand for h as a function of π, r, p1 and permanent income. Note that borrowing in the first
period is equal to c1 + p1 h − y1 .
      A limit on the DSTI ratio imposes the following condition on the budget constraint:


                                        credit = c1 + p1 h − y1 ≤ φ y1 /r .                                            (11)


At the risk of stating the obvious, the DSTI constraint becomes less likely to bind as the interest
rate declines.
      Analogously, a limit on the LTV ratio looks like:


                                        credit = c1 + p1 h − y1 ≤ θ p1 h .                                             (12)
   7 Physical depreciation is ignored in order to keep things simple.   Taxes, which also affect the user cost, are discussed
below.




                                                             9
Again noting the obvious, the existence of a maximum LTV ratio allows housing credit to rise along
with the house price or forces housing credit to fall along with the house price. This suggests that
a reduction in the maximum LTV ratio (tightening) is likely to be less effective than a reduction
in the maximum DSTI ratio (tightening) when it comes to restraining credit growth during house
price booms.
   For example, suppose that the actual LTV ratio equals the maximum LTV ratio of 80%. When
the value of a house increases by 15% this year, under the current maximum LTV ratio households
can borrow 15% more. Therefore, even after the maximum LTV ratio is lowered by 10 percentage
points from 80% to 70% this year, the credit growth over the year is positive. By contrast, house-
hold income does not typically grow over a year as fast as house prices, so there is more room for
tightening the maximum DSTI ratio to be effective than for tightening the LTV ratio by the same
amount. Likewise, an increase in the maximum LTV ratio (loosening) seems to be less effective
than an increase in the maximum DSTI ratio (loosening) when it comes to promoting credit growth
during house price downturns. In particular, when the house price falls, to meet the current maxi-
mum LTV ratio the loan amount also needs to fall. Thus, an increase in the maximum LTV ratio
may not be enough to avoid a net decrease in credit. Moreover, the interaction of house prices and
housing credit over time (especially during credit-fuelled housing booms) tends to further limit the
effect of adjusting the maximum LTV ratio.
   The utility function can be maximized subject to the budget constraint plus either the LTV or
the DSTI constraint (equation 11 or 12). The first-order condition in the case of a hard borrowing
constraint case (θ = 0),

                                              1 0        1+π 0
                           u0 (y1 − p1 h) =      v (h) +     u (p2 h + y2 ) ,                  (13)
                                              p1         1+ρ

implicitly defines a downward-sloping demand curve for h as a function of π, r, p1 and permanent
income. Note that this is very similar to the consumption Euler equation: housing earns a rate
of return π and functions as a vehicle for saving, but the v0 term says that the the household also
receives utility from the house it owns.




                                                    10
   The demand curve under the DSTI constraint is given by the analogous first-order condition,

                                                     1 0        1+π 0
                      u0 ((1 + r−1 φ )y1 − p1 h) =      v (h) +     u (p2 h + y2 ) .                     (14)
                                                     p1         1+ρ

An increase in the binding maximum DSTI ratio, φ , means that for a given h, the household will
be able to borrow more for first-period consumption. This reduces u0 (c1 ), and the household will
respond by increasing h. Note also that an increase in p1 causes a one-for-one reduction in the
resources available for first-period consumption.
   The optimal allocations for different levels of the maximum DSTI ratio may be summarized as
follows:

   • When the maximum DSTI ratio, φ , is not binding (the unconstrained case),

           credit = p1 h∗ − (y1 − c∗1 ) ≥ 0 and debt repayment = r(c∗1 + p1 h∗ − y1 ) < φ y1 .           (15)

   • When the maximum DSTI ratio, φ 0 , is binding (the constrained case),

           credit = p1 h0 − (y1 − c01 ) ≥ 0 and debt repayment = r(c01 + p1 h0 − y1 ) = φ 0 y1           (16)

   • When the maximum DSTI ratio, φ̃ , is binding and φ̃ > φ 0 ,

            credit = p1 h̃ − (y1 − c̃1 ) ≥ 0 and debt repayment = r(c̃1 + p1 h̃ − y1 ) = φ̃ y1           (17)

   • From equations 16 and 17,

                          c̃1 + p1 h̃ = (1 + φ̃ /r)y1 and c01 + p1 h0 = (1 + φ 0 /r)y1 .                 (18)


      Since (1 + φ̃ /r)y1 > (1 + φ 0 /r)y1 , c̃1 + p1 h̃ > c01 + p1 h0 . Therefore, if c̃1 = c01 , h̃ > h0 and
      if h̃ = h0 , c̃1 > c01 . This means that when the DSTI constraint is binding and the authori-
      ties lower the maximum DSTI ratio, households respond either by lowering their housing
      demand or by lowering their first-period consumption.

   With a binding maximum LTV requirement with 0 < θ < 1, housing demand is given by

                                                       1 0        1+π 0
                    (1 − θ )u0 (y1 − (1 − θ )p1 h) =      v (h) +     u (p2 h + y2 ) .                   (19)
                                                       p1         1+ρ



                                                     11
A key difference between this and the DSTI-constrained demand relationship is the 1 − θ factor
multiplying u0 (c1 ) on the left-hand side of the equation. The factor reflects the fact that when
the maximum LTV ratio is binding, because a fraction of the cost of purchase is borrowed, a
one-unit increase in h causes a less than one-for-one reduction in the resources available for first-
period consumption. An increase in the binding maximum LTV ratio, θ (loosening the constraint),
therefore, has both an inframarginal effect (increasing c1 for a given h) and a marginal effect
(raising the marginal opportunity cost in terms of c1 ) of an increase in h. But unlike in the case of
the DSTI constraint, an increase in p1 has a less than one-for-one effect on the feasible c1 .
   The optimal allocations for different levels of the maximum LTV ratio may be summarized as
follows:

   • When the maximum LTV ratio, θ , is not binding (the unconstrained case),

                     credit = p1 h∗ − (y1 − c∗1 ) ≥ 0 and (c∗1 + p1 h∗ − y1 ) < θ p1 h∗ ..            (20)

   • When the maximum LTV ratio, θ 0 , is binding (the constrained case),

                       credit = p1 h0 − (y1 − c01 ) ≥ 0 and (c01 + p1 h0 − y1 ) = θ p1 h0             (21)

   • When the maximum LTV ratio,θ̃ , is binding and θ̃ > θ 0 ,

                        credit = p1 h̃ − (y1 − c˜1 ) ≥ 0 and (c˜1 + p1 h̃ − y1 ) = θ̃ p1 h̃           (22)

   • From equations 21 and 22,
                          1                                1
                             (y1 − c̃1 ) = (1 − θ̃ )p1 and 0 (y1 − c01 ) = (1 − θ 0 )p1 .             (23)
                          h̃                               h

      Since (1 − θ 0 )p1 > (1 − θ̃ )p1 , 1/h0 (y1 − c01 ) > 1/h̃(y1 − c̃1 ). Therefore, if c̃1 = c01 , then
      h̃ > h0 and if h̃ = h0 , then c˜1 > c01 . This means that when the LTV constraint is binding and
      the authorities lowers the maximum LTV ratio, the households respond either by lowering
      their housing demand or by lowering their first-period consumption.

   This is little more than a sketch of the demand for housing credit. It nonetheless suffices to
highlight the ways in which the imposition of maximum LTV and DSTI ratios will affect credit
demand. Both shift the demand curve inward, although there are subtle differences having to do
with the ways in which house price appreciation and the interest rate affect the respective con-


                                                    12
straints. The overall effect on housing demand will, of course, depend on the share of households
that are liquidity-constrained. Deriving the implications for house prices would require the supply
side of the model to be fleshed out, but clearly the impact will depend not only on the share of
credit-constrained households, but also on the slope of unconstrained households’ demand curve
for housing. If demand is highly elastic, then a drop in constrained households’ demand for hous-
ing (credit) will be offset by an increase in the housing consumed by unconstrained households.
Importantly, the existence of credit-constrained households is not a necessary condition for taxes
to affect the house price, as these directly affect the user cost of home ownership.

2.2.2   Supply-side policy instruments

The three policy tools aimed at housing credit supply are provisioning requirements, risk-weighting,
and exposure limits. The first two are similar to reserve and liquidity requirements in the sense that
they affect bank loan supply through the cost of funds. The difference is that they apply specifi-
cally to housing credit, and consequently we classify them as targeted credit policies. By contrast,
exposure limits affect the housing credit supply, not through the cost of funds but through the
quantitative limit on banks’ supply of housing loans.
   By limiting the exposure of banks toward the housing or property sector as a percentage of the
total assets or liabilities, this type of measure aims to slow down rapid expansion of housing loans
by banks (and also limit the losses from housing loans when the housing prices correct and housing
loan defaults surge). A limit on housing loan exposure is sometimes set as a certain percentage of
a bank’s equity.
   Under Basels I, II or III, housing loans are subject to different risk weights than corporate or
sovereign exposures. Raising risk weights on housing loans makes it more costly for banks to
extend housing loans given a fixed amount of bank equity. Often, risk weights are differentiated
by the actual LTV ratio of individual loans. For example, the parts of a housing loan’s LTV ratio
that are higher than a certain threshold (say, 80%) may carry a higher risk weight. Similar to risk
weights, increases (or reductions) in general loan loss provisions and specific loan loss provisions
applied to housing loans can be used to make housing loans more (or less) costly and thus help
slow (or spur) growth in housing credit.



                                                 13
2.3     Housing-related tax policies

The final category of policies considered consists of measures that affect the cost of purchasing a
home. They include taxes (such as capital gains, wealth and value added taxes), subsidies (on first-
time home buyers and young couples and also on mortgage interest payment), fees (such as stamp
duties and registration fees) and tax deductibility of mortgage interest payments. For brevity, all
are referred to as housing-related taxes.
      The effects of these taxes are easy to understand in the context of the user cost (UC) framework.
Note that the effects on the house price does not depend on the existence of credit-constrained
households. A tax increase would increase the UC even if everyone could be unconstrained. The
effects on credit depend on the elasticity of housing demand. If demand were perfectly inelastic,
the quantity of housing purchased would remain unchanged, as would housing credit.

3     Data

The analysis in Section 4 spans the period from 1980Q1 to 2011Q4 and covers 57 advanced and
emerging market economies.8 These include 13 economies from the Asia-Pacific region (Australia,
China, Hong Kong SAR, India, Indonesia, Japan, Korea, Malaysia, New Zealand, the Philippines,
Singapore, Thailand and Chinese Taipei), 15 from central and eastern Europe (Bulgaria, Croatia,
the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Russia, Serbia, Slo-
vakia, Slovenia, Turkey and Ukraine), six from Latin America (Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia,
Mexico and Peru), two from the Middle East and Africa (Israel and South Africa), two from North
America (Canada and the United States) and 19 from western Europe (Austria, Belgium, Denmark,
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Malta, the Netherlands,
Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland and the United Kingdom). This section summa-
rizes the data sources and the criteria used for selecting the economies and subsamples, and reports
descriptive statistics for the key variables used in the analysis.
    8 As
       discussed in Section 3.3, data limitations require the United Arab Emirates, Saudi Arabia and Uruguay to be
excluded from the analysis.




                                                       14
3.1     The policy action dataset

The heart of the empirical analysis and a major contribution of the paper is a new, comprehen-
sive dataset of non-interest rate policies affecting housing credit and house prices. The dataset
includes 60 economies, spanning a period going back to January 1980 for some economies and
running through June 2012. The database is a superset of the one described in Shim et al. (2013),
which covers a shorter period (starting in 1990) and excludes changes in housing-related tax policy.
Appendix Table 1 provides details on the dates of coverage of the policy database.
      The policy action dataset draws on a variety of sources. Wherever possible, we use official
documents from central banks, regulatory authorities and ministries of finance of 60 economies,
including their annual reports, financial stability reports, monetary policy bulletins, supervisory
authorities’ circulars, budget reports, ministry of finance announcements on tax changes and press
releases from these institutions. We also consulted Borio & Shim (2007), a survey by the Com-
mittee on the Global Financial System (CGFS) on macroprudential policy conducted in December
2009, Hilbers et al. (2005), Crowe et al. (2011), Lim et al. (2011), and Tovar et al. (2012). Where
these secondary sources were used, we cross-checked the information from the secondary sources
against the information obtained from official documents. We then used our database of policy
actions to generate variables capturing the tightening and loosening of the policy instruments.
      There are clear pros and cons to this approach. One benefit is that the dataset should in princi-
ple provide a complete list of all relevant policy actions officially published by central banks and
financial authorities, while an ad hoc survey could suffer from incomplete identification of relevant
policy actions. Moreover, by reading through official publications, we can obtain full and accurate
information on each of the potentially relevant policy actions. These details allow us to use uni-
form criteria when determining which measures to include and how to record them consistently.9
Another benefit of relying on official publications is accurate identification of the implementation
date of each policy action. One disadvantage of using official sources is the language barrier for
some countries, given that English translations for such documents may be unavailable for earlier
periods. Also, for a limited number of countries, archives available on the websites of relevant au-
   9 TheIMF survey described in Lim et al. (2011) includes only those actions taken for explicitly macroprudential
purposes, and therefore excludes a large number of policy changes that are likely to have affected the housing market.



                                                         15
thorities or offline publication archives available from the BIS library may have one or two missing
years. Therefore, we may have omitted relevant policy actions taken in these missing years.
    The policy changes are categorized along the lines laid out in Section 2. The first category en-
compasses general credit policy measures: minimum reserve requirements, liquidity requirements
and limits on credit growth. The latter two policy actions are relatively infrequent, however, and so
in the empirical work performed below, the three are aggregated into a single variable representing
this class of policy.
    The database includes changes in various forms of reserve requirements. In particular, we con-
sider changes in the reserve requirement ratio and reserve base. We do not consider changes in the
remuneration rates, reserve maintenance periods or averaging methods because we focus on policy
actions directly targeting the aggregate quantity of funds available for lending. However, it should
be noted that this distinction is not clear-cut to the extent that reserve requirements also operate,
in effect, by influencing the cost of lending. We also include both average reserve requirements,
where a certain reserve requirement ratio applies to all outstanding amount of eligible liabilities,
and marginal reserve requirements, with which additional liabilities banks assume after certain
dates or the amount of liabilities exceeding the level of banks’ liabilities as of certain dates are
subject to often very high reserve requirement ratios.
    The second category consists of the targeted credit policy measures: maximum LTV ratios,
maximum DSTI ratios, risk weights on housing loans, provisioning requirements (general loan-
loss provisioning ratios and specific provisioning ratios applied to housing loans) and exposure
limits on banks to the housing sector. Finally, the third category includes housing-related tax pol-
icy measures: taxes (such as capital gains tax, wealth tax and value added tax related to housing),
subsidies (on first-time home buyers and young couples and also on mortgage interest payment),
fees (such as stamp duties and registration fees) and tax deductibility of mortgage interest pay-
ments. We only include in the database only nationwide measures targeting middle-income or
high-income groups who are potential homebuyers. Thus, tax measures applied to one or two
cities or subsidies given specifically to low-income families are not included.
    Heterogeneity is intrinsic to the policy action dataset. Even with the application of uniform
selection criteria across countries, the specifics of policy actions differ across countries and over


                                                 16
time. For example, the dataset includes the introduction of a maximum LTV ratio as well as the
subsequent reductions and increases in the ratio. Also, in some economies total household income
is used in calculating the DSTI, while in others the borrower’s income is used. Including these
data in a regression model therefore requires some degree of standardization and aggregation. Our
solution is to create monthly variables that take on three discrete values: 1 for tightening actions,
−1 for loosening actions and 0 for no change.10 The monthly observations are summed to create
quarterly time series. This means that if multiple actions in the same direction were taken within
a given quarter, the variable could take on the values of 2 or −2, or even 3 and −3. It also means
that a tightening action and a loosening action taken within the same quarter would cancel each
other out. Changes in reserve requirements account for nearly all closely spaced actions. With
only a few exceptions, no more than one of the other types of policy actions is observed in any
given quarter.
    Table 1 tabulates the different types of policy actions, aggregated by region. The dataset
contains a total of 1,111 policy actions in all, of which roughly 55% (607) are tightening, and
45% (504) are loosening. The table shows that the most active users of credit policies are the
Asia-Pacific and CEE economies in terms of both the absolute number of actions recorded in the
database and the average number of actions per region per decade. The Asia-Pacific economies
and western European countries are the most frequent users of housing-related tax measures. It
is also clear that reserve requirements are by far the most frequently used of the nine categories
of policy, accounting for roughly half of all the actions. Liquidity requirements and credit growth
restrictions are relatively less frequently used. Among the targeted credit policies, LTV restrictions
are most popular, followed by risk weights, DSTI restrictions, provisioning and exposure limits.
    Figure 1 shows that the use of these policies varies a great deal between countries. A large share
of the countries in the sample used credit and housing-related policies only occasionally. Several
countries were very active users of these policies, with 20 or more documented policy actions per
decade. About 30% of the total number of policy changes in the dataset were taken by these very
active users.
    Since the dataset documents policy actions implemented by each economy every month from
  10 Someof the policy measures that are more standard across countries, such as reserve requirements, would be
more amenable to a numerical representation.

                                                      17
January 1980, we can show which types of measures were actively used over the past three decades
or so. Figure 2 shows how often each of the nine types of policy action was used over the period
from 1980 to 2012. We find that the total number of policy actions has increased steadily from the
1980s, to 1990s, 2000s and between January 2010 and June 2012. This is also the case for the total
number of policy actions per country per decade.11
    The mix of policies has also varied over time. In the 1980s, more than 90% of policy actions
documented in the dataset were general credit policy measures, dominated by changes in reserve
requirements. In the 1990s, the share of general credit policy actions fell to 76%, while the share
of targeted credit policy measures increased from zero to 13%. The share of targeted credit policy
measures continued to rise in the 2000s, when it more than doubled to 28%, while that of general
credit policy measures decreased to 57%. Finally, over the two and a half years between January
2010 and June 2012, the share of general credit policy actions further declined to 51%, and at the
same time that of targeted credit policy measures increased by the same amount to 33% led by
the active use of LTV measures. It should be noted that, in contrast to the shares of general and
targeted credit policy measures that have changed substantially over the three decades or so, the
share of housing-related tax measures has remained stable between 10% and 15% over the same
period.
    Table 2 shows the correlations between the various policy measures. Panel A displays the cor-
relation matrix for the discrete policy change variables. Most of these correlations are relatively
small, indicating that there is little tendency for a country to take different kinds of policy action
within the quarter. The one exception is the 0.37 correlation between DSTI and LTV actions,
suggesting that the two policies are often used in conjunction. Panel B displays the correlations
between cumulative policy indicators, constructed by summing current and previous quarters’ pol-
icy changes. This takes into account the possibility of co-movements between the policies that
may not occur within the same quarter. The relationship between the DSTI and LTV variables is
even stronger in this case, with a correlation of 0.58. There is also some evidence that changes in
provisioning requirements accompany changes in the DSTI and LTV requirements.
    To give a sense of how these policies have been implemented in practice, Figures 3 to 5 dis-
  11 See   Shim et al. (2013) for more a more detailed description of policy usage.



                                                           18
play selected cumulative policy indicators along with the short-term nominal interest rate for three
Asian economies that have been active users of the policies. The figures show that the deployment
of these policies varies greatly from country to country. They have been used to complement con-
ventional interest rate policy in some episodes, while in others they have functioned as substitutes.
Similarly, the various credit and housing-related tax policy measures have sometimes been used in
concert, and independently at other times.
      In China (Figure 3), for example, the short-term interest rate, reserve requirements, LTV and
DSTI requirements have all tended to move in the same direction: tightening in 2006–08, loosening
in 2008–09, and tightening from 2010. The relationship between the LTV and DSTI measures is
particularly close. Since 2002, there has been a steady trend towards more restrictive policy in all
three non-interest rate dimensions.
      In Hong Kong SAR (Figure 4), the tightening of credit growth limits was the only monetary
tool used in 1993. Targeted credit measures (mostly changes in the maximum LTV ratio) were
used actively from the mid-1990s, usually in parallel with the general direction of interest rates in
Hong Kong SAR (as well as those in the United States). The opposite has been true since 2009,
when the LTV requirements have been progressively tightened even as the short-term interest rate
has fallen (tracking the US rate). Hong Kong authorities have also made more active use of tax
measures since 2009.
      In Korea (Figure 5), reserve requirements were the primary non-interest rate policy tool used
throughout the 1990s, rising along with the short-term interest rate (except during the Asian finan-
cial crisis). Since 2002, the short-term interest rate has remained stable, but the maximum DSTI
and LTV ratios have been tightened considerably. Both ratios followed a similar upward trajectory,
although the tightening in the LTV requirements started roughly three years prior to the tightening
of the DSTI requirements. As in China, the LTV and DSTI requirements are both significantly
more restrictive now than they were 10 years ago.

3.2    Housing credit, house price and macroeconomic data

Another contribution of the paper is its use of an extensive new dataset of house prices. The starting
point is the BIS property price database.12 We enlarged this dataset using data from statistics from
  12 Available   at http://www.bis.org/statistics/pp.htm.


                                                  19
official sources and, in a few instances, from proprietary private sector sources such as CEIC.
When multiple housing price indices are available for a given economy, for example nationwide
versus major city indices, we use indices for major cities, as these are the areas that would be most
susceptible to overvaluation and are often addressed by targeted credit policy and housing-related
tax policy. Data are available for 57 economies, although the time series are quite short in many
cases. Brazil’s data only go back to 2010Q4, for example. Appendix Table 2 lists the starting and
ending dates for the house price series.
   The property price data are highly imperfect. The definition of housing price indices varies
across the economies. The methods used in the construction of the price indices (e.g. quality ad-
justment) vary greatly between economies, as does the definition of the relevant housing market
(e.g. flats versus detached houses). Moreover, in some cases two or more series must be spliced
together in order to yield a usable time series. In India, for example, we combined the Mumbai
housing price series provided by the Reserve Bank of India, which ends in 2010Q2, with a new
price index from the National Housing Bank, which is available from 2010Q3. Conclusions involv-
ing the level of property prices are therefore problematic, especially cross-country comparisons.
Recognizing these limitations, we will proceed on the assumption that these series can serve as
informative indicators of cyclical swings in the residential property market, if not the price levels.
   Household credit data were compiled from a similarly diverse set of sources. The primary
source is the BIS data bank, supplemented with series from Datastream, CEIC and central bank
websites. Data are available for 57 countries, although for several economies the series only begin
in the late 2000s. And as with the price data, the sources and definitions are not always consistent,
even within a country. The starting and ending dates for the housing credit series are also listed in
Appendix Table 2.
   The empirical work also uses a number of macroeconomic time series. One is the consumer
price index, obtained from the IMF’s International Financial Statistics database. The IMF is also
the source for most of the short-term interest rate series, supplemented in several cases with data
from national sources or Haver Analytics.
   Ideally, our analysis would also include a measure of personal disposable income. These data
are difficult or impossible to obtain for the majority of countries we are looking at, however. We


                                                 20
therefore used as a proxy annual real per capita gross national income (GNI) from World Bank’s
World Development Indicators database, interpolated to a quarterly frequency.

3.3    Sample selection criteria

Data availability is the main constraint on the scope of our analysis. As previously noted, the
United Arab Emirates lacks interest rate data while Uruguay and Saudi Arabia have no house price
or housing credit data, narrowing our sample to 57 economies. For most countries, the 2011Q4
endpoint is constrained by the GNI data, which were only available through that date at the time
of writing.
      For some countries, data are available, but the time series are too short to be of any use.
Economies with fewer than 16 usable quarterly observations (accounting for the loss of obser-
vations from lags and differencing) are excluded. This criterion eliminates Brazil from the house
price regression. Similarly, Iceland and Serbia are dropped from the regressions involving housing
credit.
      Even where data are available, there are often good reasons to discard a portion of the sample.
We exclude periods of extreme macroeconomic instability, as these are accompanied by extremely
high inflation and interest rates. Argentina’s 1990 and 2002 crises are prime examples of such
episodes. In order to prevent these anomalous observations from unduly influencing the results,
we postpone the regression start dates to avoid these periods.
      Poor data quality is another reason for truncating the sample. While there is no good way to
independently verify the reliability of the data, many of the series exhibit extreme volatility during
the first few quarters for which they are available. Some of the observed spikes may be the result
of very rapid growth from a small base, or an artifact of small samples or thin markets. This is a
common issue among the CEE economies. The regression starting date is delayed in these cases
in order to exclude these periods. Large changes that appear to genuinely reflect conditions in the
housing market are not dropped.
      Table 3 reports descriptive statistics for the housing credit, house price and macroeconomic
data, after the sample selection criteria are applied. Even with the elimination of the most extreme
observations, there is still a great deal of volatility in the data, especially in house prices and
housing credit. The standard deviations of the annualized quarterly percentage changes in these

                                                  21
two variables are 15.6 and 12.3 respectively. The sample even contains changes in these two
variables in excess of 100%.

4     Empirical methods and results

This section presents estimates of the policies’ effects on housing credit and house prices. We
use three different empirical methods in an effort to assess the robustness of our results. The first
involves conventional panel data regressions. The second uses a mean group estimator, which
allows for cross-country heterogeneity in the model coefficients. The third can be described as a
panel event study analysis in which the results of country-specific event studies are aggregated to
estimate the average effect for the sample. We also explore the possibility of asymmetric responses
to policy tightenings and loosenings.
      The three methods yield similar point estimates for the policies’ effects. The degree of preci-
sion varies, however, with the panel regressions producing smaller standard errors than the other
two methods. To preview, we find that DSTI limits exert a significant effect on housing credit
growth, a result that holds regardless of the method used. With the exception of housing-related
tax changes, none of the policies consistently affects house price growth.

4.1    Conventional panel regression analysis

We begin with a standard reduced-form regression model of credit growth,

                                                                                               4
    ∆ lnCi,t = αi + ρ∆ lnCi,t−1 + β1 ri,t−1 + β2 ri,t−2 + β3 ∆yi,t−1 + β4 ∆yi,t−2 + ∑ γ j Xi,t− j + εi,t (24)
                                                                                             j=1


in which the quarterly credit growth rate for country i, ∆ lnCi , is expressed as a function of its own
lag, two lags of the short-term interest rate, ri , two lags of real personal income growth, ∆ ln yi , and
a variable Xi representing one (or more) of the policy variables described in Section 3. To account
for cross-country differences in the average rate of credit growth, a country-specific fixed effect,
αi is included.13 An analogous specification is used for the house price, Pi .14
   13 Strictly speaking, the inclusion of the lagged dependent variable would bias the fixed-effect estimator. But given

the relatively long time series dimension of the data, the amount of bias should be small.
   14 Theoretically, the user cost model implies a cointegrating relationship between house prices and rents, which

would suggest including the log of the rent-to-price ratio as an additional regressor. Results not presented in this paper
indicate that the inclusion of this term has no significant effect on the parameter estimates of interest.


                                                           22
    Reduced-form regressions such as equation 24 are always susceptible to the critique that the
regressors are likely to be endogenous. Specifically, policymakers may adjust interest rates or im-
plement credit and housing-related tax policies in response to conditions in the housing market (or
in response to omitted variables that are correlated with house prices or credit fluctuations). This
is especially true in those economies, such as many in the Asia-Pacific region, where policymakers
have actively changed LTV, provisioning and reserve requirements in their efforts to curb housing
market excesses. This endogeneity may bias the parameter estimates, making it problematic to
interpret the γ coefficients as a reliable gauge of the policies’ effectiveness.
    Fortunately, there is reason to believe that the endogeneity problem will lead the estimates to
understate the policies’ effectiveness. Consider a tightening of the LTV requirement (a decrease in
the maximum LTV ratio and a positive value of the LTV variable) for example. If the policy had
the desired effect, it would reduce housing credit ceteris paribus. But if policymakers tended to
tighten the LTV requirement when housing credit was already expanding rapidly, this would give
rise to a positive correlation between our LTV variable and credit, partially (or fully) offsetting the
desired policy effect. In the (implausible) limiting case in which policymakers managed to set the
maximum LTV ratio in such a way as to completely stabilize credit, the estimated regression coeffi-
cient on the LTV variable would be zero. An accurate statistical assessment of the policies’ effects
would require some exogenous variation in the policy measures (regulatory “policy shocks”). Un-
fortunately, it is hard to think of any circumstances that would give rise to such exogenous policy
shifts.

4.1.1     Housing credit

Before examining the effects of the policy variables, we estimate baseline fixed-effect regressions
for housing credit and house price growth omitting the policy variables. The fitted equation for
housing credit (with standard errors in parentheses)



    ∆ lnCi,t =     0.59 ∆ lnCi,t−1 − 0.67 ri,t−1 + 0.56 ri,t−2 + 0.59 ∆yi,t−1 − 0.004 ∆yi,t−2
                  (0.05)            (0.19)        (0.21)        (0.19)         (0.14)
                  N = 3700 R̄2 = 0.56 SEE = 10.2 ,



                                                  23
yields reasonable estimates of housing credit dynamics and the effects of interest rates and personal
income growth. With a coefficient of 0.59 on its lag, credit growth exhibits a moderate amount of
positive serial correlation. Interest rate hikes slow credit growth. The negative −0.67 coefficient
on rt−1 along with the positive coefficient of 0.56 on rt−2 (both statistically significant) together
indicate that it is the change in the short-term interest rate that is relevant for credit growth, rather
than the level.15 The variables are defined in such a way that the coefficients represent the effect
on the annualized credit growth. A coefficient of −0.67 on the change in the interest rate therefore
indicates that a 1 percentage point increase in the short-term interest rate is associated with a
0.67 percentage point reduction in credit growth in the following quarter. (Naturally, the positive
coefficient on lagged credit growth implies that the medium- and long-run effects of a sustained
increase in the interest rate will exceed −0.67.) Finally, the positive coefficient of 0.59 on the
first lag of ∆y indicates that a one percentage point increase in the rate of personal income growth
translates into an increase in the rate of housing credit growth of over half a percentage point.
    Having verified the plausibility of the baseline model, the next step is to include the policy
variables, X, in the regression.16 The results are summarized in Table 4. It is worth noting at
the outset that the numbers of each type of policy action, shown in the first numeric column of
the table, are significantly smaller than those reported in Table 1 (e.g. 378 versus 717 for the
general credit category). There are two reasons for this. One is the limited coverage of the time
series data. As explained in Section 3, the availability of housing credit and price data varies a
great deal between countries. Two of the 57 economies were excluded altogether from the credit
regressions for lack of sufficient data. The spotty coverage also limits the time series dimension
of the remaining 55 countries. Aggregation to the quarterly frequency also reduces the number
of events. This is relevant when an action in one direction was followed within the quarter by an
action in the other direction. For example, a tightening of reserve requirements in January and a
loosening in March would net to zero for the quarter.
    Moving to the right, the next two numeric columns (labelled “individually”) summarize the
estimated γ̂ coefficients when each is included one at a time in the regression given by equation 24.
  15 A formal statistical test fails to reject the hypothesis that β2 = −β1 .
  16 The estimated coefficients on the non-policy variables, including the interest rate, are largely unchanged by the
inclusion of the policy variables.


                                                         24
Thus, each of the seven lines in the table corresponds to a separate regression. Rather than give
the individual parameter estimates, which are of little intrinsic interest, we report two functions of
the estimates summarizing the magnitude of the policies’ effects. One is simply the sum of the
coefficients, which would represent the long-run impact of a permanent unit tightening, ignoring
the dynamics. Although it provides a rough gauge of the magnitude and statistical significance of
the effects, it is not particularly useful for assessing the likely effect over a policy-relevant horizon.
    We therefore also report a second summary statistic constructed to gauge the expected effect
on the growth rate over a one-year horizon, taking the dynamics into account. This is a function of
γ̂1 through γ̂4 , as well as ρ̂:

                             1
                               γ̂1 (1 + ρ̂ + ρ̂ 2 + ρ̂ 3 ) + γ̂2 (1 + ρ̂ + ρ̂ 2 ) + γ̂3 (1 + ρ̂) + γ̂4 .
                                                                                                      
              4Q effect =                                                                                  (25)
                             4

The delta method is used to calculate the standard errors.
    Reassuringly, all the parameter estimates from the one-policy-at-a-time regressions have the
correct (negative) sign, indicating that tightening and loosening policy actions can moderate hous-
ing credit cycles. Of these, four are statistically significant at at least the 5% level: LTV limits,
DSTI limits, exposure limits, and housing-related taxes. The largest effect comes from the DSTI
limits, with a unit tightening reducing credit growth by 6.8 percentage points over the subsequent
four quarters. Next come exposure limits, with a 4.6 percentage point effect. (Some caution is
warranted, however, as the sample contains only 12 changes in exposure limits.) Taxes and LTV
limits come in at approximately 2 percentage points.
    The estimates are largely unchanged when all seven policy variables are included in the same
regressions (the columns labeled “jointly”). The main difference is that the LTV limit variable is
insignificant, both economically and statistically. A plausible conjecture is that DSTI and LTV
requirements tend to be adjusted in tandem (as they were in China and Korea as illustrated in
Figures 3 and 5) so that when included individually, the LTV variable picks up the effect of the
omitted DSTI policy. This is consistent with the positive correlation between the two policies
evident in Table 2.
    While not a direct implication of the theoretical frameworks sketched in Section 2, there are



                                                         25
reasons to suspect that tightening and loosening actions may have asymmetric effects. To the extent
that reductions in reserve requirements tended to occur during economic downturns, banks may
find themselves constrained by factors other than reserve requirements, such as low loan demand
or an erosion of the capital base. Similar logic applies to the other policies as well. One might
therefore expect loosenings to have smaller effects than tightenings.
   We explore this possibility by estimating an expanded version of equation 24 in which the X’s
are distinguished by direction. Rather than a single X with positive and negative values represent-
ing tightenings and loosenings respectively, we define two separate X’s: one with positive values
for tightening episodes and zero otherwise, and a second with negative values for loosenings and
zero otherwise. Defined in this way, one would expect negative coefficients on both variables;
the question is whether those on the loosening variable are smaller in magnitude and statistical
significance.
   Table 5 reports the results from a set of regressions allowing for asymmetric effects. The esti-
mates do indeed suggest some degree of asymmetry. For three of the four policies with statistically
significant effects in Table 4, the effects of tightenings are significant, while those of loosenings are
not. In some cases, the coefficients on the loosening variables have the wrong sign, but in no case
is the effect significant at the 5% level. Only the relaxation of exposure limits has a discernible
impact. (The caveat about the small number of actions in the sample is now even more applicable.)
The standard errors associated with the loosening coefficients are generally larger than those of the
tightening coefficients, however. This is at least in part due to the smaller number of policy actions
(e.g. 32 tightenings but only six loosenings for DSTI limits). Consequently, the hypothesis of
symmetric effects is rejected at the 5% level only for the risk-weighting variable in the individual
regressions, and for the risk-weighting and LTV variables in the joint regression.

4.1.2   House prices

As with the credit regressions discussed in Section 4.1.1, we begin with the estimation of a fixed-
effect regression for house price growth, analogous to equation 24, including the 56 economies
with sufficient data. The results are as follows (with standard errors in parentheses):




                                                   26
     ∆ ln Pi,t =     0.48 ∆ ln Pi,t−1 − 0.49 ri,t−1 + 0.24 ri,t−2 + 0.60 ∆yi,t−1 − 0.17 ∆yi,t−2
                    (0.05)             (0.20)        (0.20)        (0.20)         (0.17)
                    N = 3935 R̄2 = 0.30 SEE = 10.2 .

    The estimates are similar to those for housing credit. Price changes are positively serially
correlated, albeit somewhat less than credit growth. The coefficient on the first lag of the short-
term interest rate is negative and statistically significant; the coefficient on the second is positive,
but insignificant. Finally, a 1 percentage point increase in personal income growth tends to be
followed by a 0.6 percentage point increase in house prices in the subsequent quarter.
    Table 6 reports the results from a set of regressions that includes the policy variables, X.17 As
with housing credit, the X’s are first included one by one (the “individually” columns), and then
all at once (the “jointly” columns). It is evident that none of the policies has a tangible impact on
house prices. The sum of the coefficients for the LTV variable is statistically significant at the 10%
level, but the four-quarter effect is economically small and statistically insignificant. Exposure
limits have the desired effect and the magnitudes are economically meaningful, but due to the
large standard errors the hypothesis of a zero effect cannot be rejected.
    Things are slightly more promising in the specification that allows for asymmetric effects of
tightening and loosening actions. As shown in Table 7, the sum of the coefficients for the tight-
ening of LTV requirements is somewhat larger than in the symmetric specification (−4.10 versus
−2.18), but the four-quarter effect remains insignificant. Another difference is that the sum of
the coefficients for increasing housing-related taxes is negative and statistically significant at the
5% level, suggesting that higher taxes slow house price growth. The estimated four-quarter effect
is significant at only the 10% level, however. As in the regressions for housing credit, loosening
exposure limits has a discernible positive impact on house price growth. (The caveat about the
small number of actions in the sample is again applicable.) There is some evidence for asymmetric
responses, with the symmetry hypothesis rejected at the 5% level for the exposure limit and tax
variables.
  17 The estimated coefficients on the non-policy variables are again largely unchanged by the inclusion of the policy
variables.



                                                         27
4.2     Mean group regression analysis

A potentially serious issue in panel regressions such as those estimated in Section 4.1 is cross-
country heterogeneity in the model parameters, which may lead to biased and inconsistent esti-
mates. One solution to this problem is to use the mean group (MG) estimator proposed by Pesaran
& Smith (1995). This involves estimating a separate time series regression for each country of the
form


          ∆ lnCi,t = αi + ρi ∆ lnCi,t−1 +
                                                                                  4
                       βi,1 ri,t−1 + βi,2 ri,t−2 + βi,3 ∆yi,t−1 + βi,4 ∆yi,t−2 + ∑ γi, j Xi,t− j + εi,t ,   (26)
                                                                                 j=1


in which the coefficients are now also indexed by i. (Again, we use an analogous model for house
prices, P.) Aggregating the country-specific estimates gives the MG estimator. The aggregation
can be done either on an unweighted basis, or weighted as in the random coefficient specification of
Swamy (1970). Either way, the estimated parameters’ covariance matrix is used in the calculation
of the standard errors.
      This method obviously places much greater demands on the data. First, rather than estimate
nine coefficients for the entire sample, we must estimate nine coefficients for each country — 513
if regressions were run on the 57 countries for which we have either credit or price data. Second,
each country’s time series must be long enough to allow for the estimation of equation 26. We
set the threshold for inclusion at 20 usable observations. Third, in order to estimate the relevant
γ coefficients, there must be at least one policy action in the sample for which there are sufficient
time series data. Consequently, the number of degrees of freedom drops sharply both because of
the loss of observations and because of the additional parameters to be estimated. It is therefore
not surprising that in terms of statistical significance, the results from the MG method tend to be
weaker than those from the conventional panel regressions of Section 4.1.

4.2.1    Housing credit

Table 8 reports the MG estimates of equation 26. As shown in the first two columns, except in
the case of housing-related taxes, the loss of usable data associated with the MG method reduces


                                                      28
the number of policy actions used in the estimation. Because of the requirement that each of the
country-level time series regressions contains at least one policy action, the set of countries used
in the calculation depends on the type of policy under consideration.
   Moving rightward, the next two numeric columns in the table report the sum of the γ’s and the
four-quarter effect defined by equation 25, with an unweighted aggregation of the country-level
parameter estimates. The next two contain the weighted (Swamy) estimates.18
   The change in estimation method turns out to have relatively little effect on most of the param-
eter estimates of interest. The four-quarter effect of a unit DSTI change, for example, is −6.65 for
the unweighted MG procedure versus −6.76 for the conventional panel regression. Neither is far
off from the weighted estimate of −5.54. The MG estimates are much less precise than those of the
panel regression, however. This makes a tangible difference for some of the variables, especially
DSTI where the standard errors are approximately twice as large. The estimated four-quarter effect
goes from being statistically significant at the 1% level in the panel regression to being significant
at only the 5% level in the unweighted MG results. The remaining coefficients are statistically
significant at the 10% level in the weighted results.
   One sees a similar tendency in some of the other estimates, including those of the LTV and ex-
posure limits. Somewhat surprisingly, the results turn out to be stronger for general credit policies.
In that case, the unweighted estimated four-quarter effect is −1.60 (statistically significant at the
10% level) compared with a statistically insignificant −0.55 in the panel regression. The effect is
not statistically significant in the weighted case, however, owing to the larger standard errors.

4.2.2      House prices

Table 9 reports the MG estimates of an equation analogous to 26, replacing housing credit growth
with house price growth. Having obtained such weak results using conventional panel regression
analysis, it is unlikely that the change in method would improve matters. As expected, with one
conspicuous exception none of the estimated effects is significant at even the 10% level.
   The lone exception is housing-related tax changes, which now have a large and highly statis-
tically significant impact on house price growth. Taken at face value, an incremental tightening
would slow house price growth by 3 percentage points. Unfortunately, this result disappears in
  18 The   Rats meangroup and swamy procedures were used for the calculations.


                                                        29
going to the weighted results, as doing so both shrinks the parameter estimates and increases the
standard errors. (The event study analysis in the following section gives some insights as to why
the results are sensitive to the weighting scheme.)

4.3    Event study analysis

The third method used to assess the policies’ effects is a panel event study analysis. As discussed
in MacKinlay (1997), the conventional event study involves identifying discrete events and then
partitioning time series into two mutually exclusive subsamples: a set of estimation windows over
which a forecasting model is fit, and a set of event windows spanning some period of time following
the event. The events’ effects are calculated by subtracting the forecast values from the actual
values during the event window. For an event occurring in 2004Q1, for example, a four-quarter
event window would span 2004Q2 through 2005Q1, and the model would be estimated on data
through 2003Q4 and after 2005Q1. In a panel setting, the results from individual (in our case
country-specific) event studies are aggregated to create an estimate of the average.
      The event study method has several advantages over other techniques. One is that it is (ar-
guably) less susceptible to endogeneity since the events are excluded from the estimation of the
econometric model. The second is that it imposes less of a parametric structure than either the
panel regression or MG methods. And like the MG technique, it allows for cross-country hetero-
geneity in the underlying model.
      The most common use of event study analysis involves high-frequency financial data, in which
the data are plentiful and the events widely spaced. The application of the method to our study
poses two challenges. One is that there are far fewer observations relative to the number of events.
This reduces the amount of data in the estimation window, making it more difficult (and in some
cases impossible) to estimate a reasonable forecasting model.
      Closely spaced events create a second difficulty. Continuing with the previous example, the
question is what to do when a second (or third) event occurs within four quarters after the first (e.g.
in 2005Q1 and again in 2005Q3). In our analysis, we begin the event window one quarter after
the last event in such a sequence (e.g. 2005Q4). This further reduces the number of observations
available for estimating the forecasting model. It also means that the number of events is consider-
ably smaller than the number of policy actions. In order to estimate a plausible forecasting model,

                                                  30
we restrict the analysis to countries with 20 usable observations in the union of the estimation
windows. The set of countries represented is therefore even narrower than in the MG analysis.
   The forecasting model fitted to the data is the same as the one used in the MG analysis, equation
26 (and an analogous version for house prices). A four-quarter event window is used, making the
estimates quantitatively comparable to the estimated four-quarter effects from the panel regression
and MG analysis. The comparison is done on the basis of static forecasts, which use the actual
data for the lagged dependent variable.19 Tightening and loosening actions are treated as distinct
events, so the procedure intrinsically allows for asymmetric effects.
   There are two ways to aggregate the country-level estimates. One is to take the simple, un-
weighted average (but still use the estimated country-specific variances in the calculation of the
overall standard error). These are reported as the “unweighted” estimates. An alternative is to use
the (inverse of) the country-specific standard deviations as weights (analogous to weighted least
squares regression), creating the estimates reported in the “weighted” column.

4.3.1   Housing credit

Table 10 reports the results of the event study analysis of credit growth. The first two numeric
columns show the number of countries and events used in estimating the policies’ effects. Largely
due to a propensity for frequent adjustments in reserve requirements, the number of general credit
events is less than 20% of the number of policy actions. For the other policies, the number of
distinct events is roughly one half to two thirds of the number of actions in the corresponding MG
analysis.
   The salient result from the table is the strong negative effect of DSTI tightening. The un-
weighted estimates imply that averaged across the 13 countries in the sample, a typical decrease
in the maximum DSTI ratio is associated with a 3.7 percentage point reduction in the rate of real
housing credit growth (4.2 percentage points for the weighted estimate). The effect is statistically
significant at the 1% level. The effects are somewhat smaller but still not far from the panel regres-
sion and MG estimates. None of the other estimated tightening effects is statistically significant.
   Only two DSTI loosening events survive the paring-down process, unfortunately, and so those
estimates (as well as those for exposure limits) are left unreported. One anomaly is the statisti-
  19 Dynamic   forecasts (using the fitted values as the lagged dependent variable) yield similar results.


                                                           31
cally significant reduction in credit growth following a loosening of the LTV requirement. (Note
that since the numbers represent the difference in growth rates, one would expect to see positive
numbers in the loosening columns.) None of the other estimated loosening effects is significant.
   The relatively small number of observations and high volatility of the dependent variable make
the event study analysis highly sensitive to outliers. Nowhere is this more evident than is the re-
sponse of housing credit to tightenings in general credit conditions. Each dot in Figure 6 is the
estimated country-specific effect of the general credit tightening actions, ordered by size. The bars
represent the 90% confidence intervals. The figure shows that most of the responses are either neg-
ative or close to zero. Bulgaria is a conspicuous outlier, however. There, housing credit continued
to grow at a double-digit pace even after a 4 percentage point increase in the reserve requirement
ratio in September 2007. Needless to say, it would be inappropriate to exclude anomalous observa-
tions ex post. But it is worth noting that if Bulgaria were dropped, the estimated impact on housing
credit of a general credit tightening would have been a highly significant −4.7 percentage points
in the unweighted case and −3.25 percentage points in the weighted case.

4.3.2   House prices

Table 11 presents an analogous set of results for house prices. The table shows that only housing-
related tax increases (or subsidy reductions) have statistically significant effects. The magnitudes
are strikingly similar to those estimated using the MG method: −3.6 percentage points in the un-
weighted case (statistically significant at the 1% level) and −1.9 percentage points in the weighted
case (significant at the 10% level).
   A recurring theme in both the MG and event study analyses is the difference between the
weighted and unweighted estimates. Figure 7 illustrates the reason for this discrepancy. (As in Fig-
ure 6, the dots are the estimated country-specific effects and the bars represent the 90% confidence
intervals.) The overall tendency is clearly negative. And although zero is within the confidence
interval for all but two of the countries, the simple average is statistically significant. A number
of the large negative responses are associated with large standard errors, however. The weighted
procedure discounts these observations proportionally, which tends to shrink the estimates.




                                                 32
5   Conclusions

Utilizing a new database of credit and housing-related tax policy measures and three alternative
econometric approaches, this paper has provided a systemic assessment of the efficacy of credit and
housing-related tax policies on housing credit and house prices. The evidence shows that certain
types of targeted credit and/or tax policies can affect the housing market, and could potentially be
used as tools to promote financial and macroeconomic stability.
    Using conventional panel regressions, we found that housing credit responds in the expected
way to changes in the maximum DSTI ratio, the maximum LTV ratio, exposure limits, and housing-
related taxes. However, these results are somewhat sensitive to the choice of econometric tech-
nique. In the MG and event study analyses, only changes in the maximum DSTI ratio have sta-
tistically significant effects on housing credit. Depending on the method used, an incremental
tightening in the DSTI ratio is associated with a 4 to 7 percentage point deceleration in credit
growth over the following year. Loosenings have a comparable but imprecisely estimated effect in
the opposite direction. An increase in housing-related taxes is the only policy with a measurable
impact on house prices, with an incremental tightening associated with a 2 to 3 percentage point
reduction in house price growth. Tax reductions have no discernible impact on house prices.
    From a policy perspective, the negative results are in some respects as important as the positive
ones. One such finding is that instruments affecting the supply of credit generally by increasing the
cost of providing housing loans (reserve and liquidity requirements and limits on credit growth)
have little or no detectable effect on the housing market. Nor do risk-weighting and provisioning
requirements, which target the supply of housing credit. Exposure limits, which work not by the
cost of lending but through the quantity restrictions on banks’ loan supply, may be an exception in
this regard, although the small number of documented policy actions makes it hard to draw firm
conclusions. Measures aimed at controlling credit supply are therefore likely to be ineffective.
    Of the two policies targeted at the demand side of the market, the evidence indicates that
reductions in the maximum LTV ratio do less to slow credit growth than lowering the maximum
DSTI ratio does. This may be because during housing booms, rising prices increase the amount
that can be borrowed, partially or wholly offsetting any tightening of the LTV ratio.
    None of the policies designed to affect either the supply of or the demand for credit has a dis-

                                                 33
cernible impact on house prices. This has implications for the degree to which credit-constrained
households are the marginal purchasers of housing or for the importance of housing supply, which
is not explicitly considered in this study. Only tax changes affecting the cost of buying a house,
which bear directly on the user cost, have any measurable effect on prices.
   These conclusions all pertain to the policies’ average effects in a sample of 57 heterogeneous
economies. There is no reason to believe the effects will be the same everywhere, of course. A
policy that is ineffective in one country may be highly effective in another, and vice versa. The
essential next step is to understand how policy effectiveness is influenced, narrowly, by legal, insti-
tutional and financial structural features of the housing market and, more broadly, by the financial
system.




                                                  34
                                                     Table 1: Policy actions by type and region

                                                 Central &                             Middle
                                  Asia &          eastern           Latin              East &         Western          North              All
                                  Pacific         Europe           America             Africa         Europe          America         Economies
                                   (13)            (15)              (7)                (4)            (19)             (2)              (60)
                                         per              per              per              per              per              per              per
                               total   decade   total   decade   total   decade   total   decade   total   decade   total   decade   total   decade
     Reserve requirement       201      7.5     218      8.4     87       7.9      6       1.1     109      2.6     20       3.1     641      5.4
     Credit growth              9       0.3      7       0.3      0       0.0      0       0.0      7       0.2      0       0.0      23      0.2
     Liquidity                  30      1.1      4       0.2      6       0.5      0       0.0      13      0.3      0       0.0      53      0.4
       General credit total    240      9.0     229      8.8     93       8.4      6       1.1     129      3.0     20       3.1     717      6.1
     LTV                        56      2.1     11       0.4      2       0.2      0       0.0     21       0.5      4       0.6      94      0.8
     DSTI                       20      0.7     12       0.5      1       0.1      1       0.2      9       0.2      2       0.3      45      0.4




35
     Risk-weighting             14      0.5     19       0.7      5       0.5      3       0.5      9       0.2      0       0.0      50      0.4
     Provisioning               16      0.6     10       0.4      6       0.5      1       0.2      4       0.1      0       0.0      37      0.3
     Exposure limits            11      0.4      8       0.3      0       0.0      0       0.0      1       0.0      0       0.0      20      0.2
       Targeted credit total   117      4.4     60       2.3     14       1.3      5       0.9     44       1.0      6       0.9     246      2.1
     Housing-related tax       50       1.9     23       0.9      0       0.0      0       0.0     70       1.6      5       0.8     148      1.3
     Total                     407     15.2     312     12.0     107      9.7     11       2.0     243      5.7     31       4.8     1111     9.4

     Notes: The figures in the columns labelled “per decade” are the total number of policy actions taken in all economies in one
     region, divided by the sum of the number of coverage years for each economy in the region, and then multiplied by 10 so
     that it represents the average number of actions taken in a decade. The number of coverage years for each economy used
     to calculate the average value is the difference between June 2012 and the earlier of the following two years: (1) the first
     for which official source materials from central banks and financial authorities were reviewed in order to identify relevant
     measures; and (2) the first year in which a relevant policy action appears in the database.
                       Table 2: Correlations between policy measures

                                     A. Policy changes

                      Gen cred    LTV       DSTI      Expo lim    Risk wt     Prov        Tax
General credit         1
LTV ratio              0.08      1
DSTI ratio             0.07      0.37      1
Exposure limits       −0.01      0.06      0.12          1
Risk-weighting         0.03      0.03     −0.00          0.12     1
Provisioning           0.04      0.06      0.02          0.09    −0.00       1
Housing-related tax    0.01      0.11      0.03          0.00     0.00       0.00     1

                               B. Cumulative policy indicators

                      Gen cred     LTV      DSTI     Expo lim    Risk wt     Prov        Tax
General credit          1
LTV ratio               0.08      1
DSTI ratio              0.15      0.58     1
Exposure limits        −0.11      0.07     0.11       1
Risk-weighting          0.01      0.08     0.08      −0.06        1
Provisioning            0.08      0.23     0.29       0.04        0.13      1
Housing-related tax    −0.01      0.00     0.15      −0.00       −0.00      0.06     1

 Notes: The correlations are calculated for the 57 countries used in the empirical analysis.
 Panel A shows the correlations between the discrete policy change variables. The under-
 lying monthly data are summed to obtain quarterly series. Panel B shows the correlations
 between the cumulative policy indicators, created by accumulating the policy change vari-
 ables.




                                             36
                                    Table 3: Descriptive statistics

                                                                     Fractiles
Variable                       Mean        SD       50%     5%       95%         Min        Max      Obs

Real housing credit growth         9.5    15.6      7.2     −7.9     38.3       −81.5      116.2     3730
Real house price growth            2.0    12.3      1.6    −15.2     20.6      −100.7      101.7     4067
Real personal income growth        2.4     3.2      2.5     −2.8      7.8       −19.3       14.8     4447
Short-term interest rate           6.3     5.3      4.8      0.5     17.4         0.0       39.5     4363
Inflation rate                     4.3     4.7      3.1     −0.6     13.6       −11.7       33.4     4556

Notes: Housing credit growth, house price growth, real income growth and inflation are ex-
pressed in annualized quarterly growth rates in percentage terms. The interest rates are expressed
in percentage terms. The sample covers the period with valid data for either housing credit or
house prices, whose start dates are given in Appendix Table 2.


            Table 4: Panel regression results for housing credit with symmetric effects

                                                 Individually                         Jointly
   Policy                  Actions          Sum              4Q               Sum               4Q
   General credit             378         −1.58           −0.55             −1.24          −0.37
                                           (1.14)          (0.51)            (1.44)         (0.49)
   LTV limits                 80          −4.69∗∗∗        −2.11∗∗           −0.29          −0.04
                                           (1.80)          (0.85)            (2.16)         (1.03)
   DSTI limits                38         −14.19∗∗∗        −6.76∗∗∗      −12.74∗∗∗          −6.19∗∗∗
                                          (3.52)           (1.67)        (4.19)             (1.92)
   Exposure limits            12         −10.94∗∗∗        −4.64∗∗∗      −10.34∗∗∗          −4.41∗∗∗
                                          (2.70)           (1.62)        (2.99)             (1.76)
   Risk-weighting             44          −1.46           −0.63              0.20            0.05
                                           (3.84)          (1.53)           (4.11)          (0.96)
   Provisioning               28          −3.38           −1.24             −2.99          −1.03
                                           (3.95)          (1.66)            (4.19)         (1.74)
   Housing-related tax        108         −5.24∗∗         −2.39∗∗           −5.03∗∗        −2.28∗∗
                                           (2.46)          (1.09)            (2.48)         (1.09)

    Notes: The dependent variable is annualized quarterly growth rate in real housing credit.
    Robust standard errors are in parentheses. Asterisks indicate statistical significance: ***
    for 1%, ** for 5% and * for 10%.



                                                     37
                                  Table 5: Panel regression results for housing credit with asymmetric effects

                                                  Tightening                                                     Loosening
                                          Individually                    Jointly                        Individually                   Jointly
     Policy                Actions      Sum          4Q           Sum               4Q    Actions      Sum          4Q          Sum               4Q
     General credit         179       −2.24∗      −1.05∗∗       −2.14∗         −0.86∗      199       −0.20        0.18          0.22           0.37
                                       (1.34)      (0.51)        (1.25)         (0.48)                (1.60)     (0.71)        (1.58)         (0.67)
     LTV limits              59       −7.13∗∗∗    −3.04∗∗∗      −2.33          −0.97        21         4.10       1.36        11.39∗           4.74∗
                                       (1.50)      (0.66)        (1.62)         (0.69)                (7.48)     (3.35)       (6.50)          (2.78)
     DSTI limits             32      −13.42∗∗∗    −6.19∗∗∗     −10.98∗∗∗       −5.05∗∗∗     6       −17.17      −8.89        −18.75          −9.52
                                      (3.68)       (1.74)       (4.19)          (1.93)               (16.17)     (8.16)       (14.82)         (7.55)




38
     Exposure limits         6          1.05      −0.59          2.57            0.69       4       −16.74∗∗∗   −7.11∗       −19.21∗∗∗       −7.93∗∗
                                      (10.72)      (4.40)       (9.96)          (4.07)               (6.13)      (3.69)       (5.60)          (3.23)
     Risk-weighting          31       −6.78       −2.54          4.59          −1.58        13       11.34        4.03        10.73            3.60
                                       (3.97)      (1.56)       (4.00)          (1.53)               (7.69)      (3.09)       (7.79)          (3.12)
     Provisioning            22       −5.45∗      −1.64         −4.51∗         −1.19        6         5.29        1.03         4.84            0.80
                                       (3.21)      (1.18)        (3.01)         (1.01)              (12.46)      (5.56)      (13.79)          (5.86)
     Housing-related tax     48       −7.10∗∗     −2.70∗∗       −5.98∗∗        −2.19∗       60       −3.63      −2.13         −3.93          −2.24
                                       (2.93)      (1.31)        (2.55)         (1.15)                (3.74)     (1.77)        (3.78)         (1.76)


     Notes: The dependent variable is annualized quarterly growth rate in real housing credit. Robust standard errors are in parenthe-
     ses. Asterisks indicate statistical significance: *** for 1%, ** for 5% and * for 10%. The hypothesis of symmetric effects for the
     sum of the coefficients and the average four-quarter effect is rejected at the 5% level for LTV limits and risk-weighting.
         Table 6: Panel regression results for house prices with symmetric effects

                                         Individually                   Jointly
Policy                  Actions       Sum            4Q           Sum             4Q
General credit            420     −0.37          −0.07        −0.24         −0.01
                                   (0.82)         (0.31)       (0.80)        (0.30)
LTV limits                 85     −2.18∗         −0.58        −2.01         −0.54
                                   (1.20)         (0.55)       (1.98)        (0.84)
DSTI limits                42     −2.67          −0.70        −1.70         −0.47
                                   (4.17)         (1.54)       (4.91)        (1.86)
Exposure limits            19     −7.62          −3.18        −8.76         −3.56
                                   (6.83)         (2.94)       (6.78)        (2.99)
Risk-weighting             45       6.99          1.71          8.07∗         2.08
                                   (4.39)        (1.70)        (4.42)        (1.71)
Provisioning               34     −0.61          −0.58        −0.63         −0.52
                                   (3.18)         (1.34)       (3.29)        (1.33)
Housing-related tax       120     −1.34          −0.33        −1.24         −0.32
                                   (1.46)         (0.53)       (1.54)        (0.60)

Notes: The dependent variable is annualized quarterly growth rate in the real house
price. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. Asterisks indicate statistical signifi-
cance: *** for 1%, ** for 5% and * for 10%.




                                            39
                                 Table 7: Panel regression results for house prices with asymmetric effects

                                                Tightening                                                Loosening
                                      Individually                    Jointly                   Individually                    Jointly
     Policy                N       Sum          4Q            Sum               4Q   N        Sum          4Q           Sum               4Q
     General credit        202   −0.68       −0.10       −0.73             −0.10     218      0.22       0.09           0.59           0.25
                                  (0.86)      (0.30)      (0.89)            (0.26)           (1.30)     (0.54)         (1.30)         (0.51)
     LTV limits            60    −4.10∗∗     −1.08       −3.42∗∗           −0.82     25       5.02       1.64           6.03           1.89
                                  (1.88)      (0.69)      (1.43)            (0.63)           (5.67)     (2.28)         (5.81)         (2.40)
     DSTI limits           33    −2.81       −0.59       −0.13               0.19    9      −1.55        0.60         −2.16          −0.70
                                  (5.67)      (2.08)      (5.94)            (2.31)           (6.11)     (2.30)         (6.51)         (2.50)




40
     Exposure limits       9       1.19        0.33        1.41              0.44    10    −13.71∗∗    −5.68∗     −19.88∗∗           −7.88∗∗
                                 (10.95)      (4.17)     (11.34)            (4.43)          (6.77)      (3.19)     (8.70)             (4.43)
     Risk-weighting        32      0.89        0.18           0.92           0.17    13     20.47        5.26          23.95∗∗         6.43
                                  (4.72)      (1.62)         (4.78)         (1.73)         (12.73)      (4.65)        (11.85)         (4.25)
     Provisioning          28      2.56        0.84           0.91           0.21    6     −15.16      −6.96      −10.77             −5.34
                                  (4.29)      (1.57)         (4.71)         (1.78)          (14.41)     (6.55)     (13.68)            (6.62)
     Housing-related tax   52    −7.60∗∗     −2.70∗      −7.78∗∗           −2.83∗    68       3.18∗      1.46           3.63∗          1.57
                                  (3.49)      (1.42)      (3.67)            (1.50)           (1.95)     (0.94)         (2.04)         (0.96)

     Notes: The dependent variable is annualized quarterly growth rate in the real house price. Robust standard errors are in paren-
     theses. Asterisks indicate statistical significance: *** for 1%, ** for 5% and * for 10%. The hypothesis of symmetric effects for
     the sum of the coefficients is rejected at the 5% level for the exposure limit and tax variables
                  Table 8: Mean group regression results for housing credit

                                                   Unweighted                 Weighted
Policy                Countries   Actions       Sum           4Q          Sum            4Q
General credit           42         349      −4.18∗∗      −1.60∗        −3.47        −1.43
                                              (2.13)       (0.90)        (2.91)       (1.20)
LTV limits               23         77         0.24         0.09        −0.16        −0.23
                                              (4.32)       (1.81)        (5.85)       (2.52)
DSTI limits              15         35      −13.69∗       −6.65∗∗      −11.61∗       −5.54∗
                                             (7.08)        (3.06)       (6.57)        (3.33)
Exposure limits           6         10       −7.71        −2.98         −6.89        −2.72
                                              (7.62)       (3.14)        (7.81)       (3.34)
Risk-weighting           22         42       −7.57∗       −2.93∗        −5.28        −2.00
                                              (3.98)       (1.73)        (4.41)       (2.00)
Provisioning             12         24         0.05       −0.43           0.33       −0.35
                                              (6.93)       (3.25)        (5.86)       (2.79)
Housing-related tax      28         108      −3.05        −1.47         −2.48        −1.19
                                              (2.46)       (1.06)        (2.92)       (1.30)

Notes: The dependent variable is annualized quarterly growth rate in real housing credit. Stan-
dard errors are in parentheses. Asterisks indicate statistical significance: *** for 1%, ** for
5% and * for 10%.




                                              41
                   Table 9: Mean group regression results for house prices

                                                   Unweighted                Weighted
Policy                Countries   Actions       Sum          4Q          Sum            4Q
General credit            47        404      −1.72        −0.52        −0.45        −0.10
                                              (1.86)       (0.68)       (2.28)       (0.89)
LTV limits                25         79        6.40         2.54∗        3.80         1.67
                                              (4.09)       (1.49)       (3.97)       (1.50)
DSTI limits               17         41      −0.27          0.09       −0.67          0.07
                                              (6.39)       (2.59)       (7.19)       (2.90)
Exposure limits           7          15        5.82         1.28         4.17         0.80
                                             (10.65)       (3.89)      (14.08)       (5.57)
Risk-weighting            21         40        1.21       −0.10          2.33         0.45
                                              (4.96)       (1.86)       (5.10)       (1.93)
Provisioning              14         30      −0.99        −0.38        −1.83        −0.65
                                              (6.46)       (2.24)       (6.66)       (2.40)
Housing-related tax       31        119      −7.75∗∗∗     −3.05∗∗∗     −4.73        −1.87
                                              (2.85)       (1.09)       (4.02)       (1.72)

Notes: The dependent variable is annualized quarterly growth rate in the real house price.
Standard errors are in parentheses. Asterisks indicate statistical significance: *** for 1%, **
for 5% and * for 10%.




                                              42
                                       Table 10: Panel event study results for housing credit

                                                Tightening                                      Loosening
     Policy                Countries     Events   Unweighted    Weighted     Countries   Events   Unweighted   Weighted
     General credit           11           15      −0.81        −2.71           30        57         0.77      −0.07
                                                    (4.12)       (2.00)                             (1.20)      (0.77)
     LTV limits               15           23      −0.66        −0.86           12        16       −3.79∗∗∗    −2.03∗
                                                    (1.40)       (1.24)                             (1.45)      (1.22)
     DSTI limits              13           15      −3.67∗∗∗     −4.20∗∗∗         2         2       ···         ···
                                                    (1.43)       (1.05)                            ···         ···




43
     Exposure limits          5            5       −1.03        −1.61            3         3       ···         ···
                                                    (1.49)       (0.98)                            ···         ···
     Risk-weighting           19           24      −0.32        −1.09            7         8         1.41       1.96
                                                    (1.11)       (0.87)                             (8.55)     (4.79)
     Provisioning             7            8       −0.39        −1.30            5         5         0.97       1.73
                                                    (1.17)       (0.79)                             (2.64)     (2.64)
     Housing-related tax      19           29      −2.40        −1.90           17        29         0.82      −0.29
                                                    (1.52)       (1.21)                             (3.07)      (1.78)

     Notes: The dependent variable is annualized quarterly growth rate in real housing credit. Standard errors are in
     parentheses. Asterisks indicate statistical significance: *** for 1%, ** for 5% and * for 10%.
                                       Table 11: Panel event study results for house prices

                                               Tightening                                     Loosening
     Policy                Countries    Events   Unweighted    Weighted     Countries   Events   Unweighted   Weighted
     General credit           12          18      −1.66        −0.59           33        60      −1.08        −0.04
                                                   (1.38)       (1.01)                            (1.45)       (0.90)
     LTV limits               16          23      −0.15         0.41           11        19      −1.48        −1.35
                                                   (2.01)      (1.18)                             (1.80)       (1.35)
     DSTI limits              12          14        3.30        0.98           3          3       ···         ···
                                                   (3.67)      (1.75)                             ···         ···




44
     Exposure limits          5           5         0.38       −1.24           2          2       ···         ···
                                                   (4.71)       (2.65)                            ···         ···
     Risk-weighting           18          22        0.07       −1.54           7          8        1.46       −0.55
                                                   (1.11)       (0.99)                            (2.43)       (1.48)
     Provisioning             10          12      −2.40        −0.87           4          4      −2.54         1.26
                                                   (2.00)       (1.12)                            (5.96)      (1.58)
     Housing-related tax      16          28      −3.61∗∗∗     −1.88∗          18        33      −2.53         0.61
                                                   (1.39)       (1.12)                            (2.65)      (1.82)

     Notes: The dependent variable is annualized quarterly growth rate in the real house price. Standard errors are
     in parentheses. Asterisks indicate statistical significance: *** for 1%, ** for 5% and * for 10%.
                           Figure 1: The cross-country distribution of policy actions

                      25

                      20
number of countries




                      15

                      10

                      5

                      0
                           0-5    5-10 10-15 15-20 20-25 25-30 30-35 >35
                                     average number of actions per decade

           Notes: The figure plots the cross-country distribution of the total number of policy ac-
           tions, scaled to represent the average number per decade. The decadal averages are
           calculated as the absolute number of policy actions taken in each country, divided by
           the sum of the number of coverage years, and then multiplied by 10. The number of
           coverage years for each economy used to calculate the average value is the difference
           between June 2012 and the earlier of the following two years: (1) the first for which offi-
           cial source materials from central banks and financial authorities were reviewed in order
           to identify relevant measures; and (2) the first year in which a relevant policy action
           appears in the database.




                                                       45
                                                                                                 Figure 2: Credit and housing-related tax policies over time

                                                                       Loan-to-value limits                                        Provisioning rules                                         Reserve requirements
                                                    5                                                        2                                                          10
                                                                                                                                                                          5
                                                    3                                                        1
                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                    1                                                        0                                                           -5
                                                                                                                                                                        -10
                                                    -1                                                       -1
                                                                                                                                                                        -15
                                                    -3                                                       -2                                                         -20
                                                         1980   1985    1990   1995   2000    2005   2010           1980   1985    1990    1995   2000    2005   2010          1980    1985      1990   1995   2000    2005   2010

                                                                 Debt service-to-income limits                                      Exposure limits                                           Liquidity requirements
                                                    3                                                        1.0                                                        2
                                                    2                                                        0.5
                                                                                                                                                                        1
                                                    1                                                        0.0




46
                                                    0                                                        -0.5                                                       0
                                                    -1                                                       -1.0
                                                                                                                                                                        -1
                                                    -2                                                       -1.5
                                                    -3                                                       -2.0                                                       -2
                                                         1980   1985    1990   1995   2000    2005   2010            1980 1985      1990   1995   2000    2005   2010          1980    1985     1990    1995   2000    2005   2010

                                                                         Risk weighting                                           Housing-related taxes                                           Credit growth
                                                    5                                                                                                                   1.0




     loosening (negative) / tightening (positive)
                                                                                                             3
                                                    3                                                                                                                   0.5
                                                                                                             1
                                                    1                                                                                                                   0.0
                                                                                                             -1
                                                    -1                                                       -3                                                         -0.5

                                                    -3                                                       -5                                                         -1.0
                                                         1980   1985    1990   1995   2000    2005   2010           1980   1985    1990    1995   2000    2005   2010           1980    1985     1990   1995   2000    2005 2010
                           Figure 3: Interest rate and credit policies in China

                            Interest'rate
                            Reserve'Req                                           25
                            LTV
                            DSTI
                                                                                  15




                                                                                       cumula/ve'/ghtening
interest'rate,'%




                                                                                  5
                   6
                                                                                  =5
                   4

                   2

                   0
                       2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011




Figure 4: Interest rate, credit and housing-related tax policies in Hong Kong SAR
                                                                                   4
                                                                                   3
                                                                                   2
                                                                                   1
                                                                                       cumula/ve'/ghtening



                   8                                                               0
interest'rate,'%




                                                                                  =1
                   6
                                                                                  =2
                   4
                            Interest'rate

                   2        Credit'growth
                            Targeted'credit
                            Tax
                   0
                       1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011




                                                   47
                                                           Figure 5: Interest rate and credit policies in Korea

                                                             Interest'rate
                                                             Reserve'Req                                                      5
                                                             LTV
                                                             DSTI
                                                                                                                              3




                                                                                                                                   cumula/ve'/ghtening
                                              25
                           interest'rate,'%




                                                                                                                              1
                                              20
                                                                                                                              <1
                                              15
                                              10
                                              5
                                              0
                                                    1986    1989        1992   1995   1998   2001   2004   2007   2010




                              Figure 6: Event study responses of housing credit to a general credit tightening

                                50

                                40

                                30
Four-quarter growth rate




                                20
                                                                                                                              BG
                                10

                                         0
                                                                                                                  FR     DE
                                                                                                           JP
                           -10                                                                      CO
                                                                               HK            NZ
                                                           TW                         EE
                                                   PL                  KR
                           -20

                           -30

Notes: BG = Bulgaria; CO = Colombia; DE = Germany; EE = Estonia; FR = France; HK
= Hong Kong SAR; JP = Japan; KR = Korea; NZ = New Zealand; PL = Poland; TW =
Chinese Taipei.



                                                                                       48
                           Figure 7: Event study responses of house prices to housing-related tax increases

                           15

                           10
                             5
Four-quarter growth rate




                             0
                                                                             DE        MY        CN IE
                            -5                                     KR             HU                     MT
                           -10                                          JP                  GR
                                                         TH
                           -15                              US

                           -20    SG            HK EE
                           -25             CZ

                           -30
                           -35           PL

Notes: CN = China; CZ = Czech Republic; DE = Germany; EE = Estonia; GR = Greece;
HK = Hong Kong SAR; HU = Hungary; IE = Ireland; JP = Japan; KR = Korea; MT =
Malta; MY = Malaysia; PL = Poland; SG = Singapore; TH = Thailand; US = United
States.




                                                                 49
References
Bernanke, Ben S. 2010. Monetary Policy and the Housing Bubble. Speech delivered to the annual
  meeting of the American Economic Association, January 3.

Bernanke, Ben S., & Gertler, Mark. 1999. Monetary Policy and Asset Price Volatility. Pages
  77–128 of: New Challenges for Monetary Policy. Jackson Hole Symposium. Federal Reserve
  Bank of Kansas City.

Blanchard, Olivier J., Dell’Ariccia, Giovanni, & Mauro, Paolo. 2010. Rethinking Macroeconomic
  Policy. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 42, 199–215.

Borio, Claudio. 2011. Central Banking Post-Crisis: What Compass for Uncharted Waters? In:
  Jones, Claire, & Pringle, Robert (eds), The Future of Central Banking. Central Bank
  Publications.

Borio, Claudio, & Shim, Ilhyock. 2007. What Can (Macro-)prudential policy do to support
  monetary policy? Working Paper 242. Bank for International Settlements.

Claessens, Stijn, Ghosh, Swati R., & Mihet, Roxana. 2013. Macro-Prudential Policies to Mitigate
  Financial System Vulnerabilities. Journal of International Money and Finance, forthcoming.

Crowe, Cristopher, Dell’Ariccia, Giovanni, Igan, Deniz, & Rabanal, Pau. 2011. How to Deal with
  Real Estate Booms: Lessons from Country Experiences. Working Paper 11/91. International
  Monetary Fund.

Eichengreen, Barry, El-Erian, Mohamed, Fraga, Arminio, Ito, Takatoshi, Pisani-Ferry, Jean,
  Prasad, Eswar, Rajan, Raghuram G., Ramos, Mara, Reinhart, Carmen M., Rodrik, Dani,
  Rogoff, Kenneth S., Shin, Hyun Song, Velasco, Andrés, & Yu, Yongding. 2011. Rethinking
  Central Banking: Committee on International Economic Policy and Reform. The Brookings
  Institution.

Galı́, Jordi. 2013. Monetary Policy and Rational Asset Price Bubbles. American Economic
  Review, forthcoming.

Hilbers, Paul, Otker-Robe, Inci, Pazarbasioglu, Ceyla, & Johnsen, Gudrun. 2005. Assessing and
  Managing Rapid Credit Growth and the Role of Supervisory and Prudential Policies. Working
  Paper 05/151. International Monetary Fund.

IMF-BIS-Financial Stability Board. 2011 (October). Macroprudential Policy Tools and
  Frameworks. Progress Report to G20.

Ito, Takatoshi. 2010. Monetary Policy and Financial Stability: Is Inflation Targeting Passé?
   Working Paper 206. Asian Development Bank.

King, Mervyn. 2013 (April). Monetary Policy: Many Targets, Many Instruments, Where Do We
  Stand? Remarks at the IMF Conference on Rethinking Macro Policy II: First Steps and Early
  Lessons.

                                                50
Kuttner, Kenneth N. 2014. Low Interest Rates and Housing Bubbles: Still No Smoking Gun.
  Chap. 8, pages 159–185 of: Evanoff, Douglas D. (ed), The Role of Central Banks in Financial
  Stability: How Has It Changed? World Scientific, forthcoming.

Kuttner, Kenneth N., & Shim, Ilhyock. 2012. Taming the Real Estate Beast: The Effects of
  Monetary and Macroprudential Policies on Housing Crices and Credit. Pages 231–259 of:
  Heath, Alexandra, Packer, Frank, & Windsor, Callan (eds), Property Markets and Financial
  Stability. Sydney: Reserve Bank of Australia.

Lim, Cheng Hoon, Columba, Francesco, Costa, Alejo, Kongsamut, Piyabha, Otani, Akira, Saiyid,
  Mustafa, Wezel, Torsten, & Wu, Xiaoyong. 2011. Macroprudential Policy: What Instruments
  and How to Use Them? Lessons from Country Experiences. Working Paper 11/238.
  International Monetary Fund.

MacKinlay, A. Craig. 1997. Event Studies in Economics and Finance. Journal of Economic
 Literature, 35(1), 13–39.

Mishkin, Frederic S. 2011. How should central banks respond to asset price bubbles? The ‘lean’
 versus ’clean’ debate after the GFC. Reserve Bank of Australia Bulletin, June, 59–69.

Pesaran, M. Hashem, & Smith, Ron. 1995. Estimating Long-run Relationships from Dynamic
  Heterogeneous Panels. Journal of Econometrics, 68(1), 79–113.

Posen, Adam S. 2006. Why Central Banks Should Not Burst Bubbles. International Finance,
  9(1), 109–124.

Shim, Ilhyock, Bogdanova, Bilyana, Shek, Jimmy, & Subelyte, Agne. 2013. Database for Policy
  Actions on Housing Markets. BIS Quarterly Review, September, 83–95.

Stein, Jeremy C. 2013 (February). Overheating in credit markets: Origins, measurement and
  policy responses. Speech at the research symposioum on Restoring Household Financial
  Stability After the Great Recession — Why Household Balance Sheets Matter? at the Federal
  Reserve Bank of St. Louis.

Svensson, Lars E. O. 2010. Inflation Targeting. Chap. 22 of: Friedman, Benjamin M., &
  Woodford, Michael (eds), Handbook of Monetary Economics, vol. 3B. North Holland.

Swamy, P. A. V. B. 1970. Efficient Inference in a Random Coefficient Regression Model.
  Econometrica, 38(2), 311–323.

Tovar, Camilo, Garcia-Escribano, Mercedes, & Martin, Mercedes Vera. 2012. Credit Growth and
  the Effectiveness of Reserve Requirements and Other Macroprudential Instruments in Latin
  America. Working Paper 12/142. International Monetary Fund.

Vandenbussche, Jérôme, Vogel, Ursula, & Detragiache, Enrica. 2012. Macroprudential Policies
  and Housing Prices—A New Database and Empirical Evidence for Central, Eastern and
  Southeastern Europe. Working Paper 12/303. International Monetary Fund.


                                              51
Woodford, Michael. 2012 (April). Inflation Targeting and Financial Stability. Working Paper
 17967. National Bureau of Economic Research.




                                              52
Data appendix


                      Appendix Table 1: Coverage of the policy action dataset

   Asia-Pacific          Australia      China        Hong Kong SAR           India         Indonesia
                       (1996/1998)   (1998/1998)      (1988/1991)         (1998/1999)     (2003/2008)
                          Japan         Korea               Malaysia      New Zealand      Philippines
                       (1999/1980)   (2002/1988)          (1989/1989)     (1980/1980)     (1980/1980)
                        Singapore      Thailand       Chinese Taipei
                       (1996/1996)   (1999/1999)       (2006/2000)

   Central and           Bulgaria      Croatia        Czech Republic        Estonia         Hungary
     eastern Europe    (1990/1990)   (1997/1998)       (1995/1990)        (1993/1997)     (2000/2000)
                          Latvia      Lithuania              Poland         Romania          Russia
                       (1992/2000)   (1994/2000)          (1997/2002)     (1998/1998)     (1998/1992)
                          Serbia       Slovakia             Slovenia        Turkey          Ukraine
                       (1999/2002)   (1993/1995)          (1996/2000)     (1996/2002)     (2001/2001)

   Latin America        Argentina       Brazil               Chile         Colombia         Mexico
                       (2000/2002)   (1997/1994)          (1991/1991)     (1992/1999)     (1999/2011)
                          Peru         Uruguay
                       (2000/2000)   (2001/2001)

   Middle East            Israel     Saudi Arabia         South Africa    United Arab
    and Africa         (1999/1998)   (1998/2007)          (2001/1998)       Emirates
                                                                          (2001/2011)

   North America         Canada      United States
                       (1985/1981)   (1980/1980)

   Western Europe        Austria       Belgium              Denmark         Finland          France
                       (1998/1999)   (1997/2000)          (2003/2002)     (1997/1987)     (1997/1986)
                         Germany       Greece               Iceland         Ireland          Italy
                       (1982/1982)   (1998/1999)          (1997/1999)     (1999/1981)     (1984/1981)
                       Luxembourg       Malta             Netherlands       Norway          Portugal
                       (1999/1997)   (1998/1990)          (1998/1995)     (1998/1980)     (1996/1991)
                          Spain        Sweden             Switzerland    United Kingdom
                       (1998/1999)   (1997/1991)          (1980/1988)     (1980/1981)


Notes: The first year listed in the brackets for each economy shows the first year official source
materials from the monetary, prudential or fiscal authorities were reviewed to identify relevant
measures. The second year listed in the brackets shows the first year a relevant policy action is
recorded in the dataset for each economy.




                                                     53
    Appendix Table 2: Start and end dates for house price and housing credit data

                    House price       Housing credit
Country           Start     End      Start      End    Remarks
Argentina        2003Q1   2012Q1    2003Q1    2012Q2   Macro instability pre-2003
Austria          1993Q1   2012Q1    2003Q1    2011Q4   Extreme price volatility pre-1993
Australia        1980Q1   2012Q1    1980Q1    2012Q2
Belgium          1980Q1   2011Q4    1980Q1    2012Q2
Bulgaria         2001Q1   2012Q1    2001Q1    2012Q2   Macro instability pre-2001
Brazil           2010Q4   2012Q1    1997Q1    2012Q2   Extreme credit volatility
Canada           1980Q1   2012Q1    1980Q1    2012Q2
Switzerland      1980Q1   2012Q1    1980Q1    2012Q2
Chile            1990Q4   2007Q4    2001Q1    2012Q2
China            2001Q1   2011Q4    2001Q1    2011Q4   Extreme price & credit volatility
Colombia         1988Q1   2011Q2    1994Q4    2012Q2
Czech Republic   1999Q1   2010Q4    1997Q1    2012Q2
Germany          1980Q1   2011Q4    1980Q4    2012Q2
Denmark          1980Q1   2011Q4    2003Q1    2012Q2
Estonia          2002Q1   2012Q1    2002Q1    2011Q4   Macro instability pre-2002
Spain            1987Q1   2012Q1    1989Q1    2012Q1
Finland          1980Q1   2012Q1    1989Q2    2012Q2
France           1994Q4   2011Q4    1980Q1    2012Q2
Great Britain    1980Q1   2011Q4    1980Q1    2012Q1
Greece           1993Q4   2012Q1    1980Q1    2012Q2
Hong Kong SAR    1993Q1   2012Q1    1981Q4    2012Q2
Croatia          1998Q1   2010Q4    1999Q3    2012Q2   Macro instability pre-1998
Hungary          2001Q4   2012Q1    1993Q1    2012Q2   Large spike in credit data
Indonesia        2000Q1   2012Q1    2000Q1    2012Q2   Macro instability, Asian crisis
Ireland          1980Q1   2011Q4    1990Q3    2012Q2
Israel           1994Q1   2011Q4    2004Q1    2011Q1   Extreme first credit observation
India            2003Q2   2012Q1    1998Q4    2011Q4
Iceland          2000Q1   2012Q1    2009Q1    2012Q1   Credit fell by half during crisis
Italy            1991Q1   2011Q4    1998Q2    2012Q2
Japan            1980Q1   2011Q4    1980Q1    2012Q1
Korea            1986Q1   2012Q1    1996Q1    2012Q2
Lithuania        1998Q4   2011Q4    2004Q1    2012Q2
Luxembourg       1980Q1   2011Q4    1999Q1    2012Q2
Latvia           2006Q1   2011Q4    2003Q3    2012Q2
Malta            2000Q1   2011Q4    1996Q1    2012Q2
Mexico           2005Q1   2012Q1    1996Q4    2012Q2
Malaysia         1999Q1   2011Q4    1996Q4    2012Q2
Netherlands      1985Q1   2012Q1    1990Q4    2012Q2   Extreme price volatility pre-1985
Norway           1991Q1   2012Q1    1991Q3    2012Q2
New Zealand      1980Q1   2011Q4    1998Q2    2012Q2
                                                                 Continued on next page


                                         54
                     House price         Housing credit
Country            Start      End        Start        End   Remarks
Peru              2002Q1    2012Q1     2002Q1     2012Q2    Macro instability pre-2002
Philippines       1981Q1    2011Q4     2001Q3     2012Q1    Extreme first two credit observations
Poland            2002Q4    2012Q1     1996Q4     2012Q2
Portugal          1988Q1    2012Q1     1980Q1     2012Q2
Romania           2005Q4    2011Q4     2007Q1     2012Q2
Serbia            2003Q2    2011Q4     2008Q2     2012Q2
Russia            2001Q1    2011Q4     2004Q2     2012Q2
Sweden            1993Q1    2012Q1     2001Q4     2012Q2
Singapore         1980Q1    2012Q1     1991Q1     2012Q2
Slovenia          2003Q1    2011Q4     2005Q2     2012Q2    Extreme first two credit observations
Slovakia          2005Q1    2012Q1     2006Q1     2012Q2
Thailand          1999Q1    2011Q2     1999Q1     2012Q2    Macro instability, Asian crisis
Turkey            2007Q2    2011Q4     2007Q1     2012Q2    Large spike in credit data
Chinese Taipei    1991Q3    2011Q3     1988Q3     2012Q2
Ukraine           2000Q2    2012Q1     2006Q1     2012Q2
United States     1980Q1    2012Q1     1980Q1     2012Q1
South Africa      1980Q1    2012Q1     1980Q1     2012Q2

Notes: Italicized entries are those for which the starting date was moved up to exclude extreme or
highly volatile observations. The shaded grey entries are dropped from the regressions because of
insufficient data.




                                                 55
