                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     DOLLAR APPRECIATION AND
               MANUFACTURING EMPLOYMENT AND OUTPUT




                        William H. Branson

                          James P. Love




                      Working Paper No. 1972




                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                             July 1986




The research reported here was supported by the National Science
Foundation's Division of Policy Research and Analysis. We would
like to thank the participants of the March 21, 1986 NBER con-
ference on International Economic Problems Confronting the United
States and Japan, for helpful comments on an earlier draft of this
paper. The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
program in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those
of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                                 Working Paper #1972
                                                 July 1986




           Dollar Appreciation and Manufacturing Employment and Output




                                    ABSTRACT


            This paper examines the impact of the movements in the real
      exchange rate on employment and output in U.S. manufacturing
      industries.   We use a simple model of supply and demand to
      estimate the elasticity of manufacturing employment and output
      with respect to the real exchange rate, at different levels of
      aggregation. The data are quarterly, covering two time periods——
      1963:1 to 1985:1 and 1972:1 to 1985:1. The employment estimates
      include 20 manufacturing sectors at the 2—digit SIC level, 125
      sectors at the 3—digit SIC level, 176 sectors at the 4—digit SIC
      level. In addition, we disaggregate manufacturing employment
      regionally by the 50 states plus the District of Columbia. The
      output estimates include 80 sectors of industrial production at
      different levels of aggregation.     We check for consistency by
      considering the impact of aggregation among the 2—,3—, and 4—
      digit employment estimates, and by comparing the estimates for
      employment to those for output.    We find that exchange rate
      movements have had important effects on the manufacturing sector,
      and in particular, the durable goods sector, including primary
      metals, fabricated metal products, and non—electrical machinery.
      Other sectors that suffer large employment loses when the dollar
      appreciates are stone, clay and glass products, transportation,
      instruments, textiles and apparel, chemicals, rubber and leather
               -
     goods.




William H. Branson                              James P. Love
Woodrow Wilson School                           Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University                            Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544                              Princeton, NJ 08544
                                       William H. Branson
                                       James P. Love
                                       July 1986


DOLLAR APPRECIATION AND MANUFACTURING EMPLOYMENT AND OUTPUT



I.   Introduction and Summary



         In the spring of 1981 the U.S. dollar began a four—year

period of real appreciation that took it to a peak of more than
50 percent by first quarter 1985 (see Table 1 beloj).       By 1982
the dollar as nearly 25 percent over its 1980 value. By mid—
1984 the dollar appreciation as about 40 percent over its 1980
value, and by first quarter 1985 the dollar as more than 50
percent higher The appreciation of the dollar in real terms
as part of the adjustment process by which the increase in the
structural budget deficit in the U.S. as financed. By mid—1985,
the current account deficit as about $120 billion at an annual
rate, providing a significant source of finance for the $200
billion Federal budget deficit. The links from the shift in the
budget to the appreciation of the dollar are discussed in Branson
(1985).

     The appreciation of the dollar in real terms reduces the
competitiveness of U.S. output in all U.S. industry that is



     1  The index in Table 1 uses the IMF trade weighted exchange
rate index deflated by relative unit labor costs. Different
weighting methods or price deflators change the metric of the
index somewhat.
                                2

directly or indirectly substitutable for foreign output.     It is

these effects that are the topic of this paper.

     The appreciation of the dollar was a prolonged, but,
temporary phenomena that is reversible when the structural
deficit is reduced or when international investors resist
absorption of additional dollar—denominated debt into their
portfolios., This reversal apparently began in late 1985, as the
dollar has fallen sharply in the past year.'' The depression of
output and employment in previously—competitive U.S. industries

may not be completely reversible, however. The protracted period
of a high dollar has provided an opportunity for non—U.S.
competitors in industries with increasing returns——due to fixed
costs, learning, or other factors——to establish themselves in the
world market. Thus, when the dollar returns to its 1980 level in
real terms, U.S. firms will face new international competition
that has worked its way down its cost curves while the dollar was
high. The estimates provided in this paper of the effects of
real appreciation on employment and output do not take this

potential asymmetry into account.
     In this paper, using time series data through the first
quarter 1985, we use a simple model of supply and demand to

        By the first quarter of 1985 the dollar was trading, in
nominal terms, for more than 10 French francs, 3.25 West German
marks, and 260 Japanese yen. By June 1986, the dollar was
trading for about 7 French francs, 2.2 West German marks, and
less than 170 Japanese yen. The dollar's fall was not as broadly
based as is commonly thought, however. For example, over that
same time period, the U.S. dollar actually appreciated against
the Canadian dollar. For a discussion of the heterogeneity of
recent currency movements see Hartman (1986).
                                3

estimate the impact of the recent dollar appreciation on

manufacturing employment and output, disaggregated by region and
industry sectors. These initial results are part of a larger
research project underway to estimate the effects of movements in
the real exchange rate on U.S. manufacturing industries.'
Section II of the paper is the theoretical background for the

estimation procedure, and Section III summarizes the data and the
estimates, which are reported in tables at the end of the paper.
     We find significant and substantial effects of the dollar
appreciation on employment and output in U.S. manufacturing.4
The evidence is strengthened by the consistency of the effects
across sectors as e go down in aggregation to the three and
four—digit SIC levels. In particular, e find that exchange rate
movements have had important effects on the durable goods sector,

including primary metals, fabricated metal products, and non—
electrical machinery. Other sectors that suffer large employment
loses when the dollar appreciates are stone, clay, and glass

products, transportation, instruments, textiles and apparel,
chemicals, rubber and leather goods.




        Research is underway to explain the differences in the
impact of exchange rate movements among industry sectors, and to
estimate the permanent effects of prolonged deviations from
equilibrium real exchange rates on manufacturing industries,
using more recent data that includes the recent period of dollar
depreciation.
       Compare, for example, Robert Solomon (1985).
                                         4

II. Theoretical Outline.
     In this sector we sketch the theoretical basis for the

estimating equations on which the empirical results of section
III are based. The discussion is brief, as the basic ideas are
well known from trade and computable general equilibrium (CGE)

models that distinguish three sectors: exportables X, import—
competing goods M, and non—traded goods N. We employ this
sectorization for two reasons. First, to study output and
employment effects, we must focus on exportables and import—
competing production, rather than on trade in exports and

imports. Second, given this focus, we must provide a minimum
model of the non—traded sector the economy to ensure consistency.

     The general line of the analysis can be stated simply. In
each of the three sectors, demand is sensitive to the relative

price of home and foreign goods.             In the short run at least, we
assume that a change in the nominal exchange rate E moves that
relative price, which we interpret as the "real" exchange rate e
  EP/P, where P(P) is the relevant home (foreign) price.              It is

important to note the limiting force of this assumption. If we
were to assume that exportables and import—competing goods were

perfect substitutes in demand for foreign goods, then a change in
the nominal rate E would have no effect on the relative price e,
since P, =   ePTM   and Ps,, =   ePw, where P is the relevant home

(foreign) price. Even in this case, in the short run we would
see a change in the relative price of non—traded goods when E

changes.     In the long run, as wages adjust to the change in goods
                                5

prices, a cost—based model of pricing in the non—traded goods
sector would result in the restoration of the original relative

price in that sector. The change in P, would be equal to the
initial change in E, in percentage terms. A rational—
expectations model with instantaneous market—clearing would

collapse in this long run into the short run, leaving no effect
of E on e in any of the three sectors. We do not assume perfect

substitution or instantaneous market—clearing in the empirical
work, but rather assume that changes in the nominal rate move the
U.S. real exchange rate in the short run, and attempt to estimate
the consequences.

     An appreciation o-1 the home currency (the US. dollar),

reducing e, reduces the relative price of foreign to home goods.
This tends to shift demand from home to foreign goods, reducing

output and employment in all three producing sectors. Changes in
home and foreign real income, Y and W     respectively,   also enter
the demand for exportables, while we assume that only home income
Y is relevant for importables and non—traded goods.

     On the supply side, we assume that the output of each sector
depends on its price relative to the nominal wage. As the real
product wage falls, supply increases. We do not attempt to model
inter—sectoral supply reactions as relative prices change, given
the common nominal wage rate. The supply functions below should,
in theory, contain all relative prices.

     In the theoretical background to our empirical work, then,
is a model of supply and demand in each of the three sectors with
                                               6

supply sensitive to the product wage, and demand sensitive to the
relative price of home and foreign goods and the relevant income
variable.           A log—linear model of demand and supply of
exportables is described below, with analogous results for

import—competing goods and non—tradeables.



Exportables
        The demand for exportables is written in log—linear form as:


(1) in Q,1 =        in c +    d,.,   in (EP/P,4) +   g,.1ln   Y +   gln   VTM.




Here Q, is the quantity demanded, EP/PM is the relative price of
exportabies and foreign goods, and V(Y) is home (foreign) real
income. The parameter d, is the positive price elasticity of
demand, and the g's are the income elasticities. The supply of
exportabies is assumed to be an inverse function of the product

wage:



(2)     ln Q,.. =    in c +    s,.   ln(P,.,/W).




Here W is the nominal wage rate and s,, is the price elasticity of

supply. As P,,/W increases Q, supplied increases.
        The demand and supply equations (1) and (2) can be solved to

obtain the "reduced form" expressions for Q and P,.,, give E, P*,
W, V, and V. The solution for Q,,, the output of exportables, is

given by:
                                      7


 (3)    in Q,, =   A,   +   " in    +            g,.,. mY +   g.lnY
where      P, = sMcl  — d,.,c,
                ____________
                     + d,.,    s
                               -
                                   the constant term.


Both coefficients in the reduced form are positive, given the way
d,., was defined in equation (1). n appreciation of the dollar,
expressed as the fall in the exchange rate E, reduces competitive
prices EP relative to domestic costs W, reducing Q,.,.         Growth in
V or YN increases demand and production.

       The estimating equations in Section III below follow (3).
The real exchange rate EP/W is inverted in those equations,
since the data use the inverse IMF definition of the exchange
rate. This makes the estimated coefficients for the real

exchange rate negative. The domestic income variable is broken
into trend and cyclical components, to identify a cyclical output
elasticity.
       The equation for employment N,., in the exportable sectors

takes the same form as the output equation, with the two tied by
a production function. Since all the estimated equations below
have a separate trend term, differential productivity growth
trends across sectors are included in the controlled variable

set. The employment equations are the same as the output
equations with in N,., replacing in Q,. on the left—hand side of the
equation (3).

       In a later phase of research, we will estimate the effects
of movements in the real exchange rate on real wages and profits
                                               8

in the manufacturing sectors. It will be useful then to have the
solution for F,.. from (1) and (2):


                          1
(4) in    =       +                Eg,1lnY +       g,inY   +   d,ln(EF)   +   slnW]
                          +



                  in   c1 +   in
where         =   —                ce..

                                          is   the constant term.
                          +   d,

     The usual "small—country" results can be obtained from

equations (3) and (4) by setting the price—elasticity of demand
d, at infinity. In (3), this eliminates income effects and sets
the relative price coefficient equal to s,,.                   The output of
exportables reacts along the supply function as the real exchange

rate moves exogenously. In the price equation (4), setting d, at
infinity sets the coefficients of Y, Y, and W at zero, and the
coefficient of EP at unity. Exportable prices are fixed by the
world market in the small—country case. The assumptions
maintained in the empirical work is that the U.S. is not a small
country, in the sense of being a price—taker on world markets.


Import—Competing and Non—Traded Goods
     The basic demand and supply equations for import—competing

and non—traded goods will have exactly the same form as (1) and
(2) for exportables, so the quantity and price solutions will
have the same form as (3) and (4). For both sectors we will
eliminate the foreign output variable from the demand function,
                                9

although in principle it (and many others) should be included.
In both sectors supply is again an inverse function of the
product wage, and demand depends on the price of own output

relative to competing foreign goods, represented in general by
EP'. s EPd rises, we expect substitution towards both domestic
production of import—competing goods and non—traded output, and
vice—versa as EP* falls, the dollar appreciates.

     gain, in principle we should include all product wages in
each supply function, to catch supply—side substitution as any
relative price changes. nd, we should include all relative
prices in each demand function for a similar reason. In the

empirical work, we focus on the exogenous event of a major swing
in E, producing a swing in the real exchange rate. Therefore, we
include the relative price EP/P, for each of the i (x,m,n)
sectors. The maintained hypothesis expressed in the exclusion
of the other relative prices is that there was no significant

exogenous shift amongst them during the sample period, or that

        In our empirical work we use the real exchange rate to
measure changes in import and export prices. Gene Grossman
(1984) estimated the impact of exchange rate movements on the
U.S. steel industry using a model similar to ours, but with
import prices for steel used in the estimating equation rather
than an exchange rate index. lthough data on import and export
prices are available for some sectors, concordance between the
price series and employment or output series is poor, making it
impossible for us to construct sector specific export or import
prices for most of the industry groups we have considered.
Moreover, many of the import and export price series do not move
in constant proportion with exchange rates, suggesting that for
many industries, small country or competitive market behavior
assumptions are not realistic. 4e are currently investigating
the relationship between movements in import and export prices,
industry sensitivity to exchange rate movements, and industry
market structure, and will report our findings in a later paper.
                               10

shifts over time are captured by a trend variable. The obvious
exception is the energy price, which is included explicitly in
the empirical work.

      With Y excluded from the demand functions, and m and n

subscripts denoting import—competing and non—traded output and
price, respectively, the reduced—form solutions for Qm Pm Qyi,
Pt., are equations (3) and (4) with no term in Y and the

subscripts on the elasticities altered appropriately. The
employment equations, again, would be similar to the output
equations via a production function. Trend terms will adjust for
differences in productivity growth across sectors. The presumed
difference in demand substitution against foreign goods among
exportable, import—competing, and non—traded goods should come
out in the estimated values of the demand elasticities, d,, dm
and d.,.



Conclusion on Theory

     Since we focus on output and employment, rather than trade,
the demand and supply model in each sector has the same basic
structure. Demand substitutes to some degree against foreign

goods; supply depends upon the product wage. Later in the
research project we may attempt to disaggregate between
exportables and import—competing goods within manufacturing. In
the results reported below, we have only a rough disaggregation
between traded and non—traded sectors. The specification of the

output and employment equations is an empirical representation of
                                11

equation (3), with trend and cycle in V separated, and EP/W
inverted and represented by the IMF relative unit labor cost
index.



III. Empirical Results: Employment and Output
     In this section we report the empirical estimates of the
relationship between movements in the real exchange rate and

employment and output in manufacturing for many different
industries and regions. Ps noted above, we have not modeled each
industry or region individually, taking into account the special
demand shocks and price effects that may be important.   .'Je have

constructed a rather general reduced form model that is applied
to all sectors or regions, at different levels of disaggregation.

     The left hand dependent variables are the natural logarithm
of employment or industrial production. The right hand
independent variables include a constant, three variables to

capture secular, cyclical and structural changes in demand, and
the real exchange rate. The secular and cyclical variables are
time [TREND], and the natural logarithm of the unemployment rate
ELURT]. The structural variable is the natural logarithm of an
index to measure the real price of energy [LRENGY].   The

exchange rate variable is the natural logarithm of an index that

measures the real U.S. trade—weighted exchange rate [LREX]. The
exchange rate used here is the IMF index of relative unit labor

    '   The IMF defines the exchange rate as the inverse of EP*/4
from Section II. An increase of the index is an appreciation of
the dollar.
                                         12

costs. We considered the inclusion of a foreign demand variable,
but found that deviations form trend growth in foreign demand
were so highly correlated with changes in domestic demand that rio

additional explanatory power came from foreign demand.

       The estimating equation was:

                             4                     4                    6

".t
 £     'ri   + a1t + E   a2. LURTt   -
                                         +E     (I3kLRENGYt_k +   E   (a41LREXI +
                                          k=0                     1=0

where:
       the log of employment or output in sector i,
t = the       TREND variable time,
LURT = the log of the unemployment rate,
LRENGY =      the   log of the relative price of energy,
LREX = the log of the IMF real exchange rate index, adjusted
             for changes in changes in relative unit labor costs,
   =   the stochastic error term
and the a's are the parameters to be estimated.

       The data are quarterly. The equations are estimated over a
period that ends in first quarter 1985. The equations for
employment disaggregated at the 1— and 2—digit SIC level were
estimated over the periods beginning at first quarter 1963 and
1972. The equations for output, and employment by state and by
3— and 4—digit SIC codes were estimated over a period beginning

     -,
        We further considered the inclusion of a real interest
rate variable, but found, surprisingly, that it had little
explanatory power, and did not significantly change the estimated
exchange rate elasticities. The lack of explanatory power may be
due to mulitcolinarity between the interest rate variable and the
three variables TREND, LURT, and LRENGV.
                                13

 in first quarter 1972. The 1963:1 to 1985:1 estimates have 89

 observations and 70 degrees of freedom. The 1972:1 to 1985:1
 estimates have 53 observations and 34 degrees of freedom.

      The exchange rate variable LREX includes the current plus
 six quarters of lags. The real energy price LRENGY and the
unemployment rate LURT variables both include the current value

plus four quarters of lags. The coefficient for the TREND
variable (t) is the estimated exponential rate of growth or

decline in employment or output that occurs due to secular
changes in income, tastes, comparative advantage, or technology.
The coefficients for the real exchange rate, real price of

energy, and unemployment rate variables can be interpreted as
elasticities. The Beach—Mackinnon CEconometrica 1978] maximum
likelihood procedure for correcting first order autocorrelation
was used.

The Data

     The source of the data on employment is the Bureau of Labor

Statistics' (BLS) ployment and Earnings. The dependant
variable for the employment equations is the natural logarithm of
the number of employed workers. In the regional equations, we
use the number of workers employed in manufacturing industries,

disaggregated by the 50 states plus the District of Columbia. In
the industry classifications we use the number of workers
employed in each of the 2—digit SIC manufacturing

classifications. [SIC codes 20 through 39] To test how
sensitive the estimates are to changes in the level of
                               14

aggregation we have estimated equations for all of the three and
four digit manufacturing codes that are included in the BLS
Establishment Survey tape. This includes 125 three digit
industries and 176 four digit industries.

     The dependent variable for the output equations is the
industrial production index [IF], provided by the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System. We have included GO
industrial production indexes, taken from the Citibank series for
manufacturing industries.. The concordance between the Federal
Reserve's IF index and the BLS SIC industry classifications is

not exact, but we have attempted to compare the exchange rate
coefficients on the IF series to those from equivalent SIC
classifications.

     The real exchange rate index is the IMF index of relative
unit labor costs. The real energy index is the CPI—Urban index
for energy divided by the CPI—Urban index for all consumer goods.
The unemployment rate is for all workers.'



     E  In a previous version of this paper we used a six country
index of exchange rates deflated by consumer prices. We have
also experimented with an index based wholesale prices and we
have used different weighting methods for the countries in the
index. In general, changes in the country weights or the price
deflators have changed the metric of the estimates, but not the
ranking of the coefficients. The index based on unit labor costs
tends to fit the data better that indexes based on wholesale or
consumer prices.
        Detrending of the unemployment rate to account for
secular changes in labor force participation rates [a higher
"natural rate"] changes the estimated coefficient for the LURT
variable and the TREND variable, but does not change the other
coefficients.
                                15
 Results

      The results are reported in Tables 2 through 9. The tables
 report the value of the first order autocorrelation coefficient

RHO, the coefficients for each of the independent variables, and
a significance statistic. When independent variables are lagged,
the coefficient represents the sum of all lagged coefficients.
The significance measure [SIB] is the probability that the true

value of the coefficient(s) is zero, using a two tailed t test.
The standard error [SE] for the exchange rate coefficient is also
reported.

     Table 2 reports the results for all non agriculture workers
and 9 traded and non—traded sectors of the economy, estimated
over two periods, 1963:1 — 1985:1 and 1972:1 — 1985:1, with

manufacturing disaggregated by durable and non durable goods
industries. The RHO is large for nearly all sectors, indicating
a serious problem with serial correlation. In the model
estimated from 1963:1 to 1985:1 the TREND and cyclical variable

LURT are both highly significant for all industry sectors, while
the relative price of energy variable LRENBY is only significant
at the .05 level for three sectors. The real exchange rate

variable LREX is negative for all but the construction and
finance sectors, but is statistically significant only for all

non agricultural employment, mining, manufacturing, and durable
goods manufacturing. When the same equation is estimated over
the shorter period that begins in first quarter 1972, the signs

of the exchange rate coefficients do not change, but are
                               16

generally more significant. The largest exchange rate effects
are in the mining and manufacturing sectors, as one would expect,
with durable goods showing larger effects than non durable goods.
     Table 3 reports the results of the manufacturing employment

estimates, by 2—digit SIC classification, for the period
beginning in 1963 and ending in first quarter 1985. The RHO is
positive and large for most of the industries again indicating a
serious problem with serial correlation.   The variable TREND is
positive for 15 of the industries, and statistically significant
at the .05 level in 14 of the regressions. The cyclical variable

LURT has the expected negative sign for all 20 industries, and is
significant at the .05 level 17 times. The real price of energy
variable LRENGY is negative 11 times, and significant 11 times,
including two cases where the sign is positive [SIC 27 and 38].
     The real exchange rate variable LREX is negative for 16 of
the 20 industries, and statistically significant at the .05 level
11 times. In 10 of the 11 industries where the exchange rate
coefficient is statistically significant, the sign of the
coefficient is negative. The exchange rate has its greatest
impact on primary metal industries [SIC 33], non—electrical
machinery [SIC 35], fabricated metal industries [SIC 34], and

miscellaneous manufacturing [SIC 39], with somewhat smaller, but
important, effects on textiles and apparel [SIC 22 and 23],
petroleum and coal products, leather and leather goods [SIC 31],

stone, clay and glass products [SIC 32], transportation equipment
[SIC 37], and instruments and related products [SIC 38]. Tobacco
                                17

manufactures [SIC 21] and Rubber and miscellaneous products [SIC

30] have negative coefficients close to .1 that are not

statistically significant. The exchange rate coefficient is
small in absolute value and statistically insignificant for food

and kindred products [SIC 20], lumber and wood products [SIC 24],
furniture and fixtures [SIC 25] and electrical and electronic

equipment [SIC 36]. Print and publishing [SIC 26] is the only
industry where the exchange rate coefficient is both

statistically significant and positive.
     Table 4 reports estimates for those same 2—digit

manufacturing industries, over a shorter time period that begins
in first quarter 1972. The differences in the exchange rate
coefficient are summarized in Table 5. For many industries the
exchange rate coefficients are larger, in absolute value, over

the shorter time period, indicating a greater sensitivity to
international trade, although the differences in the parameters
are not large, and within the range of error for the estimates.
     In Table 6 e compute weighted—average exchange rate

elasticities for the aggregate durable, non—durable, and all
manufacturing sections from the to digit estimates. These can
then be compared with the estimated elasticities for the

aggregate sectors from Table 2 to see the effects of aggregation

on the estimates. Using employment weights from 1980 and the
estimating period of 1963:1 to 1985:1, the weighted average
elasticity for the non durable goods industry is —.063, compared
with the estimated elasticity of —.034. For the durable goods
                                 18

sector, the weighted average elasticity is —.232, while the
estimated elasticity is —.206. For the manufacturing sector as a

whole, the weighted average elasticity is —.164, while the
estimated elasticity is —.140. Table 6 also calculates the
actual employment change from 1980 to 1984, and compares that to
the change that could be attributed to a 40 percent real

appreciation of the dollar. For the manufacturing sector as a
whole, a job loss of 1.3 million is attributed to a 40 percent

appreciation of the dollar, which compares to an actual job loss
c'f   about 1 million. The largest share of the employment decline
is attributed to the durable goods sector, where a 40 percent
dollar appreciation would account for a loss of 1.1 million jobs.

Of these, approximately 700 thousand jobs were lost in just two

sectors, primary metals, and non electrical machinery.
       ippendix I reports the exchange rate coefficients for

manufacturing industries disaggregated at the 2—,3—, and 4—digit
SIC code level, estimated over the period beginning in first
quarter 1972 to first quarter 1985. These include 20 industries
at the 2 digit level, 125 industries at the 3 digit level, and
176 industries at the 4 digit level. The 2—digit estimates are
the same as reported in Table 3..     Of the 125 3—digit industries,
98 have negative coefficients, and 86 are statistically
significant at the .05 level. Of the 86 significant
coefficients, 72 are negative. Of the 176 4—digit industries,
131 have negative coefficients, and 108 are statistically
significant. Of the 108 significant 4—digit coefficients, 93 are
                                 19

 neg at i ye.

       The results from the 2—digit industries are generally

consistent with 3— and 4—digit results. This is particularly
true for industry groups that have large negative coefficients at
the 2—digit level. For example, within the primary metal group,
[SIC 33], there are 15 3— and 4—digit sectors, and 14 have

negative coefficients, of which 13 are statistically significant.

Within the fabricated metal products group [SIC 34], there are 29
3— and 4—digit industry sectors. 26 of the 29 sectors have a
negative exchange rate coefficient. Among the three positive
coefficients, only ordinance and accessories [SIC 348] and
ammunition [SIC 3483) are statistically significant. Within the
non—electrical machinery group [SIC 35], there are 36 3— and 4—
digit industry sectors, of which 34 have negative exchange rate
coefficients and 31 of those 34 are statistically significant.

       Where the 2—digit classification is not statistically
significant or small in absolute value, the 3— and 4—digit
sectors have a mixture of signs, and fewer statistically

significant sectors. For example, within the electrical and
electronic equipment group [SIC 36] there are 27 3— and 4—digit
industries, of which 17 have negative coefficients, and 10 have
positive coefficients. 15 of the 27 coefficients are
statistically significant, and which 11 have negative signs.
      Table 7 reports the results for manufacturing employment

disaggregated by the fifty states and the District of Columbia,
with the estimation period running from first quarter 1972 to
                               20
first quarter 1985. Of the 51 exchange rate coefficients, 46 are
negative and 38 are statistically significant at the .05 level.

The "rust belt" states such as Michigan, Illinois, Wisconsin,
Ohio, Indiana, Pennsylvania, and Minnesota, which have mature
industrial bases, all have relatively large [in absolute size]

exchange rate coefficients, that are statistically significant at
the .01 level, as is the case with several smaller and more rural

states. Smaller [in absolute size] exchange rate coefficients
that are less statistically significant, are found in states with

growth in high technology industries, such as Connecticut, North
Carolina, New York, New Jersey, and Massachusetts. States with
important service or government sectors, such as Delaware,
Florida, Virginia and the District of Columbia, also show fewer
declines in manufacturing employment due to an exchange rate

appreciation.
     Table 8 reports the estimates for output, using 80 Federal
Reserve System Industrial Production tIP] catagories, as reported
on magnetic tape by Citibank. Of the 80 IP sectors, which
include different levels of aggregation, 56 have negative
coefficients, and 57 are statistically significant. Of the 57
significant coefficients, 43 are negative. The conditional
probability that a coefficient is negative, given that it is
significant, is somewhat smaller for the output estimates than
for the employment estimates, but the two are generally
consistent with each other.
     Table 9 compares the output results to the employment
                               21

results where both estimates are statistically significant at the

 .1 level. A direct comparison between the IF and the employment
estimates is not always possible as the IF and SIC

classifications are sometimes different. Of the 44 IF sectors
where a match—up is made to a single SIC sector, both estimates

have the same sign for 38 sectors. In addition, there are 2 IP
sectors have are matched up with 2 or more SIC sectors. In one
case the two SIC sectors have different signs. In the second

case, the IP sector has a negative sign, as do 3 of the 4
corresponding 3—digit SIC sectors. In the 38 sectors where both
estimates have the same sign, the output estimates are larger in
absolute value in 13 sectors and smaller in 22 sectors.


IV. Conclusion
     We have examined the impact of movements in the real
exchange rate on employment and output in U.S. manufacturing
industries. A simple model of supply and demand is used to
estimate the elasticity of employment or output with respect to
movements in the real exchange rate, over different time periods
and different level of disaggregation. We find that exchange
rate movements have important effects on the manufacturing
sector. The estimates of exchange rate effects for output and
employment are consistent when checked against each other and
when estimates for different levels of disaggregation are
compared. Our model does not take into consideration the

permanent effect of prolonged swings in the exchange rate on
                              22

industry sectors. Future research will consider this and other
issues.
                               23

                           REFERENCES


Branson, W. H.  (1985), "Causes of tppreciation and volatility of
     the dollar," in Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, editor,
     The U.S. Dollar——Recent Developments, Outlook, and Policy
     Options, Kansas City, pp. 33—54.

Grossman, Gene (1984), "Imports as a Cause of Injury: The Case
     of the U.S. Steel Industry," NBER Working Paper, No. 1494,
     November.


David G. Hartman (1986), "Focus on the Changing International
     Economic Environment," Focus: World Outlook, Data
     Resources, Inc., Spring.
Soloman, R. (1985), "Effects of the Strong Dollars," same volume
     as Branson (1985), pp. 65—88.
