NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE IMPACTS OF EXPANDING ACCESS TO HIGH-QUALITY PRESCHOOL
EDUCATION
Elizabeth U. Cascio
Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach
Working Paper 19735
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19735

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2013

We thank Patricia Anderson, Jesse Rothstein, our discussants, Caroline Hoxby and Alan Krueger,
the editors, David Romer and Justin Wolfers, and other participants in the Fall 2013 Brookings Panel
on Economic Activity for helpful comments, and Mary Zaki, Chase Eck, and Gardiner Kreglow for
helpful research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Elizabeth U. Cascio and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Impacts of Expanding Access to High-Quality Preschool Education
Elizabeth U. Cascio and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach
NBER Working Paper No. 19735
December 2013
JEL No. I21,J22
ABSTRACT
President Obama’s “Preschool for All” initiative calls for dramatic increases in the number of 4 year
olds enrolled in public preschool programs and in the quality of these programs nationwide. The proposed
program shares many characteristics with the universal preschools that have been offered in Georgia
and Oklahoma since the 1990s. This study draws together data from multiple sources to estimate the
impacts of these “model” state programs on preschool enrollment and a broad set of family and child
outcomes. We find that the state programs have increased the preschool enrollment rates of children
from lower- and higher-income families alike. For lower-income families, our findings also suggest
that the programs have increased the amount of time mothers and children spend together on activities
such as reading, the chances that mothers work, and children’s test performance as late as eighth grade.
For higher-income families, however, we find that the programs have shifted children from private
to public preschools, resulting in less of an impact on overall enrollment but a reduction in childcare
expenses, and have had no positive effect on children’s later test scores.

Elizabeth U. Cascio
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
6106 Rockefeller Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
elizabeth.u.cascio@dartmouth.edu
Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach
School of Education and Social Policy
Northwestern University
Annenberg Hall, Room 205
2120 Campus Drive
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
dws@northwestern.edu

In his 2013 State of the Union address, President Obama proposed sweeping reform to
preschool education in the United States. His “Preschool for All” initiative calls for dramatic
increases in the number of 4 year olds in public preschool programs and in the quality of these
programs nationwide. The proposed program would be funded by a $75 billion federal
investment over 10 years, to be roughly matched by states, with federal dollars allocated to states
based on the share of their 4 year olds from low- and moderate-income families.1 Local school
districts and other providers would be responsible for implementation, but in order to receive
federal funding, states would have to adopt certain quality benchmarks, including early learning
standards, teacher qualifications, and a plan for assessment.2 The new preschools would be free
for children from low- and moderate-income families and accessible to children from higherincome families at a cost to be determined by individual states.
A large body of prior research suggests that there is a high rate of return to early
childhood education among children from low-income families. Prior studies of the long-run
impacts of targeted preschool programs—for example the Perry Preschool Project and the
federally funded Head Start program—find that preschool has not only private returns in terms of
increased lifetime earnings, but also public returns through reductions in crime and use of public
assistance. Because of these externalities to preschool enrollment, economists would tend to
agree that there is a role for public policy to expand preschool access.
The Obama plan builds on existing public preschool programs operated by state
governments, which have greatly expanded over the past 30 years. Today, several states,
including Tennessee, North Carolina, New Jersey, Washington, and Kentucky, have public

1

Low- to moderate-income is defined as income at or below 200 percent of the federal poverty line.
The Obama plan also includes expansions of Head Start for low-income 3 year olds and Early Head Start for
younger children, incentives for states to adopt full-day kindergarten classes, and extension of voluntary home
visiting programs by nurses and social workers.
2

1

programs that meet many of the quality benchmarks in the Obama plan but serve a small share of
preschool-aged students. Other states, including Wisconsin, Texas, and Florida, have programs
that score high on access but low on quality. Very few states—most famously, Georgia and
Oklahoma—have state-funded preschool programs that score high on both accounts.
The “Preschool for All” proposal can be thought of as pushing all states toward the
Georgia and Oklahoma model—an accessible preschool program with high standards. Existing
evidence on the impacts of the Georgia and Oklahoma programs is focused on short- to mediumterm outcomes, and the findings are mixed. Gormley and Gayer (2005) find evidence that
disadvantaged preschool attendees in Tulsa, Oklahoma score higher on tests at the end of the
preschool year.3 Fitzpatrick (2008) finds that the Georgia program increases test scores of
disadvantaged children as late as fourth grade, but the effects appear smaller and less widespread
than those from the Tulsa study. Fitzpatrick (2010) also finds no evidence that either of these
state programs increased the labor supply of mothers of 4 year olds, despite providing a 100
percent price subsidy for childcare on the extensive margin of employment.
To our knowledge, nothing is known to date about the impacts of these programs on child
outcomes measured later than fourth grade, or on measures of family well-being or behavior
beyond maternal employment. This study addresses this gap in the literature, bringing together
data from multiple sources to estimate the impacts of the Georgia and Oklahoma programs on a
broad range of family and child outcomes. Our baseline empirical approach compares outcomes
in these two “model” states to the rest of the United States, before and after the introduction of
their universal preschool programs, in a differences-in-differences (DD) framework. For
outcomes where only more recent data are available, we take an alternative DD approach,

3

Using a similar research design as Gormley and Gayer (2005), described in detail below, Wong, et al. (2008) also
find evidence that the Oklahoma preschool program has improved children’s end-of-preschool test performance.

2

comparing families with 5 year olds and families with 4 year olds, in Georgia and Oklahoma
versus the rest of the United States. Where possible, we also combine the two strategies in a
triple-difference framework, exploiting both the timing and age-targeting of the programs.
Throughout, we present separate analyses by a child’s family background, as the alternatives to
state programs might be weaker and the marginal returns to human capital investment higher for
children from lower-income families. Instead of using family income directly, we present
separate analyses by maternal education, which is a strong correlate of family income that is not
directly affected by the implementation of universal preschool programs and is observed for
most children in our datasets.
We first show the stark difference in the effects of these programs on preschool
enrollment patterns by maternal education. Among children whose mothers have no more than a
high school degree, who are much less likely to be enrolled in preschool in the absence of a
public option, we find that the Georgia and Oklahoma programs have sharply increased the
likelihood of preschool enrollment at age 4; our DD estimates imply that the preschool
enrollment rates of children with less-educated mothers in Georgia and Oklahoma are now
around 19 or 20 percentage points higher than they would have otherwise been. On the other
hand, the same empirical approach suggests that 4 or 5 out of every 10 program enrollees whose
mothers have at least some college education would otherwise have been in private preschool.
As a result, the impact of the programs on their overall preschool attendance has been more
muted, at an 11 to 14 percentage-point gain.
We then turn to the impacts of these state “model” programs on the behavior and wellbeing of families with 4-year-old children, continuing to split the data by maternal education. We
hypothesize that the programs could affect how much time or money parents invest in children,

3

which could contribute to their academic achievement independently of preschool attendance
itself. Our findings here are less precise, but align with those described above. Higher-education
families, for whom private preschool enrollment falls significantly, see a significant reduction in
childcare spending. A back-of-the-envelope calculation based on our estimates suggests that this
spending reduction amounts to an income transfer of between $3,000 and $5,600 for families that
switch out of private programs. By contrast, lower-education families, who gain more from the
program in overall preschool participation, show larger declines in overall maternal time spent
with children. However, this finding is counterbalanced by an impact of the program on
“quality” time between mothers and children in lower-education families, spent reading, playing,
doing art projects, and talking.
In addition to its contribution to children’s human capital formation, preschool serves as
childcare. Indeed, another rationale for preschool expansions is the role that they would play as a
childcare subsidy. An economic labor supply model frames a mother’s decision to work as a
function of her net wage, that is, the difference between her wage and the hourly price of
childcare. Reducing the cost of preschool effectively increases a mother’s net wage, making it
more likely that she will participate in the labor force, and in turn, contribute to family income.4
We find some evidence of an increase in the probability that lower-education mothers are
working when their children are 4 years old. However, it appears to be confined to the first few
years after the program is in place, and estimates are relatively sensitive to changes in the
specification.
Finally, we turn to these programs’ reduced-form effects on children’s human capital,
presenting separate analyses by a student’s eligibility for free or reduced-price school lunch since

4

Among mothers already participating in the labor force, the childcare subsidy will change the relative price of
leisure and so the net impact on hours worked will depend on whether the income or substitution effect dominates.

4

maternal education is not reported in the underlying data. While the programs are still too young
for us to estimate their truly long-term impacts, we are able to explore child outcomes as late as
eighth grade with the benefit of more recent data than previously available.5 For lower-income
children, the evidence points to an impact of the programs on both reading and math scores in
fourth grade, and while the effect sizes diminish substantially by eighth grade, they remain
sizable in the case of math. However, despite the fact that some children from higher-income
families were more likely to have attended preschool, while others were in families effectively
receiving sizable income transfers at age 4, their academic achievement does not appear to have
improved on average in either grade. While we cannot be completely certain of why this is, one
possibility is that the programs induced a movement away from private preschools that were
relatively high quality, leading to negative effects on the human capital of “switchers.”
On one hand, these findings would appear to suggest that an untargeted national
preschool program would result in substantial substitution from private to public preschools,
driving up costs and limiting program efficacy. On the other hand, the presence of higher-income
children in the universal preschool classrooms in Georgia and Oklahoma—which may help to
attract better teachers or have positive spillovers for lower-income children—may be what truly
makes these programs “high quality.” Regardless, our cost-benefit analysis in Section V suggests
that the benefits could outweigh the costs even with the substantial shifts from private to public
preschool programs that we estimate.
I.

Background
The “Preschool for All” initiative proposes a bold change in the role of the federal

government in early childhood education. However, it builds on existing state efforts in
preschool education and attempts to garner support from the large and well-identified literature
5

The Georgia and Oklahoma preschool programs went universal in fall 1995 and fall 1998, respectively.

5

on the long-term impacts of targeted preschool programs. In this section, we describe these state
programs, elaborate on the small but growing literature on their impacts, and discuss key
findings from the broader literature on preschool education.
I.A.

State-funded preschool programs
Policy efforts at the state level have notably increased public preschool enrollment over

the last 30 years. In 1980, only four states had subsidized the provision of preschool programs,
and these programs were quite small.6 But in the five-year period from 1983 and 1987 alone, 11
states started their first preschool programs. Another eight states started programs over the next
five-year period, and by 2011, public preschool programs existed in 40 states and the District of
Columbia. Figure 1 (right axis) plots the cumulative fraction of states that had funded preschool
programs by year. Increases in the public preschool participation rates of 4 year olds as measured
in the October Current Population Survey (CPS) School Enrollment Supplements (left axis) track
this state subsidization activity quite well, increasing by almost 25 percentage points between
1980 and 2011. Much of the public preschool enrollment of 4 year olds prior to 1980 in the
October CPS may be accounted for by Head Start, the already existing federal preschool
program that targets children from low-income families. The Head Start enrollment rate of 4 year
olds (left axis) has risen little since the early 1990s.
There is significant variation across state preschool programs in who is eligible to attend,
both in terms of age and in terms of targeting. Most programs admit only 4 year olds, though
approximately 13 percent of enrollment consists of 3 year olds, according to surveys conducted

6

According to data compiled by the NIEER, these states were California (1965), New York (1966), Maryland
(1980), and Oklahoma (1980). NIEER uses several criteria to identify state preschool programs. For example, the
program has to be “funded, controlled, and directed by the state,” serve preschool-aged children, and focus on early
childhood education in a “group learning” environment and “be distinct from the state’s system for subsidized child
care” (Barnett et al., 2012; p. 21). As a result, the dates cited here may disagree with those reported elsewhere, such
as by the Education Commission of the States.

6

by the National Institute for Early Education Research (NIEER) over the past decade. Most
programs also target children from low-income families, though the income threshold for
eligibility varies across states, and some state programs target children who have developmental
delays or other risk factors regardless of income. Access is universal only in a handful of states,
the longest-standing and most studied of which have been Georgia (universal access began in
1995) and Oklahoma (universal access began in 1998)—the states that are also the focus of this
study.
The state programs differ not only in terms of access, but also in terms of commonly-used
metrics of quality. For the past decade, the NIEER has compiled state standards for preschool
programs—related to curriculum, teacher education, class size, and support services—into an
index with a maximum value of 10, giving each of 10 quality metrics equal weight; many of
these metrics are incentivized by the “Preschool for All” initiative.7 Figure 2 presents a
scatterplot of this index against NIEER’s internal estimate of the share of 4 year olds in statesponsored preschool programs as of the 2011-2012 school year, the most recent with data
available; dot sizes represent the Census estimates of the state 4-year-old population, as reported
by the NIEER. There appears to be a slight tradeoff between access and quality according to this
index, though the slope of the fitted line is not statistically significantly different from zero at
conventional levels.8 There is substantial variation in the index at all levels of access. For
example, the programs in Georgia and Oklahoma, as well as West Virginia and the District of
Columbia, are not only high-access, but also high-quality according to the index. However, other
7

The 10 quality metrics are as follows: program has comprehensive early learning standards; teachers are required
to have a BA; teachers are required to have specialized training in preschool education; assistant teachers required to
have a Child Development Associates (CDA) Degree (or equivalent); at least 15 hours per year of in-service
required; the maximum class size is 20 students; staff to child ratios are 1-to-10 or better; program offers vision,
hearing, health, and one support service; program offers at least one meal; program offers site visits.
8
The slope of the fitted line (heteroskedasticity-robust standard error), weighting by 4-year-old population, is -0.033
(0.025). Unweighted, the slope estimate is -0.023 (0.015).

7

states with significant access, such as Florida, Texas, Vermont, and Wisconsin, score low on the
index, and there is significant variation in this measure of quality across states where access is
quite restricted.
Because our empirical analysis will focus on estimating the impacts of the Georgia and
Oklahoma programs, it is useful to describe these programs in more detail.9 In 2011-2012, the
NIEER estimates that enrollment rates of 4 year olds in state-funded preschool in Georgia and
Oklahoma were 59 percent and 74 percent, respectively, with both programs serving 4 year olds
exclusively.10 Both states also score high on the NIEER index, most recently receiving scores of
8 and 9, respectively (Barnett et al., 2012). For example, both states require comprehensive
learning standards, and that a classroom’s lead teacher holds a bachelor’s degree, is certified in
early childhood education, and participates in annual in-service training.11 Until recently, both
states also mandated that the student-to-teacher ratio in preschool classrooms be no higher than
10-to-1, and that class sizes be no higher than 20.12
While these programs are among the highest in access and quality in the nation according
to the NIEER, they differ from one another in several respects. Oklahoma’s program is based in
local school systems, and funding runs from state governments to local school districts that can
choose to run half-day programs, full-day programs, or both. Spending per child is almost
$7,427, with $3,652 coming from state sources and the remainder from a combination of local
9

We choose not to include West Virginia, since its program has only recently become high-quality on the NIEER
scale. For example, early learning standards were adopted in West Virginia in 2004-2005, but have been in place in
Georgia and Oklahoma since 1996-1997 (Barnett et al., 2012). Likewise, Washington D.C.’s program only began in
2008-09. See Online Appendix A for discussion of how our findings change when Washington D.C. and West
Virginia are recoded as treatment states.
10
We do not use the NIEER estimates of enrollment rates in the analysis to follow, because the earliest available
data are from the 2001-2002 school year.
11
The Oklahoma program loses one point on the index because it does not require assistant teachers to have a CDA
(or equivalent).
12
Georgia has recently lost two points on the index on this account, currently mandating a maximum class size of
22, and a maximum teacher-student ratio of 1-to-11. A recent state-commissioned evaluation of the Georgia
program characterizes its classroom practices as medium quality (Peisner-Feinberg, Schaaf, and LaFollett, 2013).

8

and federal contributions. On the other hand, Georgia’s state preschool program often runs
through private childcare centers, and total spending per child is only $3,490 and is entirely from
state sources. Since both models are possible under the plan, we focus on estimating the average
effect across the two programs throughout, giving each program equal weight.13
I.B.

Previous research on the Georgia and Oklahoma programs
Given the policy relevance of the universal preschool programs in Georgia and

Oklahoma, it is not surprising that they have already been topics of study. The primary area of
interest has been children’s academic achievement. In an evaluation of the Oklahoma program
using data from the city of Tulsa, Gormley and Gayer (2005) leverage the sharp cutoff in
eligibility to participate in the program based on a child’s date of birth and find positive impacts
of participation on cognitive measures at the end of the preschool year (see also Gormley,
Phillips, and Gayer, 2008). Impacts are largest for blacks and Hispanics and low-income
children, with little improvement for whites. Wong et al. (2008) use the same research design but
different data to estimate the effects of the Oklahoma program, also finding improvements in
Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test scores at the end of the preschool year.
Less is known about outcomes in later grades. Fitzpatrick (2008) evaluates the middleterm impacts of Georgia’s universal preschool program using fourth grade outcomes measured in
the National Assessment for Educational Progress (NAEP). Using a cross-state DD approach,
she finds positive effects on fourth-grade NAEP test scores and the probability of being ongrade. The impacts are most consistently positive among disadvantaged, non-urban students, and
more mixed among other demographic groups. They also appear smaller than the effects found
in the Tulsa study, but this is not surprising given the pattern of “fadeout” in test score effects

13

We discuss differences in some program impacts by state below.

9

that pervades the early education evaluation literature. As described below, fadeout does not
preclude positive impacts on a child’s longer-term economic and social well-being.
These impacts on children’s human capital are reduced-form, reflecting not only program
participation itself but also potential changes in parental investments in children in response to
the program. The literature on this mechanism is by comparison quite thin. Using a regressiondiscontinuity (RD) design similar to that used in the Tulsa studies, Fitzpatrick (2010) finds no
statistically significant positive impacts of a child’s eligibility for state-funded preschool on his
or her mother’s chances of working. Thus, most women appear to be infra-marginal with respect
to the price subsidy for childcare implicit in these programs, i.e., many may switch from private
preschools and other childcare arrangements to the state program without changing their
employment status. As a result, the programs also do not appear to change family income, either
by reducing public assistance receipt or increasing maternal earnings, when a child is 4 years
old.14
We believe we are the first to leverage both the Georgia and Oklahoma expansions in the
same DD framework to estimate their impacts on child and family outcomes.15 There are some
advantages to a DD approach over an RD one for the question at hand. One is that the
“counterfactual” to the universal program is captured by the experiences of 4 year olds in other
14

A parallel literature exists on the impacts of universal kindergarten programs for 5 year olds. Exploiting variation
across states in the timing of first state funding for kindergarten in the 1960s and 1970s, Cascio (2009a) finds little
evidence to suggest that kindergarten improved a child’s long-term social and economic well-being, while Cascio
(2009b) finds an impact on maternal labor supply, but only for single mothers with no children under the age of 5.
On the other hand, attempting to leverage age eligibility by using quarter of birth as an instrument for kindergarten
attendance in 1980, Gelbach (2002) finds more widespread increases in maternal employment in response to
kindergarten, although Fitzpatrick (2012) provides evidence that estimates of maternal employment impacts using
the quarter-of-birth instrument are quite different from those arrived at using an RD design based on exact date of
birth and school entry cutoff birthdates. While interesting, these studies are arguably less relevant to the question at
hand, given that the kindergarten programs under study were probably lower-quality than the current Georgia and
Oklahoma preschool programs, that the counterfactual to kindergarten enrollment in the 1960s and 1970s and even
1980 was different than the counterfactual to preschool enrollment today, and that 5 year olds are at a different point
in development than 4 year olds.
15
Thus, we focus on the demand side. In a recent study, Bassok, Fitzpatrick, and Loeb (2012) use a DD approach to
estimate the effects of these particular programs on childcare providers.

10

states after the initiatives are passed. In an RD approach, by contrast, the counterfactual is
approximated by the experiences of children in the same state at a given point in time who will
enter preschool the following year. To the extent that the alternatives would be changing over
time—e.g., enrollment in private preschools might be increasing in control states—a DD
approach using other states as controls might better represent would have occurred if the
program had not been introduced.16 In addition, using an RD approach, one can only evaluate
short-term child outcomes, like end-of-preschool test scores, or contemporaneous outcomes, like
maternal employment when a child is 4 years old.17
A key contribution of the present study is thus to estimate these programs’ impacts on
child outcomes beyond the fourth grade test scores considered by Fitzpatrick (2008). Another
contribution is to estimate effects on contemporaneous, family-level outcomes beyond maternal
labor supply. Much of what is known about the impacts of preschool programs on outcomes such
as these is based on evidence from small-scale experiments in preschool education and the
larger-scale federally funded Head Start program.
I.C.

Previous research on the impacts of targeted preschool programs
Arguably the most famous experimental preschool program was the Perry Preschool

program, a 2-year intervention in the early 1960s involving half-day school attendance and
weekly home visits for extremely disadvantaged 3- and 4-year-old African American children

16

Even state programs lower down the ladders of access or quality have been found to have positive effects on
children’s outcomes, e.g. the low-quality, high-access program in Florida (Figlio and Roth, 2009) and the highquality, low-access programs in North Carolina (Ladd, Muschkin, and Dodge, 2012) and Tennessee (Lipsey, et al.,
2013a). The RD study by Wong et al. (2008) also uncovers impacts of the preschool programs in Michigan, New
Jersey, South Carolina, and West Virginia on print awareness at the end of the preschool year. In Tennessee, where
the evaluation relied on a randomized control design, there were no longer measurable positive impacts on cognitive
skills by the end of first grade but there was some evidence of lasting gains on non-cognitive measures (Lipsey, et
al., 2013b).
17
Another drawback of the RD approach is that children on either side of the age cutoffs have different ages relative
to their classmates. To the extent that these peer effects influence outcomes, the estimated policy impact may be
biased.

11

living in Ypsilanti, Michigan.18 Students were randomly assigned to receive treatment or not, and
follow-up data on the participants have been collected through age 40. Initial findings from Perry
showed increases in IQ scores for the treated group, however, these initial gains did not persist,
and by age 10, there was no measured difference in IQ scores between the treatment and
comparison group (Gramlich, 1986; Schweinhart et al., 2005). Nonetheless, the Perry treatment
students performed statistically significantly better in school: they were absent fewer days and
less likely to have been assigned to special education, had fewer failing grades and higher high
school grade point averages, were more likely to graduate from high school, and generally
reported more positive attitudes toward schooling. These improvements persisted into adulthood,
when the treatment group was statistically significantly more likely to be employed and less
likely either to have been arrested or have received transfer payments such as cash welfare or
food stamps.19 When the improvements in long-term outcomes are monetized and discounted
back to the start of the program, the benefits outweigh the costs by an estimated eight to one ratio
(Heckman, 2006).20 Recent work by Heckman, Pinto, and Savelyev (2013) finds that the program
induced changes in personality skills, which in turn explain a large portion of the improvement in
adult outcomes.
The high rate of return to Perry probably represents an upper bound on the return to any
universal program for disadvantaged children today. While the Perry treatment was high quality
in many of the same respects as the Georgia and Oklahoma programs, the alternatives to

18

More specifically, the Perry program involved school attendance for 3 hours per day, 5 days a week from October
through May, and weekly home visits for 90 minutes by a teacher to discuss a child’s progress and instruct parents
on how to provide an academically enriching environment at home (reading to children, counting with them, etc.).
19
A similar pattern of findings has emerged for other preschool experiments, for example North Carolina’s
Abecedarian Project (Masse and Barnett, 2002; Anderson, 2008).
20
Recent reanalysis using different methods to account for multiple hypothesis testing by Anderson (2008) generally
confirms these findings, but finds that the long-term benefits in Perry are concentrated among female participants.
Heckman, Moon, Pinto, Savelyev and Yavitz (2010) calculate rates of return separately by gender, and find that
returns are significantly different from zero for both males and females.

12

participating in any program for lower-income children have expanded dramatically over time.
Today, not only can lower-income children attend Head Start; they have access to some targeted
state funded programs, as described above, and some find themselves in center-based or informal
childcare arrangements while their mothers work. The marginal benefit of attending a highquality program for low-income children today would therefore likely be smaller than it was in
the 1960s. The participants in Perry were also extraordinarily disadvantaged, and marginal
investments in their human capital might have had high returns.
Based in part on the early successes of Perry, Head Start was started in 1965 as part of
the “War on Poverty.” Head Start is a large, public preschool program for low-income children
that is generally thought to be lower quality than the Perry program, yet higher quality than the
childcare that is typically available to low-income parents (Currie, 2001). To put relative quality
into context, Head Start has been estimated to cost more than many state-funded preschool
programs, but less than Perry and other high-quality preschool programs (Currie, 2001; Barnett,
2001). However, Head Start ranks lower on the NIEER scale than many state-funded preschool
programs, averaging a score just below 5 (Espinosa, 2002).21 The program also reaches further
up the income distribution than Perry did, and estimates of its longer-term impacts have been
drawn not only from the earliest cohorts to attend, for whom the alternatives were relatively
limited (Currie and Thomas, 1995; Garces, Thomas, and Currie, 2002), but also from among
more recent cohorts with a wider range of alternatives (Deming, 2009).
The first randomized evaluation of Head Start, the Head Start Impact Study (HSIS), was
conducted in 2002. Head Start participants in the HSIS saw faster improvements in language and
21

For example, Head Start teachers tend to have relatively weak academic credentials. However, the quality of Head
Start may have improved recently in response to recent policy initiatives. Currently 56 percent of Head Start
teachers hold a bachelor’s degree, and another 30 percent hold an associate’s degree, up from 30 and 16 percent,
respectively, in 1999. Over the same time period, the average child-to-teacher ratio dropped from 19.8 to 17.6, and
the average staff turnover rate dropped from 16.8 to 13.2 (Bassok, 2012).

13

literacy skills than their non-Head Start counterparts. However, these improvements dissipated
quickly so that there were no measurable differences in the test scores of Head Start and control
children as of third grade (Puma, et al., 2012). Unfortunately, the HSIS was in the field too
recently to know whether children randomized into Head Start will have better non-test
outcomes over the longer term.
The quasi-experimental literature to date on the longer-term impacts of Head Start is
however promising in this regard. The predominant research design in this literature has been to
compare outcomes across siblings who were exposed to different preschool environments (i.e.
Head Start, another preschool, or no preschool). Much of the within-family variation appears to
be idiosyncratic and may be driven by the availability of slots at local programs, which are often
over-subscribed.22 Findings from sibling comparisons suggest that Head Start participation,
relative to attending either no preschool or a non-Head Start preschool, has a substantial positive
effect on vocabulary test scores during elementary school and makes a child less likely to repeat
a grade (Currie and Thomas, 1995; Deming, 2009). Estimates are only about 20 percent smaller
than the Perry Preschool impacts. While test score gains fade to a fraction of their initial levels
by ages 11 to 14, during their teen years Head Start participants are less likely to have ever been
charged with a crime or be a teenage parent and are more likely to complete high school and
attend college as young adults (Deming, 2009; Garces, Thomas, and Currie, 2002).23
The pattern of findings in both Perry and the quasi-experimental Head Start literature—
strong contemporaneous impacts, followed by smaller medium-term impacts, culminating in
strong adult impacts—has been documented repeatedly in the early childhood evaluation
22

On the other hand, to the extent that a change in a family’s economic circumstances renders one sibling eligible
and another ineligible, this approach may understate the impact of the program.
23
Ludwig and Miller (2007) also find evidence that Head Start participation increases educational attainment,
exploiting the sharp difference in special grant-writing assistance afforded to counties with similar poverty rates at
the program’s inception.

14

literature.24 For this reason, it would be ideal to measure impacts on longer-term child outcomes
besides test scores. Unfortunately, the Georgia and Oklahoma programs were introduced too
recently for us to estimate their impacts on adult outcomes. However, we see the start of the
same pattern of program impacts in our data, in test score impacts that fade over time.
By comparison to the literature on child outcomes, the literature on the impacts of Perry
and Head Start on families is quite thin. Using data and random variation in Head Start
participation from the 2002 HSIS, Gelber and Isen (2013) find that Head Start induces parents to
increase their involvement in their children’s learning, as measured by increases in time spent
reading to kids, more visits to cultural events, and more time spent with nonresident fathers.
These improvements in the home environment persist even after Head Start ends.
II.

The Preschool Experience
For the “Preschool for All” initiative to have an impact on children’s human capital, it

must first affect their preschool enrollment. The first-order question for our analysis is therefore:
How have the state “model” programs in Georgia and Oklahoma affected children’s preschool
experiences? It stands to reason that these programs have unambiguously increased the chances
that disadvantaged children attend preschool and the average quality of preschools attended,
given the constraints faced by lower-income families. However, a substantial fraction of these
programs’ budgets could subsidize higher-income families, where children may already have a
relatively high probability of attending preschool, and for whom program quality may already be
quite high. For these children, there is not only less scope to increase preschool enrollment, but
24

James Heckman and his coauthors (e.g., Heckman, 2006; Knudsen et al., 2006) have put forth a helpful
framework to explain this pattern, relying on a distinction between cognitive and non-cognitive skills. While
cognitive skills encompass the ability to add, subtract, read, and so on, and are readily measured on traditional
standardized tests taken by school-age children, so-called “non-cognitive” skills are less likely to be measured on
achievement tests and include social, behavioral, and emotional skills, such as persistence, behavior, and the ability
to cooperate. Both types of skills are important inputs to adult outcomes like employment, wages, marriage, and
criminal activity. The hypothesized mechanism through which long-term gains are realized is through a permanent
improvement in non-cognitive skills that persists after the temporary gains in cognitive skills have faded.

15

the private programs “crowded-out” may also be at least as high quality as the state program,
opening the possibility of negative impacts on human capital.25
Our first analytical challenge is therefore to estimate how these programs have affected
preschool experiences, and how this has varied by a child’s family background. The best
available data for this purpose are from the October CPS School Enrollment Supplements. The
October supplements provide annual data back to 1968 (with complete information on state of
residence dating to 1977) on the preschool enrollment of 4 year olds, both overall and by school
type, public or private.26 We use the school type question to provide insight into substitution
from private to public preschools, noting that the possible inclination of survey respondents to
classify state-funded preschool as private enrollment in Georgia, where the program operates in
part through private centers, should bias us against finding evidence in favor of it.
Importantly, because entire households are surveyed, the October supplements allow us
to match children to other family members, and so obtain information on a family’s current
socioeconomic status (SES). While the “Preschool for All” initiative conceives of SES as family
income, family income itself would be an outcome of the program if it were to change maternal
employment—a question that we address below. We therefore think a more desirable sample
split is based on a strong predetermined predictor of family income. In this spirit, we split the
sample into two maternal education categories—children of mothers with no more than a high

25

This is of course not to say that choice is welfare reducing, since the reduction in human capital will be offset by
the family’s lower spending on childcare. We explore the impacts of these programs on consumption of childcare
services in the next section.
26
Ideally, we would have detailed enough information to classify children into “school entry cohorts” based on their
birthday and the minimum age of kindergarten entry in their state. While information on school entry regulations is
available, we only know a child’s age as of October. Fortunately, the vast majority of children who are 4 years old in
October would be eligible for preschool rather than kindergarten. In Georgia and Oklahoma, for instance, children
must be 4 years old (5 years old) by September 1 to enter preschool (kindergarten).

16

school degree and children of mothers with at least some college education.27 Results are
substantively similar if we instead stratify on paternal education or whether a family’s incometo-poverty ratio is above or below 185 percent, the cutoff for reduced-price lunch (see Online
Appendix B).
II.A.

National Trends in Preschool Enrollment
To set ideas, Figure 3 shows national trends in public preschool enrollment, private

preschool enrollment, and enrollment in any preschool (the sum of public and private) from 1968
through 2011, both for the population of 4 year olds overall and for each of the two maternal
education categories. As noted in reference to Figure 1, the overall national trend in public
preschool enrollment (solid black line in panel a) lines up well with the introduction of state
funding for preschool. Given the targeted nature of most of these programs, it is not surprising
that the increases in public preschool enrollment have been greater among the children of women
with no more than a high school degree (solid green line) than among the children of women
with some college or more (dashed orange line). That said, by the end of the sample period, the
children of more educated women were still more likely be attending any preschool, public or
private (panel c), continuing their long tradition of being more likely to attend a private program
(panel b).
But more striking is the fact that private preschool enrollment rates of 4 year olds
declined markedly over roughly the same period that state-funded preschool programs expanded.
Regardless of maternal education, private preschool enrollment rates in 2011 were not much
higher than they were in 1968, having peaked right before the recession in the early 1990s. While
27

We have also split the sample into four maternal education categories (high school dropout, high school degree
only, some college only, and college degree or more) and found that dividing the sample into two groups was a
parsimonious way of capturing the patterns in the data. While the college-educated share of mothers has increased
dramatically over the sample period (see, for example, Goldin, Katz, and Kuziemko, 2006), maternal education did
not change in response to the Georgia and Oklahoma programs (see Online Appendix Table B-1).

17

not a formal estimate of the extent of substitution between public and private programs, Table 1
provides some useful accounting. Between 1985 and 2010, the private preschool enrollment rate
of 4 year olds whose mothers have at least some college education fell by 8.6 percentage points;
among 4 year olds whose mothers have not more than a high school degree, the decline in the
private enrollment rate was almost as large, at 7 percentage points. The declines in private
enrollment among children in these groups represent significant shares—41 and 25 percent,
respectively—of their increases in public preschool enrollment over the same period. As a result,
the groups’ gains in overall enrollment between 1985 and 2010 have been much more limited
than the expansion of public enrollment alone would suggest: gains of 12.6 percentage points
and 21.1 percentage points, respectively.
Although suggestive of “crowd-out,” the declines in private preschool enrollment over
the past 25 years might have been caused by other factors, such as the stagnation in maternal
labor force participation over the same time period.28 Indeed, suggesting a link between maternal
employment and private enrollment, the increases in private enrollment through 1985 occurred
over a period of rising maternal employment rates (see Table 1).29 While this too is only a
correlation in two national time series, it reminds us that private preschools also provide
childcare, the demand for which is driven by factors beyond the availability of public
alternatives. We now turn to our formal estimates of the preschool enrollment responses to the
Georgia and Oklahoma programs, using an empirical strategy that has the potential to account
for those other factors.
II.B.

Impacts of the Georgia and Oklahoma Programs on Preschool Enrollment

28

Increases in the state-mandated age at which children are eligible to enter kindergarten since the mid-1980s and in
the practice of “red-shirting” (delaying a child’s entrance into school) (Deming and Dynarski, 2008) are other
potential contributors to the downward trend in private preschool enrollment of 4 year olds shown in Figure 3.
29
A full time series of maternal employment rates is provided in Figure 5, panel a.

18

EMPIRICAL STRATEGY. Our analysis separates out the trends in preschool enrollment in
Georgia and Oklahoma from those for states elsewhere in the country, using the October CPS
supplements from 1977 forward. With these data in hand, we can compare the changes in
preschool enrollment in these “model” states around the introduction of their universal preschool
initiatives to changes in preschool enrollment in the rest of the country over the same period.
Thus, instead of attempting to measure and control for all of the other factors affecting private
preschool enrollment, we assume that the effects of these other factors are accurately embodied
in what happened to preschool enrollment in other states.30
In its simplest incarnation, this quasi-experimental DD approach is captured in the
following model:
(1)

y st   post st   s   t   st ,

where yst is a preschool enrollment rate of 4 year olds in state s in October of year t (in percent
terms); postst is an indicator variable set to one in Georgia from 1995 forward and in Oklahoma
from 1998 forward, zero otherwise; and γs and δt are vectors of state and year fixed effects,
respectively. The state fixed effects account for fixed differences in preschool enrollment rates
across states, while the year fixed effects account for common shocks to the preschool
enrollment rate (e.g., shocks to private preschool demand stemming from the business cycle). In
some specifications, we also add a vector of state-by-year-varying controls, including child
demographics and the state unemployment rate. εst is an error term, which represents unobserved
determinants of enrollment rates.

30

Using other states in the southern census region to proxy for these other influences, our DD point estimates for
enrollment and many of the other outcomes under study tend to be diminished in magnitude, but the general pattern
of findings still holds (see Online Appendix C). The decline in the magnitude of effects is unsurprising given that
other southern states have made substantial investments in preschool, as suggested by Figure 2.

19

Estimation of this simple model will identify the coefficient of interest, θ, only if none of
the unobservables is correlated with the adoption of universal preschool. This assumption would
be violated if, for example, the private preschool enrollment rates in Georgia and Oklahoma
would have been on a steeper downward trajectory than elsewhere even without starting
universal preschool programs. In this case, the estimates would imply more “crowd-out” as a
result of universal preschool than has actually taken place. The model is also restrictive in the
sense that it assumes that the effects of universal preschool on enrollment rates were both
immediate and persistent.
We therefore begin by estimating a less restrictive “event-study” model, which allows us
to test whether the “model” states were on different enrollment trajectories prior to introducing
their programs, as well as whether the impacts of these programs have remained constant as they
have matured. In this model, we replace the postst indicator in equation (1) with a series of
indicator variables for year relative to the year that universal preschool was introduced. Instead
of creating an indicator for each individual year relative to the initiative, we create dummies for
3-year bins to reduce noise. So that the coefficients are identified, we leave omit the dummy for
the three years immediately prior to the initiative (representing 1992-94 in Georgia and 1995-97
in Oklahoma).31 This model provides us with transparent graphical evidence on the credibility of
model (1)’s identifying assumptions.
FINDINGS. Figure 4 plots the event-study estimates for each of the three preschool
enrollment rates. To facilitate the comparison across family background, we present the
coefficient estimates for a given variable for children from both maternal education categories in
the same graph, offsetting each series to the right and left of the midpoint of the relevant interval

31

The first and last indicators represent all prior and subsequent years, respectively.

20

for ease of viewing. The capped lines around the coefficient estimates represent 90 percent
confidence intervals.32
For children whose mothers have a high school degree or less (solid circles), the
introduction of the Georgia and Oklahoma programs appears to have increased enrollment in
public preschools by 15 to 20 percentage points relative to expectations based on public
enrollment trends elsewhere in the country (panel a). The point estimates are somewhat higher
among children whose mothers have more education (open circles), centered around a 25 to 30
percentage-point impact. For both groups of children, each of the post-program coefficient
estimates is statistically significant, and there is little evidence to suggest that the effects of the
program on public enrollment have systematically grown or shrunk over time.33
The remainder of the figure then provides evidence of differences by family background
in the extent of substitution between public and private preschool in response to the initiatives.
Children with lower-education mothers did not see faster declines in private preschool
enrollment than experienced elsewhere in the country after universal preschool programs were
introduced (panel b). As a result, their overall enrollment increase tracks almost one-for-one with
the increase in public enrollment (panel c). On the other hand, for the higher maternal education
group, private preschool enrollment declined between 10 and 20 percentage points more than
expected based on national trends (panel b), greatly diminishing the overall enrollment impact
(panel c) relative to program take-up (panel a). On net, both groups of children were more likely

32

Regressions are weighted by the number of observations in the October CPS micro-data used to calculate the
enrollment rate, and standard errors allow for heteroskedasticity and correlation in the error terms within states over
time. We discuss weighting and calculation of standard errors in more detail below in reference to Table 2.
33
This might seem somewhat surprising, given that administrative data suggest that universal preschool enrollment
rates in Oklahoma increased somewhat gradually over time, e.g., almost doubling between the 1998-99 and 2005-06
school years (Bassok, Fitzpatrick, and Loeb, 2012). The program was phased in much more rapidly in Georgia,
however, and, as suggested by Figure 3, panel a, the counterfactual is one of increasing public preschool enrollment.

21

to be enrolled in preschool after the introduction of the universal preschool, but the overall
enrollment effects appear to be smaller for higher-SES children.
Table 2 presents the DD estimates, helping us to put some more concrete numbers on
these patterns. Because we are working with state-by-year level means of the October CPS
micro-data, we weight the regressions (as we weighted the regression estimates underlying
Figure 4) by the number of children used to calculate the enrollment rates; unweighted estimates
are similar (see Online Appendix Table D-1). We also present standard errors that are clustered
on state. Because these standard errors rely on large-sample approximations that do not apply in
our application, we also calculate confidence intervals for the DD estimates that are robust to
having only two treatment states, using the baseline method described in Conley and Taber
(2011). We denote statistical significance based on this method with dagger superscripts in Table
2 and present the confidence intervals themselves in Online Appendix Table E-1.34
As anticipated from the graphs, estimates of the simple DD model in equation (1)
(column 1) yield larger impacts of universal preschool on the public preschool enrollment of
children of more-educated mothers—a 19.6 percentage point increase (panel b)—versus a 17.5
percentage point increase for the children of less-educated mothers (panel a). Controlling for
state unemployment rates and racial and gender composition does not change the estimates much
(column 2), though the difference across family background is made more stark when we add
separate linear time trends for Georgia and Oklahoma in an attempt to account for the relatively

34

The remainder of Online Appendices D and E show and discuss, respectively, unweighted estimation and Conley
and Taber (2011) confidence intervals for later tables in the paper where these methods are applicable. These
confidence intervals are probably conservative, leading us to reject the null hypothesis too infrequently (e.g., using
the 95 percent confidence interval, we would reject the null less than 5 percent of the time).

22

strong downward trend in public enrollment among the children of more-educated moms in the
“model” states prior to universal preschool availability (column 3).35
However, the implications regarding substitution between private and public preschool
are the same regardless of specification. Among children whose mothers have at least some
college education, the reductions in private enrollment following the introduction of public
preschool—the effect of public on private enrollment, shown in italics in the table—imply that
the likelihood of switching is 41 to 52 percent, depending on the specification.36 That is, for
every 10 children with more-educated mothers who enroll in public preschool, 4 or 5 would
otherwise have been enrolled in private school. This figure lines up very well with the back-ofthe-envelope calculations based on the national trends in Table 1. Unlike these simple
calculations, however, we find no evidence of a shift from private to public preschool among
children whose mothers have a high school degree or less. In fact, for this subpopulation, the
evidence suggests that private preschool enrollment rates rose in the post-initiative period. This
could reflect misreporting by households in Georgia, where some state-funded preschools are
operated in private childcare centers. Indeed, when we allow for separate impacts by state, we
detected a significant increase in the private preschool enrollment rates among the children of
less educated mothers only in Georgia (see Appendix Table F-1).37

35

One concern with a specification such as this, explored most prominently by Wolfers (2006), is that when a
policy’s effects grow or shrink over time, state-specific trends will pick up these dynamics in addition to preexisting trends, potentially generating substantial bias in DD coefficients. When we follow his suggestion of
including the series of post-initiative indicators from our event-study model in lieu of postst in equation (1), our
substantive conclusions are unchanged.
36
These estimates were obtained by regressing the private preschool enrollment rate on the public preschool
enrollment rate, instrumenting for the latter with the post indicator and weighting by the number of children used to
construct the private enrollment rate. The two-stage least squares estimator is thus the Wald estimator—the ratio of
the DD estimates for private and public enrollment rates.
37
We also find that Georgia’s program led to significantly less of a reduction in private preschool enrollment among
children with more educated mothers than Oklahoma’s program. On net, the impacts of universal preschool on the
likelihood of being enrolled in any preschool, public or private, were greater in Georgia than in Oklahoma, albeit
statistically significantly so only in specifications (1) and (2) of Table 2 and using conventional methods of
inference (see Appendix Table F-1).

23

The bottom line is that the high-quality universal preschool programs in Georgia and
Oklahoma increased the likelihood of enrolling in preschool at age 4 by more among lower-SES
children—between 18.7 and 20.2 percentage points—than among higher-SES children—between
11.3 and 13.8 percentage points.
III.

Family Well-Being and Behavior
While shifting enrollment from private to public preschool programs might diminish the

potential impact of universal preschool programs on the human capital of higher SES-children, it
makes some higher-SES families better off in the short term by reducing their childcare
expenses. By increasing a mother’s (or primary caregiver’s) wage net of childcare costs for at
least part of the work day, the childcare price subsidy implicit in universal preschool may also
increase labor force participation, and thus a family’s income and child investment possibilities,
regardless of family background. Further, while these programs might reduce the amount of time
that many 4 year olds will spend at home, they may change the quality of the remaining time that
parents spend with their children, depending on whether parents view these investments as
substitutes or complements for formal education.
Each of these potential responses to the program—in terms of the allocation of parental
time, consumption patterns, and labor supply—might affect a child’s human capital
accumulation independently of preschool itself. In this sense, any impacts of universal preschool
on children’s test scores will be reduced-form, reflecting not only participation in the preschool
program itself, but also changes in parental investments. In this section, we attempt to understand
the magnitude of these changes before turning to our estimates for children’s test scores.
III.A. Childcare Spending

24

The movement of children from private preschool programs into state-funded ones
should put money in a family’s pocketbook. But how much do families save in childcare
expenses? How large an income transfer does universal preschool provide? For this question, we
turn to the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX), which has asked comparable questions about
expenditures on childcare and daycare services since 1994. Note that this information is on all
household childcare expenses, and does not allow us to isolate spending on just the 4- or 5-yearold child. Limited pre-initiative data are available, and the number of households with 4 year
olds is much smaller than in the October CPS. As a result, our estimates using these data are less
precise and rely on stronger identifying assumptions—and our conclusions are thus more
tentative—than those for enrollment presented above.
In light of the data limitations, we take an alternative DD approach, comparing the
difference in childcare expenses between families with 4 year olds and families with 5 year olds
in Georgia and Oklahoma to the same difference elsewhere in the country.38 We restrict the
sample to the period after the model preschool programs are in place, analyzing monthly
spending from September 1998 through June 2011.39 The model of interest is:
(2)

ccspendas     age4a treats   age4a   treats   as ,

where ccspendas represents average monthly spending (in inflation-adjusted 2012 dollars) on
childcare for families in state s with at least one child aged a; age4a is an indicator variable set to

38

An alternative comparison group would be families with 3 year olds. We prefer families with 5 year olds as a
comparison group because they are less likely than families with 3 year olds to have been affected by state preschool
funding initiatives (e.g., through their eligibility for preschool programs in the comparison states). Our estimates of
the impact of universal preschool on childcare expenses are smaller in magnitude when we use families with 3 year
olds as a comparison group (see Appendix Table G-1).
39
We drop spending observations for July and August, when preschool is typically not in session. The CEX
suppresses state of residence for confidentiality purposes in some cases. For example, starting in 2006, we can no
longer identify Oklahoma in the data because it is suppressed. Because the data are not evenly dispersed over time
for all states, we also collapse the monthly data to the state-by-year level, separately by age and mother’s education
group, and include year fixed effects in the models.

25

one if that average corresponds to families with a 4 year old; and treats is an indicator variable
set to one if the state in question is Georgia or Oklahoma.40
The coefficient of interest in (2) is on the interaction between these two indicators, and
captures the extent to which universal preschool programs reduce the gap in childcare spending
between families with 4 year olds and families with 5 year olds, all of whom have access to at
least half-day kindergarten. This coefficient will capture the effect of universal preschool if there
is no other reason to expect a smaller gap in the “model” states. For example, the childcare
spending gap would be smaller if Georgia and Oklahoma were less likely to offer full-day
kindergarten for 5 year olds than other states. In fact, the opposite appears to be the case.41
The first column of Table 3 presents estimates of equation (2), again splitting the data
into the two maternal education groups. Consider first the estimates for families with collegeeducated mothers (panel b). The coefficient of interest is a statistically significant $66 reduction
in monthly childcare expenses (real 2012 dollars). This almost perfectly offsets the additional
average childcare spending for families with 4 year olds versus 5 year olds (the coefficient on
agea), which is estimated to be $70 per month. Because the sample sizes are small and we are
concerned about outliers, in column 2 we top-code childcare spending at the 99th percentile value
($1,800 per month), and in column 3 we take the median childcare spending instead of the mean.
The results are attenuated somewhat when outliers are restricted, with estimates ranging from a

40

As in our estimates based on the October CPS, we weight by the number of observations used to calculate the
state-by-age group-by-year averages and present standard errors clustered on state in parentheses. The unweighted
estimates are actually much more stable across the alternative measures of childcare expenses (see Online Appendix
Table D-2). However, calculated using the Conley and Taber approach, 90 percent confidence intervals on all of the
DD coefficients in Table 3 include zero (see Online Appendix Table E-2).
41
Using the October supplements from 1998 through 2011 collapsed to state-by-year level averages and weighting
by cell size, we find that 52.9 percent of 5 year olds in Georgia and Oklahoma whose mothers have at most a high
school degree attend full-day kindergarten; elsewhere in the country, this figure is 46.9 percent. For the 5-year-old
children of women with at least some college education, full-day kindergarten enrollment rates are 51.8 and 48.8
percent for the treatment and comparison states, respectively.

26

reduction of $50 to $56 per month. Scaled up, these coefficients imply on average roughly a
$450 to $500 reduction in childcare expenses for the 9-month academic year.42
While such an effect might seem too small to care much about, recall that this is the
reduction in average childcare expenses in the population at large, regardless of whether a family
takes up universal preschool. Moreover, among those taking up the program, some families—
those switching out of private preschools—may see very large reductions in childcare spending,
while other families might not be affected much at all. Although we cannot identify these
families in the CEX (and would not want to because of endogeneity concerns), we can do a backof-the-envelope calculation of the magnitude of the transfer to these families based on our
private enrollment estimates from the October CPS. Returning to Table 2, panel b, we see
declines in private school enrollment of 8 to 14.9 percentage points among 4 year olds with
mothers in the higher education category. Assuming that the effects on childcare expenses in the
CEX for this group are explained completely by the movement of 4 year olds out of private
preschool, the top-coded estimates from column 2 imply that families that switch from private
preschools to the public program save between roughly $3,000 and $5,600 per academic year on
childcare expenses.43 By comparison, the maximum EITC in the 2012 tax year for a family with
two qualifying children was $5,236. However, universal preschool provides an income transfer
only to relatively high-income families.
Indeed, returning to Table 3, we see that childcare expenses in families where mothers
have lower levels of education have not fallen, consistent with the lack of movement out of
private preschool in response to high-quality universal preschool for this group. In fact, the gap
42

The estimate in the final column is similar when we limit the comparison group to other southern states (Online
Appendix Table C-2).
43
These figures are in line with estimates of childcare expenses from the Survey of Income and Program
Participation, which range from about $110 to $143 per week (in real 2011 dollars) over the CEX sample period
(Laughlin, 2013).

27

in childcare expenses between families with 4 year olds and families with 5 year olds is higher in
Georgia and Oklahoma than it is elsewhere in the country, although this difference disappears
when we estimate the differences on median spending (column 3).
III.B. Maternal Labor Supply
The enrollment and childcare spending estimates suggest that some families—relatively
high-SES families that arguably place relatively high value on preschool education—receive
sizable income transfers from universal preschool programs. However, regardless of income,
these programs—and public education more generally—provide a 100 percent price subsidy for
childcare on the extensive margin of employment, increasing potential take-home pay and so in
theory providing a strong incentive for their primary caregivers (historically, mothers) to enter
paid work. Increases in maternal employment can increase family income, expanding a family’s
consumption possibilities—and child investment possibilities—as well.
How have the Georgia and Oklahoma programs affected maternal labor supply? To
address this question, we return to our match of 4 year olds to their mothers in the October CPS
and to our original DD estimation strategy. Our outcome of interest is the percent of mothers of 4
year olds who were working in the week prior to the survey.44 Figure 5 presents national trends
in this variable, overall and by maternal education (panel a), alongside the event-study estimates
by maternal education category (panel b). The first two columns of Table 4 present the estimates
of the postst coefficient from a model analogous to (1), without (column 1) and with (column 2)
state-by-year varying controls.
These initial results provide little evidence to suggest that the preschool programs in
Georgia and Oklahoma have increased the likelihood that mothers of 4 year olds are at work. In

44

We base our analysis on the employment status recode variable, which has been consistently asked of CPS
respondents over our sample frame.

28

fact, the coefficient estimates are negative. This is unexpected, and suggests that a simple DD
model like (1) might not be identifying the effects of the program. Indeed, the event-study
estimates in Figure 5, panel b do not provide compelling evidence of a negative impact. Rather,
they suggest that we are finding a negative impact due to unusually high maternal employment
rates in Georgia and Oklahoma well before the states introduced universal preschool programs,
e.g., the coefficient for 7 to 9 years prior to the initiative (plotted at -8) is positive and large.
Thus, what appear to be negative program impacts may actually reflect convergence of the rest
of the country to Georgia’s and Oklahoma’s higher initial rates of maternal employment.
One approach to this problem would be to re-estimate the simple DD models dropping or
dummying up the earliest years of data, so that they do not contribute to identification. Another
approach, which we find more compelling, is to attempt to account for any such convergence
using the mothers of other young children—like mothers of 5 year olds—as an additional
comparison group. The idea is these mothers should have experienced the same labor market
shocks as mothers of 4 year olds, but their children are not eligible for universal preschool. To
the extent that their employment trends of these two groups of moms diverge after the initiatives
were passed in Georgia and Oklahoma, relative to the rest of the United States, it would suggest
an employment impact of the program.
We thus combine the two empirical approaches that we have used thus far into a “tripledifference” (DDD) model that uses variation in the availability of universal preschool across
states, over time, and across women with children of different ages. The model is given by
(3)

yast   post st  age 4a   post st   as   at   ast ,

where yast is the percent of mothers of children aged a in state s who reported working in October
of year t, and postst and age4a are as earlier defined. The vectors γas and δat represent age-by-state

29

and age-by-year fixed effects, which control for fixed differences across states in employment
rates of mothers with children of different ages, and national shocks to employment rates of
mothers of children of the same age. The postst direct effect, λ, is the “effect” of universal
preschool on women with age-ineligible children. The interaction coefficient, θ, is then the effect
of interest, capturing the differential impact of universal preschool on the employment of women
with 4 year olds.45 The identifying assumption is that there are no other reasons to see a
difference in employment between women with 4 year olds and women with age-ineligible
children in Georgia and Oklahoma after their universal preschool programs were in place.46
The remaining column of Table 4 show estimates of θ in model (3) using mothers of 5
year olds as a comparison group. The estimates are quite different than the findings from the
basic DD specification. Regardless of maternal education, the estimates are much less negative
than those in the first two columns. This suggests that the use of a comparison group helps to
account for that convergence suggested in Figure 5, panel b, and indeed, when we examine the
triple-difference event-study that uses mothers of 5 year olds as a comparison group, in panel c
of Figure 5, the pre-initiative coefficients fluctuate around zero.47
Turning to the DDD estimates themselves, we see no impact of universal preschool on
the employment rate of women with at least some college education (panel b). The DDD
estimate is in fact negative. Importantly, this is not because the DDD specification fails to yield

45

Cascio (2009b) uses a similar DDD approach to estimate the effect of state funding for kindergartens (and
kindergarten enrollment) on employment of women with 5 year olds. Most of the kindergarten funding initiatives
had passed by the time that the data used here begin (1977).
46
Note that, if an inter-temporal labor supply framework applies, a mother who works more due to the availability
of universal preschool when her child is 4 years old may work less the next year due to a wealth effect, possibly
leading us to exaggerate the impact of universal preschool on maternal labor supply in a DDD framework. Because
we are looking at the extensive margin of employment (i.e., working versus not) rather than the intensive margin
(i.e., hours worked), we think that this source of bias is unlikely.
47
To arrive at these event-study estimates, we replace postst in model (3) with a full set of indicators for year relative
to the initiative (in 3-year-bins), and we replace postst x agea with interactions between these indicators and agea.
Figure 5, panel c plots the estimated coefficients on these interaction terms, separately by maternal education.

30

an impact of universal preschool on school enrollment: as shown lower down in the panel, the
introduction of universal preschool is associated with a 16 percentage-point increase in 4 year
olds’ public school enrollment rates—a figure that, along with the degree of substitution between
public and private enrollment—lines up well with the simple DD estimates in Table 2.48
Nevertheless, the estimate is imprecise enough that we cannot rule out positive employment
impacts of a reasonable magnitude.49
By contrast, the DDD estimate for less-educated mothers is positive and statistically
different from zero using conventional methods of inference; for their children, there is also clear
evidence of an impact of the programs on school enrollment. While these findings are promising,
the corresponding event-study estimates are less compelling. As shown in panel c of Figure 5,
the positive coefficient appears to be driven by an impact in the first three years of the program
(the solid coefficient plotted above 1). All remaining post-initiative event-study coefficients are
statistically insignificant, and some are negative. Further, the DDD employment estimates are
sensitive to changes in how we stratify the data, our choices of comparison states and the
comparison age group, and weighting.50 On net, these findings suggest that the Georgia and
Oklahoma programs may have increased maternal employment, but the evidence is not all that
compelling or robust.

48

We look at public and private school enrollment here, rather than public and private preschool enrollment,
because most 5 year olds would be expected to be in kindergarten. From the mother’s perspective, however, what
matters for maternal employment should be whether a child is in (public) school, not the child’s grade of enrollment.
To the extent that these numbers deviate in any meaningful way from those in Table 2, it suggests an impact of
universal preschool programs on the grade in which a child is enrolled. For example, some children may have
attended private kindergarten in the absence of public preschool.
49
If we assume that the implicit childcare subsidy from universal preschool is equivalent to an 8 percent net wage
increase, a 50 percent baseline maternal employment rate (see Table 1), and wage elasticity of labor supply for
women ranging from 0.2 to 0.4 (McClelland and Mok, 2012), then we would expect that universal preschool would
increase the likelihood of working by only 1.6 to 3.2 percentage points.
50
See Online Appendix Tables B-4 and B-6 (for results that stratify the data on eligibility for free or reduced-price
lunch and on paternal college attendance, respectively), Online Appendix Table C-3 (for results that include only
southern states in the comparison group), Online Appendix Table G-2 (for results that use mothers of 3 year olds as
a comparison group), and Online Appendix Table D-3 (for unweighted estimates).

31

III.C. Maternal Time with Children
If preschool is a substitute for childcare, then the time parents spend on childcare should
decline as the time that spent in preschool increases. Accordingly, given little evidence of
switching out of private programs for lower-SES families, we would expect relatively large
reductions in the time mothers spend with children in these families. However, universal
programs may change optimal time investments in children. For example, preschool exposure
may encourage parents to spend more or less time engaging in educational activities with their
child, such as reading to children, doing art projects, and so on.
To investigate this question, we use data from the American Time Use Surveys (ATUS)
spanning January 2003 through December 2012. The ATUS provides nationally representative
estimates of how, where, and with whom respondents spend their time. Because the ATUS
contains no pre-initiative data, we take the same general approach as in the CEX, comparing
differences across mothers with 4 year olds and mothers with 5 year olds on daily time spent on
childcare, in the two “model” states versus the rest of the country, using model (2).51 Note that,
analogous to the CEX, we cannot isolate time spent on an individual child when there are other
children in the household. Thus, these data share many of the limitations of the CEX, leading our
conclusions from them to be at best suggestive.
The first column of Table 5 shows the impact on the overall amount of time a mother
spends in the presence of her child.52 Regardless of education, mothers spend an average of
almost 8 hours per day with their children. In the absence of universal preschool, mothers also
spend more time with 4 year olds than with 5 year olds, though this difference is only statistically
51

We limit the dataset to women co-residing with a 4- or 5-year-old child, and exclude time use observations
collected on weekends, holidays, or during July or August. To increase statistical power, we average within state-byeducation cell across all years pooled together.
52
Activities for which the ATUS does not collect information on whom else was present, such as sleeping, are
omitted from this measure.

32

significant for lower-education moms (panel a). With universal preschool, however, this gap is
eliminated: the DD coefficient indicates that less-educated mothers in Georgia and Oklahoma on
average spend 46 fewer minutes per weekday in the presence of their 4 year olds than their
counterparts elsewhere in the country—an effect amounting to around 4 hours a day when
rescaled by the impacts of universal preschool on overall school enrollment.53 There is not a
significant reduction in the time that more-educated mothers spend in the presence of 4 year olds,
but the DD estimate is noisy (panel b).
In column 2, we then turn to the impact on time spent caring for and helping the
household’s children, and includes time spent with children reading, playing, doing art projects,
and talking. The program increases maternal time spent in these activities by 25 minutes per day,
which is consistent with experimental evidence from Head Start (Gelber and Isen, 2013).54
Among women with high levels of education, time spent caring for and helping children does not
appear to be affected.
IV.

Standardized Test Scores
The human capital benefits to high-quality universal preschool are likely to accrue in

large part from the preschool experience relative to the alternative use of a child’s time. Because
of the findings for enrollment and crowd-out, we expect to see clear benefits for lower-SES
children: the marginal public preschool enrollee would otherwise not have attended preschool,
the programs themselves meet high-quality benchmarks, and exposure to higher-income peers in
a universal preschool classroom may have additional positive impacts. We also find suggestive
53

This is more than would be expected if the preschool programs were only half-day. However, in auxiliary
regressions, we find that much of the impact of the Georgia and Oklahoma programs on preschool enrollment,
regardless of maternal education, can be accounted for by full-day programs.
54
This finding continues to hold when we limit the comparison group to southern states (Online Appendix Table C4) and when we give each state-by-age observation equal weight (Online Appendix Table D-4). However, it is no
longer statistically different from zero when we use confidence intervals that take into account the fact that we have
only two treatment states (Online Appendix Table E-4).

33

evidence that parental investments in children rise in lower-income families. For higher-SES
children, the potential effects are less clear: the marginal attendee has a high probability of
attending a private preschool, that private preschool may be of equal or better quality than the
state-funded one, and their academic achievement might be diminished by negative peer effects
in the classroom. Higher-SES children may also see lesser gain in academic performance if there
are diminishing returns to human capital investment.
To measure whether test scores improve in response to the model state programs, we
assembled state-by-year aggregate data from the NAEP, which is the only standardized test that
is comparable across the nation. Students are tested in mathematics and reading in grades 4 and 8
in selected years. Information is not available on maternal educational attainment, so we separate
the sample instead by whether a student’s family earns less than 185 percent of the poverty line
and is therefore eligible for free or reduced-price lunch. As shown in Online Appendix Tables B3 and B-4, the overall pattern of findings for enrollment and maternal labor supply is
substantively similar to that shown in Tables 2 and 4 when we stratify the data by a child’s free
or reduced-price lunch eligibility.
We focus on state-by-year mean scale scores on the NAEP math and reading tests. Figure
6 presents trends in mean national scale scores for math (panel a) and reading (panel b), plotting
fourth and eighth grade scores on the same graph against the preschool cohort to which they
pertain. For example, the earliest available data at the national level are from spring 1996; these
data correspond to children who would have been preschool age in fall 1990 in the case of fourth
grade scores, and in fall 1986 in the case of eighth grade scores.55 Thus, preschool cohort is
given on the horizontal axis, and the year of the test is given above each data point.

55

This calculation is made under the assumption of normal grade progression. Data are available by state and family
income starting in spring 2000 (math) and spring 1998 (reading).

34

Unsurprisingly, eighth graders score higher on this vertically-scaled test, and lower-income
students perform relatively poorly in each grade. Test scores have improved over time, albeit
with little reduction in the test score gap by family income, with the most notable improvements
coming in fourth-grade scores for cohorts turning age 4 around the time that the Georgia and
Oklahoma programs went into effect.
Recall that our preferred empirical approach, used to estimate impacts on preschool
enrollment and maternal employment, has been to compare trends in Georgia and Oklahoma
relative to the rest of the country, before and after the introduction of their initiatives, and that
simple DD estimates rely on the assumption that these trends are similar in the treatment and
comparison states in the pre-initiative period. Figure 7, which plots event-study estimates,
provides evidence that this assumption is violated for NAEP scores.56 For example, fourth grade
math scores are significantly lower than would be expected given trends elsewhere in the country
in the years immediately before the initiative (panel a); fourth grade reading scores show a
similar pattern, though the differences across pre-initiative years are not statistically significant
(panel b).57 When we look at eighth grade test scores (panels c and d), on the other hand, the
evidence suggests that the differences in test performance between Georgia and Oklahoma and
the rest of the country were largely confined to cohorts that were of preschool age well before
these state programs being introduced. For example, lower-income children in Georgia and
Oklahoma who were 4 years old seven or more years prior to the introduction of universal
preschool scored higher in eighth grade math and reading than their counterparts elsewhere in the
country. However, this advantage no longer existed among later cohorts that were 4 years old
56

Here, we use two-year bins. As above, however, the first and last indicators correspond to all prior and subsequent
years, and we omit the identifier for the year(s) immediately prior to the initiative to identify the model.
57
Fitzpatrick (2008) found little evidence that fourth grade NAEP scores in Georgia were on a different trajectory
than the rest of the nation in the years before introducing universal preschool. Consistent with this, auxiliary analysis
suggests that Oklahoma is the source of pre-initiative trends in Figure 7.

35

prior to the initiative, and among cohorts eligible for universal preschool, the advantage to be
being in Georgia or Oklahoma returned, suggesting an impact of the program.
Table 6 presents DD estimates for fourth grade NAEP scores, separately for lower- and
higher-income children. None of basic DD estimates is statistically significant, and the estimates
for higher-income children are in fact negative (column 1), which is consistent with the graphical
evidence of strong downward trends in test scores in the treated states prior to their establishing
universal preschool. However, when we attempt to account for the early pre-initiative differences
in test scores by adding a dummy for cohorts 3 or more years prior to the initiative (column 2) —
and thus identify the DD coefficient off of test scores immediately before the initiatives were
passed—the estimates become more positive, and for lower-income students marginally
statistically different from zero for math and reading scores alike (panel a). An alternative
approach, which controls for state-specific trends (column 3), moves the coefficients in the same
direction but to less of an extent. This model does not seem as good a characterization of the
patterns shown in Figure 7, however, so we return to the specification in column 2 in the
remaining columns of the table, adding controls for student demographics (column 4) and years
that a state has had “consequential” school accountability (column 5).58 Neither of these sets of
controls appreciably changes the point estimates relative to those in column 2.
Table 7 shows a similar pattern of findings for eighth grade NAEP scores, although the
point estimates are smaller in magnitude. Based on the fully-controlled specification, in column
5, the effect of high-quality universal preschool on math scores declines from 3.1 points in fourth

58

The school accountability programs put in place after the No Child Left Behind (NCLB) Act of 2001, as well as
the “consequential” state accountability programs that preceded NCLB, may be an alternative explanation for the
patterns we see in the data. Oklahoma implemented a consequential accountability in 1996 and Georgia in 2000
(Dee and Jacob, 2011). Comparing states that implemented consequential accountability as a result of NCLB to
those that had it prior to NCLB, Dee and Jacob (2010, 2011) find evidence that NCLB resulted in higher NAEP
scores, particularly in fourth grade.

36

grade to (a marginally statistically significant) 2.2 points in eighth grade. For reading, the decline
is even more extreme—from 3.1 points to 0.8 points between fourth and eighth grade. This
pattern of findings is consistent with the pervasive finding of test score “fadeout” in the broader
preschool evaluation literature, discussed in Section I.C. When viewed in this context, the
persistence of test score impacts through eighth grade is somewhat surprising.
The point estimates from Table 7 indicate that lower-income children who were eligible
for universal preschool in Georgia and Oklahoma scored on average about 2.2 points higher on
the NAEP math test in eighth grade than would have been expected based on national trends,
after accounting for several other state-by-year varying factors. Depending on the estimate, this
amounts to a gain of 0.058 to 0.067 student-level standard deviations. Rescaled by the programs
impacts’ on preschool enrollment rates of lower-SES children and assuming no positive spillover
effects onto classmates, these findings suggest that preschool attendance increases eighth-grade
math scores by almost a third of a standard deviation. For fourth grade math and reading alike,
the estimates are even larger.59 Given our findings for maternal time use and labor supply, we
think it unlikely that the impacts are working through preschool attendance alone.
That said, like our findings for maternal employment, our findings for NAEP scores are
not as robust to alternative specifications as those for enrollment. For example, the DD estimates
are substantially smaller when we limit the comparison group to states in the South (see Online
Appendix Tables C-5 and C-6).60 They are also not statistically significant at conventional levels

59

The fourth grade estimates are thus larger than found by Fitzpatrick (2008) in her study of Georgia. One possible
explanation is that we have three more years of post-initiative data at our disposal (from 2007, 2009, and 2011), and
the reduced-form program impacts appear to grow slightly over time (Figure 7, panels a and b). However, the
studies are not necessarily comparable since we include Oklahoma as a treatment state. Unfortunately, we lack
sufficient pre-initiative observations in the state-aggregated NAEP (i.e., we lack 1996 data by free lunch status) to
present informative estimates separately by state.
60
When rescaled by the slightly smaller enrollment impacts when the comparison group is limited to the South (see
Online Appendix Table B-1), the implied effect of public preschool enrollment at age 4 on later test scores are closer
in magnitude.

37

when we account for the fact that we have only two treatment states (Online Appendix Tables E5 and E-6). Based on the Conley and Taber (2011) methodology, the most precise test score
results are for fourth grade math, which are statistically different from zero at the 20 percent
level.
V.

Cost-Benefit Analysis
Economists typically attempt to quantify potential benefits of social programs in order to

compare them to costs and judge whether they make a worthwhile investment. There is
necessarily a lot of uncertainty surrounding projecting the benefit of universal, high-quality
preschool into the future, and the projected benefits depend on a variety of assumptions about the
state of the labor market in the future and about the discount rate. Our estimates of benefits, like
test score impacts, are also less precise than would be ideal for an exercise such as this. Below
we attempt to quantify the projected long-term impacts of preschool, recognizing these
limitations.
V.A.

Measuring benefits
To predict the long-term earnings impact of high-quality universal preschool, we predict

how improved math test scores will increase future earnings over the life span. The first step in
this prediction is to estimate the impact on math scores on all children, which we find to be 2.4
points in fourth grade and (a statistically insignificant) 0.9 points in eighth grade. The next step is
to convert these “intention-to-treat” estimates, which combine outcomes for children whether or
not they attended preschool, into “treatment-on-treated” impacts, which rescale by the program’s
impacts on public preschool enrollment—a 23.27 percentage point increase in the pooled

38

sample.61 Using this scaling factor, we arrive at treatment-on-treated estimates equal to 0.29 and
0.11 standard deviations in grades 4 and 8, respectively.
Next, we convert this test score improvement into predicted wage gains using the
relationship between earnings and test scores. The best available estimate of this relationship is
from Chetty et al. (2013), who find that a 1 standard deviation improvement in test scores
(measured in grades 4 through 8) correlates to a 12 percent increase in earnings when a worker is
in his mid- to late-20s. Assuming that this relationship continues to hold across the rest of the
worker’s career, this estimate implies annual earnings impacts of 3.5 percent (when benefits are
based on the fourth grade math results) and 1.3 percent (when benefits are based on the eighth
grade math results). To convert this wage boost into dollar terms across a worker’s career, we
apply it to the age-earnings profile of workers with positive earnings using the 2011 March CPS.
Following the Congressional Budget Office’s long-term forecast, we assume real labor
productivity growth equal to 1.9 percent per year. We also assume an 80 percent labor force
participation rate, and that workers are employed from age 18 to age 65.
V.B.

Measuring costs
Estimating the costs of preschool is arguably more straightforward. The most recent

available data report annual costs per enrollee of $3652 in Georgia and $7427 in Oklahoma.
Since the impacts are estimated based on the pooled impact across these two states, we take the
enrollment-weighted average of per-pupil costs as total cost measure. This weighted average is
$4698, and represents the total government outlays for the program. Importantly, though, this
overstates the true economic costs because some of this spending offsets the out-of-pocket costs
that would have been borne by families who would have sent their children to preschool in the

61

One drawback to this approach is that it assumes there are no positive spillover impacts of preschool attendance
onto a child’s classmates who did not attend preschool.

39

absence of the public program. In other words, some of this spending is not new spending, but
can be thought of as an income transfer to parents who would otherwise pay for preschool out of
pocket. Our most conservative estimate of the share of preschoolers who substitute from private
to public preschool is 16 percent. Once subtracting this income transfer, the estimated spending
per student is $3946.
V.C.

Comparing present discounted values
Table 8 gives present discounted values of lifetime earnings using a range of discount

rates and compares these to costs. Panel A projects benefits from the point estimate for fourth
grade test scores, while Panel B projects them from the (statistically insignificant) eighth grade
point estimate. In column 8-1 we discount using the return on the 30-year Treasury bill, which is
the government’s long-term borrowing rate. The 30-year interest rate has averaged 3.4 percent
from January through October 2013. At this rate, the present discounted benefits as projected
from the fourth grade test score impacts equal $33,684. These benefits outweigh government
outlays by a factor of 7. When benefits are compared to economic costs less the transfer from the
government to families that switch enrollment from private to public preschools, the benefit-cost
ratio increases to approximately 8.5. Substituting a higher discount rate reduces the benefits, but
even with a 6 percent discount rate, the benefits outweigh the economic costs 3.4 to 1. As shown
in Panel B, the estimated benefits are more modest based on the 8th grade test score impacts, but
when they are discounted by the 30-year Treasury rate they still outweigh net outlays by a factor
of 3.2 to 1.
Due to lack of precision and effect fade-out, there is considerable uncertainty surrounding
the magnitude of the test score impacts. Another way to think about the cost effectiveness of the
program is to solve for the level of the test score impact that equates the long-term benefits to the

40

costs. Assuming a 3.4 percent annual discount rate, a treatment-on-treated test score impact of
0.04 standard deviations equates the benefits to the total outlays for the program. An impact of
0.03 standard deviations is enough in present discounted terms to offset the net economic costs
of the program. These translate to between 1.0 and 1.4 scale score points on the NAEP.
V.D.

Additional considerations
The likely benefits of the program are under-stated for at least two reasons. First, our

benefits calculations are based entirely on projected earnings increases. Other work on early
childhood education has found that there are strong long-term impacts on other outcomes such as
criminal behavior and use of the social safety net. In their extraordinarily thorough cost-benefit
analysis of the Perry Preschool Program, Heckman et al. (2010) find that when benefits that
accrue to society more broadly are included, the internal rate of return increases by at least 20
percent over the return to individuals. We do not estimate potential benefits along these other
dimensions in our cost-benefit calculation. Second, we predict future earnings increases from
fourth and eighth grade test score improvements. Other research on early childhood education
has found that realized earnings impacts are larger than those implied by subsequent test score
gains alone (Chetty et al. 2011). This could be due to improvements in non-cognitive skills,
which are rewarded in the labor market but are not well measured by cognitive achievement
tests.
VI.

Conclusions
President Obama’s $75 billion “Preschool for All” initiative calls for dramatic increases

in the number of 4 year olds in public preschool programs and in the quality of these programs
across the nation. This proposal shares—and other proposals likely to follow will share—many
characteristics with the state-funded preschool programs Georgia and Oklahoma, which both

41

meet high-quality benchmarks and are accessible to all children. We estimate the impacts of
these “model” programs on a variety of child and family outcomes using difference-in-difference
frameworks. Our findings suggest sharply different impacts for children from across the income
distribution, which is not surprising when one recognizes that the impact of attending a highquality public preschool depends crucially on what the child would have been doing in the
absence of the program.
For lower-SES children, we find evidence of increases in math scores that may be
sustained through eighth grade. The increases may be working through multiple channels. First,
children are likely to switch from not attending preschool to attending a high-quality public
preschool when a universal program is introduced. Moreover, we find suggestive evidence that
although they spend less time overall in the presence of their mothers, they spend more time
actively engaging in activities such as playing and reading with them. We also find suggestive
evidence that their mothers become employed. For higher-SES children, we find no positive
impacts on student achievement. These children are much less likely to be moved on the
extensive margin of preschool enrollment, and instead are more likely to switch from private to
public preschool in response to the program. We also find suggestive evidence that some
families are able to substantially reduce their spending on private preschool and childcare in
response to the program, freeing these resources up for other purposes.
This pattern of results raises the question of whether the proposal design could be altered
to obtain the same positive impacts without inducing as much crowd-out. Could a targeted
program meet these goals more efficiently? The findings of rapid and complete fadeout in test
score effects in recent randomized controlled trials of Head Start (Puma et al., 2012) and
Tennessee’s targeted voluntary preschool program (Lipsey et al., 2013b) suggest that targeted

42

programs today might not induce such gains. One possible explanation is that the test score
impacts of universal programs rely on peer effects in preschool classrooms. Indeed, universal
programs might be “high quality” not because they meet specific quality benchmarks, but rather
because of improvements in the classroom environment from the presence of higher-SES
children. We cannot rule out this possibility, and we think it is an important question for future
research.
That said, while the Georgia and Oklahoma programs share a number of features with the
preschool programs proposed under the Obama plan, there are several reasons to be cautious in
generalizing our findings. First, and most importantly, the Obama plan gives states discretion
over whether and how much to charge middle-class families for access to the public programs.
The more that states charge middle-class families, the less substitution away from private
programs there is likely to be. Second, while it has been the focus of our analysis, universal
preschool is not all that there is to the “Preschool for All” initiative. For example, it also calls for
increases in Head Start enrollment among 3 year olds, which affect the success of universal
preschool in ways that we have not been able to measure. On the other hand, our suggestion that
the programs in Georgia and Oklahoma have had some lasting impacts on the human capital of
lower-SES children might have nothing to do with the quality benchmarks emphasized in the
Obama plan. We have estimated the reduced-form impacts of these programs, and the
mechanisms at work are not completely clear. The available data have also limited our analysis
in important ways that might be rectified in future research.

43

References
Anderson, Michael L. 2008. “Multiple Inference and Gender Differences in the Effects of Early
Intervention: A Reevaluation of the Abecedarian, Perry Preschool, and Early Training
Projects,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 103, no. 484: 1481-1495.
Barnett, W. Steven, Megan E. Carolan, Jen Fitzgerald, and James H. Squires. 2012. The State of
Preschool 2012: State Preschool Yearbook. New Brunswick, NJ: National Institute for
Early Education Research.
Bassok, Daphna. 2012. “Raising Teacher Education Levels in Head Start: Are there programlevel tradeoffs?” Center on Education Policy and Workforce Competitiveness Working
Paper, June.
Bassok, Daphna, Maria Fitzpatrick, and Susanna Loeb. 2012. “Does State Preschool Crowd-Out
Private Provision? The Impact of Universal Preschool on the Childcare Sector.” NBER
Working Paper 18605.
Cascio, Elizabeth. 2009a. “Do Investments in Universal Early Education Pay Off? Long-term
Effects of Introducing Kindergartens into Public Schools.” NBER Working Paper 14951.
Cascio, Elizabeth. 2009b. “Maternal Labor Supply and the Introduction of Kindergartens into
American Public Schools.” The Journal of Human Resources 44(1): 140-170.
Chetty, Raj, John Friedman, Nathaniel Hilger, Emmanuel Saez, and Danny Yagan. 2011. “How
Does Your Kindergarten Classroom Affect Your Earnings? Evidence from Project
STAR.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(4): 1593-1660.
Chetty, Raj, John Friedman, and Jonah Rockoff. 2013. “Measuring the Impact of Teachers II:
Teacher Value-Added and Student Outcomes in Adulthood.” NBER Working Paper
19424.

44

Currie, Janet. 2001. “Early childhood education programs.” The Journal of Economic
Perspectives 15, no. 2 (Spring): 213-238.
Currie, Janet and Duncan Thomas. 1995. "Does Head Start Make a Difference?" The American
Economic Review 85, no. 3 (June): 341-364.
Dee, Thomas S. and Brian A. Jacob. 2010. “The Impact of No Child Left Behind on Students,
Teachers, and Schools.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2010, no. 2: 149-194.
Dee, Thomas S. and Brian A. Jacob. 2011. “The Impact of No Child Left Behind on Student
Achievement.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 30(3): 418-446.
Deming, David. 2009. "Early childhood intervention and life-cycle skill development: Evidence
from Head Start." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1, no. 3: 111-134.
Deming, David and Susan Dynarski. 2008. “The Lengthening of Childhood.” Journal of
Economic Perspectives 22(3): 71-92.
Espinosa, Linda M. (2002). "High-Quality Preschool: Why We Need It and What It Looks Like."
NIEER Preschool Policy Matters, Issue 1. (November 2002).
Available http://nieer.org/resources/policybriefs/1.pdf
Figlio, David and Jeffrey Roth. 2009. “The Behavioral Consequences of Pre-Kindergarten
Participation for Disadvantaged Youth.” In The Problems of Disadvantaged Youth: An
Economic Perspective (ed. Jonathan Gruber), pp. 15-42. Chicago and London: University
of Chicago Press.
Fitzpatrick, Maria D. 2008. “Starting School at Four: The Effect of Universal Pre-Kindergarten
on Children’s Academic Achievement,” The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy
8, no. 1 (Advances), Article 46. Available at:
http://www.bepress.com/bejeap/vol8/iss1/art46

45

Fitzpatrick, Maria D. 2010. “Preschoolers Enrolled and Mothers at Work? The Effects of
Universal Pre-Kindergarten.” Journal of Labor Economics 28(1): 51-85.
Fitzpatrick, Maria D. 2012. “Revising our Thinking about the Relationship between Maternal
Labor Supply and Preschool.” Journal of Human Resources 47: 583-612.
Garces, E., D. Thomas, and Janet Currie. 2002. "Longer-Term Effects of Head Start." American
Economic Review 92, no. 4: 999-1012.
Gelbach, Jonah B. 2002. “Public Schooling for Young Children and Maternal Labor Supply.”
American Economic Review 92(1): 307-322.
Gelber, Alexander, and Adam Isen. 2013. "Children's Schooling and Parents’ Behavior:
Evidence from the Head Start Impact Study." Journal of Public Economics 101: 25-38.
Goldin, Claudia, Lawrence Katz, and Ilyana Kuziemko. 2006. “The Homecoming of American
College Women: The Reversal of the College Gender Gap.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 20(4): 133-156.
Gormley, William T., Deborah Phillips, and Ted Gayer. 2008. "Preschool Programs Can Boost
School Readiness." Science 320, no. 5884: 1723-1724.
Gormley, William T., and Ted Gayer. 2005. "Promoting School Readiness in Oklahoma An
Evaluation of Tulsa's Pre-K Program." Journal of Human Resources 40, no. 3: 533-558.
Gramlich, Edward M. 1986. "Evaluation of education projects: The case of the Perry preschool
program." Economics of Education Review 5, no. 1: 17-24.
Heckman, James J. 2006. "Skill formation and the economics of investing in disadvantaged
children." Science 312, no. 5782: 1900-1902.

46

Heckman, James J., Seong Hyeok Moon, Rodrigo Pinto, Peter Savelyev, and Adam Yavitz.
2010. “The Rate of Return to the HighScope Perry Preschool Program.” Journal of
Public Economics 94(1-2): 114-28.
Heckman, James J., Rodrigo Pinto, and Peter Savelyev. 2013. “Understanding the Mechanisms
through Which an Influential Early Childhood Program Boosted Adult Outcomes.”
American Economic Review 103(6): 2052-86.
Knudsen, Eric I., et al. 2006. "Economic, neurobiological, and behavioral perspectives on
building America’s future workforce." Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 103, no. 27: 10155-10162.
Ladd, Helen F., Clara G. Muschkin and Kenneth Dodge. 2012. “From Birth to School: Early
Childhood Initiatives and Third Grade Outcomes in North Carolina.” Working Paper,
Duke University.
Laughlin, Lynda. 2013. Who’s Minding the Kids? Childcare Arrangements: Spring 2011.
Current Population Reports, P70-135. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Census Bureau.
Lipsey, Mark W., Kerry G. Hofer, Nianbo Dong, Dale C. Farran, and Carol Bilbrey. 2013a.
Evaluation of the Tennessee Voluntary Prekindergarten Program: End of Pre-K Results
from the Randomized Control Design (Research Report). Nashville, TN: Vanderbilt
University, Peabody Research Institute.
Lipsey, Mark W., Kerry G. Hofer, Nianbo Dong, Dale C. Farran, and Carol Bilbrey. 2013b.
Evaluation of the Tennessee Voluntary Prekindergarten Program: Kindergarten and
First Grade Follow-Up Results from the Randomized Control Design (Research Report).
Nashville, TN: Vanderbilt University, Peabody Research Institute.

47

Ludwig, Jens, and Douglas L. Miller. 2007. "Does Head Start improve children's life chances?
Evidence from a regression discontinuity design." The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 122, no. 1: 159-208.
Masse, Leonard N., and Steven Barnett. 2002. “A Benefit-Cost Analysis of the Abecedarian
Early Childhood Intervention” in Levin, Henry M. and Patrick J. McEwan (eds.), CostEffectiveness and Educational Policy: American Education Finance Association.
McClelland, Robert and Shannon Mok. 2012. “A Review of Recent Research on Labor Supply
Elasticities.” Congressional Budget Office, Working Paper 2012-12.
Peisner-Feinberg, Ellen, Jennifer Schaaf, and Doré LaForett. 2013. Children’s Growth and
Classroom Experiences in Georgia’s Pre-K Program: Findings from the 2011-2012
Evaluation Study. Chapel Hill, NC: Frank Porter Graham Child Development Institute.
Puma, Mike, Stephen Bell, Ronna Cook, Camilla Heid, Pam Broene, Frank Jenkins, Andrew
Mashburn, and Jason Downer. 2012. Third Grade Follow-up to the Head Start Impact
Study Final Report. OPRE Report # 2012-45b. Washington, DC: Office of Planning,
Research and Evaluation, Administration for Children and Families, U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services.
Schweinhart, L. J., Montie, J., Xiang, Z., Barnett, W. S., Belfield, C. R., & Nores, M.
2005. Lifetime effects: The HighScope Perry Preschool study through age 40.
(Monographs of the HighScope Educational Research Foundation, 14). Ypsilanti, MI:
HighScope Press.
Wolfers, Justin. 2006. “Did Unilateral Divorce Laws Raise Divorce Rates? A Reconcilation and
New Results.” American Economic Review 96(5): 1802-1820.

48

Wong, Vivian C., Thomas D. Cook, W. Steven Barnett, and Kwanghee Jung. 2008. “An
Effectiveness-Based Evaluation of Five State Pre-Kindergarten Programs.” Journal of
Policy Analysis and Management 27(1): 122-154.

49

100

50

Figure 1. Percent of 4 Year Olds Enrolled in Public Preschool Programs and
Percent of States Funding Preschool Programs, 1965-2011

80
20
0

0

10

40
60
% of States

% of 4-Year-Olds
20
30

40

Public Preschool Enrollment Rate (left axis)
Head Start Enrollment Rate (left axis)
Percent of States Funding Preschool (right axis)

1960

1970

1980
1990
School Year (Fall)

2000

2010

Sources: October CPS (public preschool enrollment rate), Head Start Bureau (numerator of Head
Start enrollment rate), Vital Statistics (denominator of Head Start enrollment rate), and National Institute
for Early Education Research (state funding dates).

50

10

Figure 2. Relationship between Quality and Access in State-Funded Preschool
Programs, 2011-2012 School Year a

AK AL
RI
WA

TN

MODEOR NM
NV
AZ

KY
NJ

AR

OK

IL LAMD
MI
KS

GA
WV
NY

CT
MA
VA CO
NE

ME

DC

IA

SC

WI

PA
CA

VT
FL

OH
TX

0

Score on Quality Standards Checklist
2
4
6
8

MN

NC

0

20

40
60
80
% of 4 Year Olds in State-Funded Preschool

100

Sources: National Institute for Early Education Research (2012).
a

Dot sizes represent the number of children born in the state four years prior. The dashed line
represents the regression fit, weighting by this figure; the unweighted fit is substantively similar. The
quality standards checklist gives equal weight to each of 10 factors: program has comprehensive early
learning standards; teachers are required to have a BA; teachers are required to have specialized training
in preschool; assistant teachers required to have a Child Development Associates (CDA) Degree (or
equivalent); at least 15 hours per year of in-service required; the maximum class size is 20 students; staff
to child ratios are 1-to-10 or better; program offers vision, hearing, health, and one support service;
program offers at least one meal; program offers site visits.

51

Figure 3. Preschool Enrollment Rates of 4 Year Olds, Overall and by Maternal
Education, 1968-2011
b. Private Preschool Enrollment
100

HS Degree or Less
Some College or More
All 4 Year Olds

20
0

0

20

Percent
40
60

80

HS Degree or Less
Some College or More
All 4 Year Olds

Percent
40
60

80

100

a. Public Preschool Enrollment

1970

1980

1990
2000
School Year (Fall)

2010

1970

1980

HS Degree or Less
Some College or More
All 4 Year Olds

0

20

Percent
40
60

80

100

c. Any Preschool Enrollment
(Public or Private)

1970

1980

1990
2000
School Year (Fall)

2010

Source: October CPS school enrollment supplements, 1968-2011.

52

1990
2000
School Year (Fall)

2010

Figure 4. Event-Study Estimates of the Effect of Introducing High-Quality
Universal Preschool on Preschool Enrollment Rates of 4 Year Olds, by Maternal
Educationa

10
-30

-10

0

-20

10

-10

0

20

30

20

b. Private Preschool Enrollment

40

a. Public Preschool Enrollment

-11

-8

-5

-2

1

4

7

10

13

-11

Year Relative to Year Universal Preschool (Midpoint of 3-Year Window)
HS Degree or Less
Some College or More

-8

-5

-2

1

4

7

10

13

Year Relative to Year Universal Preschool (Midpoint of 3-Year Window)

90% CI
90% CI

HS Degree or Less
Some College or More

90% CI
90% CI

-20

-10

0

10

20

30

c. Any Preschool Enrollment
(Public or Private)

-11

-8

-5

-2

1

4

7

10

13

Year Relative to Year Universal Preschool (Midpoint of 3-Year Window)
HS Degree or Less
Some College or More

90% CI
90% CI

Source: October CPS school enrollment supplements, 1977-2011.
a

States with high-quality preschool programs are Georgia (introduced in fall 1995) and
Oklahoma (introduced in fall 1998). All regressions include state fixed effects and year fixed effects in
addition to dummies for 3-year groupings of year relative to the year that high-quality preschool was
introduced. The coefficients plotted at -11 represented 10 years or more prior to introduction, while the
coefficients plotted at 13 represent 12 or more years after; the dummy at -2, representing the three years
immediately prior to introduction, is omitted to identify the model. All regressions were weighted by the
number of children used to calculate the enrollment rate, and standard errors were clustered on state.

53

Figure 5. Trends in Employment Rates of Mothers of 4 Year Olds and EventStudy Estimates of the Effect of Introducing High-Quality Universal Preschool on
Maternal Employment, by Maternal Educationa

100

a. National Trends

0

20

Percent
40
60

80

HS Degree or Less
Some College or More
All 4-Year-Olds

1970

1980

1990
2000
School Year (Fall)

2010

c. Event-Study Estimates
(Mothers of 5 Years Olds as Additional
Comparison Group)

-30

-10

-10

10

10

30

30

b. Event-Study Estimates
(No Additional Comparison Group)

-8

-5

-2

1

4

7

10

13

-30

-11

Year Relative to Year Universal Preschool (Midpoint of 3-Year Window)
HS Degree or Less
Some College or More

-11

90% CI
90% CI

-8

-5

-2

1

4

7

10

13

Year Relative to Year Universal Preschool (Midpoint of 3-Year Window)
HS Degree or Less
Some College or More

90% CI
90% CI

Source: October CPS school enrollment supplements, 1977-2011.
States with high-quality preschool programs are Georgia (introduced in fall 1995) and
Oklahoma (introduced in fall 1998). Regressions underlying the coefficients in panel b include state fixed
effects and year fixed effects in addition to dummies for 3-year groupings of year relative to the year that
high-quality universal preschool was introduced. The coefficients plotted at -11 represented 10 years or
more prior to introduction, while the coefficients plotted at 13 represent 12 or more years after; the
dummy at -2, representing the three years immediately prior to introduction, is omitted to identify the
model. Regressions underlying the coefficients in panel c include all of the same controls, entered both
directly and interacted with an indicator for whether the mother has a 4 year old. The coefficients plotted
are the coefficients on the interactions with the indicators for year relative to the initiative. All regressions
were weighted the number of observations used to calculate the maternal employment rate, and standard
errors were clustered on state.
a

54

Figure 6. National Trends in Mean NAEP Scale Scores, by Grade, Subject, and
Eligibility for Free or Reduced-Price Luncha

2005

2003

b. Reading

2007

2009

280

300

a. Mathematics
2011

2002 2003

1998

2005

2007

2009

2005

2007

2009

2002 2003

2005

2002 2003

2005

2011

1996

2007

2009

2011

2002
1998

2000
2003

2005

2007

2009

2011

2000

220

2003

2007

2009

2011

200

2000

1998

200

1996

2005

1985

1990

1995
year of potential pre-K entry

2000

2005

2007

2009

2007

2009

2011

1985

1990

2011

2000

1995
year of potential pre-K entry

2000

2005

Grade 4, Free/Reduced-Price Lunch

Grade 4, Not Free/Reduced-Price Lunch

Grade 4, Free/Reduced-Price Lunch

Grade 4, Not Free/Reduced-Price Lunch

Grade 8, Free/Reduced-Price Lunch

Grade 8, Not Free/Reduced-Price Lunch

Grade 8, Free/Reduced-Price Lunch

Grade 8, Not Free/Reduced-Price Lunch

Source: Main NAEP Data Explorer (NDE).
a

2000

2011

220

240

1998
1996

2003

240

2005

2003

260

1996

260

280

2000

Test years (spring) are given above the data points.

55

Figure 7. Event-Study Estimates of the Effect of Introducing High-Quality
Universal Preschool on Fourth and Eighth Grade State Mean NAEP Scores, by
Eligibility for Free or Reduced-Price Luncha
b. Grade 4 Reading
15
10
5
0
-5

-5

0

5

10

15

a. Grade 4 Mathematics

-7.5

-5.5

-3.5

-1.5

.5

2.5

4.5

6.5

-7.5

Cohort Relative to First Cohort with Universal Preschool (Midpoint of 2-Year Window)
Eligible for Free or Reduced-Price Lunch
Not Eligible for Free or Reduced-Price Lunch

-5.5

-3.5

-1.5

.5

2.5

4.5

6.5

Cohort Relative to First Cohort with Universal Preschool (Midpoint of 2-Year Window)

90% CI
90% CI

Eligible for Free or Reduced-Price Lunch
Not Eligible for Free or Reduced-Price Lunch

90% CI
90% CI

d. Grade 8 Reading
15
10
5
0
-5

-5

0

5

10

15

c. Grade 8 Mathematics

-7.5

-5.5

-3.5

-1.5

.5

2.5

4.5

6.5

-7.5

Cohort Relative to First Cohort with Universal Preschool (Midpoint of 2-Year Window)
Eligible for Free or Reduced-Price Lunch
Not Eligible for Free or Reduced-Price Lunch

-5.5

-3.5

-1.5

.5

2.5

4.5

6.5

Cohort Relative to First Cohort with Universal Preschool (Midpoint of 2-Year Window)

90% CI
90% CI

Eligible for Free or Reduced-Price Lunch
Not Eligible for Free or Reduced-Price Lunch

90% CI
90% CI

Source: Main NAEP Data Explorer (NDE). State mean scores by free/reduced-price lunch status
in math are available for spring 2000, 2003, 2005, 2007, 2009, and 2011. Mean scores by free/reducedprice lunch status in reading are available for spring 1998, 2002, 2003, 2005, 2007, 2009, and 2011.
Grade 4 (8) scores pertain to cohorts of age to enter preschool the fall 6 (10) years prior, assuming normal
grade progression.
a

States with high-quality preschool programs are Georgia (introduced in fall 1995) and Oklahoma
(introduced in fall 1998). All regressions include state fixed effects and cohort fixed effects in addition to
dummies for 2-year groupings of cohorts relative to the first cohort exposed to high-quality universal
preschool. The first and last coefficients in each graph are on dummies set to one for all prior and later
cohorts, respectively; the dummy at -1.5, representing the two cohorts immediately prior to introduction,
is omitted to identify the model. Regression standard errors were clustered on state.

56

Table 1. Preschool Enrollment of 4 Year Olds and Employment of Mothers of 4 Year Olds, by
Maternal Education: 1970, 1985, and 2010

1970

Year:
1985

2010

Change:
1970-1985
1985-2010

Enrolled in Public Preschool
Enrolled in Private Preschool
Enrolled in Any Preschool
Mother Employed Last Week

4.4
6.4
10.9
28.6

a. Mother Has High School Degree or Less
13.7
41.7
9.2
15.4
8.4
8.9
29.0
50.2
18.1
42.4
43.1
13.7

Enrolled in Public Preschool
Enrolled in Private Preschool
Enrolled in Any Preschool
Mother Employed Last Week

5.5
30.1
35.6
31.7

b. Mother Has Some College or More
10.6
31.8
5.1
41.6
33.0
11.4
52.2
64.8
16.6
56.1
61.6
24.3

28.1
-7.0
21.1
0.8

21.2
-8.6
12.6
5.5

Source: Authors' calculations from the October CPS, 1969-71 (for 1970), 1984-86 (for 1985), and 2009-11
(for 2010).

57

Table 2. Differences-in-Differences Estimates of the Impact of High-Quality Universal Preschool on
a
Preschool Enrollment Rates of 4 Year Olds, by Maternal Education
Effect Sizes:

Dependent variable (%)

Baseline DD
2-1

Add Demographics
2-2

Add State Linear
Trends
2-3

a. Mother Has High School Degree or Less (N=1785)
Public Preschool Enrollment Rate
Private Preschool Enrollment Rate
Effect of Public on Private
Overall Preschool Enrollment Rate

†

16.99***†
(1.342)
1.822
(1.974)
0.107
(0.116)

18.68***
(2.487)

18.81***
(2.434)

17.49***
(1.326)
1.191
(2.349)
0.068
(0.135)

17.13***†
(1.136)
3.035***
(0.851)
0.177***
(0.0508)
20.17***†
(1.435)

b. Mother Has Some College or More (N=1784)
Public Preschool Enrollment Rate
Private Preschool Enrollment Rate
Effect of Public on Private
Overall Preschool Enrollment Rate
Controls:
State Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects
Nonwhite (%), Female (%)
State Unemployment Rate
Linear Trends for GA and OK

19.63***
(3.449)
††
-8.296
(5.442)
-0.423**
(0.206)
11.34***
(2.233)

††

19.72***††
(3.535)
-8.044††
(6.105)
-0.408*
(0.239)
11.67***
(2.764)

28.66***††
(2.766)
-14.90***††
(3.244)
-0.520***
(0.0681)
13.77***
(1.134)

Y
Y
N
N
N

Y
Y
Y
Y
N

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Source: Authors' regressions based on state-by-year-by age averages of microdata from the October CPS
School Enrollment Supplements, 1977-2011.
Each non-italicized coefficient is a separate OLS estimate of θ from model (1). See the text for details.
Each italicized coefficient is the two-stage least squares estimate of the effect of the public preschool
enrollment rate on the private preschool enrollment rate, where the instrument for the public preschool
enrollment rate is the post indicator. Regressions are weighted by the number of children used to calculate
the enrollment rate. Standard errors clustered on state are in parentheses. Asterisks indicate statistical
significance based on these conventional standard errors at the ***1 percent, ** 5 percent, or * 10 percent
level. Daggers indicate statistical significance based on Conley and Taber (2011) confidence intervals at the
†† 5 percent or † 10 percent level (and apply to non-italicized DD estimates only).
a

58

Table 3. Differences-in-Differences Estimates of the Impact of High-Quality Universal
Preschool on Monthly Spending on Child Care, by Maternal Educationa

Coefficient on:

Age4 x GA or OK
Age 4
GA or OK

Age4 x GA or OK
Age 4
GA or OK
Additional Controls:
Year Fixed Effects

Baseline DD
3-1

Topcode Spending
3-2

Use Median
Spending
3-3

a. Mother Has High School Degree or Less (N=920)
35.48***
34.94***
-1.723
(9.428)
(9.415)
(4.145)
7.747
8.414
0.0475
(5.716)
(5.703)
(3.582)
-31.34***
-30.36***
-9.438
(5.595)
(5.445)
(6.495)
b. Mother Has Some College or More (N=1008)
-65.86***
-49.69**
-56.17***
(21.66)
(19.45)
(14.12)
70.37***
63.29***
54.39***
(14.25)
(12.40)
(11.57)
-32.30**
-31.47***
4.046
(12.87)
(10.94)
(13.90)
Y

Y

Y

Source: Authors' regressions based on state-by-year-by presence of 4 year old averages of
microdata from the Consumer Expenditure Survey, September 1998-June 2011.
a

Each panel and column represents a separate estimate of model (2). Average monthly childcare
spending is in real 2012 dollars. Sample is limited to families with a 4- and/or 5-year-old child. In
column 3-2, we topcode spending at the 99th percentile before collapsing the data to state-by-yearby-age means. In column 3-3, we collapse the data to cell medians instead of cell means.
Regressions are weighted by the number of families used to calculate the dependent variable.
Standard errors clustered on state are in parentheses. Asterisks indicate statistical significance
based on these conventional standard errors at the ***1 percent or **5 percent level.

59

Table 4. Differences-in-Differences and Triple-Difference Estimates of the Impact of High-Quality
Universal Preschool on Employment Rates of Mothers of 4 Year Olds, by Maternal Educationa

Coefficient on post (Model 1):

Dependent Variable

Baseline
4-1

Add Controls
4-2

Coefficient on post x
age4 (Model 3),
Comparison Group
is (Mothers of) 5 Year
Olds
4-3

a. Mother Has High School Degree or Less
Maternal Employment:
% Mothers at Work Prior Week

-1.874
(2.533)

-1.114
(2.700)

4.728**
(2.273)

19.94***†
(1.408)
-1.361
(1.137)
-0.0683
(0.0544)

18.91***†
(1.386)
-0.638
(0.820)
-0.0337
(0.0424)

15.00***
(3.091)
0.793
(1.942)
0.0529
(0.140)

1,785

1,785

3,570

Child's School Enrollment:
Public School Enrollment Rate (%)
Private School Enrollment Rate (%)
Effect of Public on Private

N (state-by-year-by-age cells)

b. Mother Has Some College or More
Maternal Employment:
% Mothers at Work Prior Week

-4.620***
(1.389)

-4.518***
(1.394)

-1.111
(3.182)

23.32***††
(5.746)
-15.18***††
(1.542)
-0.651***
(0.216)

23.35***††
(6.000)
-14.90***††
(0.989)
-0.638***
(0.189)

16.61*
(8.718)
-6.980***
(1.766)
-0.420***
(0.133)

1,784

1,784

3,568

Y
Y
N
N
N

Y
Y
Y
Y
N

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Child's School Enrollment:
Public School Enrollment Rate (%)
Private School Enrollment Rate (%)
Effect of Public on Private

N (state-by-year-by-age cells)
Controls:
State Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects
Nonwhite (%), Female (%)
State Unemployment Rate
All controls x age4 indicator

60

Source: Authors' regressions based on state-by-year-by age averages of microdata from the October Current
Population Survey, 1977-2011.
a

See the text for further details on model (1) and model (3). Coefficients in italics are two-stage least squares
estimates of the effect of the public school enrollment rate on the private school enrollment rate, where the
instrument for the public school enrollment rate is either post (in columns 4-1 and 4-2) or postxage4 (in column 43). Regressions are weighted by the number of children used to calculate the enrollment rate. Standard errors
clustered on state are in parentheses. Asterisks indicate statistical significance based on these conventional
standard errors at the ***1 percent, **5 percent, or *10 percent level. Daggers indicate statistical significance
based on Conley and Taber (2011) confidence intervals at the †† 5 percent or † 10 percent level (and apply to
non-italicized DD estimates in columns 4-1 and 4-2 only).

61

Table 5. Differences-in-Differences Estimates of the Impact of High-Quality
Universal Preschool on Mothers' Time Use, by Maternal Educationa

Coefficient on:

Age4 x GA or OK
Age 4
GA or OK
Constant

Age4 x GA or OK
Age 4
GA or OK
Constant

Time spent
with child present
5-1

Time spent caring for
and/or helping child
5-2

a. Mother Has High School Degree or Less (N=96)
-46.18*
24.96**
(24.65)
(11.59)
32.74***
16.54**
(11.80)
(6.693)
27.95
-15.65
(41.25)
(10.95)
477.3***
101.6***
(12.12)
(5.787)
b. Mother Has Some College or More (N=102)
2.702
-7.703
(44.41)
(7.352)
13.29
15.51***
(10.50)
(4.867)
-1.274
-7.849
(34.52)
(6.122)
461.8***
121.5***
(7.781)
(3.408)

Source: Authors' regressions based on state-by-presence of 4 year old averages of
microdata from the American Time Use Survey, January 2003-December 2012.
a

Each panel and column represents a separate estimate of model (2). Time is measured in
minutes, and the sample is limited to women in households with a 4- or 5-year-old child,
and to non-holiday weekdays from September through June. Regressions are weighted by
the number of families used to calculate the dependent variable. Standard errors clustered
on state are in parentheses. Asterisks indicate statistical significance based on these
conventional standard errors at the ***1 percent, **5 percent, or *10 percent level.

62

Table 6. Differences-in-Differences Estimates of the Impact of High-Quality Universal Preschool on Fourth Grade NAEP Mathematics and Reading
Scores, by Child's Eligibility for Free or Reduced-Price School Luncha
Effect Sizes:

Dependent variable

Math Scale Score, 4th Grade
N (state-years)
Reading Scale Score, 4th Grade
N (state-years)

Math Scale Score, 4th Grade
N (state-years)
Reading Scale Score, 4th Grade
N (state-years)
Controls:
State Fixed Effects
Cohort Fixed Effects
3+ Cohorts Prior to First Affected Cohort (=1)
Linear Trends for GA and OK
Student Demographics
Years with School Accountability

Baseline DD
6-1

Baseline +
Indicator for 3+
Cohorts Preinitiative
6-2

Baseline + Add
State Linear Trends
6-3

Specification 2 +
Student
Demographics
6-4

Specification 4 +
Other State
Education Policies
6-5

1.769
(1.791)
296
0.398
(2.118)
339

a. Child Eligible for Free or Reduced-Price Lunch
3.201***
2.643*
3.146**
(1.189)
(1.332)
(1.182)
296
296
296
3.288***
2.468
3.011***
(1.095)
(2.472)
(1.083)
339
339
339

3.138**
(1.214)
296
3.154***
(1.155)
339

-0.256
(1.130)
296
-2.968
(1.939)
339

b. Child Not Eligible for Free or Reduced-Price Lunch
0.834
0.467
0.725
(0.627)
(1.089)
(0.593)
296
296
296
-1.332
-0.653
-1.585*
(0.879)
(0.864)
(0.853)
339
339
339

0.857
(0.719)
296
-1.589*
(0.848)
339

Y
Y
N
N
N
N

Y
Y
Y
N
N
N

Y
Y
N
Y
N
N

Y
Y
Y
N
Y
N

Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y

Source: Authors' regressions based on state-by-year test score data from NAEP Data Explorer, data on enrollment by race from the Common Core of Data, and dates
of consequential school accountablity reported in Dee and Jacob (2011).
a Each reported coefficient is a separate estimate of θ from model (1). See the text for details. Standard errors clustered on state are in parentheses. Asterisks indicate
statistical significance at the ***1 percent, **5 percent, or *10 percent level.

63

Table 7. Differences-in-Differences Estimates of the Impact of High-Quality Universal Preschool on Eighth Grade NAEP Mathematics and Reading
Scores, by Child's Eligibility for Free or Reduced-Price School Luncha
Effect Sizes:

Dependent variable

Math Scale Score, 8th Grade
N (state-years)
Reading Scale Score, 8th Grade
N (state-years)

Math Scale Score, 8th Grade
N (state-years)
Reading Scale Score, 8th Grade
N (state-years)
Controls:
State Fixed Effects
Cohort Fixed Effects
7+ Cohorts Prior to First Affected Cohort (=1)
Linear Trends for GA and OK
Student Demographics
Years with School Accountability

Baseline DD
7-1

Baseline +
Indicator for 7+
Cohorts Preinitiative
7-2

Baseline + Add
State Linear Trends
7-3

Specification 2 +
Student
Demographics
7-4

Specification 4 +
Other State
Education Policies
7-5

2.015
(1.938)
295
0.193
(2.729)
334

a. Child Eligible for Free or Reduced-Price Lunch
2.724*
2.455**
2.252*
(1.434)
(1.215)
(1.197)
295
295
295
1.014
0.155
0.899
(1.912)
(1.393)
(1.873)
334
334
334

2.152*
(1.121)
295
0.819
(1.874)
334

-1.115
(1.033)
295
-1.078
(2.387)
334

b. Child Not Eligible for Free or Reduced-Price Lunch
-1.009
-1.756***
-1.260
(0.983)
(0.360)
(0.850)
295
295
295
-0.763
0.111
-0.769
(2.304)
(1.061)
(2.294)
334
334
334

-1.293
(0.835)
295
-0.813
(2.297)
334

Y
Y
N
N
N
N

Y
Y
Y
N
N
N

Y
Y
N
Y
N
N

Y
Y
Y
N
Y
N

Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y

Source: Authors' regressions based on state-by-year test score data from NAEP Data Explorer, data on enrollment by race from the Common Core of Data, and dates
of consequential school accountablity reported in Dee and Jacob (2011).
a Each reported coefficient is a separate estimate of θ from model (1). See the text for details. Standard errors clustered on state are in parentheses. Asterisks indicate
statistical significance at the ***1 percent, **5 percent, or *10 percent level.

64

Table 8. Cost-Benefit Analysis of Universal Pre-school Program, Based on Test Score
Impacts in Fourth and Eighth Grades

Dependent variable

Present discounted value

Annual discount rate:
4 percent
5 percent
8-2
8-3

3.4 percent*
8-1

6 percent
8-4

a. Benefits estimated from 4th grade test score impacts
$33,740
$26,997
$18,876
$13,419

Ratio of PDV to total outlays

7.18

5.75

4.02

2.86

Ratio of PDV to net outlays

8.55

6.84

4.78

3.40

Present discounted value

b. Benefits estimated from 8th grade test score impacts
$12,798
$10,240
$7,160
$5,090

Ratio of PDV to total outlays

2.72

2.18

1.52

1.08

Ratio of PDV to net outlays

3.24

2.60

1.81

1.29

Notes: Wage impacts are estimted based on the 2011 age-earnings profile in the Current
Population Survey, assuming a 1.9 percent per year real productivity growth rate and an 80
percent labor force participation rate. A 1 standard deviation increase in math test scores is
assumed to increase earnings by 12 percent. Estimated math score impacts are 0.29 and 0.11
standard deviations in grades 4 and 8, respectively. Present discounted values are compared to
current-year total outlays of $4698 and net outlays of $3946.

65

