NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ENDOGENOUS PROPERTY RIGHTS
Daniel Diermeier
Georgy Egorov
Konstantin Sonin
Working Paper 19734
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19734

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2013

We are grateful to seminar participants in Princeton, Moscow, Frankfurt, Mannheim, Northwestern,
the University of Chicago and to participants of MACIE conference in Marburg and CIFAR meeting
in Toronto for valuable comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Daniel Diermeier, Georgy Egorov, and Konstantin Sonin. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Endogenous Property Rights
Daniel Diermeier, Georgy Egorov, and Konstantin Sonin
NBER Working Paper No. 19734
December 2013
JEL No. D72,D74,P48
ABSTRACT
It is often argued that additional checks and balances provide economic agents with better protection
from expropriation of their wealth or productive capital. We demonstrate that in a dynamic political
economy model this intuition may be flawed. Surprisingly, increasing the number of veto players or
the majority requirement for redistribution may reduce property right protection on the equilibrium
path. The reason is the existence of two distinct mechanisms of property rights protection. One are
formal constraints that allow individuals or groups to block any redistribution which is not in their
favor. The other occurs in equilibrium where agents without such powers protect each other from redistribution.
Players without formal blocking power anticipate that the expropriation of other similar players will
ultimately hurt them and thus combine their influence to prevent redistributions. Yet, such incentives
can be undermined by adding formal constraints. The flip-side of this effect is that individual investment
efforts might require coordination. The model also predicts that the distribution of wealth in societies
with weaker formal institutions (smaller supermajority requirements) among players without veto
power will tend to be more homogenous.

Daniel Diermeier
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
d-diermeier@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Georgy Egorov
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
g-egorov@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Konstantin Sonin
Higher School of Economics
20 Myasnitskaya ul.
Moscow, 101000, Russia
ksonin@hse.ru

1

Introduction

The protection of property rights is widely viewed as a cornerstone of e¢ ciency and economic
growth (e.g., Coase, 1960, Alchian, 1965, Demsetz 1967, Barro 1998).1 But whether property
rights are e¤ectively protected depends on the political economy of the respective society and
its institutions. Among political institutions, checks and balances have long been viewed as
an essential tool to limit the power of government to expropriate its subjects. The ideas date
back at least to the Roman republic (Polybius [2010], Macchiavelli [1984]) and, in modern
times, to Montesquieu’s Spirit of the Laws (1748 [1989]) and the Federalist papers, the
intellectual foundation of the United States Constitution. In Federalist papers #51, James
Madison argued for the need to contrive the government “as that its several constituent
parts may, by their mutual relations, be the means of keeping each other in their proper
places.”Riker (1987) concurs: “For those who believe, with Madison, that freedom depends
on countering ambition with ambition, this constancy of federal con‡ict is a fundamental
protection of freedom.”
In modern political economy checks and balances have been associated with various
bene…cial consequences.2 North and Weingast (1989) argued that the checks and balances
established by the Glorious Revolution in 1688 provided “the credible commitment by the
government to honour its …nancial agreement [that] was part of a larger commitment to
secure private rights”.3 Similarly, Root (1989) has argued that checks and balances on British
monarchs led to lower borrowing costs compared to the French Kings. Persson, Roland, and
Tabellini (1997, 2000) model checks and balances as the separation of taxing and spending
decisions within budgetary decision-makings. They argue that properly designed checks and
balances improve the accountability of elected o¢ cials and thereby voter utility and limit
rent-seeking by politicians. Keefer (2004) argues that “The absence of multiple veto players
in countries often means that some groups in society are less represented than they otherwise
would be.”4
1

Alchian (2008) de…nes private property as “the exclusive authority to determine how a resource is used.”
Recent research in political economy, however, has also pointed out that in some domains check and
balances may lead to ine¢ ciencies (e.g., see Diermeier and Myerson, 1999, on ine¢ ciencies of bicameralism
due to incentives to create restrictive internal procedures and grid-lock).
3
Much of the literature on the political economy of checks and balances has focused on incentives for
expropriation by a monarch and the associated commitment problem (e.g. North and Weingast 1989, Root
1989). Our approach allows us to consider the issue of democratic expropriation, e.g., the expropriation of
a minority by a majority. This was one of the central concerns of, e.g., Montesquieu and Madison, and led
to various power sharing arrangements from multi-cameralism to Federal political structures.
4
In a recent paper, Acemoglu, Robinson, and Torvik (2011) have argued that this phenomenon can be
used to explain why voters may sometimes dismantle checks and balances. Under checks and balances,
politicians receive less rents throug the political process which makes them more susceptible to be bribed by
elites. Removing checks and balances leads to more rents, but better policy outcomes for the majority.
2

1

In this paper, we study political mechanisms that ensure protection of individuals’property. Checks and balances come in di¤erent forms such as the separation of powers between
the legislative, executive, and judicial branches of government, multi-cameralism, or federalism. However, at its core are institutional limits on majority rule, usually in the form
of veto rights for individuals or groups, and supermajority requirements. Such limits allow
individuals or collectives to block any redistribution without their consent. In our model,
these serve as abstract representations of checks and balances.5 Those include a president
with veto powers, a supreme court that can strike down a law as unconstitutional, or the
Spartan Gerousia, the Council of Elders, that could veto motions passed by the Apella, the
citizens’assembly (Plutarch [2010]). If we interpret property rights as institutions that sustain allocations unless changed by the legislature, we can formally investigate the e¤ect of
checks and balances on the allocation of property rights and prerogatives.6 .
Much of existing work has interpreted veto rights as constraints on collective choice
processes. They correspond to individual or collective rights to block any undesirable reallocation. Often, though not always, they are formalized in constitutions or codes of law.
Formally, they are features of the game-form. But property rights can be protected in other
ways. That is, the protection of property rights can also be understood as equilibrium outcomes of interacting economic agents. The property rights of an individual may be respected
in equilibrium not because he is entitled or powerful enough to protect them on his own, i.e.
has veto power, but because others …nd it in their respective interest to respect such rights.
Speci…cally, members of a coalition, formed in equilibrium, have an incentive to oppose the
expropriation of each other because they know that once a member of the group is expropriated, others will be next in the line for expropriation. Such groups serve as endogenous
blocking coalitions, i.e. collections of agents that in equilibrium can prevent any path that
makes any of the members worse o¤. That is, an agent’s incentive to protect a particular
property rights system hinges on the rational foresight of what might happen once the redistributive process is initiated. This means that property rights systems can be stable even
in the absence of explicit veto powers.7
Paradoxically, adding additional exogenous protection (e.g., by increasing the number of
5

Some scholars have argued that veto player arrangements are the most important feature of political
governance structures (e.g., Tsebelis 2002).
6
While we use the language of “voting” and “vetos” which suggests a legislative process, our model can
also be interpreted as power struggle between individuals and coalitions. Here a “veto” simply means that
an individual has the military or economic means to block any redistribution without his consent.
7
Similar e¤ects can be observed in models of legislative bargaining in dynamic policy environments with
a persistent proposer (Diermeier and Fong, 2011). In that model it is the fact that the persistent agenda
setter, e¤ectively the sole veto player, can always reconsider a proposal that induces a group of voters to
“protect” each other’s allocation.

2

veto players) may lead to the break-down of an equilibrium with stable property rights (see
Example 2), as the newly empowered agent (e.g., one who was granted or has acquired on
his own veto power) now no longer as an incentive to protect others. A similar e¤ect can
occur with additional super-majority requirements. Thus, by adding additional constraints,
in the form of veto players or super-majority requirements, the protection property rights
may inadvertently be eroded. In other words, agents’property rights may be well-protected
in the absences of formal constraints, while strengthening formal constraints may worsen
property rights protection. Consider the following example.
Example 1 Five legislators decide how to split 15 units of wealth, with the status quo being
(1; 2; 3; 4; 5). Legislator #5 is the sole veto player and reallocation requires a majority of
votes. For the sake of simplicity we assume that when agents are indi¤erent, they support the
proposer. In a standard legislative bargaining model in the tradition of Baron and Ferejohn
(1989a) a proposer makes a proposal to the legislature and the game ends when the proposal
is accepted. In this setting a proposer, say legislator #5, would simply build a coalition
to expropriate two agents, say agents #3 and #4; and capture the surplus resulting in the
allocation (1; 2; 0; 0; 12). But this logic does not hold in a dynamic model where the agreed
upon allocation can be reallocated in the subsequent periods. That is, with the new status
quo (0; 0; 2; 1; 12); agent #5 might propose to expropriate agents #1 and #2 by proposing
(0; 0; 0; 0; 15), which is accepted in equilibrium. Anticipating this, agents #1 and #2 should
not agree to the …rst expropriation, thus becoming the e¤ective guarantors of property rights
of agents #3 and #4.8
To demonstrate which allocations are stable when further reallocations are possible, consider the simplest possible case. Allocation (0; 0; 0; 0; 15) is stable as agent #5 has veto
power, while allocations where where a single agent among #1–4 has some wealth and the
rest has zero (e.g., (0; 1; 0; 0; 14), (3; 0; 0; 0; 12), or (1; 1; 0; 0; 13)) are unstable, as the veto
player can always use two of the remaining agents to redistribute all wealth to himself. Allocation (1; 1; 1; 0; 12) ;however, is stable: in order to improve his position, the veto player
must either move to (0; 0; 0; 0; 15) or to an unstable allocation (which ultimately leads to the
same result). For any such transition, the veto player will not get enough votes from players
with su¢ cient foresight. Notice, however, that (1; 1; 1; 1; 11) is unstable: the veto player can
expropriate one of the non-veto ones and gain consent of the remaining three as they know
that there will be no further reallocations after the initial expropriation. In general, one
can prove that allocation (x1 ; x2 ; x3 ; x4 ; x5 ) is stable if and only if among the four non-veto
8

We will see the later that the original status quo allocation (1; 2; 3; 4; 5) is not stable either. The allocation
(3; 3; 3; 0; 6), however, is stable, and there is an equilibrium where it is reached.

3

agents, three have the same wealth (positive or zero), and the remaining agent has zero.
This simple example points out to an important phenomenon, which is much more general. Protection of property rights may not be based on a formal set of rules, but emerge from
equilibrium behavior of economic agents, whose commitment to protection of property rights
hinges on rational foresight. The critical element is the observation that property rights are
dynamic in nature. For example, the right to own a parcel of land means that the owner
bene…ts from the income stream generated from the asset. In a political economy context
this means that we can capture property rights as equilibrium phenomena that generate a
stream of bene…ts to individuals according to a status quo allocation of assets. A status quo
allocation of assets stays in place for the next period unless it is changed by the political
decision mechanism in which case the newly chosen allocation becomes the status quo for
the next period.
The logic of endogenous veto power explains how a small change in formal political rules
might lead to a dramatic reallocation. In a historical context, this might help to explain why
rulers often oppose even small concessions to the political opposition. Many monarchs from
Charles I of England to Nicholas II of Russia, for instance, would not concede any of their
formidable formal power until the very end (Schwarz and Sonin, 2009).
Our next example demonstrates the workings of this logic formally. A small change in
political rights, an addition of a veto player, drastically changes the equilibrium: the process
of redistribution will involve the majority of agents (with about one half of agents being
expropriated) and the most part of the society’s wealth.
Example 2 To see this, let us modify Example 1. There are again …ve agents, and three
votes are required to make a change, but now there are two veto players instead of one,
agents #4 and #5. If only these two players may make a proposal, all allocations of the
type (0; 0; 0; x4 ; x5 ) are stable, and those of the type (x1 ; x2 ; x3 ; x4 ; x5 ), where one or two
out of x1 ; x2 ; x3 are zeroes, are unstable (the two veto players will get the vote of one agent
with zero and redistribute the assets of the remaining two agents). But then any allocation
such that x1 = x2 = x3 = 1 is stable, because, within the realm of stable states, it is
impossible to improve the welfare of the veto players without hurting all of non-veto players.
Proceeding inductively, one can prove that an allocation is stable if and only if x1 = x2 = x3 .
Thus, the allocation (1; 1; 0; 1; 12) with two veto players, players #4 and #5, is unstable as
x1 = x2 6= x3 : The addition of a new veto player (agent #4) leads to expropriation of agents
#1 and #2: if there is an o¤er to move to (0; 0; 0; 3; 12); (0; 0; 0; 2; 13); or (0; 0; 0; 1; 14);
there will be the majority of three, including both veto players, in support of this motion.9
9

We ignore for the moment the possibility that agent #5 might block moving to (0; 0; 0; 2; 13) in hope

4

We see here an interesting phenomenon. The naive intuition would suggest that giving
one extra player (agent #4 in this example) veto power would make it more di¢ cult for
agent #5 to expropriate the rest of the group. Our analysis, however, shows that this is not
the case. On the contrary, the introduction of a new veto player breaks the stable coalition
of non-veto players, and makes #5; the agenda-setter, more powerful. Beforehand, nonveto players sustained an equal allocation, precisely because they were individually more
vulnerable. With only one veto player and an equal allocation for agents #2; #3, and #4,
the three non-veto players formed an endogenous veto group, which blocked any transition
that hurts the group as a whole (even one of them). Here, an additional veto player makes
expropriation more, not less, likely.
The example provides another important observation. With one veto player, #5, allocation (1; 1; 0; 1; 12) is stable. Adding one veto player (say, agent #4) makes allocation
(1; 1; 0; 1; 12) unstable as agent #4 would now be willing to join #3 and #5 in expropriating
#1–2. The critical role is played by #4: previously, he was opposing expropriation of #1–2
as he would have been vulnerable in the next round. Once he is safe as a veto player, he
ceases to oppose the expropriation of #1–2. A resulting stable allocation is (0; 0; 0; x; y);
where x

1; y

12, and x + y = 15: Both the amount of wealth being redistributed and

the number of agents a¤ected by expropriation is signi…cant. The number of agents who
stand to lose is two, close to half the total number of agents, and a …fth of the total wealth
is redistributed through voting (this last number would be even greater if the veto player
#5 were poorer in the beginning).
Changes to the set of veto players is not the only signi…cant change to consider. We
can explore the impact of changing supermajority rules. Like veto players, supermajority
rules are usually considered safeguards to make reallocation more di¢ cult. As we will see in
the next example, this intuition is ‡awed. Adding super-majority requirements may lead to
additional redistribution.
Example 3 As above, consider an economy with …ve agents, which makes redistributive
decisions by majority, and one of which (#5) has veto power. With one veto player, #5,
allocation (1; 1; 1; 0; 12) is stable. Now, instead of a change in the number of veto agents,
consider a change in the supermajority requirements. If a new rule requires four votes, rather
than three, the status quo allocation becomes unstable. Instead, (1; 1; 0; 0; 13) becomes stable,
and this move is supported by coalition of four agents out of …ve. (The veto-player, #5;
bene…ts from the move, #4 is indi¤erent as he gets 0 in both allocations, and #1–2 support
this move as they realize that with the new supermajority requirement they form a group
that the eventual outcome is (0; 0; 0; 1; 14) which player #5 prefers.

5

which is su¢ cient to protect its members against any expropriation.) Thus, an increase in
supermajority may result in expropriation and redistribution.
A naive view of supermajority requirements suggests that raising the supermajority requirement should strengthen property rights. As Example 3 demonstrates, this might produce the opposite: a number of agents are expropriated. Proposition 5 below establishes that
this phenomenon, as well the one discussed in Example 2, is generic: adding a veto plater
or raising the supermajority requirement almost always leads to a wave of redistribution.
To provide a general characterization of politically stable allocations of wealth, we use
the approach developed in Acemoglu, Egorov, and Sonin (2008) and Acemoglu, Egorov, and
Sonin (2012). In particular, we characterize the (Markov perfect) political equilibrium and
the stable allocations as outcomes of a non-cooperative voting game. More precisely, we
show that stable allocations correspond to the von Neumann-Morgenstern stable set, and
may be found using a recursive algorithm. We then use this characterization to obtain the
comparative statics results described above.10
Our results also provide a new perspective on the role of veto players on policy stability.
The existing literature has focused on the role of veto players in a static environment. One
approach has conceptualized veto players as constraints on majority rule in a social choice
theoretic environment (e.g., Tsebelis, 2002). Another approach has adapted the sequential
bargaining approach developed by Baron and Ferejohn (1989b). Examples include Romer
and Rosenthal (1978), Diermeier and Myerson (1994), McCarthy (2000), Cameron and McCarthy (2004), and Persson, Roland, and Tabellini (1997, 2000). The policy environments
in these models, however, are static: once a decision is made it is not revised and the chosen
policy does not in‡uence future decisions. (See Bernheim, Rangel, and Rayo, 2006, on the
power of the last proposer in a legislative setting.)
Tsebelis (2002) summarizes the main insights of the standard (static) veto players theory
on policy consequences as follows: “The veto players theory expects policy stability (impossibility of signi…cant change of the status quo) to be caused by many veto players, by
big ideological distances among them, by high quali…ed majority thresholds (or equivalents)
in any collective veto player.”11 Keefer (2004) asserts that “as the number of veto players
10

Our analysis contains the results of Diermeier and Fong (2011) and Diermeier and Fong (2012) as a
special case. Diermeier and Fong considered a single persistent proposer, who also, by de…nition, was the
single veto player. We separate proposer and veto power, which allows us to study the e¤ects of changing
the number of veto players and super-majority rules.
11
Spiller and Tomassi (2008, in Handbook of NIE) argue that “The main deterrent to stable policies is
that government controls both the administrative and the legislative processes. Thus, political changes that
bring about a change in government can also bring about legislative changes. By having few institutional
checks and balances, such systems have an inherent instability that raises questions about their ability to

6

increases, independent of their preferences, their incentives to o¤er favors to special interests
diminishes,”and corroborates this with empirical evidence.
Our analysis shows that in a dynamic policy environment this intuition no longer holds.
Examples of continuing policies include entitlements such as social security, monetary policy,
but also allocations of land, property and privileges, and many others. In such environments,
the policy or allocation remains in e¤ect unless it is changed by the legislature. There is a
growing literature in political economy that has investigated dynamic policy environments
(Baron, 1996, Battaglini and Coate, 2007, 2008, Battaglini and Palfrey, 2007, Bowen and
Zahran, 2012, Dekel, Jackson, and Wolinsky, 2009, Diermeier and Fong, 2011, Dixit, Grossman, and Gul, 2000, Duggan and Kalandrakis, 2011, Kalandrakis, 2004, 2007, Morelli, 1999).
Our analysis shows that once we consider a dynamic policy environment policy stability
should be viewed as an equilibrium phenomenon that is sustained by the long-run incentives
of political agents. Adding additional veto players or strengthening super-majority requirements changes the dynamic equilibrium of the political economy and may lead to signi…cant
redistribution and policy change.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces our general
model. In Section 3, we establish the existence of (pure-strategy Markov perfect) equilibrium
in a non-cooperative game and provide full characterization of stable wealth allocations.
Section 4 focuses on the impact of changes in the number of veto players or supermajority
requirements. Section 5 contains an extension, in which collective decisions over wealth
distribution are preceded by an investment stage.

2

Setup

Consider a set N of n = jN j political agents who have to choose an outcome out of a …nite
set A of feasible allocations. We assume that A

Rn , and we will use lower indices (xi ) to

denote the amount that individual i gets under allocation x 2 A. Throughout, we focus on
the case where agents redistribute b indivisible objects, so
n
o
Xn
A = x 2 (N [ f0g)n :
xi = b .
i=1

Time is discrete and indexed by t > 0, and in each period there is a status quo xt 2 A. The
initial status quo x0 is given exogenously, while xt for t

1 is determined through a voting

provide regulatory commitment.” Making a more general point, Allston and Mueller (2008, in Handbook of
NIE) state: “A set of universally shared beliefs in a system of checks and balances is what separates populist
democracies from democracies with respect for the rule of law.” Gehlbach and Malesky (2010) provide a
formal model where more numerous veto players might help a policy reform.

7

procedure in period t. More precisely, in period t an alternative x defeats xt
12

t

x if it gains the support of a winning coalition of agents.

1

and becomes

In each period t, each agent i

gets instantaneous utility xti and acts as to maximize his continuation utility
Uit

=

xti

+

1
X

j t+j
xi ,

j=1

where

2 (0; 1) is a common discount factor. We will focus on the case where

is close to

1, i.e. individuals are su¢ ciently forward-looking.13

To de…ne which coalitions are powerful enough to redistribute, we use the language of
winning coalitions. Let V

N be a non-empty set of veto players (denote v = jV j; without

loss of generality, let us assume that V corresponds to the last v agents n

v + 1; : : : n), and

let k 2 [v; n] be a positive integer. A coalition W is winning if and only if (a) V
(b) jW j

W and

k. The set of winning coalitions is denoted by W:
W = X 2 2N n f?g : jXj

k and V

X .

In this case, we say that the society is governed by a k-rule with veto players V , meaning that
a transition is successful if it is supported by at least k players and no veto player opposes it.
We will compare the results for di¤erent k and V . We maintain the assumption that there is
at least one veto player— that V is non-empty— throughout the paper; this helps us capture
various political institutions, e.g., a supreme court, but it is also helpful in ruling out cycles.
We do no require that k > n=2, so we allow for minority rules. For example, 1-rule with the
set of veto players fig is a dictatorship of legislator i.

The timing of the game below uses the notion of a protocol (e.g., Acemoglu, Egorov, and

Sonin, 2012, Ray and Vohra, 2013). A protocol is a sequence (permutation) of legislators who
are able to make proposals. We assume that only veto players are able to make proposals,14 so
the sequence is described by the order of veto players,

1; : : : ;

v

(e.g., according to seniority

or in alphabetical order). The protocol is the same for all states and de…nes both the sequence
in which legislators make proposals and vote (both assumptions are non-consequential for
the results). More precisely, the timing of the game in period t
12

1 is the following.15

Acemoglu, Egorov and Sonin (2012) consider an environment where political power may depend on the
state. The characterization results in this paper are made possible by keeping power allocation (i.e. the set
of all possible winning coalitions in each state) constant, which is natural in a legislative bargaining context.
13
This assumption is common in dynamic bargaining models and allows us to focus on long-run outcomes.
See, e.g., Acemoglu, Egorov, and Sonin (2009, 2012) and Diermeier and Fong (2011).
14
This assumption simpli…es the analysis and formal statements considerably, but it is not necessary for
the main results in this paper.
15
There are many game forms that would yield to identical results. For example, we could have each
agenda-setter nominate an alternative and then proceed to choosing one that will be put for a vote against
the status-quo. To simplify the exposition and proofs, we opted for a simpler game.

8

1. For j = 1, legislator
( 1; : : : ;

v ),

j

is recognized as an agenda-setter as described by the protocol

and either proposes an alternative z j 6= xt

1

or passes (in which case we

write z j = ?).

2. If legislator j passed and j < v, the game moves to stage 1 with j increased by 1, and
if j = n, then xt = xt

1

and the game moves to stage 5.

3. If zj 6= ?, then all legislators vote in a sequence given by protocol , yes or no.
4. If the set of those who voted yes, Y j ;is a winning coalition, i.e. Y j 2 W, then the new
allocation is xt = z j , otherwise xt = xt 1 .

5. Each legislator i receives an instantaneous payo¤ xti .
The equilibrium concept we use in this game of full information is Markov Perfect equilibrium in pure strategies, with an additional requirement: we impose that when a legislator is
indi¤erent between continuation payo¤s given by the two subgames, he votes yes, and when
he is indi¤erent between making a proposal and not, he does not.16 One can interpret it as
that proposing a redistribution, as well as resisting a redistribution, is slightly costly, but
passively approving it is not. We do not model cost of redistribution explicitly to simplify
exposition and to save on notation.

3

Analysis

Our strategy is as follows. We start by proving some basic results about equilibria of the noncooperative game described above. Then, we characterize stable allocations, i.e. allocations
with no expropriations, and demonstrate that the stable allocations correspond to equilibria
of the non-cooperative game. We then proceed to studying comparative statics with respect
to the number of veto players, di¤erent voting rules (majority requirements), and equilibrium
paths that follow an exogenous shock to some agent’s wealth.

3.1

Non-cooperative Characterization

Every pure-strategy Markov Perfect Equilibrium (MPE)
rise to a transition mapping

=

(we will omit

of the non-cooperative game gives

whenever it leads to no ambiguity).

t

This mapping is de…ned as follows: If x is the allocation in period t, then the allocation
16

This assumption is technical and allows for a simpler characterization of stable allocations. Without it,
the main insights on stability and the e¤ects of majority requirements would still hold, but would be less
transparent.

9

is xt+1 =

in period t + 1 determined by the pro…le of equilibrium strategies

(xt ). The

Markovian property ensures that this transition mapping is well-de…ned. The usefulness
of the mapping

is twofold: …rst, it allows us to capture equilibrium paths in terms of

allocations and transitions rather than individuals’agenda-setting and voting strategies (i.e.,
more concisely), and second, it allows continuation utilities to be written in a very simple
form. If allocation xt is chosen in period t, then the continuation utility of legislator i from
period t onwards is
Uit

x

t

t

=x +

1
X

j

j

xt

i

.

j=1

Iterating the mapping
if

is acyclic. (Mapping

gives a sequence of mappings ;
is acyclic if x 6=

2

;

(x) implies x 6=

3

; : : :, which must converge

(x) for any

show that every MPE satis…es this property.) Denote this limit by
for some t0 as the set A is …nite. We say that mapping
equivalent to

=

2

), and we call an MPE

we call allocation x stable if

1

> 1; we will

, which is simply

is one-step if

=

1

t0

(this is

simple if

is one-step. Given an MPE ,

1

maps any allocation into a stable

(x) = x. Naturally,

allocation.
Our …rst result deals with existence of an equilibrium. The following theorem shows
that an MPE exists for any protocol when the discount factor

is su¢ ciently high. More

importantly, it demonstrates formally that our approach is essentially protocol-free and
justi…es our focus on simple MPE: for any two protocols, the …xed point of an equilibrium
transition mapping under one protocol is a reshu- ing of a …xed point of the equilibrium
transition mapping of the other protocol.
Proposition 1 There exists

0

< 1 such that for any discount factor

2(

0 ; 1):

1. For any protocol , there exists a Markov Perfect Equilibrium . Moreover, there is a
simple MPE.
2. Every MPE

is acyclic. If a transition mapping

under some MPE
that

=

0

(i.e.,

=

1

is the limit of transition iterations

for some ), then there is a simple MPE

0

such

.

Apart from existence, this result implies that we can, without any loss of generality, focus
on simple equilibria. Indeed, they always exist (part 1) and they result in the same ultimate
allocations that an MPE can support (part 2); moreover, we show in the Appendix that the
set of mappings that may be supported by a simple MVE does not depend on the protocol
. The proof of Proposition 1 is technically cumbersome and is relegated to the Appendix.
10

Proposition 1 shows existence of an equilibrium. The following Example 4 demonstrates
that the equilibrium is not necessarily unique: there may be multiple equilibria. However,
the set of stable allocations that may be reached with these equilibria is the same for any
protocol.
Example 4 Suppose there are b = 3 units of wealth, four agents, the required number of votes is k = 3, and the set of veto players is V = f#4g. In this case, there
is a simple equilibrium with transition mapping

, under which allocations (0; 0; 0; 3),

(1; 1; 0; 1), (1; 0; 1; 1) and (0; 1; 1; 1) are stable. Speci…cally, we have the following transitions:

(2; 1; 0; 0) =

(2; 0; 1; 0) =
has
0

(1; 2; 0; 0) = (1; 1; 0; 1);

(1; 0; 2; 0) =

(x) = (0; 0; 0; 3).

(0; 2; 1; 0) =

(0; 1; 2; 0) = (0; 1; 1; 1);

(1; 1; 1; 0) = (1; 0; 1; 1); and any allocation with x4 = 2

However, another mapping

0

coinciding with

except that

(1; 1; 1; 0) = (1; 1; 0; 1) may also be supported in equilibrium.

3.2

Stable Allocations

Our next goal is to get a more precise characterization of equilibrium mappings and stable
allocations. Let us de…ne a binary relation B (interpreted as a “dominance” relation) on A
as follows:
x B y () fi 2 N : xi

yi g 2 W and xj > yj for some j 2 V .

Intuitively, allocation x dominates allocation y if some agenda-setter strictly prefers x to y
so as to be willing to make this motion, and there is a winning coalition that (weakly) prefers
x to y. Note that this does not imply that x will be proposed or supported in an actual
voting against y because of further changes this move may lead to. Following the standard
de…nition (von Neumann and Morgenstern, 1947, Greenberg, 1990), we call a set of states
S

A von Neumann-Morgenstern- (vNM-)stable if the following two conditions hold: (i)

For no states x; y 2 S it holds that y B x (internal stability); and (ii) For each x 62 S there
exists y 2 S such that y B x (external stability).

Below, we prove that in our case, the vNM-stable set is unique, and corresponds to the

…xed points of transition mappings of non-cooperative equilibria described in Proposition 1.
Let us denote q = k
coalition; d = m

v, the number of non-veto players that is required in any winning

q+1 = n

k + 1, the size of a minimal blocking coalition of non-

veto players; and, …nally, r = bm=dc, the maximum number of pair-wise disjoint blocking

coalition that non-veto players may be split into.
Proposition 2

1. For the binary relation B, a vNM-stable set exists and is unique.
11

2. Each element x of this set S has the following structure: the set of non-veto players
M = N n V may be split into a disjoint union of r groups G1 ; : : : ; Gr of size d and one

(perhaps empty) group G0 of size m

rd, such that inside each group, the distribution

of wealth is equal: xi = xj = xGk whenever i; j 2 Gk for some k

1, and xi = 0 for

any i 2 G0 . In other words, up to a permutation of members in M :
0

1

x 2 S , x = @ 1 ; : : : ; 1 ; 2 ; : : : ; 2 ; : : : ; r ; : : : ; r ; 0; : : : ; 0 ; xm+1 ; : : : ; xn A .
| {z } | {z } |
| {z } | {z }
{z
}
d times

3. There exists

0

d times

d times

m rd times

< 1 such that for any discount factor

(x) = x , x 2 S.

2 (

0 ; 1)

veto players

and any MPE

,

The proof of Parts 1 and 2 is important for understanding the structure of endogenous
veto groups, and we prove it in the text (the proof of Part 3 is technical, and we relegate it
to the Appendix). We show that starting from any wealth allocation x 2 S, it is impossible
to redistribute the units between agents without making at least d agents worse o¤, and thus

no redistribution would gain support from a winning coalition. In contrast, starting from
any allocation x 2
= S, such redistribution is possible. Furthermore, our proof will show that

in any transition, the number of individuals who are worse-o¤ as a result is limited to the
d

1 richest non-veto players.
Proof of Proposition 2, Parts 1 and 2. We will prove that set S, as de…ned in Part

2, is vNM-stable, thus ensuring existence. To show internal stability, suppose that x; y 2 S

and y B x, and let the r groups be G1 ; : : : ; Gr and H1 ; : : : ; Hr , respectively. Without loss
of generality, we can assume that each set of groups is ordered so that xGj and yHj are
non-increasing in j for 1

j

r. Let us prove, by induction, that xGj

yHj for all j.

The induction base is as follows. Suppose that the statement is false and xG1 > yH1 ; then
xG1 > ys for all s 2 M . This yields that for all agents i 2 G1 ; we have xi > yi . Since the
total number of agents in G1 is d, G1 is a blocking coalition, and therefore it cannot be true
that yj

xj for a winning coalition, contradicting that y B x.

For the induction step, suppose that xGl

yHl for 1

l < j, and also assume, to obtain

a contradiction, that xGj > yHj . Given the ordering of groups, this means that for any l; s
S
such that 1 l j and j s r, xGl > yHs . Consequently, for agent i 2 jl=1 Gl to have
Sj 1
yi xi , he must belong to s=1
Hs . This implies that for at least jd (j 1) d = d agents
Sj
in l=1 Gl M , it cannot be the case that yi xi , which contradicts the assumption that
P
P
y B x. This establishes that xGj
yHj for all j, and therefore i2M xi
i2M yi . But

y B x would require that xi
yi for all i 2 V with at least one inequality strict, which
P
P
implies b = i2N xi < i2N yi = b, a contradiction. This proves internal stability of set S.
12

Let us now show that the external stability condition holds. To do this, we take any x 62 S

and will show that there is y 2 S such that y B x. Without loss of generality, we can assume
that xi is non-increasing for 1

i

poorest). Let us denote Gj = f(j

m (i.e., non-veto players are ordered from richest to
Sr
1) d + 1; : : : ; jdg for 1 j r and G0 = M n
j=1 Gj .

Since x 62 S, it must be that either for some Gj , 1

r, the agents in Gj do not get the

j

same allocation, or they do, but some individual i 2 G0 has xi > 0. In the latter case, we
de…ne y by

yi =

8
<
:

xi +

if i

xi
P0

xj

j2G0

dr or i > m + 1;
if dr < i m;
if i = m + 1

(In other words, we take everything possessed by individuals in G0 and distribute it among
veto players, for example, by giving everything to one of them). Obviously, y 2 S and y B x.

If there exists a group Gj such that not all of its members have the same amount of

wealth, let j be the smallest such number. For i 2 Gl with l < j, we let yi = xi . Take the

…rst d 1 members of group Gj , Z = f(j 1) d + 1; : : : ; jd 1g. Together, they possess
Pjd 1
z =
1) xjd (the inequality is strict precisely because not all xi in
i=(j 1)d+1 xi > (d

Gj are equal). Let us now take these z units and redistribute it among all the agents
(perhaps including those in Z) in the following way. For each s : j < s < r, we let
y(s

1)d

= y(s

1)d+1

=

= ysd

1

= x(s

1)d ;

this makes these d agents having the same

amount of wealth and being weakly better o¤ as the agent with number (s

1) d was the

richest among them.
Now, observe that in each group s, we spend at most (d
(d

1) x(s

where Z 0

1)d

1) x(s

xsd . For s = r, we take d agents as follows: D = f(r

Z is a subset of the …rst d

(m

(r

1) d + 1) = rd

m

make D a collection of exactly d agents (notice that Z = ? if jG0 j = d
o¤ and spending at most (d

1) x(r

1)d

1)d

xsd

1

1) d; : : : ; mg [ Z 0 ,

1 agents needed to

0

G0 = ?). For all i 2 D, we let yi = x(r

1)d

1 and Z 0 = Z if

(thus making all members of G0 weakly better

units) and we let yi = 0 for each i 2 Z n Z 0 . We

have thus de…ned yi for all i 2 M and distributed
c

(d

thus having z

1) xjd

x(j+1)d +

+ x(r

2)d

x(r

1)d

+ x(r

1)d

= (d

1) xjd ;

c > 0 remaining in our disposal. As before, we let ym+1 = xm+1 + z

c

and yi = xi for i > m + 1. We have thus constructed y 2 S such that ym+1 > xm+1 and

fi 2 N : yi < xi g

Z. The latter, given jZj

d

1, implies fi 2 N : yi

xi g 2 W, which

means y B x. This completes the proof of external stability, and thus S is vNM-stable.

Let us now show that S is a unique stable set de…ned by B. Suppose not, so there is S0
P
that is also vNM-stable. Let us prove that x 2 S , x 2 S0 by induction on i2M xi . The
13

induction base is trivial: if xi = 0 for all i 2 M , then x 2 S by de…nition of S. If x 2
= S0 ,
then there must be some y such that y B x. But for such y,
b=
a contradiction.

X

i2N

yi

X

i2V

yi >

X

i2V

xi =

X

i2N

xi = b;

The induction step is as follows. Suppose that for some x with
0

P

i2M

xi = j > 0, x 2 S

but x 2
= S (the vice-versa case is treated similarly). By external stability of S0 , x 2
= S0
P
P
implies that for some y 2 S0 , y B x, which in turn yields that i2V yi > i2V xi : We have
For y such that

X
P

i2M

i2M

yi = b

X

i2V

yi < b

X

i2V

xi =

X

i2M

xi = j:

yi < j induction yields that y 2 S , y 2 S0 , and thus y 2 S.

Consequently, there exists some y 2 S such that y B x, but this contradicts x 2 S. This
contradiction establishes uniqueness of the stable set.

The characterization of stable allocations obtained in Proposition 1 gives several important insights. First, the set of stable allocations (…xed points of any transition mapping
under any MPE) does not depend on the mapping; it maps into itself when either the veto
players V or the non-veto players N n V are reshu- ed in any way. Second, the allocation of

wealth among veto players does not have any e¤ect on stability of allocations. Third, each
stable allocation has a well-de…ned “class” structure: every non-veto player with a positive
allocation is part of a group of size d (or a multiple of d) of equally-endowed individuals who
have incentives to protect each other’s interests.17
To demonstrate how this protection works, consider the following example.
Example 5 There are b = 15 units. Take n = 5 individuals with one veto agent (#5)
and a supermajority requirement k = 4 (i.e., a supermajority of four-…fths is needed for a
transition). Then d = 2 and r = 2, so stable allocations have two groups of size two. In
particular, allocation x = (4; 4; 2; 2; 3) is stable. Let

be a transition mapping for some

simple MPE .
Suppose that we, exogenously, remove a unit from agent #2 and give it to the veto player;
i.e., consider y = (4; 3; 2; 2; 4). This resulting allocation is unstable, and agent #1 will
necessarily be expropriated. The way redistribution may take place is not unique; for example,
(y) = (3; 3; 2; 2; 5) is possible, but so are

(y) = (2; 3; 3; 2; 5) or

17

(y) = (2; 3; 2; 3; 5).

It is permissible that two groups have equal allocations, xGj = xGk , or that members of some or all
groups get zero. In particular, any allocation x where xi = 0 for all i 2 M is in S. Notice that if non-veto
players get the same under two allocations x and y, so xjM = yjM , then x 2 S , y 2 S; moreover, this is
true if xi = y (i) for all i 2 M and some permutation on M .

14

Now suppose that one of the agents possessing two units, say agent 3, was expropriated,
i.e., take z = (4; 4; 1; 2; 4). Then it is possible that the other member, agent 4, would be
expropriated as well:

(z) = (4; 4; 1; 1; 5). But it is also possible that one of the richer agents

may be expropriated instead: e.g., a transition to

(z) = (4; 1; 1; 4; 5) would be supported by

all agents except agent #2.
Example 5 demonstrates that equilibrium protection that agents provide to each other
extends beyond members of the same economic class. In the latter case, agent #2 would oppose a move from (4; 4; 2; 2; 3) to (4; 4; 1; 2; 4) if the subgame the next move is to (4; 1; 1; 4; 5) :
This corresponds to a coalition among economic classes.
We see that in general, an exogenous shock may lead to expropriation, on the subsequent
equilibrium path, of agents belonging to di¤erent wealth groups; the particular path depends
on the equilibrium mapping, which is not unique. However, if we apply the re…nement that
only equilibria with a “minimal”(in terms of the number of units that need to be transferred)
redistribution along the equilibrium path are allowed, then only the agents with exactly the
same wealth endowment would su¤er from the redistribution that follows a shock.
Also, Example 5 demonstrates the mechanism of mutual protection among players with
the same wealth. If a non-veto player becomes poorer, at least d 1 agents other agents would
su¤er in the subsequent redistribution. This makes them willing to oppose any redistribution
from any of their members. Their number, if we include the initial expropriation target
himself, is d, which is su¢ cient to block a transition. Thus, members of the same economic
class have an incentive to act as a politically cohesive coalition, in which its members mutually
protect each others’economic interests.
The next proposition generalizes Example 5 to establish the mutual protection result
formally. It also highlights that protection of a non-veto player is sustained, in equilibrium, by
equally endowed or richer individuals, rather than by those who has less wealth. Proposition
3 focuses on equilibrium consequences of a negative shock to some agent’s wealth, starting
with a stable allocation.
Proposition 3 Consider any MPE

and let

=

. Suppose that the voting rule is not

unanimity (k < n), so d > 1. Take any stable allocation x 2 S, some non-veto plater i 2 M ,
and let new allocation y 2 A be such yjM nfig = xjM nfig and yi < xi . Then:

1. Player i will never be as well o¤ as before the shock, but he will not get any worse
o¤: yi

[ (y)]i < xi . Furthermore, the number of agents that su¤er as a result of a

redistribution on the equilibrium path de…ned by is given by:
n
o
j 2 M n fig : [ (y)]j < yj = d 1;
15

2. Suppose, in addition, that for any k 2 M with xk < xi , xk

yi , i.e., the shock did

not make agent i poorer than the agents in the next wealth group. Then [ (y)]j < yj

implies xj

xi ; i.e., members of poorer wealth groups do not su¤er from redistribution.

The essence of Proposition 3 is that following a negative shock to some agent’s wealth
(yi < xi ), at least d

1 other agents are expropriated, and agent i never fully recovers. If

the shock is relatively minor so the ranking of agent i relative to other wealth groups did not
change (weak inequalities are preserved),18 then it must be equally endowed or richer people
who su¤er from subsequent redistribution. Thus, in the initial stable allocation x, they have
incentives to protect i from the negative shock. This result may be extended to the case
when a negative shock a¤ects more than one (but less than d) non-veto players. The proof
is straightforward when all the a¤ected agents belong to the same wealth group. However,
this requirement is not necessary. If expropriated agents belong to di¤erent groups, then
the lower bound of the resulting wealth after redistribution is the amount of wealth that
the poorest (post-shock) agent possesses. In this case, the number of agents who su¤er as a
result of the redistribution following the shock is still limited by d

1:

Our next step is to derive comparative statics with respect to di¤erent voting rules given
by k and v.

4

Comparing Voting Rules

Suppose that we vary the supermajority requirement, k, and the number of veto players, v.
The following result easily follows from the characterization in Proposition 2.
Proposition 4 Fix the number of individuals n.
1. The size of each group Gj , j

1, is decreasing as the majority requirement k increases.

In particular, for k = v + 1, d = n

v = m, and thus all the non-veto players form

a single group; for k = n (unanimity rule), d = 1, and so each agent can veto any
change.
2. The number of groups is weakly increasing in k, from 1 when k = v + 1 to m when
k = n (from 0 when k < v + 1).
3. The size of each group Gj , j

1 does not depend on the number of veto players, but

as v increases, the number of groups weakly decreases, reaching zero for v > n
18

Note that this will always be the case if, e.g., yi = xi

16

1.

d.

The last result is most remarkable. The size of groups does not depend on the number
of veto players, but only on the majority requirement as it determines the minimal size of
blocking coalitions. As the majority requirement increases, groups become smaller. This has
a very simple intuition: as redistribution becomes harder (it is necessary to get approval of
more agents), it takes fewer non-veto players to defend themselves; as such, smaller groups
are su¢ cient. Conversely, the largest group (all non-veto players together) is formed when
a single vote from a non-veto player is su¢ cient for veto players to accept a redistribution;
in this case, non-veto players can only keep a positive payo¤ by holding equal amounts.
Example 6 Suppose that k = v + 1; as before, d = n

v. In this case, an allocation x is

stable if xi = xj for all non-veto players i and j, i.e., if all non-veto players hold the same
amount. This is consistent with Proposition 1 of Diermeier and Fong (2011), which shows
this result for the special case n = 3, v = 1. More generally, a single group of non-veto
players with positive amount of wealth may be formed if and only if k
In this case, some n

v

q

(m + 1) =2:

k + 1 non-veto players belong to the group and get the same amount,

and the rest get zero.
One important implication of Proposition 4 is that k and v a¤ect the economic heterogeneity of the society in equilibrium, at least for the non-veto players. Indeed, take n
large and v small (so that m is large enough to be interesting) and start with the smallest
possible value of k = v + 1. Then all the non-veto players possess the same allocation in
any equilibrium. In other words, all agents, except perhaps those explicitly endowed with
veto power, must be equal. If we increase k, then two groups will form, one of which may
possess a positive amount, while the rest possesses zero, which is clearly more heterogenous
than for k = v + 1. If we increase k further beyond v + (m + 1) =2, then both groups may
possess positive amounts and a third group will form further, etc. In other words, as k
increases, so does the number of groups, which implies that the society becomes less and
less homogenous and can support more and more groups of smaller size. We see that in this
model, heterogeneity of the society is directly linked to di¢ culty of expropriation, measured
by the degree of majority needed for expropriation or, equivalently, by the minimal size of a
coalition that is able to resist attempts to expropriate. If we interpret the equally-endowed
groups as economic classes, then we have the following result: the more politically di¢ cult it
is to expropriate, the larger is the number of classes in a society.
Proposition 4 dealt with comparing stable allocations for di¤erent k and v. We now
study whether or not an allocation that was stable under some rules k and v remains stable
if these rules change. For example, suppose that we make an extra individual a veto player
(increase v), or increase the majority rule requirement (increase k). A naive intuition would
17

say that in both these cases, individuals would not be worse o¤ from better property rights
protection. As the next proposition shows, in general, the opposite is likely to be true. Let
Sk;V denote the set of stable allocations under the supermajority requirement k and the set
of veto players V:
Proposition 5 Suppose that allocation x is stable for k (k < n) and V (x 2 Sk;V ). Then:
1. If we increase the number of veto players by granting an individual i 2
= V veto power
so that the new veto set is V [ fig, then allocation x 2 Sk;V [fig if and only if xi = 0;

2. Suppose k + 1 < n and all groups Gj , j

0, had di¤erent amounts of wealth under x:

xGj 6= xGj0 for j 0 6= j (and xjM 6= 0). If we increase the majority requirement from k

to k 0 = k + 1, and k 0 < n, then x 2
= Sk+1;V .

The …rst part of this proposition suggests that adding a veto player makes an allocation
unstable, and therefore will lead to a redistribution hurting some individual. There is only
one exception to this rule: if the new veto player had nothing to begin with, then the
allocation will remain stable. On the other hand, if the new veto player had a positive
amount of the good, then, while he will be weakly better o¤ from becoming a veto player,
there will be at least one other non-veto player who will be worse o¤. Indeed, removing
a member of one of the groups Gj without changing the required sizes of the groups must
lead to redistribution. This logic would not apply if V 0 = N , when all agents become veto
players; however, the proposition is still true in this case because then i would have to be
the last non-veto player, and under k < n he would have to get xi = 0 in a stable allocation
x. Interestingly, removing a veto player i (making him non-veto) will also make x unstable
as long as xi > 0. This is, of course, less surprising, as this individual may be expected to
be worse o¤.
The second part says that if all groups got di¤erent allocations (which is the typical case),
then an increase in k would decrease the required group sizes, leading to redistribution. When
some groups have equal amounts of wealth in a stable allocation, then allocation x may, in
principle, remain stable. This is trivially true when all non-veto players get zero (xi = 0 for
all i 2
= V ), but, as the following Example 7 demonstrates, this is possible in other cases as
well.

Example 7 Suppose n = 7, V = f#7g, b = 6 and the supermajority requirement is k = 5.

Then x = (1; 1; 1; 1; 1; 1; 0) is a stable allocation, because d = 3 and the non-veto players
form two groups of size three. If we increase k to k 0 = 6, then x remains stable, as then
d0 = 2 and x has three groups of size two.
18

5

Veto Power and Incentives to Invest

Our analysis so far has focused on the game of pure redistribution. This allowed us to identify
two distinctive sources of property rights: legal rights (here modeled as exogenous veto
power) and equilibrium property rights.19 In Section 3, we showed that the consequences of
these rights might be di¤erent: in particular, in response to a shock, agents with equilibrium
property rights may su¤er, and this makes them protect each other on the equilibrium path.
A natural question is whether equilibrium property rights are di¤erent from legal ones when
it comes to important economic activities such as production, investment, and, ultimately,
the implications for economic growth. While a comprehensive analysis of these issues is,
obviously, beyond the scope of the paper, we argue below that the distinction between two
types of property rights has very real implications. To show why, we consider a very simple
extension to the game of Section 2. Consider …rst the following example.
Example 8 Take four agents n = 4 and assume that one of them is veto; V = f#4g; let

b = 12. The supermajority requirement is k = 2, i.e., it takes the veto player and one nonveto player to redistribute successfully. In this case, the size of the minimal blocking coalition
of non-veto players is d = 3. Start with a stable allocation x = (3; 3; 3; 3).
Suppose that before the redistribution game is played, in period 0, some agents (a subset
L) get an opportunity to work and produce: if an individual i works, he gets a disutility c < 1
from labor, but creates 1 unit of wealth that initially goes to him: x0i = xi + 1. Assume also
that agents know who has a production opportunity and who does not.
The incentives of the veto player #4 are clear: he produces whenever he is given an
opportunity to, because he will keep the product of his labor. Now, consider the incentives
that agent #1 face. He is only going to keep the product of his labor if the other two non-veto
players produce successfully, so that each of them gets 4 units. Therefore, he will not invest
unless L

f1; 2; 3g, and even in that case, multiple equilibria are possible: with the three

non-veto players investing and with the three of them not investing. The reason for this

multiplicity is that under the threat of redistribution, production is a coordination game: a
agent can retain what he produces only if all the agents in his group get richer; otherwise
he gets expropriated. For example, if #1 is the only one who invested, the allocation is
x0i = (4; 3; 3; 3), which will lead, after redistribution, to xti = (3; 3; 3; 4) from the next period
on. This means that if the opportunity to produce comes to all the agents with equal probability
and independently, then a veto player is ex ante strictly more likely to invest than a non-veto
19

Recall that all we mean by "legal rights" here is that they are modeled as exogenous veto power. No
reallocation is possible without the consent of the current asset holder. As we discussed above such exogenous
veto power can rest in explicit legal protections or in the ability to defend allocations unilaterally by force.

19

player – even though they may be equal in terms of the initial endowment.
Now let us modify the example by increasing the supermajority requirement to k = 3. In
that case, d = 2; let us start with a stable allocation x~ = (4; 4; 0; 4). Again, the veto player
makes the e¢ cient decision to produce: he does so whenever he has an opportunity. Agents
#1 and #2 produce only if both of them have an opportunity to do so: indeed, if only one
agent produces, he is going to be expropriated: e.g., if x~0 = (5; 4; 0; 4), then redistribution
may lead to (4; 4; 0; 5) or (0; 4; 4; 5), but in any case agent #1 would not keep the extra unit
that he produces. In other words, agents #1 and #2 are again less likely to produce than the
veto player. However, in this case, they do not need to have agent #3 producing in order to
coordinate on production. This implies that production by non-veto players is a more likely
event when property rights are better defended: when it is harder to expropriate, coordination
between fewer players is needed for a production decision to be undertaken.
The intuition developed in Example 8 holds more generally. To study the consequences
of di¤erent types of property rights, we develop a simple growth model below.
For simplicity and tractability, let us focus on the case where q

(m + 1) =2, so that

in any stable allocation, there is only one group of non-veto agents with positive allocation
(see Example 6); in addition, assume that there is only one veto player. In this case, the
condition q

(m + 1) =2 may then be rewritten as k

n=2 + 1. These assumptions ensure

that the distribution of wealth is characterized by only two variables: the amount that the
veto player possesses and the amount that non-veto players possess.
Assume that in the beginning every period (which starts with allocation xt

1

inherited

from the previous period) each agent gets an opportunity to produce with probability p,
independently across agents and periods; production requires e¤ort c > 0. Let L denote the
set of agents who have the opportunity to produce. All agents observe who belongs to L and
make production decisions (eti 2 f0; 1g). After producing and observing the intermediate
outcome x~t given by

x~ti = xti

1

+ ei ;

they play a within-period redistribution game as in Section 2, with the additional assumption
that voting against a proposal costs an agent " 2 (0; 1).20 We are interested in Markov Perfect
equilibria of the game with pure production strategies along the equilibrium path.

To obtain a precise characterization, let us furthermore assume that the initial allocation,
0

x , is stable in the corresponding game without production, i.e., x0 2 S, and the group

structure among non-veto players is already established, namely, x0i > 1 for some i 2 n n V
20

In the basic setup, we assume that agents weakly prefer to agree with proposals, now we assume that
they strictly prefer to do so.

20

(let the set of such non-veto players be G). Finally, let us focus on MPEs with minimal
redistribution on the equilibrium path: for every x, the di¤erence k

(x)

xk achieves its

minimum among all possible MPEs . The next example illustrates this concept.
Example 9 Consider again Example 4: there are four agents, one of them (#4) has veto
power, with k = 3 and b = 3 . Then the equilibrium
particular,

described there is minimal: in

((2; 1; 0; 0)) = (1; 1; 0; 1). On the other hand, if we take

((2; 1; 0; 0)) = (0; 1; 1; 1), then

equal to

except that

may be supported in a simple MPE, but is not minimal.

Focusing on minimal equilibria appears to be a reasonable equilibrium selection criterion
as the actual process of transferring units of wealth might involve some costs. Under the
assumptions discussed above, we get the following results.
Proposition 6 Suppose that the status-quo x0 is a stable allocation, and let G be the subset
of non-veto players with x0i > 1. There exists
2(

0 ; 1) ;

0

> 0 such that for any discount factor

there exists a threshold p0 > 0 such that for any p 2 (0; p0 ):

(i) the veto player (i = #n) produces whenever he has the opportunity (i 2 L);

(ii) there always exists a minimal MPE where non-veto players never produce. In any
minimal MPE, non-veto players with zero endowment produce nothing: for i 2
= V , xti

1

=0

implies ei = 0.

(iii) in the equilibrium maximizing social welfare, non-veto players from group G produce
whenever all of them have this opportunity, i.e., G

L implies ei = 1 for i 2 G.

In other words, veto players make an e¢ cient decision to produce. As for non-veto players,
there always exists an equilibrium where they do not invest at all. They may only invest if
all members of their group have an opportunity to do so; only then may they coordinate on
investment.
Proposition 6 yields an important conclusion: equilibrium property rights enjoyed by
non-veto players create less incentives to invest, and ultimately lead to ine¢ cient outcomes.
For non-veto players whose property rights are just an equilibrium phenomenon, production
e¤ectively becomes a game of coordination. Producing alone does not make sense, as the
successful producer would be expropriated along the equilibrium path. It is only worth the
e¤ort if there are multiple agents that will produce and will be able (and willing) to protect
each other (and obviously, if the result of production was uncertain, the decision to produce
would be even harder to coordinate on). As a result, non-veto players produce only if some
other players produce, and therefore they do so less frequently than veto players do. It is
straightforward to show that in the absence of redistribution, they would be more investment
by non-veto players.
21

Let us now study comparative statics, focusing on the following variable of interest: g =
X
max E
ei , where the maximum is taken over all minimal MPEs (and this maximum
i2N

does not depend on the period). This g has a natural interpretation as (average) economic
growth.
Proposition 7 Under the assumptions of Proposition 6, in the minimal MPE that maximizes social welfare:
1. the growth rate g = max E
opportunities arrive;

X

i2N

ei is increasing in p, the rate at which production

2. the growth rate g is increasing in k, the degree of property rights protection.
These comparative statics results are intuitive: the more often individuals have a chance
to produce, the faster wealth accumulates. The smaller is the group of agents that needs to
coordinate, the more likely they are to succeed in coordinating. This …nding has important
implications: the harder it is to expropriate, the more likely we have production or investment
decisions, resulting in faster economic growth. Remarkably, this e¤ect does not result from
the actions of agents whose property rights are legally protected (veto players), but rather
from those who only enjoy equilibrium property rights.
This analysis yields the following important insights. First, property rights have di¤erent
implications for growth: the individuals who have legal rights are more likely to produce and
to accumulate wealth than other agents. Non-veto players who possess property rights in
equilibrium also can invest, but do so less frequently and only if they are able to coordinate.
In other words, while the equilibrium e¤ects we study in this paper are able to maintain a
status quo, they are less e¤ective in promoting growth and investment, especially if expropriation is relatively easy. Second, production decisions by individuals or groups of individuals
may be di¤erent even if their observed wealth is the same: these decisions depend on whether
their property rights are protected by law or are sustained in equilibrium by others’fear of
being expropriated. These insights may be helpful for understanding allocations of wealth
and means of production, economic growth, and social structure in a historical perspective.

6

Conclusion

The modern political economy literature on checks and balances has mainly concentrated
on public spending with less attention being paid to the original motivation of protecting
property rights. The reason may lie in the intuition that the relationship between additional
22

checks and balances and better protection of rights seems so obvious that there is little left
to explain. Yet, from a political economy perspective property rights systems are to be
understood as equilibrium outcomes rather than exogenous …xed constraints. Legislators
cannot commit to entitlements, prerogatives, and rights. Rather, any allocation must be
maintained in equilibrium. By varying the characteristic of the political institutions (here
modeled as checks and balances) one can assess the consequences for economic institutions
(property rights).
Our approach suggests shows that a dynamic perspective may lead to a more subtle
understanding of the e¤ects of checks and balances such as veto players and super-majority
rules. Traditionally, such features are viewed as constraints on collective choice; they are
exogenous to political behavior. Our model shows that a dynamic environment may lead to
the emergence of endogenous veto groups: groups of players that sustain a stable allocation
in equilibrium. Our analysis also shows that stable allocations give rise to an “economic
classes” structure. That is, non-veto players with a positive allocation are part of a group
of equally-endowed individuals who have incentives to protect each other’s interests. The
e¤ect of exogenous constraints on endogenous veto groups is complex. One the one hand,
endogenous veto groups may protect each other in equilibrium even in the absence of formal
veto rights. One the other hand, adding more veto players may lead to more instability
and policy change if such additions upset dynamic equilibria where agents were mutually
protecting each other.
Our results point to the importance of looking beyond formally de…ned property rights,
and more, generally, beyond formal institutions. While formal institutions provide better
incentives for investment and production, the incentives provided by informal equilibrium
institutions are substantial as well. Thus, a change in formal institutions might strengthen
protection of property rights of designated agents, yet have negative consequences for protection of property rights of the others, and, as a result, a negative overall e¤ect.

23

References
[1] Acemoglu, Daron, Georgy Egorov, and Konstantin Sonin. 2008. “Coalition Formation
in Nondemocracies.”Review of Economic Studies. 75(4): 987-1009.
[2] Acemoglu, Daron, Georgy Egorov, and Konstantin Sonin. 2012. “Dynamics and Stability of Constitutions, Coalitions, and Clubs” American Economic Review. 102(4):
1446-1476.
[3] Acemoglu, Daron, James Robinson, and Ragnar Torvik. 2013. Political Economy of
Checks and Balances. Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.
[4] Baron, David P. 1996. “A Dynamic Theory of Collective Goods Programs.” American
Political Science Review, 90(2): 316-30.
[5] Baron, David P. and John Ferejohn. 1989a. “Bargaining in Legislatures.” American
Political Science Review, 83(4): 1181-1206.
[6] Baron, David P. and John Ferejohn. 1989b. “The Power to Propose.” In Models of
Strategic Choice in Politics, ed. Peter C. Ordeshook. Ann Arbor, MI: University of
Michigan Press, pp.343-366.
[7] Battaglini, Marco and Stephen Coate. 2007. “Ine¢ ciency in Legislative Policy-Making:
A Dynamic Analysis.”American Economic Review, 97(1): 118-149.
[8] Battaglini, Marco and Stephen Coate. 2008. “A Dynamic Theory of Public Spending,
Taxation and Debt.”American Economic Review, 98(1): 201-236.
[9] Battaglini, Marco and Thomas R. Palfrey. 2007. “The Dynamics of Distributive Politics.”Unpublished.
[10] Bernheim, Douglas, Antonio Rangel, and Luis Rayo. 2006. “The Power of the Last Word
in Legislative Policy Making.”Econometrica, 74(5): 1161-1190.
[11] Bowen, T. Renee and Zaki Zahran. 2012. “On Dynamic Compromise.” Games and
Economic Behavior, 76(2):391-419.
[12] Dekel, Eddie, Matthew O. Jackson, and Asher Wolinsky. 2009. “Vote Buying: Legislatures and Lobbying.”Quarterly Journal of Political Science, 4:103-128.
[13] Diermeier, Daniel and Pohan Fong. 2011. “Legislative Bargaining with Reconsideration.”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126 (2): 947-985.
24

[14] Diermeier, Daniel and Pohan Fong. 2012. “A Dynamic Theory of Parliamentary Democracy.”Economic Theory, 49(3): 703-738.
[15] Diermeier, Daniel and Roger B. Myerson. 1994. “Bargaining, Veto Power, and Legislative Committees,”Northwestern University CMSEMS Working Paper No.1089.
[16] Diermeier, Daniel and Roger B. Myerson. 1999. “Bicameralism and Its Consequences
for the Internal Organization of Legislatures.”American Economic Review, 89(5):11821196.
[17] Dixit, Avinash, Gene M. Grossman, and Faruk Gul. 2000. “The Dynamics of Political
Compromise.”Journal of Political Economy, 108(3): 531-568.
[18] Duggan, John and Tasos Kalandrakis. 2007. "Dynamic Legislative Policy Making."
Wallis Institute of Political Economy Working Paper No.45.
[19] Gehlbach, Scott and Edmund J. Malesky. 2010. “The Contribution of Veto Players to
Economic Reform.”Journal of Politics 72(4): 957-975.
[20] Greenberg, Joseph. 1990. The Theory of Social Situations: An Alternative GameTheoretic Approach, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, UK.
[21] Hassler, John, Kjetil Storesletten, José V. Rodríguez Mora, and Fabrizio Zilibotti. 2003.
“The Survival of the Welfare State.”American Economic Review 93(1): 87-112.
[22] Kalandrakis, Tasos. 2004. “A Three-Player Dynamic Majoritarian Bargaining Game.”
Journal of Economic Theory, 16(2): 294-322.
[23] Kalandrakis, Tasos. 2007. “Majority Rule Dynamics with Endogenous Status Quo.”
Wallis Institute of Political Economy Working Paper No.46.
[24] Maskin, Eric and Jean Tirole. 2001. "Markov Perfect Equilibrium I. Observable Actions." Journal of Economic Theory, 100(2): 191-219.
[25] Morelli, Massimo. 1999. "Demand Competition and Policy Compromise in Legislative
Bargaining." American Political Science Review, 93(4): 809-820.
[26] Riker, William. 1987. The Development of American Federalism, Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
[27] Root, Hilton L. 1989. “Tying the King’s Hands: Credible Commitments and Royal
Fiscal Policy during the Old Regime.”Rationality and Society. 1(2): 240-258.
25

[28] Romer, Thomas and Howard Rosenthal. 1978. “Political Resource Allocation, Controlled Agendas, and the Status Quo.”Public Choice, 33(4): 27-43.
[29] Schwarz Michael and Konstantin Sonin. 2008. “A Theory of Brinkmanship, Con‡icts,
and Commitment.”Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization. 24(1):163-183.
[30] Tsebelis, George. 2002. Veto Players: How Political Institutions Work, Princeton Univ.
Press.
[31] von Neumann, John and Oskar Morgenstern. 1947. Theory of Games and Economic
Behavior, Princeton University Press, Princeton.

26

Appendix
Proofs
Our strategy of proof is the following. First, we prove three auxiliary lemmas; then, we
complete the proof of Proposition 2. After that, we prove Proposition 1.
Let

0

=

1
jAj

jAj
jAj+1

. We show that for
1

individual prefers the ultimate allocation

2(

(x) to

0 ; 1),
1

and any acyclic mapping , if an

(y), then he prefers the continuation

utility starting from x to one starting from y.
Lemma 1 Suppose
allocations x; y 2 A, [

2(
1

Then for any acyclic mapping , any agent i 2 N and any

0 ; 1).

(x)]i > [

1

(y)]i implies Ui (x) > Ui (y).

Proof of Lemma 1. Simple algebra shows that
since

1

is acyclic, we have
Ui (x) =

=

t

for t

xi + [ (x)]i +
jAj

1
1

1

[
jAj

1

(x)]i >

jAj +

jAj >

jAj

. Now,

jAj. Using these two results, we get
h

+
1

jAj 1
jAj

1
jAj

1

yi + [ (y)]i +

jAj

satis…es 1

+

i
(x)

jAj +

[

1

h

jAj 1

+
i

jAj

[

1

jAj

([

1

1

1

(x)]i

(x)]i

1)

(y)]i
i
(y)

+
i

jAj

1

[

1

(y)]i = Ui (y) .

To formulate the next lemma, we introduce the following notation. Take any (not necessarily simple) MPE ; then for each status quo x there is a set of stages Jx
such that if stage j 2 Jx is reached, agent

x;j

accepted in subsequent voting.
Lemma 2 Suppose
1. if

proposal

fi 2 N : [

1

>
y

(y)]i

0

is

=

jAj
jAj+1

accepted
[

1

1
jAj

proposes an alternative zx;j 6= ?, and it is

. For any (acyclic) MPE

at

some

f1; : : : ; vg

stage

j,

then

and any x 2 A:
the

set

of

(x)]i g 2 W;

2. if proposal y is accepted at some stage j, then for any i 2 V , Ui (y)
3. the set of agents fi 2 N : Ui (

(x))

Ui (x)g 2 W;
27

Ui (x);

agents

1

4. the set of agents fi 2 N : [
1

5. either

1

(x) = x or

xi g 2 W;

(x)]i

(x) B x.

Proof of Lemma 2. Part 1. Suppose not; then take any i 2 N for whom the opposite
1

holds: [

(y)]i < [

fi 2 N : Ui (y)

1

(x)]i . By Lemma 1, this must imply Ui (y) < Ui (x). Hence, the set

Ui (x)g 2
= W. But this implies that y cannot be the outcome of the voting

at that stage, which contradicts the assumption.

Part 2. This is trivial: if Ui (y) < Ui (x) and y is accepted in equilibrium, it means that
agent i votes Y es, but it would be a best response to vote N o and thus veto the proposal,
which cannot be true in an equilibrium.
Part 3. This statement is trivial if
j = min Jx , the proposal zx;j =

(x) = x. Otherwise, Jx 6= ? and at the stage

(x) is made and is accepted. Each agent i gets utility

(x)) if it is accepted and utility Ui (x) if it is not. Assuming, to obtain a contradiction,

Ui (

that fi 2 N : Ui (

Ui (x)g 2
= W, would imply that the proposal cannot be accepted

(x))

in equilibrium; this proves the result.

Part 4. The statement is trivial if
a mapping

0

: A ! A given by

0

(x) = x, so consider the case
(y) if y 6= x and

(y) =

is acyclic, too. Consider an individual i 2 N such that [
1

1
0

(x) and

(x)) < Ui (x). Thus, fi 2 N : [

Ui (

hence fi 2 N : [

(x) = x; since

(x)]i < xi . Since

(x) = x, then applying Lemma 1 to mapping

). Rearranging, we have Ui (

xi = (1

1

0

1

xi g

(x)]i

(x)]i < xi g

fi 2 N : Ui (

0

is acyclic,
1
0

(

yields Ui (

0

(x)) =
(x)) <

(x)), which is equivalent to

(x)) < xi + Ui (
1

(x) 6= x. Consider

fi 2 N : Ui (

(x)) < Ui (x)g, and

Ui (x)g. By Part 3, the latter is win-

(x))

ning, which, coupled with monotonicity, completes the proof.
1

Part 5. If
that

1

(x) 6= x, then the set Jx 6= ?. Assume, to obtain a contradiction,
1

(x) 7 x. Since fi 2 N : [

i 2 V : [

1

(x)]i = xi . Consider the agent k =
l

at the stage min Jx . Let us prove that
l

…rst that some l,
[

1

that

l

(x)

(x)

k

l

(x)

(x)

k

k

l

xk for all l, but

= xk for all l

(x)

k

min Jx

2 V who makes the proposal

= xk for all l

1. Indeed, suppose

> xk . But then Part 4 (given that k 2 V ) would imply that

k

), implying Uk (

xk = (1
l

1

(x)]k =

xi g 2 W by Part 4, it must be that for all

(x)]i

(x)
l

k

> xk , contradicting the earlier result. Now suppose

(x)

k

< xk for some l. But in that case, Uk (

(x)) <

(x)) < Uk (x), which contradicts the result of Part 2. Hence,

1. This implies that Uk (

(x)) = Uk (x) = xk = (1

).

Consider the utility of agent k if he passes on his chance to propose. If jJx j = 1, then

in that stage x remains the status quo, and k gets continuation utility Uk0 = xk + Uk (x) =
xk + xk = (1

) = xk = (1

) = Uk (x). If jJx j > 1, then some proposal y 6= x is accepted,

and from Part 2 we know that in this case, Uk0 = Uk (y)
28

Uk (x). In either case, Uk0

Uk (x),

so his out-of-equilibrium continuation utility if he passes is at least as high as his utility from
making the proposal. In other words, he does not strictly prefer to make the proposal, which
is impossible in the set of equilibria that we consider. This contradiction completes the proof.

Lemma 3 Any MPE

is acyclic.

Proof of Lemma 3. Part 1. Suppose that there is a cycle starting from x:
l

but

(x) = x for some l > 1. Similarly to Part 2 of Lemma 2, we can prove that for any

i 2 V , Ui

Ui

(x) 6= x,

l 1

j+1

(x)

Ui

j

(x) for any j, which means that Ui (x) = Ui (

(x) , and therefore xi = [

(x)]i =

l 1

=

(x)) =

(x) i . Consider the agent k =

=
min Jx ;

as in the proof of Part 5 of Lemma 2, we can show that by passing on the opportunity to
make his proposal, he can guarantee Uk0

xk = (1

) = Uk (

(x)) = Uk (x) which he gets

if he follows the equilibrium play. But this means that he is not strictly better o¤ by making
a proposal, which is impossible. This contradiction completes the proof.
Proof of Proposition 2. Part 1, Part 2: Proven in the text.
Part 3. We let

2(

0 ; 1),

with

0

de…ned above. Let D = fx 2 A :

(x) = xg; we

then must prove that D = S. To do so, we prove that D is vNM-stable with respect to
the binary relation B; given the results of Part 1 and Part 2, this will imply that D = S.
We need to show that D satis…es internal stability and external stability. We also know, by
is acyclic, and thus mapping

1

is well-de…ned and D is nonempty.

External stability: Take any x 2
= D. Let y =

1

(x) 6= x (because

Lemma 3, that

is acyclic). By Part

5 of Lemma 2, y B x, which proves external stability.

Internal stability: Suppose, to obtain a contradiction, that for some x; y 2 D, y B x. We

know that if the current state is x, no alternative is accepted (because x 2 D), and thus
jJx j = ?. Let us show that this means that at no stage any agent makes a proposal. Indeed,
suppose that at stage j, agent
gives him U j (x) = x j = (1
get U 0 j

j

makes a proposal that is rejected. Then equilibrium play

), whereas if he passes, then, by Part 2 of Lemma 2, he will

U j (x), which means that proposing is not strictly better then passing. Given our

equilibrium re…nement, this means that no proposal is made at any stage when the state is
x.
Now take k 2 V that satis…es yk > xk and consider stage j with

j

= k. If, at this stage,

agent k made proposal y, then it would be accepted, because y B x means, in particular,
that fi 2 N : yi
yi = (1

xi g 2 W, and thus fi 2 N : Ui (y)

) and Ui (x) = xi = (1

Ui (x)g 2 W (as, of course, Ui (y) =

)). We showed that in equilibrium, k does not make
29

any proposal in this subgame, and gets Uk (x). But then he would be able to get more by
proposing y, as Uk (y) = yk = (1

) = Uk (x). Hence, he has a pro…table

) > xk = (1

deviation in this subgame, which is impossible. This contradiction proves that D is also
internally stable. Thus, it is vNM-stable, and given uniqueness, coincides with S. This
completes the proof.
Proof of Proposition 1. Part 1. Let us prove a stronger result: for any mapping
such that

(x) = x for any x 2 S and for any x 2
= S,

(x) 2 S and

(x) B x. (Existence

of such a mapping follows from external stability of mapping S implying that for any S we
can pick such

(x) 2 S; clearly, equilibrium

with

=

will be simple because

2

= .)

To construct , take the following strategy pro…le. First, de…ne continuation utilities of
P
t
(x) i . If the
each agent i if the current period ends with state x, Ui (x) = xi + 1
t=1

current state is x 2 A n S, the last agenda-setter i with [ (x)]i > xi proposes a transition to
(x), and all agents [ (x)]j

xj support this proposal while the rest vote against it, so it

is accepted in equilibrium. Other agenda-setters — earlier and later — do not propose. (We
do not need to de…ne voting strategies for these proposals if they are made, or for any other
proposal made by agent i, explicitly: the continuation equilibrium play is de…ned for any
outcome of any given voting, either the proposal y or the status quo x, and thus the rule that
agents support the proposal y whenever Ui (y)

Ui (x) gives a unique set of strategies.) If

the current state is x 2 S, then no agenda-setter makes a proposal; again, this de…nes voting
strategies if some proposal is made. This set of strategies (call it ) is clearly Markovian. We

need to check that this is indeed an equilibrium, i.e., that there is no one-step deviation, and
that it satis…es the requirements we imposed on agents’actions when they are indi¤erent.
If strategies in

are played, mapping

=

is implemented, and therefore continuation

utilities are indeed given by Ui (x). This automatically implies that all voting strategies that
we speci…ed are best responses; moreover, we required agents to vote Y es whenever they are
indi¤erent. We only need to consider agenda-setting strategies. First, suppose x 2 A n S,

and agent j gets a chance to propose after i. By the choice of agent i, it must be that
[ (x)]j

xj (in fact, equality must hold), so Uj ( (x))

better o¤ making the proposal

Uj (xj ), and the agent i is not

(x). Suppose he makes some other proposal y; this is a

pro…table deviation only if y is to be accepted (otherwise, passing yields the same utility).
If y is accepted, Part 1 of Lemma 2 also implies that fk 2 N : [ (y)]k
(because mapping

is simple). Since j is strictly better o¤ from this deviation, it must be

that Uj (y) > Uj (x) = xj = (1

), which means that either yj > xj or [ (y)]j > xj ; in either

case, [ (y)]j > xj = [ (x)]j . Now, we have shown that
for

[ (x)]k g 2 W

(x) ; (y) 2 S.
30

(y) B

(x), but this is impossible

Let us now suppose that agent j gets a chance to propose before agent i. Then he is
not strictly better o¤ proposing

(x), because i would do so along the equilibrium path if j

passes. Suppose he proposes some y 6=

(x); then again it is only pro…table if y passes. For

this to be true, it must be that fk 2 N : [ (y)]k

[ (x)]k g 2 W. But if j is strictly better

o¤, it must be that [ (y)]j > [ (x)]j , again implying

(y) B

(x), which cannot be true.

Consider the possibility that agent i deviates. He does not want to deviate by passing, since [ (x)]i > xi and thus Ui ( (x)) > Ui (x).
proposing some y 6=

fk 2 N : [ (y)]k

(x); again,

Suppose that he deviates to

(x) must be accepted.

We analogously get that

[ (x)]k g 2 W and [ (y)]j > [ (x)]j , leading to the same contradiction.

Thus, there is no pro…table deviation if x 2 A n S.

Finally, suppose that for some x 2 S, some agent j 2 V deviates and proposes some

y 6= x. For this to be pro…table, y must be accepted, which would imply, again by Part 1 of
Lemma 2, that fk 2 N : [ (y)]k
[ (y)]j

xk g 2 W. Again, similarly to earlier cases, we must have

xj if the deviation is to be pro…table. But then

is impossible. This contradiction completes the proof that

(y) B x for x; (y) 2 S, which
is a MPE and that it satis…es

the re…nements.
Part 2. Acyclicity of any MPE was proved in Lemma 3. Now take mapping
some . From Part 3 of Proposition 2 it follows that
(x) = x , x 2 S. By Part 5 of Lemma 2,

for any x 2
= S,

1

(x) = x , x 2 S; since
1

(x) = x or

(x) B x. Consequently, mapping

proof of Part 1, and there is a simple equilibrium

=

1

for

is acyclic,

(x) B x, which implies that

satis…es the conditions speci…ed in the
0

with

0

=

=

1

. This proves Part

2.
Proof of Proposition 3.

Part 1. Lemma 2 implies that

(y) B y; in particu-

lar, for each j 2 V , [ (y)]j

yj and for at least one of them the inequality is strict.
n
o
Suppose, to obtain a contradiction, that
j 2 M n fig : [ (y)]j < yj
< d
1; then
n
o
j 2 M : [ (y)]j < xj < d. But we also have that for each j 2 V , [ (y)]j xj , with at
(y) B x, which
is impossible, given that
n
o x; (y) 2 S.
Now suppose, to obtain a contradiction, that j 2 M n fig : [ (y)]j < yj > d 1. But
least inequality strict. This means

then for at least d agents [ (y)]j < yj , which contradicts (y) B y. This contradiction proves
n
o
that j 2 M n fig : [ (y)]j < yj = d 1. It remains to prove that yi [ (y)]i < xi . Suppose not, i.e., either [ (y)]i < yi or [ (y)]i

xi . In the …rst case, we would have that at

least d agents have [ (y)]j < yj , contradicting (y) B y. In the second case, [ (y)]i xi ,
n
o
coupled with the already established j 2 M n fig : [ (y)]j < yj = d 1, would mean
n
o
j 2 M : [ (y)]j < xj
= d 1, and therefore (y) B x. This is impossible, and this
31

contradiction completes the proof.
Part 2. This proof is similar to the proof of internal stability in the proof of Proposition
2. Denote (y) = z; then z B y and x; z 2 S. We know that x and z have the group structure
by Part 2 of Proposition 2; then let the r groups be G1 ; : : : ; Gr for x and H1 ; : : : ; Hr for z,

respectively. Without loss of generality, we can assume that each set of groups are ordered
so that xGj and zHj are nonincreasing in j for 1
that for some agent i0 2 M with xi0

fj 2 M : xj

xi g there are at most d

fj 2 M : xj < xi g there are at most d

j

r. Suppose, to obtain a contradiction,

yi < xi , zi0 < yi0 . In that case, among the set
1 agents with zj < yj ; similarly, among the set
1 agents with zj < yj .

We can now proceed by induction, similarly to the proof of Proposition 2, and show that
zHj for all j. Base: suppose not, then xG1 > zH1 ; then xG1 > zs for all s 2 M . But

xG j

this mean that for all agents l 2 G1 have xl > zl ; since their total number is d, we get a
contradiction. Step: suppose xGl

zHl for 1

l < j, and suppose, to obtain a contradiction,

that xGj > zHj . Given the ordering of groups, this means that for any l; s such that 1 l j
S
and j s r, xGl > zHs . Consequently, for a agent i00 2 jl=1 Gl to have zi00 xi00 , he must
S
S
belong to js=11 Hs . This implies that for at least jd (j 1) d = d agents in jl=1 Gl M ,
S
zi00 xi00 does not hold (denote this set by D. If that is true, it must be that jl=1 Gl includes
all the agents in D, including agents i and i0 found earlier, and in particular, xGj yi < xi .
S
But on the other hand, these d agents are not in js=11 Hs . In particular, this implies that
for any i00 2 D, zi00 < xGj , but xi0

xGj , which means zi < xi0 . But zi

yi by Part 1 of this

0

Proposition, so yi < xi0 . But this contradicts with the way we chose i to satisfy xi0
This proves that such i0 cannot exist, and thus the d
worse o¤ satisfy xj

yi < xi .

1 agents other than i who are made

xi .

Proof of Proposition 4. This result immediately follows from the formulas m = n
d=n

v,

k + 1, r = bm=dc and from Proposition 2.

Proof of Proposition 5. Part 1. If k < n, then d > 1. An allocation x is stable only
if jfj 2 M : xj > 0gj is divisible by d. If x is stable and some agent i with xi > 0 is made

a veto agent, then the set jfj 2 M 0 : xj > 0gj = jfj 2 M : xj > 0gj

1 and is not divisible

by d, thus x becomes unstable. At the same time, if xi = 0, then the group structure for all
groups with a positive amount is preserved; thus x remains a stable allocation.
Part 2. In this case, the size of each group in x is d > 2, and every positive amount is
possessed by either none or d non-veto players. If k increases by 1, d decreases by 2. Then
allocation x becomes unstable, except for the case xjM = 0.
Proof of Proposition 6. We …rst show that a minimal equilibrium exists; moreover,
32

we can construct on-equilibrium production strategies explicitly. We will use the following
notation: for a vector of payo¤s x and a coalition X, we write x+X to denote a vector de…ned
by
x+X

i

=

xi + 1 if i 2 X,
xi
if i 2
= X.

Fix for a moment the number of units available in a society as b. For every such b let us
construct, for every x 2
= S, a set Zx
subset Zx0

elements of

S consisting of all y 2 S such that y B x. Consider a

Zx consisting of all y 2 Zx that achieve miny2Zx ky

Zx0

lexicographically according to the preferences of player 1 (from high to low),

then player 2, etc, and let
z1 among z 2

xk1 . Let us now order all

Zx0 ;

(x) 2 Zx0 be the …rst element. In other words,

among those that also maximize z1 ,

(x) is uniquely de…ned for every x 2
= S. Let us de…ne

this construction and de…nition for all values of b

0.

(x) maximizes

(x) maximizes z2 , etc. This element
(x) = x if x 2 S, and let us repeat

We construct an equilibrium where in each stage of redistribution which starts with x~t ,
an immediate transition to xt = z (~
xt ) is achieved. Since p is assumed to be small, this is
possible. Notice that in this way, the only veto player who bene…ts from a redistribution is
the …rst one, player n

v + 1; moreover, if xjM = yjM , then [ (x)] jM = [ (y)] jM , i.e., the

allocations that non-veto players get only depend on the allocations that they possess before
a redistribution.
Next, let us de…ne production strategies. Suppose that the current state is x = xt 1 . In
all cases, we will require that veto players make the e¢ cient investment, ei = 1 whenever
i 2 L \ V . To de…ne strategies of other players, consider the case where x 2 S. If kxjM k = 0

(i.e., if non-veto players possess nothing), then they choose ei = 0. Otherwise, for x 2 S,

there is a group of non-veto players G of size d which possesses a positive amount xG . If
xG > 1, then let us again require that all non-veto players choose ei = 0. If, however, xG = 1,
we require that a player i 2 L \ M invests if and only if xi = 0 and jfj < i : j 2 G [ Lgj < d.

This speci…es strategies for any x 2 S, and therefore gives continuation utilities for any

combination of investment decisions that players make if x 2
= S; for such x, we can therefore

pick (possibly mixed) strategies that form an equilibrium at period t if the continuation play
is given by the strategies above. Finally, it is easy to verify that given the redistribution
mapping , investment strategies that we de…ned for x 2 S are part of equilibrium, i.e., no

player has an incentive to deviate. We have thus proved existence of an equilibrium with
the properties required by Part (ii) of the Proposition.
To prove Part (i), suppose that player n (the veto player) considers whether to invest. If

without him investing the (temporary) allocation would be x~, then if he invests, it would be
x~+fng . If x~ is stable then so is x~+fng , and if they are not, then any minimal mapping would
33

transfer exactly the same amount to player n during the redistribution phase. Consequently,
player n will invest whenever he has the opportunity to do so and for any strategy pro…le
that other players play.
To prove Part (iii), note that on the equilibrium path, we only need to study production
decisions for x 2 S and where xG > 2. Notice that it is never a best response to produce

if jL \ M j < d, because all new units will be expropriated immediately. It is also never a

best response for i 2 G to produce if jL \ M j = d, but L \ M 6= G, because d units will be
expropriated (so the amount possessed by i will not increase), and moreover, in a minimal

equilibrium, possessing exactly xi = xG guarantees that i will not be expropriated, while
possessing xi + 1 need not guarantee that. Hence, i 2 G does not invest, and therefore the
rest do not invest, since a minimal equilibrium would require that the newly created units
(by less than d players) will be moved to the veto player.
If jL \ M j = d and L\M = G, it is straightforward to see that having players in group G

produce is an equilibrium. Moreover, if jL \ M j > d and G

L \ M , it is an equilibrium for

these players in G to produce and for the rest not to (because the units created by i 2 M n G

will be transferred to player n). Finally, let us prove that there cannot be an equilibrium
where more than d units are produced. Indeed, if so, then some of these units must be
expropriated. Moreover, in a minimal equilibrium, all units produced by players in M n G

will be taken, and thus such players do not have incentives to produce. This contradicts
the assertion that more than d units are produced, which shows that exactly d units are

produced in the best equilibrium where only pure strategies are played along the equilibrium
path.
Proof of Proposition 7. From Proposition 6, it follows that
g = p + dpd = p + (n

k + 1) pn

k+1

:

Therefore, g is increasing in p. Consider
d+1
(d + 1) pd+1
=
p
d
dp
d
because d

3
p;
2

2. Since we are considering small p, this ratio is less than 1. Consequently, g is

decreasing in d, and thus is increasing in k. This completes the proof.

34

