1%(5:25.,1*3$3(56(5,(6

'2(67+(86(2):25.(5)/2:6,03529(7+($1$/<6,62)(67$%/,6+0(17
785129(5"(9,'(1&()520*(50$1$'0,1,675$7,9('$7$
7DQMD+HWKH\0DLHU
-RKDQQHV)6FKPLHGHU
:RUNLQJ3DSHU
KWWSZZZQEHURUJSDSHUVZ
1$7,21$/%85($82)(&2120,&5(6($5&+
0DVVDFKXVHWWV$YHQXH
&DPEULGJH0$
'HFHPEHU

:HZRXOGOLNHWRWKDQN6WHIDQ%HQGHU7LOOYRQ:DFKWHUDQGZRUNVKRSSDUWLFLSDQWVDWWKH((6:
 DQG&$('  IRUPDQ\KHOSIXOFRPPHQWV:HDUHJUDWHIXOIRUVXSSRUWE\WKH,QVWLWXWH
IRU(PSOR\PHQW5HVHDUFKLQ1XUHPEHUJDQGWKH'HXWVFKH)RUVFKXQJVJHVHOOVFKDIW ')* $OOUHPDLQLQJ
HUURUVDUHRXURZQ7KHYLHZVH[SUHVVHGKHUHLQDUHWKRVHRIWKHDXWKRUVDQGGRQRWQHFHVVDULO\UHIOHFW
WKHYLHZVRIWKH1DWLRQDO%XUHDXRI(FRQRPLF5HVHDUFK
1%(5ZRUNLQJSDSHUVDUHFLUFXODWHGIRUGLVFXVVLRQDQGFRPPHQWSXUSRVHV7KH\KDYHQRWEHHQSHHU
UHYLHZHGRUEHHQVXEMHFWWRWKHUHYLHZE\WKH1%(5%RDUGRI'LUHFWRUVWKDWDFFRPSDQLHVRIILFLDO
1%(5SXEOLFDWLRQV
E\7DQMD+HWKH\0DLHUDQG-RKDQQHV)6FKPLHGHU$OOULJKWVUHVHUYHG6KRUWVHFWLRQVRI
WH[WQRWWRH[FHHGWZRSDUDJUDSKVPD\EHTXRWHGZLWKRXWH[SOLFLWSHUPLVVLRQSURYLGHGWKDWIXOOFUHGLW
LQFOXGLQJQRWLFHLVJLYHQWRWKHVRXUFH

'RHVWKH8VHRI:RUNHU)ORZV,PSURYHWKH$QDO\VLVRI(VWDEOLVKPHQW7XUQRYHU"(YLGHQFH
IURP*HUPDQ$GPLQLVWUDWLYH'DWD
7DQMD+HWKH\0DLHUDQG-RKDQQHV)6FKPLHGHU
1%(5:RUNLQJ3DSHU1R
'HFHPEHU
-(/1R&&&'/
ABSTRACT
$GPLQLVWUDWLYHGDWDVHWVSURYLGHDQH[FHOOHQWVRXUFHIRUGHWDLOHGDQDO\VLVRIHVWDEOLVKPHQWHQWULHVDQG
H[LWVRQDILQHDQGGLVDJJUHJDWHOHYHO+RZHYHUDGPLQLVWUDWLYHGDWDVHWVDUHQRWZLWKRXWSUREOHPV
UHVWUXFWXULQJDQGUHODEHOLQJRIILUPVLVRIWHQSRRUO\PHDVXUHGDQGFDQFUHDWHODUJHELDVHV,QIRUPDWLRQ
RQZRUNHUIORZVEHWZHHQHVWDEOLVKPHQWVFDQSRWHQWLDOO\DOOHYLDWHWKHVHPHDVXUHPHQWLVVXHVEXWLW
LVW\SLFDOO\KDUGWRMXGJHKRZZHOOFRUUHFWLRQDOJRULWKPVEDVHGRQWKLVPHWKRGRORJ\ZRUN7KLVSDSHU
HYDOXDWHVWKHXVHRIWKHZRUNHUIORZPHWKRGRORJ\XVLQJDGDWDVHWIURP*HUPDQ\WKH(VWDEOLVKPHQW
+LVWRU\3DQHO:HILUVWGRFXPHQWWKHH[WHQWRIPLVFODVVLILFDWLRQWKDWVWHPVIURPUHO\LQJVROHO\RQ
WKHILUVWDQGODVWDSSHDUDQFHRIWKHHVWDEOLVKPHQWLGHQWLILHU (,' WRLGHQWLI\RSHQLQJVDQGFORVLQJV
2QO\DERXWWRSHUFHQWRIQHZDQGGLVDSSHDULQJ(,'VZLWKPRUHWKDQHPSOR\HHVDUHOLNHO\
WRFRUUHVSRQGWRUHDOHVWDEOLVKPHQWHQWULHVDQGH[LWV:HSURYLGHSLHFHVRIHYLGHQFHWKDWXVLQJD
FODVVLILFDWLRQV\VWHPEDVHGRQZRUNHUIORZVLVVXSHULRUWRXVLQJ(,'VRQO\)LUVWHVWDEOLVKPHQWELUWK
\HDUVJHQHUDWHGXVLQJWKHZRUNHUIORZPHWKRGRORJ\DUHPXFKKLJKHUFRUUHODWHGZLWKHVWDEOLVKPHQW
ELUWK\HDUVIURPDQLQGHSHQGHQWVXUYH\6HFRQGHVWDEOLVKPHQWHQWULHVDQGH[LWVZKLFKDUHLGHQWLILHG
XVLQJWKHZRUNHUIORZPHWKRGRORJ\PRYHFORVHO\ZLWKWKHEXVLQHVVF\FOHZKLOHHYHQWVZKLFKDUH
LGHQWLILHGDVVLPSOH,'FKDQJHVDUHQRW7KLUGQHZHVWDEOLVKPHQWHQWULHVDUHVPDOODQGVKRZUDSLG
JURZWKXQOLNHQHZ(,'VWKDWFRUUHVSRQGWR,'FKDQJHV
7DQMD+HWKH\0DLHU
%XQGHVDJHQWXUIXHU$UEHLW)RUVFKXQJVGDWHQ]HQWUXP
5HJHQVEXUJHU6WU
1UQEHUJ
VWHUQHQVWDXE#JP[GH
-RKDQQHV)6FKPLHGHU
'HSDUWPHQWRI(FRQRPLFV
%RVWRQ8QLYHUVLW\
%D\6WDWH5RDG
%RVWRQ0$
DQG,=$
DQGDOVR1%(5
MRKDQQHV#EXHGX

1

Introduction

The availability of administrative ﬁrm and establishment level datasets has spurred new research in
many areas of economics, spanning Labor, Industrial Organization and Trade. This work relies crucially on following establishments or ﬁrms over time. Unfortunately longitudinal ﬁrm/establishment
identiﬁers (EID) often have problems: For example EIDs change spuriously due to changes of
ownership or legal form, due to restructuring of the ﬁrm, or coding errors. When not taken into
account a change of the EID will appear as a spurious establishment exit and a new entry. This is
particularly problematic in research projects that focus on entering and exiting ﬁrms, for example
analyzing the role of ﬁrm entries and exits for employment growth (and the lack thereof) during
the great recession.1
A possible solution to this problem has gained popularity more recently (See for example
Benedetto, Haltiwanger, Lane, McKinney 2007 and Vilhuber 2009): If individual workers can be
linked to the EIDs and the individuals can also be followed over time, one can identify ID changes
as events where large groups of worker simultaneously leave an exiting EID and enter a new EID.
Thus using information on worker ﬂows offers a way to generate consistent EIDs over time and
correct for mistakes. While this method is quickly gaining popularity, it is not well known how big
the potential bias is from using uncorrected establishment IDs or how well the method works.
In this paper we evaluate the method of using worker ﬂows to identify true establishment entries and exits using German administrative data. We provide three separate ways to evaluate
whether the worker ﬂow method improves upon using simply uncorrected EIDs: First, we investigate whether EID entries and exits that we identify as corresponding to establishment entries and
exits are more highly correlated with the business cycle, than EID entries and exits that we identify
as spurious. Second, we combine the administrative data with an establishment level survey to
compare establishment entry years derived using the worker ﬂow method with the establishment
entry year in the survey. And third, we analyze how establishment characteristics evolve around
entries of EIDs. All three methods show that establishment deaths and births identiﬁed using the
worker ﬂow method, clearly correspond to real economic events and improve upon the simple
measure of uncorrected establishment identiﬁers.
This paper is related to a number of papers that have documented problems with and attempted
to correct longitudinal person identiﬁers. For example Abowd and Vilhuber (2005) describe the
method used by the Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics Program (LEHD) at the U.S.
Census and Vilhuber (2009) provides a broader overview. On the ﬁrm or establishment level,
the problems are in some ways more difﬁcult: while for person identiﬁers at least it is clear that
the underlying unit of observation remains the same over time, ﬁrms and establishments change
1 For

examples, see Foster, Grim and Haltiwanger (2013), or Fort, Haltiwanger, Jarmin and Miranda (2012).

1

ownership, are restructured, break-up or relocate in ways that make it ambiguous what exactly the
underlying unit of observation is that is to be tracked over time.
However a consensus has emerged that it is useful for economic research to distinguish cases
where identiﬁers change due to a change in ownership, the legal form of the ﬁrm or simply a change
of accountants. In this case the change of a ﬁrm identiﬁer should not be counted as a ﬁrm exit in one
and an entry in the next period. Furthermore it is generally thought that ﬁrm restructuring events
such as merger, acquisitions and outsourcing should generally not be considered as components of
job creation and destruction (For a discussion see Persson 1999; Baldwin et al. 2002; Benedetto,
Haltiwanger, Lane and McKinney 2007; Vilhuber 2009; Geurts, Ramioul and Vets 2009; Abowd
and Vilhuber 2011).
To deal with problems of longitudinal linkages, researchers and statistical agencies have employed probabilistic matching methods based on similarities in partial ﬁrm identiﬁers as well as
information about name, location and economic activity (Eurostat/OECD 2007; Vilhuber 2009).
More recently information on worker ﬂows between employers has been used, since it is usually
presumed that if the work force is identical in two consecutive years, then there is a high probability that these records relate to the same ﬁrm or establishment. This approach has been used for
administrative datasets, among others, in Italy (Revelli 1996, Contini 2007), Finland (Vartiainen
2004), the U.S. (Benedetto et. al. 2007), and Belgium (Geurts et. al 2009). This study follows
most closely the approach taken by Benedetto et. al. (2007). Our main contribution relative to this
literature is that rather than just using the worker ﬂow methodology to correct for problems in the
EIDs, we document how successful this approach is with ﬁxing these identiﬁers.
As an illustration for the importance of the bias from not using corrected EIDs, we investigate
the role of establishment turnover for job creation and destruction using corrected and uncorrected
identiﬁers. The notion that producer entry and exit is an important form of reallocation of production factors and thus contributing to aggregate growth has inspired a long line of theoretical and
empirical research. One aspect of this reallocation mechanism that has been particularly prominent in the political sphere is the role of this churning process in the creation and destruction of
jobs. New and small producers are often referred to as an important job growth engine, while
the demise of a plant is usually lamented for the number of jobs it destroys.2 For this reason job
creation and destruction has long been studied by economists to enhance the understanding of the
business cycle and the adjustment processes in the economy (David, Haltiwanger and Schuh 1996;
Bartelsman, Scarpetta and Schivardi 2005; Brown, Haltiwanger and Lane 2008). These studies
typically decompose net job creation into the contributions of entering and exiting ﬁrms in addition to reallocation between existing ﬁrms. We demonstrate that in the German administrative data,
2 The

impact of job destruction due to plant closings on the displaced workers has also received a lot of attention in
the literature, see for example Jacobson, Lalonde, and Sullivan (1993) and von Wachter, Song and Manchester (2009).

2

using only EID entries and exits may dramatically overstate, by as much as 100 percent, the role
of establishment turnover for job creation and destruction. Correcting for spurious EID entries and
exits reduces the absolute measures for job creation and destruction by up to 13 percent and aligns
them closer with the business cycle.
This paper continues as follows: Section 2 discusses the data we are using and describes our
methodology, in particular our system to classify appearances and disappearances of EIDs. Section 3 takes this classiﬁcation system to the data and evaluates how well the worker ﬂow method
does in identifying true economic events. In Section 4 we discuss the robustness of our results to
choosing different cutoffs for classifying entries and exits and provide some evdience in support of
the chosen thresholds. Section 5 provides the application to job creation and destruction measures,
by showing the bias that arises from using uncorrected EIDs. Section 6 concludes.

2

Data and the Worker Flow Method

2.1

Data

The establishment history panel (BHP) is created from German social security records. Employers
are required to ﬁle a report for all employees who are employed during a year. This report contains information on the duration of employment, the total pay over that period and a number of
demographic variables (such as education, nationality, gender, and age). The pay information is
generally very accurate (since it determines the social security contributions) but top coded. There
is also information on industry, occupation and work status (full-time, part-time, apprentice) available. Since employers and individuals are uniquely identiﬁed through establishment and person
IDs, it is possible to construct complete job histories for individual workers, and to follow establishments over time. The data covers all employment subject to social security contributions, but
excludes certain types of government employees and the self-employed.3 Overall about 80 percent
of the working population in Germany is in the dataset. While this is a large part of the population,
it is clear that for the study of establishment turnover this dataset omits establishments that consist
only of workers not covered by social security (mainly government agencies and institutions such
as schools) or only of self-employed such as law ﬁrms who only have partners - though in most
cases there would at least be some staff who is employed and liable to social security contributions.
Establishments are identiﬁed on the basis of establishment identiﬁcation numbers (EID). Those
numbers are allocated to each organizational unit in a speciﬁc region and industry consisting of
at least one worker liable to social insurance.4 The deﬁnition of an establishment in this data
3 Also

marginal part-time employment had been exempt from social security until 1999, so that up to this date it is
not included in this data.
4 Since 1999 establishments with at least one marginal part-time worker are also assigned an EID.

3

does not necessarily correspond exactly to a meaningful economic unit like a ﬁrm or a plant.
An establishment may consist of one or more branches. As long as they all belong to the same
industry and authority district (Kreis) they might all be covered under the same EID. Once an
establishment is assigned an EID this number remains constant over time. This holds especially if
the establishment moves to another region or is temporarily closed. The latter prevents classifying
a reopened establishment as a true entry. On the other hand, an ownership or industry change
triggers the assignment of a new EID to an establishment, despite not being a truly new opening.
The BHP is created by collapsing social security records data on the establishment year level.5
Only employment spells that cover June 30th are used so that for each establishment and year
there is a record with information on characteristics and size of the employees on this date. The
resulting data is a panel comprising the universe of German social security liable employment since
the year 1975. Our analysis is based on BHP data for the time period 1975-2004. The strength
of this data is clearly its large scope (about 2 million observations per year covering about 25
million jobs) and time span. One important weakness, and the motivation for this paper, is that it
is difﬁcult to identify establishment entry and exit in the BHP. While for each EID it can be easily
determined when it appears for the ﬁrst and last time, it is not clear that these dates correspond to
true entries and exits. An important concern is that if an EID changes for other reasons, this would
appear as an exit and an entry without any corresponding economic event. That this can happen is
acknowledged in the documentation of the BHP (Dundler et al. 2006), but it is hard to judge how
often this actually happens and whether this biases empirical work that ignores the issue.
Establishments and Firms
It is helpful to clarify what we mean by establishment entry and exit before discussing how to
identify these events. We understand an establishment to be a local economic unit consisting of
workers and capital, and producing some sort of goods or services. Examples are a manufacturing
plant, a restaurant, a local branch of a bank, or a gas station. This is different from the ﬁrm as an
economic unit, which may consist of several establishments, which may create new or destroy old
establishments, and which may buy or sell them. It can be the case that a ﬁrm disappears but an
establishment belonging to the ﬁrm continues to exist (e.g. after being taken over by a competitor)
and vice versa.
It is not completely clear under which conditions one would consider an establishment in year
t to be the same establishment in year t + 1. If all workers are still employed at the same location
but possibly by a different owner or as part of a different company, one would probably consider
this a continuing establishment that experienced an ownership change. On the other hand if only
5 The social security data is available to the scientiﬁc community in several different forms,

ranging from individual
level panel data (the IABS) to linked employer-employee data (the LIAB). For more information see http://fdz.iab.de.

4

the location is the same and the new owner replaced all old workers with new ones, one would
likely consider this a new establishment. In between these two extremes the distinction becomes
fuzzy and in practice somewhat arbitrary deﬁnitions will have to be made. In addition to ID
Changes, which allow following an establishment from one year to another, and clear creations or
destructions of establishments, it is also possible for establishments to break up into several units
or for several establishments to merge.
For this paper we completely ignore the capital aspect of establishments (for data reason) and
focus on the employee side. We therefore deﬁne a new establishment to be an establishment where
a new group of workers get together and start producing something, and we deﬁne a continuing establishment to be an establishment where a large part of the workforce has been employed together
in the previous year. We will also take care to classify break ups and spin-offs appropriately. Since
we do not have direct information on ownership structure or ﬁrm identities, it should be kept in
mind that we are limited in that dimension.

2.2

The Worker Flow Method for Correcting Establishment IDs

In this paper we directly address the problem of spurious EID entries and exits by providing and
evaluating a new way to identify establishment entry and exit based on worker ﬂows. Having
access to the underlying social security records of the BHP we observe directly how many workers
move between each establishment pair between two consecutive years. We will call all workers
who move from an establishment A to an establishment B, a cluster of workers. Such a cluster will
represent an inﬂow in establishment B and an outﬂow in establishment A. Using the individual
level social security data, we created a dataset on all worker ﬂows, where a unit of observation is
one clustered ﬂow. Of all the clustered inﬂows to an EID, we call the largest one (most number
of workers) in a given year the maximum clustered inﬂow (MCI). Similarly we deﬁne the largest
ﬂow of all the clustered outﬂows in a year the maximum clustered outﬂow (MCO).6
Our strategy to classify new EIDs into new establishments, Spin-Offs, and id changes is based
on whether the workers in a new establishment all come from the same EID or not. In practice
this is done by looking whether not more than a certain percentage of the current work force at an
entering EID was employed together in the previous year. To check this it is sufﬁcient to know
the total number of workers currently employed, and the maximum clustered inﬂow to the EID.
Similarly, in order to classify exiting EIDs it is enough to have information on the maximum
6 In addition to inﬂows from other establishments, there are also workers that were not employed in a social security
liable job on June 30th of the previous year. In our ﬂow data we cannot distinguish between whether these workers
were unemployed at that time or worked in a job not covered by our data (self-employed, government or jobs below
the earnings threshold for social security). The MCI (and similarly the MCO) is the maximum of all inﬂows from
other establishments, so if no workers come from other establishments the MCI would be 0.

5

clustered outﬂow. We therefore restrict our ﬂow data to the MCI and MCO and merge those to
each establishment year observation in the BHP.
Classifying Entering Establishment IDs
Not all new EIDs are also new establishments since an EID can change for a number of reasons.
However it is true that the way EIDs are assigned in Germany implies that almost all new establishments will receive a new unique EID.7 This allows us to focus on new EIDs to identify new
establishments. Based on the previous discussion a new EID can correspond to either a new establishment or a continuing establishment. A new establishment is an establishment where the
workforce consists largely of workers that have newly come together to the production process
(either be as a new ﬁrm or as part of an existing ﬁrm).
Continuing establishments correspond to the case where a large fraction of the workforce at
the new establishment was employed together in the year before. We will call the EID where the
largest cluster of workers has been employed together in the prior year the predecessor. If the
workers at the new EID that were employed together in the year before also constituted most of
the predecessor’s employment, then the new EID and the predecessor correspond to very similar
working arrangements and we will thus call them the same establishment, that underwent a change
of the establishment identiﬁer.
The other possibility for a continuing establishment is that a large fraction of the workers
have been employed together in the previous year, but that they did not actually represent a large
fraction of the workforce of the predecessor. We call this case a Spin-Off or break up, since a part
of the predecessor is spun-off to create a new production unit. This can be further distinguished in
whether or not the predecessor continues to exist or not. If not, we refer to a Spin-Off as pushed,
since the group of workers is pushed out by the closing/disappearance of the larger unit. If the
predecessor continues to exist we label the Spin-Off as pulled. While we use the label ’spin-off’
here, it is important to note that without more context or information, this may encompass a number
of different economic events. For example if an existing ﬁrm creates a new branch or plant (which
for industry code or accounting reasons is assigned a new EID), this may be associated with a ﬂow
of workers from existing plants. Since such a new EID would still be part of the same company,
calling this spin-off may be a bit misleading. Exploring the economic signiﬁcance of these spin-off
events is a particularly interesting avenue for future research. Also note that some new EIDs do
not ﬁt any of these patterns very well. We will come back to those later. From this discussion we
can classify new EIDs into the following ﬁve broad categories:
7 Except

for the qualiﬁcations in the data section of how an establishment is deﬁned in the BHP, there is only one
qualiﬁcation: If a business owner essentially shuts down his business for a number of years and then reopens it, she
may use the same EID again even though this may reasonably referred to as a new establishment by our deﬁnition.

6

• New establishments:
A group of workers who come together to form a new production unit
• Continuing establishments: Spin-Off / Break Up pushed
• Continuing establishments: Spin-Off / Break Up pulled
• ID Change (because of ownership change, take over, change of legal form, restructuring)
• Other / Not classiﬁable / Unclear
In order to apply these classiﬁcations to the data it is necessary to deﬁne cutoffs for what it
means that most workers did not work together in the previous year etc. Our cutoffs and classiﬁcation system follow Benedetto et. al. (2007) and are displayed in Table 1. For very small
establishments the ratio of MCI to employment is not a very meaningful statistic (since for example for an establishment with exactly one worker in its ﬁrst year this ratio can only be 0 or 1). We
therefore put all establishments with less than 4 workers in the ﬁrst year into an extra category
which we call New Establishments (small). For the establishments with more than 3 employees
we use the MCI to categorize them. If the MCI is less than 30 percent of all inﬂows in the ﬁrst
year of an EID, we call this a medium or big New Establishment (med & big). For 30 to 80
percent of MCI/inﬂows and less than 80 percent MCI/predecessor employment we put the new
EID into a category which we call New Establishment (fuzzy) to indicate that these are likely new
establishments but that there is some possibility of misclassiﬁcation.
Most establishments with a higher than 80 percent MCI/inﬂow ratio can be considered to be
continuing establishments. To distinguish between the different continuing establishment categories it is necessary to look at the predecessor. If the MCI corresponds to less than 80 percent of
the predecessor’s total employment (in the previous year), we call the continuing establishment a
Spin-Off, if it is more than 80 percent and the predecessor exits we call it an ID-change. If the predecessor exits from the previous to the current year, we call the Spin-Off pushed, otherwise pulled.
The remaining ﬁelds seem odd combinations for various reasons and are thus labeled Unclear (we
come back to this in the results section).
Classifying Exiting Establishment IDs
Our method for classifying exiting establishments follows the same principle. All exiting establishments with less than 4 workers are classiﬁed as small establishment deaths, since for those the
ratio of MCO to employment in the last year is not a meaningful statistic. All establishments where
the ratio of MCO to employment in the year before the exit is less than 30 percent are classiﬁed as
atomized deaths. Exiting establishment IDs where the MCO/last employment ratio is between 30
7

and 80 percent are classiﬁed as fuzzy deaths. It is certainly debatable what the best classiﬁcation
for this group is. One could both imagine that establishments of this kind are true exits, where a
relatively large chunk of workers happens to end up at the same establishment, or some kind of
spin-offs or takeovers that only take a relatively small fraction of workers. Since we think that any
cutoff is ultimately arbitrary we put them in a separate category, which allows us later to see the
importance of this group. For symmetry with the entry classiﬁcation we label establishments with
less than 80 percent MCO/outﬂow ratio and more than 80 percent MCO/successor employment
ratio Spin-Offs (in this cased pushed, since the predecessor exits).
Exiting EIDs where a very large fraction – we take 80 percent as the cutoff – of workers stay
together indicate that these are not true exits. If these worker go to a new EID in the following
year and this group makes up most of the workers at the new establishment ID, then we take this
as a strong indication that this is actually simply a change of the EID and we classify this as an ID
change. If the workers enter an existing EID and make up less than 80 percent of the workforce at
this EID, this may correspond to a takeover of the exiting establishment and we label this takeover
/ restructuring. The remaining categories are labelled unclear again.

2.3

Applying the Worker Flows Method to German Establishments

Table 2 Panel A shows the total number of establishments in each of our seven entry categories,
pooling all establishment entries from 1976 to 2003. The vast majority (83 percent) of all new
EIDs are New Establishments (small), with the two second largest groups being the other two New
Establishment classes, accounting for 6 percent each. The other categories account for far fewer
establishments: ID-changes for about 0.8 percent and Spin-Offs (pulled) and Spin-Offs (pushed)
for 1.7 and 1.1 percent respectively. About 0.9 percent are classiﬁed as Unclear. While thus 95
percent of all new EIDs appear to be truly new establishments (excluding the fuzzy category),
and Spin-Offs and ID-changes appear to be pretty rare, this masks the fact that most of these new
establishments are very small. The table therefore also shows total employment in each of these
establishment classes (in the year the EID appears). This changes the relative importance of these
categories substantially. ID Changes and Unclear entries now account for nearly 10 percent of
employees in new EIDs. Spin-Offs combined have about 3 million employees in their ﬁrst year
out of a total of 17 million in new EIDs. New establishments still account for most employees
(about 73 percent), but the group of small establishments is now much less important (though
still the largest) while the fuzzy and med & big groups account for 4 and 3 million employees
each. Given the ambiguity of the fuzzy new establishment category, the group of unambiguous
establishment entries is thus signiﬁcantly reduced when either considering employment weighted
number (accounting for only 50 percent of all employment) or when considering only EIDs with

8

more than 3 employees (accounting for only 37 percent of all new EIDs).
The impression that spurious entries, due to the non-new establishment categories, are more
important among large new EIDs, is conﬁrmed further when we break up the entry classiﬁcations
by employment size in the ﬁrst year (See Appendix Table A-2). By deﬁnition New Establishments
(small) only appear in the smallest size class. Among the larger establishments it is apparent that
the two new establishment categories become relatively less important as employment increases.
It is probably not surprising that there are few truly new establishments that start out very big and
those that do would often be new establishments set up by large multi-establishment ﬁrms or some
kind of outsourcing of parts of an establishment, both of which may show up us Spin-Offs (pulled).
The total number of establishments in each exit category is reported in Table 2 Panel B. The
Small Deaths account for the vast majority of exits, with nearly 83 percent. Among the exiting EIDs with more than 3 employees, the Atomized and Fuzzy Death categories are clearly the
largest with 290,000 and 240,000 establishments respectively. Establishment deaths that are associated with a Spin-Off occurring, are less frequent, with a total of 86,000 establishments. Exiting
EIDs that probably do not correspond to an actual dissolution of the establishment – Takeovers and
ID Changes – make up about 37,000 establishments each. Finally about 0.7 percent of all establishments are classiﬁed as Unclear. Again these raw numbers overstate the importance of the Small
Death category for employment. The numbers on employment in each of the categories reveal that
the Small Death category, while still the largest, only accounts for about 30 percent of employment
in exiting EIDs. The other two death categories are relatively more important for employment,
having a share of about 23 percent each. Finally takeovers, ID Changes and Unclear exits do represent a sizable fraction of the workforce in exiting EID, representing a combined total of about
13 percent. This is again reinvorced when when we break up the exit types by establishment size
in the year prior to exit (Appendix Table A-3): Among the smaller size classes the atomized and
fuzzy death classes clearly dominate, accounting for most of the exits. However, these categories
become less important among the larger establishments, where ID Changes and Takeovers are relatively more important. It is particularly interesting that among large establishment exits with 100
workers or more, less than one in four exits fall into the atomized death category. This clearly
highlights the importance of controlling for spurious exits in studies of job-displacement.
To summarize, while spurious entries and exits are less important among smaller establishments, they become signiﬁcantly more important when establishments are employment weighted
or similarly when looking at larger establishments. While this supports the notion that it is potentially important to apply the worker ﬂow method to control for spurious entries and exits, based
on this categorization alone it is unclear whether the worker ﬂow method does in fact improve in
identifying exits and entries that correspond to real economic events.

9

3

Evaluating the Worker Flow Method

In this section we evaluate the performance of the worker ﬂow categorization of establishment
entries and exits using three independent methods, that allow us to judge whether the categories of
entries and exits correspond closer to the economic events that we want to capture.

3.1

Cross Validation with Survey Data

As a ﬁrst way to gauge whether the worker ﬂow method is able to distinguish between real establishment entries and spurious entries, we compare the entry years that are implied by our method
with the years of the foundation of the establishment according to a survey based self-assessment
of the establishments. If the categorization of entering EIDs in the administrative data is meaningful, then for categories capturing true entries, the correlation between survey based foundation
year of an establishment with the administrative birth year (based on the ﬁrst appearance of the
EID), should be signiﬁcantly higher than for the other categories.
We derive the year of establishment foundation from the Establishment Panel (EP), a large,
representative survey of German establishments.8 The Establishment Panel is a panel of establishments that are interviewed yearly starting in 1993. The size of the panel varies over time but in
recent years about 15,000 establishments are interviewed every year. The Establishment Panel can
be linked on the establishment level to the establishment identiﬁers in the Establishment History
Panel. We deﬁne as the birth year in the BHP, the year in which the EID ﬁrst appeared. In the EP
the birth year is the answer to the question when the establishment was founded. Establishments
are also asked whether the foundation was a) a new ﬁrm or branch, b) a new establishment, or c)
neither of these.
Table 3 shows the correlation coefﬁcients between the birth years in the BHP and EP for the
three EP establishment categories and the seven BHP establishment entry categories based on
worker ﬂows. Column (1) shows the correlation between survey birth year and administrative
birth year in the ’new ﬁrm or branch’ category of the EP. The correlation is highest in the New
establishment small and med & big categories, providing support for our classiﬁcation of these
establishments as true entries. The correlation is weaker for the other categories, though also not
zero. It is interesting that the correlation is still about 0.49 for ID-Changes. This might be because
ID-changes could be associated with ownership changes and that survey respondents interpret
’founding year of the establishment’ to be the year when ownership changed.
Column (2) shows the same correlations for the ’new establishment’ category in the survey,
again the correlation between birth years is highest for the New estab (med & big) category, close
8 More

information regarding the EP can be found at: http://fdz.iab.de

10

to 0.9. Strikingly the correlation between birth years is negative for the ID changes in this column
and pretty low for the New Establishment (fuzzy) category, supporting our suspicion that this
category may contain many spurious entries. Finally Column (3) provides correlations for the other
category, which are generally weaker, as would be expected given that in this case the foundation
year in the survey data may be spurious.
Overall the comparison with the survey based in formation supports our categorization in so far
as that the correlations between birth years tend to be higher in the establishments categories that
we would expect to correspond to true entries in both datasets. Notice that both datasets capture
slightly different concepts. E.g. in the survey respondents may well state the age of the motherﬁrm rather than the establishment in a multi-level ﬁrm, thus measuring something different than
the administrative establishment unit. Similarly respondents to the survey may or may not view an
ownership change as a new ’foundation-year’ of an establishment. So while the patterns seem to
support our categorization, the imperfect correlations may not be surprising.

3.2

The Cyclicality of Entries and Exits

Economic upswings are usually associated with an increase in the formation of new establishments
and ﬁrms, while recessions tend to be associated with plant closures and job destruction. If our
entry and exit classiﬁcation system does indeed capture differences in underlying economic events,
then we should expect that the entry of EIDs classiﬁed as new establishments goes up in a boom
and down in a recession, while the reverse should hold for EID exits classiﬁed as establishment
exits. On the other hand the spurious entry and exit categories should be less correlated with the
business cycle.
Figure 1 (a) shows the number of entering EIDs by entry category and year for West Germany.9
On average there are about 120,000 new EIDs per year, with a slight increase to about 130-140,000
after 1990. 1999 (and to a lesser extent the following 2 years) is a clear outlier with a sharp
spike in the New Establishment (small) category. In this year the reporting requirements for the
social security system were changed to cover marginally employed workers. While we attempted
to correct for this by dropping these employment relationships, the underlying structure of the
reporting rules make it impossible to correct for this perfectly which almost certainly explains the
spike.10
9 For

East Germany the data starts in 1991 and by focusing on 1992 and later we should not pick up establishments
which are simply covered by the social security system for the ﬁrst time. Nevertheless, as we show in the Web
Appendix we still ﬁnd a very large number of new establishments, more than 160,000, in 1992. Nearly all of them
fall in the new establishment categories. The number of new EIDs drops sharply in 1993 and then shows a declining
pattern, though with some outliers, across all categories until 2004.
10 Apart from this outlier the number of EIDs in the New Establishment (small) category shows essentially no time
trend. This is markedly different from all other categories which show fairly strong increases over time. Perhaps

11

The corresponding establishment exits are shown in Figure 1 (b). Again there appears to be
an overall trend towards more establishment turnover throughout the 90s and early 2000s. The
various true exit categories seem to increase similarly as the spurious exits, such as ID Changes.
In Figures 1 (a) and (b), recessions (1982, 1993 and 2003) are indicated by vertical bars. These
ﬁgures give a visual impression of the cyclicality (and acyclicality) of the different time series:
it appears that establishment entries in the medium/big category and small category are markedly
lower in recessions, while the corresponding establishment exit categories increase in downturns.
We assess this more carefully by computing correlation coefﬁcients between the time series of
the different entry and exit categories and business cycle indicators. As business cycle indicators
we use the growth rate of real GDP, as well as the year to year change in the unemployment
rate measured in percentage points. Table 4 Panel A displays the correlation between number
of establishments and number of employees in each of the seven entry categories with the two
business cycle indicators. Since the change in the unemployment rate and GDP growth are quite
highly negatively correlated (as one might expect from Okun’s law), the patterns emerging from
the two measures are pretty similar. Since several categories show strong increases over time, the
raw correlation between such categories and the business cycle indicators (which are essentially
trendless) will be highly affected by the long term trends and is thus not very informative. For
this reason we detrend the establishment and employment time series using the Hodrick-Prescott
ﬁlter.11
ID Changes and Spin-Offs Pulled are not strongly correlated with the business cycle and only
the detrended time series show a weak (and statistically insigniﬁcant) counter cyclical correlation.
For the Spin-Off Pushed category the correlation is very strongly counter-cyclical once the long
term trend is taken out (correlation of 0.7 with the change in the UR). Since we think of these
as spin-off which are forced by plant closings it makes sense that these are more common during downturns. On the other hand the New Establishment (med & big) and New Establishment
(small) time series appear to follow the business cycle quite closely, showing clear and statistically
signiﬁcant correlations of around 0.4 to 0.6 with the business cycle measures.
The fact that only those entry categories which we consider to be relatively unambiguously new
establishments are strongly procyclical indicates that our classiﬁcation corresponds to real economically different events and we ﬁnd this reassuring. Furthermore the ambiguity of the Unclear
and New Establishment (fuzzy) categories is reﬂected in the weaker correlation with the business
most striking is the fact that ID-Changes are more than three times as common towards the end of our sample period
compared to the beginning. Similarly there is a very strong increase of both Spin-Off categories. There is also a
pronounced increase in the Unclear and Fuzzy New Establishment categories, while the New Establishment (med &
big) category shows only a moderate increase over time which reverts back to its starting value in the last 2 years.
11 We use a smoothing parameter value of 1600, which is commonly used for quarterly data, since we found that the
more standard values for annual data take out too much of the cyclical variation. The results are very similar if instead
of HP ﬁltering, we simply take out a linear time trend.

12

cycle, which points towards our suspicion that these categories correspond to true establishment
entries as well as spin-offs and restructuring events.
For the exits in Table 4 Panel B, Atomized Deaths and Spin-Offs Pushed (which we argued
should also be considered true exits) show nearly the same pattern of a very robust positive correlation with the change in the unemployment rate (about 0.7) and a weaker negative correlation
with GDP growth. Interestingly the Small Death category is nearly uncorrelated with the business
cycle, and thus shows a markedly different pattern than the New Small category. Also quite different from the respective entry categories, both the Fuzzy Death and the Unclear categories appear
to be somewhat procyclical (although only marginally statistically signiﬁcant), which may indicate
that there are relatively few true exits in these categories and instead that they involve a signiﬁcant
amount of restructuring. The Takeover/Restructuring category is nearly acyclical as well as the ID
Change category, which exhibits the same pattern as the corresponding entry category.
This evidence supports the common practice in displacement studies of the Jacobson, Lalonde
and Sullivan (1993) type to view only worker separations from disappearing establishments that
are large and atomized (in our parleance) as true displacements. The strong correlation of these
establishment exits (in particular compared to the other EID exit categories) with economic downturns clearly indicates that these are more likely to correspond to real establishment closings and
lumping all EID exits together may severely downward bias our displacement effects in the absence
of such corrections.

3.3

The Evolution of Establishment Characteristics around Establishment
Events

We now turn to how characteristics of establishments evolve around establishment events. We
investigate the evolution of new EIDs over time depending on their entry type. There are two
simple descriptive ways to achieve this. On the one hand one can pick a cohort of entering EIDs
and follow them over time. On the other hand one can pick a year and analyze establishments
of different ages in that year. The former approach has the problem that the variation with age
is confounded by overall time trends, while the latter has the disadvantage that age is possibly
confounded by differences of establishments across cohorts. We show results based on the latter
approach.
Table 5 shows characteristics in establishments of different age in 2000 by their entry category.
The ﬁrst Panel shows how employment varies with establishment age (we speak of establishment
age here even though we really mean the age of the EID, i.e. time since the ﬁrst appearance of the
EID). New establishments small and med & big show fairly strong employment growth over the
ﬁrst few years. For example New Establishments (small) have on average only 1 employee in their
13

ﬁrst year, but nearly 4 in their fourth year. New establishments (med & big) start out larger with
about 12 employees, but this also quickly increases to 19 by age 4 and continues to rise afterwards.
Since we would probably expect new establishments to grow this provides some support for our
deﬁnition of new establishments. The New Establishments (fuzzy) category also shows increasing
employment with age, but the relationship is not quite monotone. Also consistent with the fact that
the other categories do not represent true establishment entries, they show no clear relationship
between time since entry and employment.
The correlation between employment and establishment age can of course be driven by selection. This possibility is particularly important since new establishments have a very high probability of exiting again, so that the increase in average employment may be a simple composition
effect. For this reason Table 5 Panel B shows how employment growth varies with establishment
age. Here growth is computed on the establishment level (Employment current year minus employment last year divided by employment last year) and then averaged over the establishments.
It is clear that the increase in employment in Panel A is not just driven by selection and instead
all three new establishment categories show strong growth over the ﬁrst couple of years, while the
other categories show little growth.12

4

Sensitivity: What are the Correct Cutoffs for Deﬁning Entries and Exits?

There is necessarily some arbitrariness in picking cutoffs for classifying establishment entries and
exits. There is an inherent trade-off similar to the standard econometric trade-off between bias
and efﬁciency. If the cutoff for the ratio of the maximum concentrated inﬂow to employment is
very low, then the new establishment deﬁnition is most likely to correspond to only true entries.
However in this case the number of observations is also quite low and a potentially large number of
true new establishments are not captured by the deﬁnition. If the cutoff is increased, the deﬁnition
will likely cover a larger share of real establishment entries, but will also include more ’false
positives’. While the right deﬁnition depends on the research question at hand, in this section we
present some evidence that the chosen cutoffs for establishment entries (MCI/inﬂows < 30%) and
exits (MCO/outﬂows < 30%) may infact represent a reasonable choice for many applications.
In order to investigate the role of different inﬂow cutoffs for deﬁning establishment entries, we
divided all new EIDs into bins of the ratio of the MCI and the employment in the ﬁrst year. We
use 10 bins for MCI/inﬂow ratios between 0 to 1, where the bandwidth of each bin is 0.1. We
12 Schmieder

(2013) investigates how these high growth rates in new establishments are associated with wages,
showing a negative relationship between establishment age and wages within establishments.

14

then compute the number of EID entries per year in each of those bins and compute the correlation
coefﬁcient between the number of EIDs and the change in the unemployment rate in the same way
as we did for Table 4.
Figure 2 shows the correlation coefﬁcients for the 10 bins (along with conﬁdence intervals), as
well as the average number of new EIDs per year in each of the bins. The top ﬁgure uses all new
EIDs with more than 3 employees in the ﬁrst year, while the bottom restricts the sample to EIDs that
start out with at least 10 employees. Both ﬁgures show that the correlation between entries and the
change in the unemployment rate is clearly negative (i.e. entries increase in good labor markets) for
small cutoffs, as we would expect. As the cutoffs become larger the negative correlation becomes
insigniﬁcant and eventually is reversed for the last two bins (MCI/inﬂows>80%), providing strong
support that EID entries with high MCI/inﬂow ratios are unlikely to be new establishments.
Turning to the number of establishments in each bin, the top ﬁgure is somewhat jagged with
a spike in the 3rd bin. This is due to the fact that inﬂows are a discrete number of employees and
most EID entries are very small. E.g. establishments where all workers come from different EIDs
in the prior year, still have an MCI/inﬂow ratio of 0.2 or 0.25 if employment in the ﬁrst year is
only 5 or 4 employees respectively. This explains why there are so few establishments in the ﬁrst
bin, since only EIDs with at least 10 employees could even show up in this bin. In the bottom
ﬁgure, where we only look at EIDs with at least 10 employees in the ﬁrst year, we do not have
this issue due to the integer nature of inﬂows. Here we have a clear U-shaped pattern, with many
new EIDs in the ﬁrst bin, as well as for high MCI/inﬂow ratios. This ﬁgure strongly suggests that
new EIDs are indeed divided into a large number of truly new establishments, but also a signiﬁcant
number of ID changes in the higher bins. Note that cutoff of MCI/inﬂows < 30% can be viewed
as a sweet-spot, since it is roughly the turning point when the number of EIDs increases again and
when the correlation coefﬁcient is starting to not be signiﬁcant anymore.
Figure 3 represents a parallel analysis for exiting EIDs. Since exits tend to be larger than
entries in any case and many papers are interested in closings of larger plants, we show the results for EIDs with at least 10 (top ﬁgure) and 50 (bottom ﬁgure) employees.13 The results are
similar across both ﬁgures. The correlation between establishment exits and the change in the unemployment rate is, as expected, positive and highly statistically signiﬁcant, for the ﬁrst 3-4 bins
but falls rapidly thereafter indicating that indeed only the lower bins correspond to true establishment deaths. Furthermore there is again a low point in the number of EIDs in the 3rd and 4th
bin. Overall this indicates that the cutoff for deﬁning atomized deaths, or true establishment exits,
of MCO/outﬂows < 30% is a reasonable trade-off, providing a large number of observations that
13 See Web Appendix for samples with EIDs with at least 4 and 30 employees. While the employee threshold of 4
and larger again displays the jaggedness in the number of EIDs per year due to the discrete nature of outﬂows, the 30
employee sample looks very similar to Figure 3

15

likely correspond to true exits.
We also conducted a careful sensitivity analysis of our other results where we varied the thresholds for inﬂows and outﬂows by values of 0.1 around the main threshold (e.g. deﬁning new establishments to be EIDs where MCI/inﬂows < 20% or MCI/inﬂows < 40%). As one might expect
from the low mass of EIDs in these ranges in Figures 2 and 3, this has only a relatively small impact on the number of observations in each entry and exit classiﬁcation. Furthermore it has almost
no impact on the correlations in Tables 3 to 5. This is again not surprising, given the results in
Figures 2 and 3, since there the correlations are quite stable around smaller changes of the inﬂow
and outﬂow cutoffs.

5

Application: Correcting Measures of Job Creation and Job
Destruction

New establishments are often considered to be important contributors to overall job growth. However, as discussed before, spurious entries and ID Changes can signiﬁcantly overstate the contribution by new entries. In order to assess the magnitude of this problem Figure 4 (a) shows job
creation over time by new EIDs. The solid black line represents the uncorrected measure which
corresponds simply to total employment in new EIDs in their ﬁrst year of appearance. In a typical
year, there are about 300,000 - 400,000 jobs in new EIDs, which represents about 25 percent of
total job creation in the economy, or about 2 percent of all jobs. It is not completely clear, which of
the entry categories should be considered new entries, or corresponding to true job creation. If we
apply the most conservative measure and use only the New Small and New (med & big) category,
the job creation number by new establishments is nearly cut in half and new establishments account for only about 13 percent of overall job creation. Furthermore the strong increase over time
disappears and job creation by new establishments appears quite stable (though procyclical) in the
long run. The ﬁgure also shows corrected measures which are less conservative and for example
include the Fuzzy entries and Spin-Offs.
Figure 4 (b) shows the same for job destruction. Again the most conservative correction measure, shows a much smaller contribution of establishment exits to overall job destruction (about 15
rather than 25 percent) and decreases the long term time trend, although there is still a signiﬁcant
increase over time. Unsurprisingly our corrected measures for job creation and job destruction by
entries and exits are also closer correlated with the business cycle.
We also analyzed total job creation and job destruction after taking out the creation and destruction by spurious entries and exits (Correcting in the same way as in Figures 4 (a) and (b)).
Using the most conservative measure, it appears that the uncorrected overall job creation measure

16

is about 13 percent higher (increasing in recent years) than our corrected measure, a quite signiﬁcant upward bias.14 Similarly the uncorrected total job destruction time series is about 11 percent
higher than the corrected one. For less conservative corrections, the difference is smaller but still
appears to be economically signiﬁcant.
The impact of these corrections is strongest when we consider net job creation (deﬁned as job
creation minus job destruction) and destruction measures uncorrected and corrected for spurious
entries and exits. In absolute numbers, the correction for net-job creation measures has a smaller
impact, since the biases tend to cancel each other out. However since net job creation has a lower
level (on average around 0), the relative bias (the ratio of spurious net-job creation to total net-job
creation) in any particular year can be large and ranges from -60 to +30 percent in years where net
job creation is close to zero. On average (over all years) the relative bias is about 16 percent, a
quite signiﬁcant number in economic terms.

6

Conclusion

Every year there is a large number of newly appearing and disappearing establishment identiﬁers
in the data. In this paper we provide a way of classifying these events in order to distinguish true
establishment entries and exits from ID changes and restructuring events. We ﬁnd that clear cut
establishment entries and exits account only for roughly half of the employment in entering and
exiting EIDs. There is a large number of establishments which come out of Spin-Off events or
some sort of ﬁrm restructuring. There is also a sizable number of establishment identiﬁers, which
disappear or appear in ways which are not easily classiﬁed. Finally there are sizable numbers of
pure ID changes, particularly important among larger establishments.
Our rules to identify true entries and exits create time series that closely line up with the business cycle, while the other categories appear relatively acyclical. Across the board there are interesting time patterns which warrant further investigation. For example there has been a strong
increase in establishment restructuring events in West Germany, while East Germany experienced
a decline over the same time period.
Correcting job creation and destruction measures for spurious ID Changes and Restructuring
events has very sizable effects on the overall numbers. Not correcting for such events overestimates the contribution of entries and exits to job creation and destruction by a factor of around 2.
Furthermore overall job creation and destruction rates are severely biased and about 5 percent (for
moderate corrections) to 10-13 percent (for more conservative corrections) lower when correcting
for spurious events.
14 See

web appendix for detailed ﬁgures documenting this

17

The bias created by time inconsistent establishment identiﬁers and ﬁrm restructuring events
appears to be quite signiﬁcant and may be even more problematic within particular industries,
regions, or establishment size classes. It is hard to know exactly how big this problem is for the
interpretation of previous studies which identiﬁed establishment turnover solely using the EID
entries and exits (sometimes in conjunction with arbitrary size cutoffs), but it seems important to
take the potential biases into account.
Fortunately our study indicates that using worker ﬂows will allow for signiﬁcant improvements
of the ﬁrm linkages and thus improve the overall data quality of the BHP. Working together with
the Research Data Center of the IAB, we have made the 6 crucial variables, on which all our definitions are based, available to users of the BHP, thus allowing researchers to either replicate our
entry and exit categories, or create their own classiﬁcation system. Several papers have already
made use of our approach to study entries and exits. For example Fackler, Schnabel and Wagner
(2012) study the role of establishment size and age for establishment exit patterns using the BHP
in combination with the extension ﬁles containing the ﬂow variables created by us. In addition
to classifying entries and exits, these variables should also be useful for other purposes. For example Schmieder, von Wachter and Bender (2010) use the same information on worker ﬂows to
distinguish true Mass-Layoffs from spurious exits and spin-off events to study earnings losses of
displaced workers. Similarly Fackler and Schnabel (2013) use our spin-off deﬁnitions to study the
survival dynamics of spin-offs and start-ups in Germany. We expect researchers to come up with
many more interesting research projects where this approach will be fruitful.

18

References
Abowd, John M. and Lars Vilhuber. 2005. “The sensitivity of economic statistics to coding
errors in personal identiﬁers,” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics. 23 (2). 133–152.
and . 2011. “National estimates of gross employment and job ﬂows from the Quarterly
Workforce Indicators with demographic and industry detail,” Journal of econometrics. 161 (1).
82–99.
Baldwin, John, Desmond Beckstead, and Andrée Girard. 2002. “The importance of entry to
Canadian manufacturing with an appendix on measurement issues,” Statistics Canada
Analytical Studies-Micro-Economic Analysis Division Working Paper. (189).
Bartelsman, Eric J., Stefano Scarpetta, and Fabiano Schivardi. 2005. “Comparative analysis
of ﬁrm demographics and survival: evidence from micro-level sources in OECD countries,”
Industrial and Corporate Change. 14 (3). 365–391.
Bauer, Thomas K., Alexandra Schmucker, and Matthias Vorell. 2008. “KMU und
Arbeitsplatzdynamik: Eine Analyse auf Basis der Beschäftigten-Historik (SMEs and
employment dynamics: an analysis based on the Employee History),” Zeitschrift für
ArbeitsmarktForschung-Journal for Labour Market Research. 41 (2/3). 199–221.
Benedetto, Gary, John Haltiwanger, Julia Lane, and Kevin McKinney. 2007. “Using worker
ﬂows to measure ﬁrm dynamics,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics. 25 (3).
299–313.
Brixy, Udo. 2008. “Welche Betriebe werden verlagert?: Beweggründe und Bedeutung von
Betriebsverlagerungen in Deutschland,” IAB Discussion Paper.
Brown, Clair, John Haltiwanger, and Julia Lane. 2008. Economic turbulence: Is a volatile
economy good for America?. University of Chicago Press.
Contini, Bruno and Riccardo Revelli. 2007. “The process of job creation and job destruction in
the Italian economy,” Labour. 1 (3). 121–144.
Davis, Steven J., John C. Haltiwanger, and Scott Schuh. 1996. Job Creation and Destruction.
MIT Press.
Dundler, A., M. Stamm, and S. Adler. 2007. “The establishment history panel BHP 1.0:
handbook version 1.0. 0,” FDZ Datenreport. Documentation on Labour Market Data.
Dunne, Timothy, Mark J. Roberts, and Larry Samuelson. 1989. “Plant turnover and gross
employment ﬂows in the US manufacturing sector,” Journal of Labor Economics. 7 (1). 48–71.
Eurostat / OECD. 2007. Eurostat - OECD Manual on Business Demography Statistics.
Luxembourg.
Fackler, Daniel and Claus Schnabel. 2013. “Survival of spinoffs and other startups: First
evidence for the private sector in Germany, 1976-2008,” Institut fr Wirtschaftspolitik und
Quantitative Wirtschaftsforschung - Discussion Papers. 6.
, , and Joachim Wagner. 2012. “Establishment exits in Germany: The role of size and age,”
Small Business Economics. pp. 1–18.
Fort, Teresa, John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda. 2012. “How Firms
Respond to Business Cycles: The Role of Firm Age and Firm Size,” mimeo.
Foster, Lucia, Cheryl Grim, and John Haltiwanger. 2013. “Reallocation in the Great
Recession: Cleansing or Not?,” Working Paper.
Fritsch, Michael and Udo Brixy. 2004. “The establishment ﬁle of the German social insurance
statistics,” Schmollers Jahrbuch. 124 (2). 183–190.
19

, Reinhold Grotz, Udo Brixy, Michael Niese, and Anne Otto. 2002. Gründungen in
Deutschland: Datenquellen, Niveau und räumlich-sektorale Struktur. Springer.
Geurts, Karen, Monique Ramioul, and Peter Vets. 2009. “Using employee ﬂows to improve
measures of job creation and destruction and ﬁrm dynamics: The case of Belgium,” MPRA
Paper. (15306).
Haltiwanger, John, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda. “Business Formation and Dynamics by
Business Age: Results from the New Business Demography Statistics,” Technical Report.
working paper 2008.
Jacobson, Louis S., Rorbert J. LaLonde, and Daniel G. Sullivan. 1993. “Earnings Losses of
Displaced Workers,” American Economic Review. 83 (4). 685–709.
Persson, Helena. 1999. “Job ﬂows and worker ﬂows in Sweden 1986-1995,” Essays on Labour
Demand and Career Mobility, Swedish Institute for Social Research, Vol. Dissertation Series.
40.
Revelli, Riccardo. 1996. “Statistics on job creation: issues in the use of administrative data,” Job
creation and loss. Analysis, policy and data development.
Schmieder, Johannes F.. 2013. “What Causes Wage Dispersion? Evidence from New Firms,”
mimeo, Boston University.
, T. von Wachter, and S. Bender. 2010. “The long-term impact of job displacement in
Germany during the 1982 recession on earnings, income, and employment,” IAB Discussion
Paper.
Vartiainen, Juhana. 2004. “Measuring interﬁrm mobility with an administrative dataset,”
National Institute for Economic Research. Mimeograph.
Vilhuber, Lars. 2009. Adjusting imperfect data: overview and case studies. Chicago: University
of Chicago.
von Wachter, Till, Jae Song, and Joyce Manchester. 2009. “Long-Term Earnings Losses due to
Job Separation During the 1982 Recession: An Analysis Using Longitudinal Administrative
Data from 1974 to 2004,” mimeo.

20

Tables
Table 1: Classifying Entering and Exiting Establishments by Clustered Worker Flows
Panel A: Entries

MCI
Inﬂows

Predecessor exits
MCI / Predecessor Employment
<30%
30-80%
>80%

Predecessor continues
MCI / Predecessor Employment
<30%
30-80%
>80%

No predecessor
MCI=0

≤3 empl.

-

New Estab
(small)

New Estab
(small)

New Estab
(small)

New Estab
(small)

New Estab
(small)

New Estab
(small)

New Estab
(small)

>3 empl.

<30%

New Estab
(med & big)

New Estab
(med & big)

New Estab
(med & big)

New Estab
(med & big)

New Estab
(med & big)

New Estab
(med & big)

New Estab
(med & big)

30-80%

New Estab
(fuzzy)

New Estab
(fuzzy)

Unclear

New Estab
(fuzzy)

New Estab
(fuzzy)

Unclear

>80%

Spin-off
pushed

Spin-off
pushed

ID
Change

Spin-off
pulled

Spin-off
pulled

Unclear

Panel B: Exits

MCO
Outﬂows

Successor is entrant
MCO / Successor Employment
<30%
30-80%
>80%

Successor is existing estab.
MCO / Successor Employment
<30%
30-80%
>80%

No successor
MCO=0

≤3 empl.

-

Small
Death

Small
Death

Small
Death

Small
Death

Small
Death

Small
Death

Small
Death

>3 empl.

<30%

Atomized
Death

Atomized
Death

Spin-off
pushed

Atomized
Death

Atomized
Death

Atomized
Death

Atomized
Death

30-80%

Fuzzy
Death

Fuzzy
Death

Spin-off
pushed

Fuzzy
Death

Fuzzy
Death

Fuzzy
Death

>80%

Unclear

Unclear

ID
Change

Take-Over /
Restruct.

Take-Over /
Restruct.

Unclear

Notes: MCI stands for Maximum Clustered Inﬂow: the size of the largest cluster of inﬂowing current workers. Inﬂows stands for all the
total number of workers that arrived since the previous year at an EID, which for a new EID is the same as total current employment.
MCO stands for Maximum Clustered Outﬂows: the size of the largest cluster of outﬂowing current workers. Outﬂows are all workers that
leave the EID until the next year.

21

Table 2: The Distribution of Entering and Exiting Establishment IDs over Entry/Exit Classiﬁcations (1976-2003)
Panel A: Entering establishment IDs
# Establishments
New estab (small)
3,950,679
New estab (med & big)
295,800
New estab (fuzzy)
291,163
Spin-Off Pulled
78,900
Spin-Off Pushed
53,609
ID change
38,881
Unclear
45,196
Total
4,754,228

Percent # Workers Percent
83.10 4,990,187
29.76
6.22 3,026,472
18.05
6.12 3,996,527
23.83
1.66 2,222,568
13.25
1.13
883,627
5.27
0.82
711,358
4.24
0.95
939,927
5.60
100 16,770,666
100

Panel B: Exiting establishment IDs
# Establishments Percent # Workers Percent
Small death
3,494,502
82.88 4,321,132
30.01
Atomized death
293,127
6.95 3,377,142
23.46
Fuzzy death
239,519
5.68 3,247,262
22.56
Spin-Off Pushed
86,451
2.05 1,628,907
11.31
Takeover
36,652
0.87
661,479
4.59
ID change
37,625
0.89
681,140
4.73
Unclear
28,267
0.67
479,912
3.33
Total
4,216,143
100 14,396,974
100

22

Table 3: Correlation Coefﬁcients between Birth Year in Administrative Data (BHP) and
Survey Data (Establishment Panel BP).

ID Change
Spin-Off Pulled
Spin-Off Pushed
New Estab. (small)
New Estab. (med & big)
New Estab. (fuzzy)
Reason Unclear

New ﬁrm or branch
(according to survey)
0.49
0.49
0.61
0.68
0.82
0.55
0.51

New Establishment
(according to survey)
-0.08
0.73
0.57
0.45
0.88
0.52
0.58

Not a new ﬁrm or branch
(according to survey)
0.47
0.47
0.58
0.56
0.53
0.54
0.51

Note: The table shows correlation coefﬁcients between establishment birth years in the administrative
dataset (BHP) and the survey (BP). Each column shows a different new eststablishment category according to the survey (BP).

23

Table 4: The Correlation Between Establishment Entry and Exit Categories and
Business Cycle Indicators
# Establishments
# Employees
Change in UR GDP Growth Change in UR GDP Growth
Panel B: Entry Variables Detrended (Hodrick-Prescott Filtered)
ID Change
0.28
-0.037
0.17
0.087
[0.17]
[0.85]
[0.41]
[0.66]
Spin-Off Pulled
0.34
-0.31
0.22
-0.27
[0.087]
[0.10]
[0.27]
[0.17]
Spin-Off Pushed
0.70*
-0.39*
0.48*
-0.31
[0.000063]
[0.039]
[0.013]
[0.10]
New Small
-0.45*
0.38*
-0.64*
0.41*
[0.021]
[0.043]
[0.00040]
[0.031]
New Medium/Big
-0.63*
0.48*
-0.69*
0.54*
[0.00062]
[0.0096]
[0.000082]
[0.0028]
Fuzzy
-0.28
0.27
-0.31
0.35
[0.16]
[0.16]
[0.12]
[0.064]
Unclear
-0.55*
0.45*
-0.12
0.19
[0.0036]
[0.016]
[0.54]
[0.33]
Panel B: Exit Variables Detrended (Hodrick-Prescott Filtered)
ID Change
0.25
-0.021
0.24
[0.23]
[0.92]
[0.23]
Takeover/Restructuring
-0.016
0.26
-0.0090
[0.94]
[0.19]
[0.97]
Spin-Off Pushed
0.70*
-0.37
0.66*
[0.000072]
[0.056]
[0.00022]
Small Death
0.13
0.15
0.31
[0.52]
[0.46]
[0.12]
Atomized Death
0.68*
-0.34
0.65*
[0.00012]
[0.084]
[0.00029]
Fuzzy Death
-0.14
0.39*
-0.072
[0.48]
[0.046]
[0.73]
Unclear
-0.39*
0.37
-0.014
[0.048]
[0.058]
[0.94]

0.053
[0.79]
0.23
[0.24]
-0.33
[0.091]
-0.00099
[1.00]
-0.32
[0.11]
0.35
[0.074]
0.23
[0.25]

Note: The table reports correlation coefﬁcients between the respective variables. The ﬁrst two
columns show the correlation between the number of establishments in each of the establishment categories with the business cycle indicators (in the column headings), the second two
columns the correlation between the number of employees in the categories with the business
cycle indicators. P-Values are given in brackets.
* indicates that the correlation coefﬁcient is statistically signiﬁcant on the 5 percent level.

24

Table 5: Establishment Size by Entry Category and Establishment Age
Establishment Age in Years
3
4
5
6-10

0

1

2

19.1
36.6
20.0
1.1
11.7
15.2
23.1

18.8
45.1
21.6
1.6
14.6
18.8
26.0

18.5
41.4
14.3
3.1
17.1
18.7
21.2

21.8
42.0
16.0
4.0
18.4
19.3
24.3

18.9
45.3
16.9
3.7
19.1
21.9
27.4

16.2
48.3
18.1
4.4
20.4
20.2
25.0

-0.034
0.063
0.009
0.252
0.075
0.060
-0.031

0.008
0.005
-0.001
0.122
0.045
0.033
0.026

-0.001
0.013
-0.014
0.100
0.049
0.017
0.000

0.025
0.044
0.010
0.086
0.030
0.043
0.027

-0.001
0.004
-0.005
0.080
0.049
0.030
0.024

11-15

16-20

21-25

13.9
40.8
14.3
4.3
20.1
18.7
19.2

17.3
31.7
16.6
4.9
23.1
20.6
21.7

17.8
32.7
18.0
5.6
23.4
19.9
21.1

15.9
36.8
16.7
6.2
24.9
24.4
27.5

0.006
0.007
0.004
0.059
0.027
0.018
0.008

0.002
0.006
-0.013
0.040
0.018
0.010
0.005

-0.001
0.002
0.000
0.033
0.011
0.011
0.011

-0.011
0.002
0.008
0.027
0.020
0.006
0.000

Panel A: Establishment Size
ID Change
Spin-off / pulled
Spin-off / pushed
New estab. (small)
New estab. (med & big)
New estab. (fuzzy)
Reason Unclear

Panel B: Employment Growth
ID Change
Spin-off / pulled
Spin-off / pushed
New estab. (small)
New estab. (med & big)
New estab. (fuzzy)
Reason Unclear

25

Figures

0

0

No. Estab.
5000

50000
100000
150000
No. Estab. (Small Entries)

10000

200000

Figure 1: Number of New Establishments in each Entry and Exit Category from 1976 2004

1975

1980

1985

1990
year

1995

2000

2005

Estab Entry: New Medium/Big

Estab Entry: Fuzzy

Estab Entry: Spin−Off Pushed

Estab Entry: Spin−Off Pulled

Estab Entry: Unclear

Estab Entry: ID Change

Estab Entry: New Small

0

0

5000

No. Estab.
10000

50000
100000 150000
No. Estab. (Small Exits)

200000

15000

(a) Entry Categories

1975

1980

1985

1990
year

1995

2000

2005

Estab Exit: Atomized Death

Estab Exit: Fuzzy Death

Estab Exit: Takeover/Restructuring

Estab Exit: Spin−Off Pushed

Estab Exit: Unclear

Estab Exit: ID Change

Estab Exit: Small Death

(b) Exit Categories
Notes: The top ﬁgure shows the number of establishments in each of the 7 entry categories
by year. Vertical lines indicate recession years. Data: Establishment History Panel. The
bottom ﬁgure shows the number of establishments in each of the 7 exit categories by year.
Vertical lines indicate recession years. Data: Establishment History Panel.

26

3000

.4

N

.2
0

1000

2000

−.8 −.6 −.4 −.2
−1

Correlation Coefficient

.6

.8

1

4000

Figure 2: Correlation between Number of New Establishments per Year and the Business
Cycle as a Function of the Concentration of Employee Inﬂows

0

.2
.4
.6
.8
Cutoff for Maximum Concentrated Inflow as Share of First Year Employment
Correlation Coefficient

1

Avg. Number of New Establishments per Year

800
700

.4

N

.2

600

0

400

500

−.8 −.6 −.4 −.2
−1

Correlation Coefficient

.6

.8

900

1

(a) Establishments with at least 4 employees in entry year

0

.2
.4
.6
.8
Cutoff for Maximum Concentrated Inflow as Share of First Year Employment
Correlation Coefficient

1

Avg. Number of New Establishments per Year

(b) Establishments with at least 10 employees in entry year
Notes: The ﬁgures show how the correlation between the number of new establishments
per year and the change in the unemployment rate is affected by different thresholds for
what constitutes an establishment entry. For each point, all new establishment where the
share of the maximum concentrated inﬂow of entry year employment falls into the given
cutoff range (e.g. [0 - 0.1] for the ﬁrst bin) are calculated by year. Then the correlation
between the (Hodrick-Prescott ﬁltered) time series of establishment births and the year to
year change in the unemployment rate is calculated. The left axis shows the correlation
coefﬁcient, while the right axis shows the average number of establishment births per year
in the cutoff bin. The bands are 95% conﬁdence intervals.

27

800
N

.4
.2

600

0
−.6

400

−.4

−.2

Correlation Coefficient

.6

1000

.8

1

1200

Figure 3: Correlation between Number of Establishment Deaths per Year and the Business
Cycle as a Function of the Concentration of Employee Outﬂows

0

.2
.4
.6
.8
Cutoff for Maximum Concentrated Outflow as Share of Pre−Death Employment
Correlation Coefficient

1

Avg. Number of Atomized Deaths per Year

100

.4

80

N

.2
0

40

−.6

−.4

60

−.2

Correlation Coefficient

.6

120

.8

140

1

(a) Establishments with at least 10 employees in year prior to exit

0

.2
.4
.6
.8
Cutoff for Maximum Concentrated Outflow as Share of Pre−Death Employment
Correlation Coefficient

1

Avg. Number of Atomized Deaths per Year

(b) Establishments with at least 50 employees in year prior to exit
Notes: The ﬁgures show how the correlation between the number of establishment deaths
per year and the change in the unemployment rate is affected by different thresholds for
what constitutes an establishment death. For each point, all establishment deaths where
the share of the maximum concentrated outﬂow of pre-exit employment falls into the given
cutoff range (e.g. [0 - 0.1] for the ﬁrst bin) are calculated by year. Then the correlation
between the (Hodrick-Prescott ﬁltered) time series of establishment deaths and the year to
year change in the unemployment rate is calculated. The left axis shows the correlation
coefﬁcient, while the right axis shows the average number of establishment deaths per year
in the cutoff bin. The bands are 95% conﬁdence intervals.

28

0

200000

400000

600000

Figure 4: Correcting Measures of Job Creation and Job Desctruction by New and Exiting
Establishments for Spurious Entries and Exits

1975

1980

1985

1990
year

1995

2000

2005

Uncorrected
Correcting for ID Changes and Unclear
Correcting for ID Changes, Unclear, Fuzzy Entries
Correcting for ID Cha., Unclear, Fuzzy & Spin−Offs (New Estab Only)

0

200000

400000

600000

(a) Entry Categories

1975

1980

1985

1990
year

1995

2000

2005

Uncorrected
Correcting for ID Changes and Unclear
Correcting for ID Changes, Unclear, Fuzzy Exits
Correcting for ID Cha., Unclear, Fuzzy & Spin−Offs (Estab Deaths Only)

(b) Exit Categories
Notes: The top ﬁgure shows corrected and uncorrected measures of job creation by year.
Vertical lines indicate recession years. Data: Establishment History Panel. The bottom
ﬁgure shows corrected and uncorrected measures of job destruction by year. Vertical lines
indicate recession years. Data: Establishment History Panel.

29

A

A PPENDIX

Table A-1: The Distribution of Clustered Worker Flows among Entering and Exiting Establishments (1976 - 2004)
Panel A: Entries

MCI
Inﬂows

Predecessor exits
MCI / Predecessor Employment
<30%
30-80%
>80%

Predecessor continues
MCI / Predecessor Employment
<30%
30-80%
>80%

No predecessor
MCI=0

≤3 empl.

-

124,863
2.63

187,893
3.95

199,348
4.19

1,076,374
22.64

181,330
3.81

43,249
0.91

2,137,606
44.96

>3 empl.

<30%

27,949
0.59

19,234
0.40

10,566
0.22

185,437
3.90

18,229
0.38

3,366
0.07

31,017
0.65

30-80%

26,462
0.56

123,057
2.59

37,752
0.79

101,279
2.13

40,365
0.85

3,230
0.07

>80%

10,996
0.23

42,613
0.90

38,881
0.82

54,802
1.15

24,098
0.51

4,214
0.09

Panel B: Exits

MCO
Outﬂows

Successor is entrant

Successor is existing estab.

No successor

Successor is entrant
MCO / Successor Employment
<30%
30-80%
>80%

Successor is existing estab.
MCO / Successor Employment
<30%
30-80%
>80%

No successor
MCO=0

≤3 empl.

-

124,863
2.63

187,893
3.95

199,348
4.19

1,076,374
22.64

181,330
3.81

43,249
0.91

2,137,606
44.96

>3 empl.

<30%

27,949
0.59

19,234
0.40

10,566
0.22

185,437
3.90

18,229
0.38

3,366
0.07

31,017
0.65

30-80%

26,462
0.56

123,057
2.59

37,752
0.79

101,279
2.13

40,365
0.85

3,230
0.07

>80%

3,158
0.07

23,059
0.55

37,625
0.89

24,277
0.58

12,375
0.29

2,050
0.05

Notes: The ﬁrst row in each cell shows the number of establishments, the second row the percentage of the
total (among entries and exits). MCI stands for Maximum Clustered Inﬂow: the size of the largest cluster of
inﬂowing current workers. Inﬂows stands for all the total number of workers that arrived since the previous year
at an EID, which for a new EID is the same as total current employment. MCO stands for Maximum Clustered
Outﬂows: the size of the largest cluster of outﬂowing current workers. Outﬂows are all workers that leave the
EID until the next year.

30

Table A-2: The Distribution of Establishment Entry Categories by Establishment Size in Year of Entry
Panel A: Number of Establishments
Number of
ID Spin-off Spin-off /
Employees Change
pulled
pushed
≤3
4-9
23,920
40,751
32,035
10-19
8,246
17,609
11,955
20-49
4,413
12,290
6,706
50-99
1,283
4,501
1,913
100-249
754
2,584
817
250-499
168
736
142
500-999
7/
295
3/
1000+
2/
134
/
Total
38,881
78,900
53,609

New estab.
(small)
3,950,679

New estab.
(med & big)

New estab.
(fuzzy)

Unclear

Total

3,950,679

223,767
45,394
20,749
4,257
1,341
221
48
23
295,800

189,552
60,659
30,092
7,308
2,887
494
137
34
291,163

27,479
9,816
5,059
1,567
849
252
124
50
45,196

3,950,679
537,504
153,679
79,309
20,829
9,232
2,013
710
273
4,754,228

Panel B: Number of Workers in Establishment Type
≤3
4,990,187
4-9
134,527
235,190
186,434
10-19
108,725
235,982
157,679
20-49
131,382
371,269
200,541
50-99
87,753
310,513
129,741
100-249
111,644
388,131
119,620
250-499
57,311
252,191
48,499
500-999
49,022
198,914
20,089
1000+
30,994
230,378
/
Total
711,358 2,222,568
883.6//
4,990,187

1,191,253
601,661
605,412
282,668
194,604
74,517
30,207
/
3.026.4//

1,075,007
809,100
887,678
493,186
423,171
164,336
89,934
54,115
3,996,527

160,023
131,756
150,062
107,708
128,156
87,939
85,822
88,461
939,927

4,990,187
2,982,434
2,044,903
2,346,344
1,411,569
1,365,326
684,793
473,988
471,122
16,770,666

Note: Data conﬁdentiality rules prohibit the publication of table cells with less than 20 observations. For this reason
cells with less than 20 observations have been replaced by “/”. Furthermore certain digits in the total counts have
similarly been replaced by “/” to make it impossible to infer the cell counts indirectly.

31

Table A-3: The Distribution of Establishment Exit Categories by Establishment Size in Year prior to
Exit
Panel A: Number of Establishments
Number of
ID Takeover /
Employees Change Restructuring
≤3
4-9
23,094
21,589
10-19
8,118
8,044
20-49
4,211
4,741
50-99
1,247
1,416
100-249
701
661
250-499
166
153
500-999
7/
3/
1000+
/
/
Total
37,625
36,652

Spin-off /
pushed

Atomized
Death

Fuzzy
Death

Unclear

Total

3,494,502

205,728
53,866
25,770
5,645
1,770
276
6/
/
293,127

155,387
50,846
24,875
5,700
2,180
413
86
32
239,519

17,128
6,480
3,244
860
393
108
4/
/
28,267

3,494,502
474,816
144,803
73,795
18,659
7,587
1,480
396
105
4,216,143

Panel B: Number of Workers in Establishment Type
≤3
4,321,132
4-9
130,837
122,783
297,728
10-19
106,760
106,881
235,032
20-49
125,143
141,657
329,951
50-99
85,551
97,192
260,665
100-249
105,547
97,431
277,574
250-499
56,632
50,630
122,586
500-999
46,526
26,592
65,339
1000+
24,144
18,313
40,032
Total
681,140
661,479 1,628,907 4,321,132

1,121,023
718,318
752,926
379,241
251,065
91,457
39,727
23,385
3,377,142

887,946
673,998
729,853
384,408
317,098
136,819
57,362
59,778
3,247,262

99,784
84,519
95,700
58,061
57,725
36,885
27,954
19,284
479,912

4,321,132
2,660,101
1,925,508
2,175,230
1,265,118
1,106,440
495,009
263,500
184,936
1.44e+07

51,890
17,449
10,954
3,791
1,882
364
99
22
86,451

Small
Death
3,494,502

Note: Data conﬁdentiality rules prohibit the publication of table cells with less than 20 observations. For this reason
cells with less than 20 observations have been replaced by “/”. Furthermore certain digits in the total counts have
similarly been replaced by “/” to make it impossible to infer the cell counts indirectly.

32

B

W EB A PPENDIX - N OT FOR P UBLICATION
Table WA-1: Establishment Entry Categories by Year: Number of Establishments

Panel A: West Germany
ID - Spin-off
Change
pulled

Spin-off /
pushed

New estab.
(small)

New estab.
(med & big)

New estab.
(fuzzy)

Unclear

Total

1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004

503
547
552
637
640
689
699
859
885
796
887
987
997
1,033
1,092
1,163
1,129
1,367
1,425
1,213
1,183
1,378
1,459
1,340
1,436
1,396
1,849
1,623
1,844

1,884
1,674
1,477
1,182
2,221
1,543
1,500
1,455
1,381
1,274
1,168
1,353
1,454
1,611
1,344
1,376
1,460
1,915
2,218
2,250
3,067
2,692
2,482
2,359
2,177
2,424
2,440
2,781
2,366

577
845
728
637
732
847
1,071
1,328
1,048
1,185
1,055
1,165
1,118
1,139
991
1,188
1,208
1,688
1,910
1,678
2,092
1,850
1,785
2,020
1,626
2,036
2,384
2,803
2,310

129,286
109,455
107,275
104,953
106,188
98,169
95,663
96,602
104,372
101,405
105,311
100,861
101,671
102,444
116,058
118,157
109,933
108,100
107,840
111,946
111,463
108,795
114,966
198,391
145,207
131,542
119,153
100,078
107,494

7,307
6,147
6,661
7,138
6,932
6,124
5,580
5,789
6,383
5,994
6,772
6,097
6,035
6,494
7,975
8,257
7,213
7,160
7,278
7,289
7,571
7,105
7,743
9,924
10,370
9,262
7,369
6,530
6,692

6,235
6,654
6,665
6,667
7,330
6,794
6,243
6,230
6,251
6,185
7,000
6,731
7,018
7,375
8,260
8,739
8,646
8,816
8,628
8,208
9,058
7,983
8,561
9,555
10,284
10,708
9,941
9,158
8,754

876
781
912
945
923
929
824
856
1,008
961
1,295
1,105
1,178
1,333
1,521
1,447
1,411
1,513
1,340
1,217
1,348
1,305
1,404
1,569
1,857
1,658
1,638
1,386
1,692

146,668
126,103
124,270
122,159
124,966
115,095
111,580
113,119
121,328
117,800
123,488
118,299
119,471
121,429
137,241
140,327
131,000
130,559
130,639
133,801
135,782
131,108
138,400
225,158
172,957
159,026
144,774
124,359
131,152

Total

31,608

54,528

41,044

3,272,778

207,191

228,677

36,232

3,872,058

Panel B: East Germany
ID - Spin-off
Change
pulled

Spin-off /
pushed

New estab.
(small)

New estab.
(med & big)

New estab.
(fuzzy)

Unclear

Total

1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004

114
284
395
441
521
544
556
543
559
523
661
549
612

3,070
3,878
2,466
2,302
2,317
1,512
1,104
807
828
870
743
1,516
785

1,124
729
719
764
1,136
921
931
893
776
862
890
739
686

115,417
51,233
41,531
37,710
31,929
29,585
48,786
53,505
34,633
29,213
26,520
24,181
23,453

32,786
6,590
6,035
5,280
3,896
3,434
3,563
3,771
3,001
2,511
2,057
1,962
1,736

8,454
5,987
5,103
4,716
4,483
3,759
3,673
3,451
3,129
2,961
2,655
2,367
2,079

481
745
728
679
618
538
595
604
603
506
502
460
452

161,446
69,446
56,977
51,892
44,900
40,293
59,208
63,574
43,529
37,446
34,028
31,774
29,803

Total

6,302

22,198

11,170

547,696

76,622

52,817

7,511

724,316

33

Table WA-2: Establishment Entry Categories by Year: Number of Workers in Establishments
Panel A: West Germany
ID Spin-off
Change
pulled

Spin-off /
pushed

New estab.
(small)

New estab.
(med & big)

New estab.
(fuzzy)

Unclear

Total

1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004

6,403
7,001
7,921
11,168
9,200
9,316
12,080
13,292
14,644
12,326
18,360
16,515
16,485
13,428
16,831
18,443
15,155
19,693
20,306
21,514
21,938
29,731
27,742
26,200
27,419
32,627
47,372
39,406
40,547

42,624
43,326
33,229
24,982
37,481
35,244
31,912
33,616
32,571
25,455
26,540
31,366
29,984
44,577
48,035
42,995
45,680
66,986
69,184
91,419
111,502
99,108
93,713
90,773
79,612
82,724
79,929
77,663
89,441

8,247
11,655
11,357
8,948
9,725
11,162
16,090
21,938
14,722
15,199
13,978
18,645
16,356
17,561
15,614
14,650
16,218
27,315
28,045
31,324
41,125
31,373
27,018
40,274
32,501
36,252
42,735
49,841
41,456

162,757
137,676
135,952
134,857
138,092
127,391
121,937
123,630
133,322
128,831
136,057
130,509
132,024
132,872
148,459
153,191
143,795
141,979
142,592
146,835
146,381
140,979
150,064
173,692
163,065
152,292
137,507
129,536
124,614

72,400
59,939
66,958
66,874
64,524
55,713
46,210
49,994
57,307
55,053
59,826
64,070
54,305
58,685
73,187
80,299
65,406
62,887
65,342
70,045
78,854
71,982
78,972
103,573
120,933
101,440
76,560
75,292
70,851

85,592
86,255
84,056
85,265
89,162
81,853
68,904
70,408
64,947
68,766
85,260
79,249
88,999
87,902
107,811
109,335
102,556
109,199
105,401
104,450
147,292
112,905
117,366
149,096
155,978
178,760
154,129
143,321
130,249

14,053
11,775
15,301
12,690
13,959
12,930
13,502
11,617
18,103
16,026
21,902
18,806
23,480
24,367
28,393
25,106
20,767
29,667
24,712
30,809
42,776
28,680
28,748
37,289
42,874
41,161
60,298
30,873
51,655

392,076
357,627
354,774
344,784
362,143
333,609
310,635
324,495
335,616
321,656
361,923
359,160
361,633
379,392
438,330
444,019
409,577
457,726
455,582
496,396
589,868
514,758
523,623
620,897
622,382
625,256
598,530
545,932
548,813

Total

573,063

1,641,671

671,324

4,070,888

2,027,481

3,054,466

752,319

1.28e+07

Panel B: East Germany
ID Spin-off
Change
pulled

Spin-off /
pushed

New estab.
(small)

New estab.
(med & big)

New estab.
(fuzzy)

Unclear

Total

1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004

1,676
5,268
6,995
8,375
7,760
13,958
8,658
7,788
9,886
11,435
13,731
12,081
14,633

84,826
97,942
58,419
51,591
68,988
28,389
18,842
11,704
15,833
15,339
15,132
31,294
15,561

28,416
15,839
14,058
19,605
17,010
12,675
11,896
12,280
10,968
12,496
12,657
10,355
9,707

177,046
69,015
57,836
52,771
44,724
41,232
65,364
68,560
45,348
38,745
34,541
32,948
29,135

368,820
73,573
75,365
61,554
45,617
37,056
39,076
39,144
31,473
28,003
22,709
21,934
19,393

140,088
96,985
88,210
66,051
89,310
46,593
44,724
40,464
38,832
41,314
33,743
31,227
27,499

7,136
13,610
16,480
14,650
14,618
10,503
10,816
12,680
10,228
15,681
11,728
11,749
10,180

808,008
372,232
317,363
274,597
288,027
190,406
199,376
192,620
162,568
163,013
144,241
151,588
126,108

Total

122,244

513,860

187,962

757,265

863,717

785,040

160,059

3,390,147

34

Table WA-3: Establishment Exit Categories by Year: Number of Establishments
Panel A: West Germany
ID Takeover /
Change Restructuring
1975
373
807
1976
453
771
1977
498
824
1978
586
866
1979
602
763
1980
628
694
1981
644
767
1982
807
667
1983
842
716
1984
767
574
1985
863
700
1986
958
699
1987
974
748
1988
979
818
1989
1,042
840
1990
1,121
850
1991
1,108
936
1992
1,301
959
1993
1,345
1,072
1994
1,176
984
1995
1,127
1,127
1996
1,382
1,160
1997
1,440
1,194
1998
1,329
1,378
1999
1,402
1,451
2000
1,395
1,403
2001
1,847
1,855
2002
1,664
1,562
2003
1,926
1,870

Spin-off /
pushed
898
1,334
1,186
1,081
1,232
1,416
1,761
2,138
1,785
2,075
1,875
2,025
1,903
1,874
1,760
1,986
2,170
2,722
3,030
2,820
3,075
3,113
3,053
3,355
2,768
3,305
3,981
4,613
4,095

Small
Death
70,092
74,017
75,222
72,065
77,665
79,387
80,768
82,882
83,262
89,099
90,329
89,840
89,702
88,931
90,206
93,627
100,218
98,146
99,534
102,032
104,628
108,133
110,512
113,080
133,369
141,628
156,269
217,369
157,378

Atomized
Death
5,405
6,025
5,339
4,683
5,232
6,204
7,503
7,559
6,599
7,506
6,963
6,655
6,266
5,776
5,882
6,507
7,187
8,082
8,815
8,810
8,668
9,195
8,839
8,865
9,064
10,846
12,445
13,152
11,935

Fuzzy
Death
4,600
5,140
5,036
5,228
5,365
5,441
5,233
5,353
5,183
4,909
5,692
5,574
5,965
6,098
6,845
7,344
7,519
7,408
7,575
7,274
7,097
7,121
7,444
8,700
9,192
9,623
9,925
9,534
8,687

Unclear

Total

391
417
428
488
516
485
463
534
568
540
769
676
729
726
883
870
908
937
859
793
788
857
926
964
1,211
1,085
1,209
956
1,203

82,566
88,157
88,533
84,997
91,375
94,255
97,139
99,940
98,955
105,470
107,191
106,427
106,287
105,202
107,458
112,305
120,046
119,555
122,230
123,889
126,510
130,961
133,408
137,671
158,457
169,285
187,531
248,850
187,094

29,055

68,429

2,969,390

226,007

196,105

22,179

3,541,744

Panel B: East Germany
ID Takeover /
Change Restructuring
1991
106
401
1992
263
454
1993
362
508
1994
401
536
1995
440
501
1996
502
487
1997
534
514
1998
525
630
1999
551
477
2000
524
483
2001
664
590
2002
571
460
2003
623
548

Spin-off /
pushed
825
796
893
963
1,293
1,355
1,448
1,365
1,239
1,401
1,396
1,236
1,099

Small
Death
18,233
22,308
23,536
24,532
25,074
25,339
26,139
39,206
46,739
41,216
38,955
40,470
38,890

Atomized
Death
3,809
3,101
3,698
4,219
4,702
4,881
4,840
4,432
4,778
5,142
4,719
4,002
3,745

Fuzzy
Death
2,340
2,531
2,963
2,884
2,869
2,860
2,817
3,139
2,819
2,951
2,839
2,478
2,297

Unclear

Total

290
451
496
449
406
337
390
432
394
352
405
342
411

26,004
29,904
32,456
33,984
35,285
35,761
36,682
49,729
56,997
52,069
49,568
49,559
47,613

15,309

410,637

56,068

35,787

5,155

535,611

Total

Total

30,579

6,066

6,589

35

Table WA-4: Establishment Exit Categories by Year: Number of Workers in Establishments
Panel A: West Germany
ID-Change
Takeover /
Restructuring
1975
4,323
14,367
1976
5,516
11,452
1977
6,445
15,658
1978
10,827
15,543
1979
8,766
10,631
1980
8,686
9,189
1981
10,897
15,294
1982
11,494
10,065
1983
13,887
13,388
1984
11,533
8,943
1985
14,337
12,474
1986
15,918
13,129
1987
15,128
12,690
1988
12,372
13,950
1989
16,503
13,195
1990
15,819
14,538
1991
14,316
12,759
1992
19,661
15,216
1993
19,878
17,477
1994
20,676
15,033
1995
20,570
20,831
1996
30,492
21,108
1997
24,511
21,685
1998
26,251
22,649
1999
26,248
25,135
2000
31,189
27,880
2001
47,469
34,849
2002
41,047
34,628
2003
42,181
42,515

Spin-off /
pushed
16,213
22,150
21,527
16,528
17,872
22,556
32,161
43,991
31,186
34,507
29,918
35,627
29,703
30,052
25,890
25,146
31,882
46,381
52,471
52,837
61,725
55,285
49,133
63,284
52,002
60,509
75,714
95,664
78,223

Small
Death
89,376
94,327
94,427
90,942
98,735
101,394
104,186
105,728
106,061
113,195
114,989
113,863
114,162
113,454
115,542
118,992
127,342
126,285
128,883
132,260
134,562
139,655
143,042
146,779
147,071
160,267
175,867
190,343
193,138

Atomized
Death
69,221
81,208
60,562
49,376
55,008
68,756
90,119
83,868
72,259
84,352
74,696
71,384
63,023
56,951
63,692
62,224
71,788
87,295
98,784
94,370
92,855
98,537
88,115
90,130
92,078
119,171
140,823
141,596
122,998

Fuzzy
Death
62,744
67,177
62,963
70,965
68,459
66,314
60,403
62,650
61,893
55,308
64,956
66,905
72,690
68,801
81,962
93,707
87,569
97,215
99,537
89,206
94,315
96,340
98,347
124,497
120,617
143,568
145,410
146,929
122,366

Unclear

Total

5,864
5,334
6,120
5,346
6,640
5,766
5,702
6,011
7,366
7,915
10,090
11,035
11,460
12,170
14,059
12,199
13,461
14,920
14,045
14,632
17,701
15,822
13,162
16,922
21,182
18,060
30,519
24,361
25,715

262,108
287,164
267,702
259,527
266,111
282,661
318,762
323,807
306,040
315,753
321,460
327,861
318,856
307,750
330,843
342,625
359,117
406,973
431,075
419,014
442,559
457,239
437,995
490,512
484,333
560,644
650,651
674,568
627,136

Total

516,271

1,210,137

3,634,867

2,445,239

2,553,813

373,579

1.13e+07

Panel B: East Germany
ID-Change
Takeover /
Restructuring
1991
1,655
12,611
1992
4,645
11,877
1993
6,366
8,867
1994
7,843
13,940
1995
6,706
7,966
1996
12,118
6,803
1997
7,989
8,273
1998
7,609
9,449
1999
9,922
6,228
2000
11,595
8,955
2001
14,050
8,450
2002
12,780
8,399
2003
15,142
8,868

Spin-off /
pushed
65,565
27,045
25,496
32,057
28,305
28,987
28,364
23,799
22,502
25,705
25,233
22,260
19,776

Small
Death
24,106
29,778
31,889
34,196
34,830
35,685
36,851
52,531
60,616
54,274
51,003
49,027
50,957

Atomized
Death
146,752
50,596
55,904
59,088
67,475
65,804
61,926
51,288
54,436
56,336
53,255
45,496
39,497

Fuzzy
Death
80,603
60,413
49,291
50,124
46,851
39,835
40,120
39,312
33,137
40,329
36,421
31,526
30,026

Unclear

Total

7,936
8,595
9,002
6,707
7,853
5,143
5,156
7,234
7,818
5,711
6,839
5,925
5,512

339,228
192,949
186,815
203,955
199,986
194,375
188,679
191,222
194,659
202,905
195,251
175,413
169,778

375,094

545,743

807,853

577,988

89,431

2,635,215

Total

546,940

118,420

120,686

36

0

No. Employees.
50000
100000

150000

Figure WA-1: Number of Employees in each Establishment Entry Category from 1976 2004

1975

1980

1985

1990
year

1995

2000

Estab Entry: New Medium/Big

Estab Entry: Fuzzy

Estab Entry: Spin−Off Pushed

Estab Entry: Spin−Off Pulled

Estab Entry: Unclear

Estab Entry: ID Change

2005

Estab Entry: New Small

Notes: The ﬁgure shows the number of employees in each of the 7 entry categories by year. Vertical lines
indicate recession years. Data: Establishment History Panel.

37

0

50000

No. Employees
100000
150000

200000

Figure WA-2: Number of Employees in each Establishment Exit Category from 1976 2004

1975

1980

1985

1990
year

1995

2000

2005

Estab Exit: Atomized Death

Estab Exit: Fuzzy Death

Estab Exit: Takeover/Restructuring

Estab Exit: Spin−Off Pushed

Estab Exit: Unclear

Estab Exit: ID Change

Estab Exit: Small Death

Notes: The ﬁgure shows the number of employees in each of the 7 exit categories by year. Vertical lines
indicate recession years. Data: Establishment History Panel.

38

3000
N

.4
.2

2000

0
−.6

1000

−.4

−.2

Correlation Coefficient

.6

.8

4000

1

Figure WA-3: Correlation between Number of Establishment Deaths per Year and the Business Cycle as a Function of the Concentration of Employee Outﬂows

0

.2
.4
.6
.8
Cutoff for Maximum Concentrated Outflow as Share of Pre−Death Employment
Correlation Coefficient

1

Avg. Number of Atomized Deaths per Year

200
N

.4
.2

150

0
−.6

100

−.4

−.2

Correlation Coefficient

.6

250

.8

300

1

(a) Establishments with at least 4 employees in year prior to exit

0

.2
.4
.6
.8
Cutoff for Maximum Concentrated Outflow as Share of Pre−Death Employment
Correlation Coefficient

1

Avg. Number of Atomized Deaths per Year

(b) Establishments with at least 30 employees in year prior to exit
Notes: The ﬁgures show how the correlation between the number of establishment deaths
per year and the change in the unemployment rate is affected by different thresholds for
what constitutes an establishment death. For each point, all establishment deaths where
the share of the maximum concentrated outﬂow of pre-exit employment falls into the given
cutoff range (e.g. [0 - 0.1] for the ﬁrst bin) are calculated by year. Then the correlation
between the (Hodrick-Prescott ﬁltered) time series of establishment deaths and the year to
year change in the unemployment rate is calculated. The left axis shows the correlation
coefﬁcient, while the right axis shows the average number of establishment deaths per year
in the cutoff bin. The bands are 95% conﬁdence intervals.

39

0

1000000

2000000

3000000

Figure WA-4: Correcting Total Job Creation Measures for Spurious Entries

1975

1980

1985

1990
year

1995

2000

2005

Uncorrected
Correcting for ID Changes and Unclear
Correcting for ID Changes, Unclear, Fuzzy Entries
Correcting for ID Cha., Unclear, Fuzzy & Spin−Offs (New Estab Only)

Notes: The ﬁgure shows corrected and uncorrected measures of total job creation by year. Vertical lines
indicate recession years. Data: Establishment History Panel.

40

0

1000000

2000000

Figure WA-5: Correcting Total Job Destruction Measures for Spurious Exits

1975

1980

1985

1990
year

1995

2000

2005

Uncorrected)
Correcting for ID Changes and Unclear
Correcting for ID Changes, Unclear, Fuzzy Exits
Correcting for ID Cha., Unclear, Fuzzy & Spin−Offs (Estab Deaths Only)

Notes: The ﬁgure shows corrected and uncorrected measures of total job destruction by year. Vertical lines
indicate recession years. Data: Establishment History Panel.

41

−1000000 −500000

0

500000

1000000

Figure WA-6: Correcting Total Net Job Creation Measures for Spurious Entries and Exits

1975

1980

1985

1990
year

1995

2000

2005

Uncorrected
Correcting for ID Changes and Unclear
Correcting for ID Changes, Unclear, Fuzzy Entries and Exits
Correcting for ID Cha., Unclear, Fuzzy & Spin−Offs

Notes: The ﬁgure shows corrected and uncorrected measures of net job creation by year. Vertical lines
indicate recession years. Data: Establishment History Panel.

42

