                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      RISK AND RETURN IN VILLAGE ECONOMIES

                                    Krislert Samphantharak
                                       Robert Townsend

                                     Working Paper 19738
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w19738


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2013




We would like to thank Giacomo De Giorgi, Lars Hansen, John Heaton, Ethan Ligon, Juhani
Linnainmaa, Albert Park, Michael Peters, Scott Rozelle, Yasuyuki Sawada, Christopher Udry,
and seminar participants at various conferences and workshops. Research support from the
Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD)
(grant number R01 HD027638), the research initiative ‘Private Enterprise Development in Low-
Income Countries’ [(PEDL), a programme funded jointly by the Centre for Economic Policy
Research (CEPR) and the Department for International Development (DFID), contract reference
MRG002_1255], the John Templeton Foundation (grant number 12470), and the Consortium on
Financial Systems and Poverty at the University of Chicago (funded by Bill & Melinda Gates
Foundation under grant number 51935) are gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed are not
necessarily those of CEPR, DFID, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2013 by Krislert Samphantharak and Robert Townsend. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Risk and Return in Village Economies
Krislert Samphantharak and Robert Townsend
NBER Working Paper No. 19738
December 2013, Revised April 2016
JEL No. D12,D13,G11,L23,L26,O12,O16,O17

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper provides a theory-based empirical framework for understanding the risk and return on
productive capital assets and their allocation across activities in an economy characterized by
idiosyncratic and aggregate risk and thin formal markets for real and financial assets. We apply
our framework to households running business enterprises in Thai villages with extensive
networks, taking advantage of panel data: income, assets, consumption, gifts, and loans. We
decompose risk and estimate the risk premia faced by households, distinguishing aggregate risk
from idiosyncratic, potentially diversifiable risk. This distinction matters for estimating measures
of underlying productivity and has important policy implications.


Krislert Samphantharak
IR/PS
UC, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0519
krislert@gmail.com

Robert Townsend
Department of Economics, E52-538
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
rtownsen@mit.edu
1. Introduction


       This paper provides a theoretical framework for understanding the allocation, risk,
and return on productive real capital assets across activities and sectors in an economy
characterized by idiosyncratic and aggregate risk and thin formal markets for real and
financial assets. We apply our framework to households running farm and non-farm
business enterprises in rural and semi-urban Thai villages with extensive family
networks, taking advantage of unusual panel data, a monthly household survey over 156
months that measures income, assets, consumption, gifts, and loans.


       Our framework allows us to quantify and decompose the risk faced by households
running these business enterprises into two components: (1) aggregate, non-diversifiable
risk, and (2) idiosyncratic, potentially diversifiable, risk. In particular, we are able to
estimate the risk premia for the aggregate and the idiosyncratic risk components
separately. We find these two risk premia are quite different from each other, specifically,
much higher for the aggregate risk than for the idiosyncratic risk. The distinction thus
matters for backing out accurate measures of underlying productivity, risk-adjusted net
returns, i.e., what remains after subtracting risk premia from expected, average returns.


       Many households in the data face relatively more idiosyncratic risk. Idiosyncratic
risk carries a low risk premium. For these households, although the quantity of this risk
can be high, not much of it is borne by the household as it is diversified away to a
considerable degree. Thus these households have low risk premia and, with not much to
subtract, net returns are relatively close to unadjusted returns. In contrast, other
households in the data bear considerably more aggregate risk than idiosyncratic risk. As
this aggregate risk cannot be diversified away, it bears a high risk premium. Thus
unadjusted returns for such households can seem quite high, but the net returns after
subtracting the risk premia, i.e., the measures of their latent productivity, are low.



                                               2
        This in turn has important policy implications. To the extent that a community
faces aggregate risk, there is little more that could be done within the community itself
for alleviating that risk. Aggregate risk is not entirely exogenous. Under our framework,
aggregate risk is chosen optimally as sectors and activities within and across households,
but beyond that there is little the community can do ex post. On the other hand,
idiosyncratic risk is in principle diversifiable, hence one can think about potential policy
improvements, e.g., improved ex ante insurance products within the community or ex
post government transfers.1             Therefore, the distinction between aggregate and
idiosyncratic risk is important for policies that are geared toward risk sharing.


        Other policies addressing credit constraints, financial access, and occupation
choice also hang on the distinction between aggregate and idiosyncratic risk. The
relatively poor households in the village economies of our sample are engaged in
production activities with high expected returns. Thus they might appear to be credit
constrained in the usual, stereotypical sense. But these poor households face high
aggregate risk, and also idiosyncratic risk. Adjusting for each of these risks appropriately,
with differential risk premia, we find that poor households in the more developed region
of the country have net returns which are actually lower than the relatively wealthy in
that region. So poor households in the developed region seem constrained after all but in
a different sense: they are not constrained within their chosen sectors and activities but
rather are constrained away from the activities with the highest returns net of risk premia
that are available for richer households. Further, the returns of the relatively poor in the
less developed, agrarian region are not different from those of the relatively wealthy in
that region, after adjusting for risk premia. Thus poor households are not credit
constrained in the usual sense, either.




1 There may be underlying obstacles such as moral hazard that prevent idiosyncratic risk from being fully
covered. Likewise, there can be interactions between aggregate and idiosyncratic risk that move us away
from the full information standard on both dimension. See for example Di Tella (2015). Put another way,
businesses need to be exposed to at least some idiosyncratic risk, to have some “skin in the game” in order
to mitigate unobserved reallocation of capital.


                                                     3
       Our framework and the results are made clear by a comparison of two extreme
benchmarks. A full risk-sharing benchmark, not with ex ante asset trades, but with ex post
transfers of consumption goods contingent on output, delivers the prediction that only
aggregate covariate risk contributes to the risk premium. In contrast, an autarky
benchmark would predict that aggregate and idiosyncratic risks should enter the risk
premium with the same weight because total risk faced by the household business is
simply the sum of the risks from each component. In the data, the risk sharing benchmark
picks up a large part, though not all, of the variation in risk premia. There is a residual,
smaller part due to idiosyncratic risk, but otherwise it is substantially diversified away.
More specifically, a financial autarky model that would simply adjust for total risk, that
is, with equal weight on aggregate and idiosyncratic risk factors, is rejected in the data.
Intermediate models which allow substantial though less than perfect risk sharing fit the
data best.


       This finding, derived entirely from production and rate of return data, is highly
reminiscent of findings in the literature on risk sharing using consumption and income
data (Townsend 1994). The full risk sharing benchmark is typically rejected, and so are
the borrowing-lending or buffer stock financial regimes. The best fitting models typically
lie between these extremes, sometimes closer the former than the latter. Here we take a
direct look at this issue: we use the consumption as well as gifts and lending data from
the same sample of households, and establish a consistent picture of what we are seeing
on production and consumption sides. Idiosyncratic shocks to rates of return are
positively correlated with gifts-out and lending as the full insurance benchmark would
suggest. Still, in consumption risk sharing regressions, these same idiosyncratic shocks
do nevertheless move consumption, with positive but quantitatively small coefficients. So
indeed households do bear some of the idiosyncratic risk and that is why there is risk
premium for idiosyncratic risk. Yet, the idiosyncratic risk premium is small relative to
risk premium associated with aggregate shocks which in the data move both production
and consumption. To the best of our knowledge, little previous work has analyzed risk



                                              4
sharing of the same households in the same sample using data from both consumption
and production sides.


         The results in this paper on risk premia are much like those of the standard capital
asset pricing model, yet here, in these village economies, households infrequently trade
their fixed business assets (machinery, livestock, and land).2 The seeming puzzle is
explained by the fact that these households have extensive family networks and engage
actively in gifts and loans. This makes the economic mechanism in these village
economies with informal markets and institutions close to complete market mechanism in
the standard capital asset pricing model. The institutions are different but the predicted
outcome is identical. More specifically, to determine the solution to one of benchmark
models, the full risk sharing problem including an efficient allocation of assets across
households and activities, we consider the social planning problem that delivers Pareto
optimal allocations, namely the problem that maximizes a Pareto weighted sum of
expected utilities subject to resource constraints. This is of course the same framework
that led to the literature on consumption risk sharing, but we explicitly incorporate
production into the analysis. At the beginning of each period, each household starts with
initial resources that consist of two components: the assets held from the previous period
over all production activities, and their realized, current output. The households may then
pay or receive gifts and transfers to other households, as in a risk-sharing syndicate. The
household then invests part of this interim wealth in terms of assets carried to the next
period and consumes the rest. For this social planning problem interpretation, the planner
(actually, of course, the community as a whole) retains full control over the projects,
assigns them to households, chooses the current gifts and transfers to each household, and
chooses the assets to be allocated to each activity run by each household in the following
period. Alternatively, more intuitively, and less demanding in terms of actual
implementation, we may assume that households fully commit to a date- and state-

2 We emphasize the returns to the relatively illiquid real productive assets that are mainly from the output
they produce. There are a few financial assets (such as deposits at financial institutions). The returns to
these tradable liquid financial assets are from interest, dividends, or capital gains (and losses), but these
assets and their returns are small in the data and are not driving the conclusion.


                                                      5
invariant risk-sharing rule that maps aggregate resources into a consumption allocation
across the households. Knowing that this risk-sharing rule is locked in for the future,
households choose, on their own, which projects to undertake.


       What we study in this paper is related to recent, important literatures in both
development and macroeconomics measuring rates of return. In development economics,
there is a literature on the impact of interventions (De Mel, McKenzie, and Woodruff
2008; Evenson and Gollin 2003; McKenzie and Woodruff 2008; Udry and Anagol 2006).
The impact on revenue of additional investments in agriculture can be high, particularly
with respect to small investments, such as fertilizer and improved seeds. In a recent
paper, Beaman, Karlan, Thuysbaert, and Udry (2015) demonstrate that the return to
agricultural investment varies across farmers, farmers are aware of this heterogeneity, and
farmers with particularly high returns self‐select into borrowing. However, as they note,
lending may not be sufficient to induce investments in the presence of other constraints.
Related, the evidence from traditional microcredit, targeting micro enterprises, is mixed:
some studies with randomized control trials find an increase in investment in self-
employment activity (Crepon, Devoto, Duflo, and Pariente 2015; Angelucci, Karlan, and
Zinman 2015) while others do not (Attanasio, Augsburg, de Haas, Fitzsimons, and
Harmgart 2015; Augsburg, de Haas, Harmgart, and Meghir 2015; Banerjee, Dulfo,
Glenerster, and Kinnan 2015; Tarozzi, Desai, and Johnson 2015). Evidently, farmers may
be constrained by a lack of insurance (Karlan, Osei, Osei-Akoto, and Udry 2013), have
time inconsistent preferences (Duflo, Kremer, and Robinson 2011), or face high costs of
acquiring inputs (Suri 2011). In this paper, we add to this list an important consideration
that measured rates of return may reflect a risk premium. Therefore, targeting without
information on risk may blunt, if not seemingly eliminate real gains, in taking an average
over individuals who vary in true underlying productivity (some are constrained and
productive while others are not). Put differently, to the extent we can identify subgroups
and their exposure to different kinds of risk, we would be better able to target the ones
with genuinely high returns.



                                             6
       Likewise, in macroeconomics, Hsieh and Klenow (2009), Restuccia and Rogerson
(2008), and Bartelsman, Haltiwanger, and Scarpetta (2013) study misallocation of
resources. The essential idea is that an optimal allocation of capital (and other factor
inputs) requires the equalization of marginal products. Deviations from this outcome
represent a misallocation of resources and translate into sub-optimal aggregate outcomes.
Typically, however, the literature does not examine the underlying causes. An important
recent exception is David, Hopenhayn, and Venkateswaran (2014) in which firm’s
informational frictions drive capital decisions. Interestingly, loss of productivity in China
and India is mitigated by connections to formal stock markets, as a source of more
reliable signals or at least a better measure of the ex ante uncertainty faced by firms
before making production decisions. Likewise, Midrigan and Xu (2013), Moll (2014),
Buera and Shin (2013), and Asker, Collard-Wexler, and De Loecker (2012) study the role
of financial frictions and capital adjustment costs, respectively. However, studies often
take risk and return on the production side of the economy as exogenous. We add to these
studies the role of risk aversion, the various types of risk faced by firms, and evidence
that people can and do choose among potential projects based on a risk-return trade-off.
For us, the market is crucial, but in our case informal markets, not the stock market, are
the mechanism allowing mitigation of much of the idiosyncratic risk. In turn, adjustments
of the measured rates of return to get at underlying productivity require different risk
premium, varying with idiosyncratic versus aggregate risk.


       Our study also differs from the standard empirical consumption-based asset
pricing in macroeconomics and finance literature. The consumption-based finance
literature typically relies on countrywide aggregate consumption to explain asset risk and
return of financial assets. Our study is applied locally to collections of closely connected
villages in which almost everyone is in a family network, allowing us to link asset returns




                                              7
of the households with panel data of relevant market participants, including household
specific data on consumption, gifts, and loans.3


         Our paper is intended as a contribution to a general audience, integrating finance,
macroeconomics, and development literatures. Although the tradeoff between risk and
return is extensively studied in finance, there is relatively sparse cross-referencing
between these two concepts in development economics. On the one hand, there is a
literature on returns on household enterprises as a source of household income, as noted
earlier. On the other hand, there is also a literature on risk and the vulnerability of poor
households.4 One of the few studies that explicitly connects these two concepts together
is Rosenzweig and Binswanger (l993) who test for the existence of a positive association
between the average returns to individual production assets and their sensitivity to
weather variability. Related, Morduch (1995) finds that poor households in villages in
India have limited ability to smooth consumption ex post and tend to choose production
activities with lower yields to give them smoother ex ante income. Our study in contrast
finds that Thai households with lower initial wealth are more involved with risky
activities, both aggregate and idiosyncratic, and for that reason have higher average
returns. More recently, Karlan, Osei, Osei-Akoto, and Udry (2013), argue that risk is a
constraint to agricultural investment in Ghana, as noted earlier. The point we are making
however is that there is commonality across all these studies, in the linking of returns to
risk.


         In the finance literature, there are studies of risk and return to private enterprises
but these are mainly in developed countries. For example, Moskowitz and Vissing-
Jorgensen (2002) find that the rates of return on private equity in the US are not higher

3  Campbell (2003) provides a review of the development of the consumption-based model. Cochrane
(2001) discusses how the traditional capital asset pricing model (CAPM) and the consumption-based model
are interrelated. For the literature on limited market participation in the developed economy context, see
Mankiw and Zeldes (1991), Vissing-Jorgensen (2002), and Vissing-Jorgensen and Attanasio (2003).
4 For literature on vulnerability, see Morduch and Kamanou (2003), Hoddinott and Quisumbing (2003),
Ligon (2004), and Ligon and Schechter (2004). Related, there is an extensive literature on insurance against
poverty; for example, see Dercon (2004).


                                                      8
than the returns to public equity even though private firms are seemingly more poorly
diversified, raising this as a puzzle. Heaton and Lucas (2000) show that entrepreneurial
risk is important for portfolio choice. In our village economies, at least, the limits to
diversification at the household level are mitigated by risk sharing through informal
networks of family in the community. Though it may be a stretch to imagine this is
happening in the US, the point remains that in any given setting informal networks could
potentially rationalize apparent risk return anomalies.


       The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents the two benchmark, the end-
points, as it were that we use to study risk and return in village economies. The more
realistic intermediate case lies between these two extremes. Section 3 describes the data
from the Townsend Thai Monthly Survey that we use in our empirical work. Section 4
presents one of the main empirical results on the relationship between expected return
and aggregate risk. As robustness checks, we also extend our analysis to incorporate
human capital, time-varying risks, and time-varying stochastic discounts. We find that
expected returns are positively associated with aggregate risks in our village economies.
This is our first set of empirical findings. Section 5 quantifies idiosyncratic risk and
analyzes its effect on risk premium and expected returns, as well. The main point though
is the contributions of the aggregate and the idiosyncratic risk premium to the total risk
premia as distinct from the contribution of aggregate risk and idiosyncratic risk to total
risk. A nonparametric statistical test finds that the median percentage contribution of
idiosyncratic risk to the total risk is statistically different from the median percentage
contribution of idiosyncratic risk premium to the total risk premium. This is the second
set of empirical results. Section 6 discusses and compares the empirical results from the
production and asset return data in this paper with the results from the consumption and
income data in earlier literature and complements this with a direct look in our panel data
where both production and consumption are measured. This is our third set of empirical
results. Section 7 distinguishes the risk premium from the productivity of household
enterprises, computing the household’s rate of return net of the risk premium. Section 8



                                              9
presents our final set of empirical findings that there is heterogeneity across households
in their exposure to aggregate and idiosyncratic risks, and discuss policy implications.
Section 9 concludes.


2. Theoretical Framework


         We start with an economy consisting of J households, indexed by j = 1, 2,..., J.
There are I production activities, indexed by i = 1, 2,..., I, that utilize capital as the only
input. Each production technology delivers the same consumption good. Let ki, j be the

assets assigned to production activity i and operated by household j as of the end of the
previous period, and let fi, j (ki, j ) be their output, net of depreciation, realized at the

beginning of the current period. The fluctuation and the pairwise comovement of the
                                                                                     dfi, j (ki, j )
marginal returns, under a particular capital allocation ki, j , namely                               = fi,/ j (ki, j ) ,
                                                                                       dki, j

are represented by the variance-covariance matrix of the marginal returns. Various
portfolios of assets can be formed by allocating assets to various households and to
various activities. Varying the weights of the assets in a portfolio creates a feasible set of
all possible returns that could be achieved by available current assets. Note that some of
the elements in this set could have zero weight for some of the assets, i.e., it is not
necessary to have all of the assets included in a particular portfolio. Also note that this
feasibility set is derived from the production technology alone, without any assumptions
on preferences or optimization.5


         We present two polar benchmarks in this section. For expositional clarity, we
begin with the first benchmark economy where full risk-sharing delivers Pareto optimal


5 A familiar feasibility set derived from portfolios of assets is the mean-variance frontier. Any portfolio of
assets delivers a coordinate in a mean-variance space that corresponds to the expected return and the
variance of the constructed portfolio. Varying the weights allocated to available assets creates a feasibility
set of means and variances that could be achieved by all available assets.


                                                       10
allocations of risk for the community as a whole. We show how technologies introduced
in the underlying environment above are linked together when risks are pooled efficiently
over all households and production technologies. Then, we discuss the second, opposite
benchmark that considers an economy where each household absorbs risk in isolation.
Note that the underlying technologies are the same in both benchmarks.


2.1 A Full Risk-Sharing Benchmark: A Pareto Optimal Allocation of Risk


        First we consider a benchmark case in which all households in the economy are
able to completely pool and share risk from their production. Let kM be the total assets of

the aggregate economy, M, and FM be the total output produced from all assets in the

                                           J    I
aggregate economy. FM = F(k) = ∑ ∑ fi, j (ki, j ) where k is a vector of capital allocation
                                          j=1 i=1



in the economy, ki, j , for all i and all j. The marginal return of aggregate production, when

an additional unit of capital is allocated proportionately to production activities based on
                                      J    I                                                   J   I
                                                                               ki, j
their share in total capital, is     ∑ ∑ θi, j fi,/ j (ki, j ) where θi, j =   kM
                                                                                     and kM = ∑ ∑ ki, j . In
                                      j=1 i=1                                                 j=1 i=1



this economy, the variance of the marginal aggregate return is therefore

            ⎛ J I                      ⎞       ⎛ G             ⎞ G 2 2 G
        var ⎜ ∑ ∑ θ i, j fi, j (ki, j )⎟ = var ⎜ ∑ θ g fg (kg )⎟ = ∑ θ gσ g + ∑ ∑ θ gθ g /σ g,g / ,
                           /                             /

            ⎝ j=1 i=1                  ⎠       ⎝g=1            ⎠ g=1            g=1 g ≠g
                                                                                /




where g is an index for household-specific production activity (i, j), for all i and all j, and

G = I x J; σ g2 is the variance of the marginal return on activity g; and σ g,g / is a pairwise

covariance between the marginal return on activity g and another activity g ′                         in the

economy. As the number of activities, G, becomes larger, the first component (the
variance term) of the aggregate fluctuation converges to zero and only the second
component (the covariance term) determines the fluctuation of aggregate return. This is


                                                       11
intuitive. As more activities are included in the risk-sharing syndicate, each activity-
specific idiosyncratic fluctuation contributes less and less to the aggregate fluctuation. In
the limit, idiosyncratic risk is completely diversified away and only covariate risk
remains. This covariate risk is the non-diversifiable risk of the economy. Note that the
diversification of idiosyncratic risk could be achieved by either increasing the number of
activities performed by a particular household (i.e., increasing I), or increasing the
number of households in the risk-sharing syndicate (i.e., increasing J), if not both.


            To determine an efficient allocation of assets across households and activities, and
consumption to the households, we consider a social planning problem that maximizes a
Pareto-weighted sum of expected utilities subject to resource constraints. At the
beginning of each period, each household j starts with initial resources that consist of two
components. The first component is the assets held from the previous period, summing
                                                         I
over all production activities, k j = ∑ ki, j . The second component is the sum of the
                                                        i=1


                                                                 I
associated outputs (net of depreciation),                       ∑f     i, j   (ki, j ) . The household j may give out or
                                                                i=1



receive gifts and transfers with other households, as in a risk-sharing syndicate.6 The
household then invests a part of this interim wealth in the form of assets carried to the
next period. This is the usual neoclassical specification, putty-putty model as capital net
of depreciation can be eaten.7 For this social planning problem, the planner retains full
control over the projects, assigns them to households, chooses the net current gifts and
transfers to each household j, and chooses the assets to be allocated to each activity run



6 Generally, households could make state-contingent lending and borrowing contracts, which could be
incorporated into the gift term in this setup. For an example of this arrangement, see Udry (1994).

7   The production function fi, j (ki, j ) can be rewritten as fi, j (ki, j ) = !f i, j (ki, j ) − δ i, j ki, j . Generalizing, we can
also subtract an adjustment cost term, gi, j (ki, j , ki,′ j ) , the derivative of which will enter into the first order
conditions below. We maintain in the text subtraction of next period’s capital separable from current capital.


                                                                      12
by each household in the following period, ki,′ j . Effectively, the planner determines the

current period consumption for each household j,

                              (                 )
                         I                           I
                  c j = ∑ fi, j (ki, j ) + ki, j − ∑ ki,′ j + τ j .
                        i=1                         i=1



The value function of the social planning problem is

                                            ⎛ J ⎛ I                                       ⎞                   ⎞
                                                               (        )
                                                                           I
                  V (W ; Λ) = max ⎜ ∑ λ j u j ⎜ ∑ fi, j (ki, j ) + ki, j − ∑ ki,′ j + τ j ⎟ + φ E [V (W ′; Λ)]⎟
                              ki , j ′ ,τ j ⎝
                                          j=1   ⎝        i=1                    i=1       ⎠                   ⎠

subject to the aggregate resource constraint, i.e., aggregate consumption plus aggregate
                                                                            J             J
savings, in the form of next-period capital, equals wealth,                 ∑ c + ∑ k ′ = W , and the non-
                                                                                      j             j
                                                                            j=1           j=1




negativity constraint of capital, ki, j ′ ≥ 0 , that is no project capital can go negative, i.e.,

households cannot short assets. Current state W denotes the aggregate wealth of the

                                                                                                            (   )
                                                                                                J       I
whole economy at the beginning of the current period, that is, W = ∑ ∑ fi, j (ki, j ) + ki, j .8
                                                                                              j=1 i=1



Here the parameter φ is a common preference discount factor; the parameter Λ is a time-

invariant vector of the Pareto weights for the households, λ j where j =1, 2, .. J; and the

function u j (⋅) is the within-period utility function of a risk-averse household j, which is

strictly concave, continuously differentiable, increasing without satiation, and with
infinite derivative at zero. Note that we are allowing in this general set up differential risk

8  In the way this setup is written, it appears that the economy is closed, where the aggregate asset is
identical to the aggregate wealth. The model can be extended and reinterpreted to allow external borrowing
and lending, simply by subtracting any economy-wide debt, D, and interest from the previous period, and
adding potential new borrowing (to be paid back next period). External borrowing can be negative, i.e.,
savings. Specifically, assuming that the external interest rate is r, the right-hand side of the resource
constraint becomes W  ! = W − (1+ r)D + D ′ . We can also allow outside stocks and mutual funds. What is
important here is that these assets and liabilities are external to the small open economy under
consideration and we take whatever they are as given, not included in our analysis of efficiency, the sub-
program here. Further, stocks and bonds are not issues and traded on within village assets, so in that sense
external assets markets are incomplete.


                                                                   13
aversion. The solutions to this planning problem for fixed Pareto weights correspond to a
particular Pareto optimal allocation, and all of the optima can be traced out as the Pareto
weights are varied.


          For a given Λ , the first-order conditions are that

              [τ j ] : λ j u jc (c j ) = µ                                               for all j

              [ ki,′ j ] : − λ j u jc (c j ) + φ E ⎡⎣VW (W ′ )(1+ fi,/ j ( ki,′ j )) ⎤⎦ ≤ 0 for all i and j, with equality for

ki,′ j > 0,

where µ is the shadow price of consumption in the current period. Note that the first

equation, i.e., equalized weighted marginal utilities, is the key equation in the study of
consumption risk sharing, and it is an integral part of our framework here. The second
equation is a standard Euler equation for investment. Finally, for each ki,′ j > 0 , the

technologies actually chosen, the first-order conditions imply

                   φ E ⎡⎣VW (W ′ )(1+ fi,/ j ( ki,′ j ) ⎤⎦      ⎡ φV (W ′ )                       ⎤
              1=                                             = E⎢ W         (1+ fi,/ j ( ki,′ j ) ⎥ = E ⎡⎣ m ′Ri,′ j ⎤⎦ ,   (1)
                                λ j u jc (c j )                 ⎣    µ                            ⎦

                     φVW (W ′ )
where m ′ =                     and Ri,′ j = 1+ fi,/ j ( ki,′ j ) .
                        µ



          We focus in part on equation (1) but the other equations are also a key part of the
system. Equation (1) has some important properties. First, m ′ , the stochastic discount

factor or the intertemporal marginal rate of substitution, is common across households
and across assets. The model also implies that equation (1) holds for each of the assets
actively allocated to production activity i and run by household j, for any i and any j. This
equation is equivalent to the pricing equation derived in the Consumption-based Capital




                                                                         14
Asset Pricing Model (CCAPM) in the finance literature.9 However, it is important to
reiterate that although our empirical counterpart will be similar to what is derived in the
capital asset pricing literature, the mechanism that delivers the predicted allocation
outcome is different. In the asset pricing literature, households (investors) trade their
assets ex ante. Optimally allocated assets deliver the returns that the households in turn
use to finance their consumption, or reinvest, ultimately maximizing their utility.
Although asset reallocations across households are possible in our model environment,
households do not typically trade their assets ex ante in some markets. The rate of return
on an asset is simply the real yield from holding it.10 Given asset holdings and given
returns, transfers among households in the economy then give an optimal consumption
allocation, i.e., the consumption allocation under the full risk-sharing regime where the
marginal rates of intertemporal substitution are equalized across households. These inter-
household transfers could be through formal securities or through informal financial
markets, namely, gifts and transfers within social networks.


         Second, the Pareto weights, λ j , j = 1, 2,… , J, are implicit parameters in equation

(1) as they are arguments in the value function. Intuitively, the marginal rates of
substitution are common across households in any particular optimum but can vary across
the many optima, as if moving along a (potentially nonlinear) contract curve, as the
Pareto weights are varied, but we fix the weights as part of our specification. Our general
analysis only requires that the risk sharing community be at one fixed social optimum,
not at any particular optimal allocation per se. However, when preferences aggregate in a
Gorman sense, then the Pareto weights can be dropped from the analysis, and it is as if a
social planner were a “stand-in representative consumer” allocating assets among its
various “selves”.


9For the derivation of this equation from consumer-investor’s maximization problem, see Lucas (1978),
Hansen and Singleton (1983), and Cochrane (2001), for example.
10 In the empirical section, net profits include capital gain (or loss) when assets were sold at higher (lower)
prices than purchased, adjusted for depreciation. These transactions are however not frequent.


                                                       15
          Third, since E[ m ′Ri,′ j ] = E[ m ′ ]E[ Ri,′ j ] + cov( m ′, Ri,′ j ) equation (1) can be rewritten

as
                                     1        cov( m ′, Ri,′ j ) var( m ′ )
                   E[ Ri,′ j ] =            −
                                   E[ m ′ ]     var( m ′ ) E[ m ′ ]

                   E[ Ri,′ j ] = γ ′ + β m′ ,ijψ m′ .                                                 (2)

                             cov( m ′, Ri,′ j )
Specifically, β m′ ,ij = −                      could be interpreted as the quantity of the risk of the
                               var( m ′ )

assets used in activity i by household j that cannot be diversified, i.e., the risk implied by
the comovement of the asset return and the aggregate return. Note that the sign is
negative since high returns mean low marginal utility. Since this risk cannot be
diversified away, even in the full risk-sharing environment, it must be compensated by a
risk premium, which is a product of the quantity of risk and the price of the risk. The
price of the risk is in turn equal to the volatility of the aggregate economy,
         var( m ′ )                    1
ψ m′ =              . Finally, γ ′ =                    is the risk-free rate, R f ′ , since by definition the
          E[ m ′ ]                   E[ m ′ ]

covariance of the risk-free rate and the aggregate economy return is zero.


          Finally, the intuition behind this optimal allocation is straightforward. An optimal
allocation of assets is a portfolio that delivers an aggregate consumption for the economy
that maximizes the Pareto-weighted expected utility of the households. This optimal
consumption allocation is stochastic, and its distribution is derived from the distribution
of underlying assets in the optimal allocation. Since households are risk averse, the
optimal aggregate consumption represents a tradeoff between expected return and risk. In
the full risk-sharing environment, idiosyncratic risks are diversified away, and this
optimal aggregate consumption consists of only the aggregate nondiversifiable
component. Note that some of the optimal asset holdings could be zero if they are not



                                                               16
needed for the construction of the portfolio that delivers this optimal aggregate
consumption. However, for all of the assets that are positively allocated, an optimal
allocation implies that the stochastic intertemporal rates of substitution are equalized, i.e.,
the marginal utility from the expected returns, net of disutility from risk, from the next
period are equal across these assets. This equalized intertemporal rate of substitution
condition across assets implies that the assets with lower expected return are held in this
optimal portfolio because they are less risky than other assets. Since the only remaining
risk in the full risk-sharing economy is the covariate risk, an optimal allocation implies
the positive relationship between the expected return of the asset and its covariate,
nondiversifiable risk, as represented by the asset’s beta.11


2.2 A Financial Autarky Benchmark


         The second, opposite benchmark case is an economy where households are in
financial autarky and there is no risk sharing across households. The underlying
environment, in terms of preferences, technologies, and initial conditions, is of course the
same as in the full risk sharing benchmark. In particular, production technologies deliver
returns that are still correlated across households and production activities. However,
households absorb the risk in isolation from the rest of the community so that net
incoming (or outgoing) transfers, τ j , are zero for all j. In this benchmark, the value

function of each household j is
                                      ⎛ ⎛ I                                   ⎞                 ⎞
                                              (                 )
                                                                      I
                  Vj (W j ) = max ⎜ u j ⎜ ∑ fi, j (ki, j ) + ki, j − ∑ ki,′ j ⎟ + φ E[Vj (W j′)]⎟
                               ki′, j ⎝ ⎝ i=1                        i=1      ⎠                 ⎠


subject to the household’s resource constraint,

11 Our prediction from the full-risk sharing benchmark should be viewed as a necessary condition for the
full risk sharing, but not a sufficient one. For example, if a household is endowed with a production
technology that has returns comoving with the aggregate returns, there will be a positive relationship
between expected return and household beta, even when this household is in autarky. However, we have a
second necessary condition for optimality: not only is risk premium determined by comovement with the
aggregate, but it is not determined by idiosyncratic risk as well. This is closely parallel to the consumption
risk sharing literature: not only does consumption move with the aggregate but it also does not move with
the idiosyncratic income risk.


                                                         17
                                  (                  )
                             I
                    W j = ∑ fi, j (ki, j ) + ki, j
                            i=1



and the nonnegativity constraint of asset holding, ki,′ j ≥ 0 .



          Operationally, the Euler equation for asset allocation is of the same form for all
activities i in which household j chooses to hold and operate. But in this environment, the
stochastic discount factor is specific for household j and not equalized across all
households in the economy. Since risk cannot be shared across households, the total
fluctuation of the rate of return on asset for each household consists of both the
household’s idiosyncratic component and the comovement with the economy-wide
return. Alternatively speaking, since there is no risk sharing, each household cannot and
does not need to differentiate its idiosyncratic and aggregate risk, as both components of
fluctuation in the rate of return are viewed and treated identically by the household. In
financial autarky, their contribution to the household risk premium would be the same.


2.3 Empirical Implementation


          For our empirical implementation, we impose two additional assumptions onto
production technology and preference. The first assumption is a linear production

technology: fi, j (ki, j ) = ri, j ki, j , which implies that fi,/ j (ki, j ) = ri, j   and Ri, j = 1+ ri, j . This

assumption can be derived from a more general constant return to scale production
function where optimal inputs are chosen sequentially. As is standard in many settings,
e.g., Angeletos (2007) and Moll (2014), capital is predetermined at the beginning of the
period. Technologies are then hit with productivity shocks and prices of input and output
are determined. Finally households make input (such as labor) decisions and get output.
This yields a linear technology mapping predetermined capital into output, an Ai, j ki, j

model where productivity shocks and prices are embedded in the technology parameter



                                                            18
Ai, j . It is as if there were a single input, capital, and we focus on this technology

henceforth, that is, a single factor production function in capital with random returns.


       Due to the linear production technology, equation (1) also holds for any of the
portfolios constructed by any combinations of the assets ki,′ j for all i and all j.

Specifically, if we consider a household as our unit of observation, equation (1) implies
that
                                                 I

                                                ∑ θ ′ R′   i, j          i, j
                1 = E[ m ′R′j ] , where R′j =   i=1
                                                      I                         .
                                                     ∑θ ′         i, j
                                                     i=1




In other words, R′j is the weighted average return to the portfolio of the assets operated

by household j, where the weights are the shares of each asset in household j’s portfolio.
This insight allows us to study the risk and return of a household’s portfolio of assets
instead of the risk and return of each individual asset. This implication is especially
important in the empirical study where the classification of asset types and the income
stream from each asset is problematic, as one asset may be used in various production
activities or various types of assets are used jointly in a certain production activity.


       The second assumption is that the value function of the social planning problem
can be well approximated as quadratic in the total assets of the economy,
          η
V (W ) = − (W − W * )2 , which implies that at W ′ ,
          2

                                       ⎛ J I                     ⎞
        VW (W ′ ) = −η (W ′ − W ) = −η ⎜ ∑ ∑ Ri,′ j ki,′ j − W * ⎟ = −η ( RM′ kM′ − W * ) ,
                                  *
                                                                                              (3)
                                       ⎝     j=1 i=1             ⎠




                                                           19
              J      I

              ∑ ∑ R′ k ′       i, j i, j                J    I
where RM′ =   j=1 i=1
                                           and kM′ = ∑ ∑ ki,′ j . The first-order conditions from the value
                         kM′                            j=1 i=1



function (3) imply

                                  φη ( RM′ kM′ − W * )        φηW * φη kM′
                   m′ = −                                   =      −       RM′ ,
                                             µ                  µ     µ

                   m ′ = a − bRM′ ,                                                                (4)

where a and b are implicitly defined. Next, combining equation (4) with equation (2)
derived earlier,
                                             cov(a − bRM′ , Ri,′ j ) var(a − bRM′ )
                   E[ Ri,′ j ] = γ ′ −                              ⋅
                                               var(a − bRM′ )         E[a − bRM′ ]

                                             cov( RM′ , Ri,′ j ) b var( RM′ )
                   E[ Ri,′ j ] = γ ′ +                          ⋅               .
                                               var( RM′ )         a − bE[ RM′ ]

In this case we have
                   E[ Ri,′ j ] = γ ′ + βijψ ,                                                      (5)

which is a linear relationship between the expected return of an asset, E[ Ri,′ j ] , its

nondiversifiable risk as measured by the comovement with the aggregate return, βij , and

the price of the nondiversifiable risk, ψ . Note again that equation (5) holds for any assets

or portfolios of assets, including the market portfolio, M, and the risk-free asset, f. Since
β M = 1 and β f = 0 , equation (5) also implies that γ ′ = R′f and ψ = E[ RM′ ] − R′f . In other

words, the price of the aggregate, nondiversifiable risk is equal to the expected return on
the market portfolio in excess of the risk-free rate. This condition, presented in equation
(5), is equivalent to the relationship between risk and expected return derived in the
traditional Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) in asset pricing literature. Finally, as
discussed earlier, equation (5) also holds for any of the portfolios constructed by any



                                                                  20
combinations of the assets for any i and any j because the production technologies are
assumed to be linear in capital. In other words, for each household j, we have

                                       (             )
                  E[ R′j ] − R′f = β j E[ RM′ ] − R′f ,                                             (6)

where R′j is the return to household j’s portfolio and β j is the beta for the return on

household j’s assets with respect to the aggregate market return,
                         cov( RM′ , R′j )
                  βj =                    .                                                         (7)
                           var( RM′ )

Finally, note that common quadratic utility functions do Gorman aggregate and we can
drop the reference to Pareto weights. Also, the quadratic utility function is not the only
setting that delivers this result. We can also arrive at the same linear relationship
presented in equation (6) with other sets of assumptions.12


3. Data and the Village Environment


         The data used in this study are from the Townsend Thai Monthly Survey, an on-
going intensive monthly survey initiated in 1998 in four provinces of Thailand.
Chachoengsao and Lopburi are semi-urban provinces in a more developed central region
near the capital city, Bangkok. Buriram and Srisaket on the other hand are rural and
located in the less developed northeastern region by the border of Cambodia. In each of
the four provinces, the survey is conducted in four villages, chosen at random within a
given township.13




12The linear relationship can be derived from various consumption-based models, including those with (1)
two-period quadratic utility; (2) two periods, exponential utility and normal returns; (3) infinite horizon,
quadratic utility and i.i.d. returns; or (4) log utility. It is also a linear approximation of the models with
continuous time limit and normal distributions. See chapter 9 of Cochrane (2001) for detail.
13 Townships, i.e., tambons, were chosen randomly, taking into account ecological considerations. See
Binford, Lee, and Townsend (2004).


                                                         21
         The analysis presented in this paper is based on 156 months from January 1999 to
December 2011, which coincides with 13 calendar years. During this time, there were
salient aggregate shocks and a plethora of repeated idiosyncratic shocks in these village
economies. For example, seasonal variation in the amount and timing of rainfall and
temperature can be crucial in rice cultivation. Shrimp ponds were hit with both diseases
as well as restrictions on exports to the EU. At the micro level, milks cows varied in their
productivity, i.e., the flow was quite irregular over time for a given animal and over the
heard.


         We include in this study only the households that were present in the survey
throughout the 156 months. Since we compute our returns on assets from net income
generated from cultivation, livestock, fish and shrimp farming, and non-agricultural
business, we also include in this study only the households that generated income from
farm and non-farm business activities for at least 10 months during the 156-month period
(on average about one month per year). In other words, we drop the households whose
income was mainly exclusively from wage earnings. In the end, there are 541 households
in the sample: 129 from (the sampled township in) Chachoengsao and 140 from Lopburi
provinces in the central region, and 131 from Buriram and 141 from Srisaket provinces in
the northeast. Table A.1 in the appendix presents descriptive statistics of household
characteristics. Table A.2 shows the revenue (gross of cost of production) of the
occupations in the sample.


3.1 Networks


         We use a township as the aggregate market for empirical analysis in this paper for
two reasons. First, the four villages from the same province in our sample are from the
same township and therefore located close to each other. There are likely economic
transactions across these villages. Second, one of the salient features of the households in
the Townsend Thai Monthly Survey is the pervasive kinship network with extended



                                              22
families. Table A.3 in the appendix shows that almost all households in our sample have
at least one relative living in the same township.


3.2 Construction of Variables


         We use a household as our unit of analysis and consider the return on the
household’s total assets instead of the return on specific assets. As noted earlier, we
consider the total assets as a portfolio that is composed of multiple individual asset
classes (including both financial and fixed assets), and apply the predictions from our
framework to study the risk and return of this portfolio. It is difficult and arbitrary to
assign the percentage use of each asset in each distinct activity. Imposing additional
assumptions on the data to disaggregate assets into subcategories would likely induce
measurement errors that could bias our empirical analysis.14 The rate of return on assets
(ROA) is calculated as household’s accrued net income divided by household’s total
asset, the conventional financial accounting measure of performance of productive assets.


Net Income: Income is accrued household enterprise income, which is the difference
between the enterprise total revenue and the associated cost of inputs used in generating
that revenue. Revenue is realized at the time of sale or disposal. Associated cost could be
incurred earlier, in the periods before the sale or disposal of outputs. Total revenue
includes the value of all outputs the household produces for sale (in cash, in kind, or on
credit), own consumption (imputed value), or given away. Revenue also includes rental
income from fixed assets. Revenue does not include wages earned outside the household
or gifts and transfers received by the household. Cost includes the value of inputs used in
the production of the outputs, regardless of the method of their acquisition, i.e., purchase
(in cash, in kind, or on credit) or gifts from others or transfers from government. Costs

14  For similar reasons, we do not distinguish well the use of assets for production activity versus
consumption activity. This could lead to a downward bias of our estimates on return to assets, as some of
the assets that we include in the calculation were not used in production. Samphantharak and Townsend
(2012) provide an exercise that classifies total assets into subcategories based on additional assumptions on
production and consumption of the households, and analyze the sensitivity of the rate of return. The ROA
measure we use here is shown there to be robust.


                                                      23
includes the wage paid to labor provided by non-household members as well as imputed
compensation to the labor provided by household members.15 Cost includes all utility
expenses of the household regardless of the purposes of their uses and also includes
depreciation of fixed assets.


Total Assets: Assets include all assets, i.e., fixed assets, inventories, and financial assets.
Fixed assets are surveyed in the Agricultural Assets, Business Assets, Livestock,
Household Assets, and Land Modules of the survey. In the Agricultural Assets Module,
fixed assets include walking tractor, large four-wheel tractor, small four-wheel tractor,
aerator, machine to put in seeds and pesticides, machine to mix fertilizer and soil,
sprinkler, threshing machine, rice mill, water pump, rice storage building, other crop
storage building, large chicken coop, other buildings for livestock, and other buildings. In
the Household Assets Module, assets include car, pick-up truck, long-tail boat with
motor, large fishing boat, bicycle, air conditioner, regular telephone, cellular telephone,
refrigerator, sewing machine, washing machine, electric iron, gas stove, electric cooking
pot, sofa, television, stereo, and VCR. 16 Due to the variety in non-agricultural businesses,
in the Business Module, we do not list the specific name of the assets, but instead ask the
household to report the fixed assets they use in their business enterprises. In the Land
Module, assets include land and building at acquisition value, the value of land and
building improvement, and the appreciation of land when major events occurred (such as
an addition of new public roads). In all of the modules, assets that are not explicitly listed
but have value more than 2,000 baht are also asked and included. We also adjust the
value of fixed assets with monthly depreciation. Inventories include raw material, work in
progress, finished goods for cultivation, fish and shrimp farming, livestock activities
(such as milk and eggs), and manufacturing non-farm businesses. For merchandizing

15 For the detailed procedure how we impute the compensation to household's own labor, See
Samphantharak and Townsend (2010).
16  Note that we decide to include all household assets in our calculation. This is mainly because some of
these assets were used by the households in their production activities as well and it would be arbitrary to
include certain household assets while excluding others. However, the value of these assets was relatively
small compared to the value of total assets (which was largely determined by land and other fixed assets).
See Samphantharak and Townsend (2012) for the sensitivity analysis of ROA on household assets.


                                                      24
non-farm businesses, inventories are mainly goods for resale. Animals from the Livestock
Inventory Module, which include young meat cow, mature meat cow, young daily cow,
mature dairy cow, young buffalo, mature buffalo, young pig, mature pig, chicken, and
duck, are accounted as either inventories or fixed assets, based on their nature. Financial
assets include cash, deposits at financial institutions, other lending, and net ROSCA
position. These line items are computed from the Savings Module, the Lending Module,
and the ROSCA Module. The stock of cash is not asked directly but can be imputed from
questions about each and every transaction that each households had since the last
interview. Finally, the total asset used in the calculation of rate of return is net of
liabilities. We use the information from the Borrowing Module to calculate the
household’s stock of total liabilities.


Rate of Return: The rate of return on assets (ROA) is defined as household’s accrued net
income divided by household’s average total assets (net of total liabilities) over the period
from which that the income was generated, i.e., one month in this paper. The average
total asset is the sum of total assets at the beginning of the month and total assets at the
end of the month, divided by two. We use the real accrued net income and the real value
of household’s total assets in the ROA calculation. The real variables were computed
using the monthly Consumer Price Index (CPI) at the regional level from the Bank of
Thailand. The rate is then annualized (multiplied by twelve). We assume that the real
risk-free rate is zero for all of the periods and for all of the townships.17 Table A.4 in the
appendix presents descriptive statistics of the ROA. The median of the annualized
average ROA was 0.38% for Chachoengsao and 1.46% for Lopburi in the central region,


17 The rationale for zero risk-free rate is based on the assumption that households have access to storage
technology. If the nominal return on stored inventory is the same as inflation rate (which is likely the case
for food crop storage), then the real rate of return is zero. We also perform a robustness check with different
risk-free rates. The overall conclusion does not change, which is what we expect because the shift in both
excess asset return and excess market return does not affect the covariance between these two variables.
Note that in the earlier versions of this paper, we also used alternative calculations of ROA in the analysis,
namely, ROA computed only from fixed assets (i.e., excluding financial assets) and nominal ROA (i.e., not
adjusted for inflation). Again, the main conclusions did not change. We also used ROA computed from total
assets without subtracting liabilities; the overall conclusions were robust (which is sensible, given that
liability to asset ratios for most households are relatively small).


                                                       25
and 0.28% for Buriram, and 1.99% for Srisaket in the northeast. Excluding land and
building structure from total assets, the median ROA is 1.27 for Chachoengsao and 4.55
for Lopburi in the Central region, and 1.11 for Buriram and 4.23 for Srisaket in the
Northeast.


3.3 Measurement Errors


       For the aggregate risk, the positive relationship between beta and expected (or
mean) return could be driven by measurement error if the measurement errors of
household ROAs are positively correlated with the measurement errors of the aggregate
ROA. However, for most production activities, we use direct answers on revenue from
those production activities from each household to compute that household’s ROA.
Constructing price indices from these data reveals that prices in a given month can vary
considerably over households. This may be due in part to the fact that we did not try to
distinguish within village versus farm gate prices, i.e., we have revenue and price at the
point of sale, wherever that might be. Actual and imputed wages also vary enormously
over households at a point in time. There are also likely measurement errors in
idiosyncratic returns but detailed studies of rice production show that yields can be
explained beyond rainfall but measured differences in soil moisture, soil type, elevation,
and timing of rain, which are household specific, and the heterogeneity across households
is real and not necessary measurement error (Tazhibayeva and Townsend 2012). Some
other measurement errors are intrinsic to any survey. However, as we will discuss later in
this paper, our findings from the analyses that use the data from the production modules
are largely consistent with the findings from the consumption, gifts, and loan modules of
the same survey, reassuring that the main conclusions in this paper are unlikely driven by
measurement error in the data.




                                             26
4. Aggregate Risk and Return on Assets


Baseline Specification


            In the first stage of our empirical analysis, we compute the asset beta of each
household’s portfolio of assets to get household beta, β j , for all household j. We define a

township as the aggregate economy and use township average real returns on assets as
aggregate return, RM , computed as the total net income in the township divided by the

township’s total assets. To avoid the effect of each household’s return on the township
return, for each household we do not include the household’s own net income and assets
in the calculation of its corresponding township return, i.e., we compute and use instead a
leave-out mean. As shown in equation (7), an asset beta of household j is defined as
        cov( RM′ , R′j )
βj =                     , which is the key ratio of moments we need. Operationally, it is
          var( RM′ )

identical and conveniently computed as a regression coefficient from a simple regression
of R′j,t on RM′ ,t . Specifically, in the first stage, for each household j we estimate β j from a

time-series regression
                        R′j,t = α j + β j RM′ ,t + ε j,t .                                 (8)

In the second stage, we study the expected return and beta relationship derived earlier in
equation (5). With the assumption that the real return on risk-free asset is zero, we
compute the expected rate of return on assets of household j, E[ R′j ] . Empirically, the

expected return is computed as a simple time-series average of monthly rates of return,
        T

        ∑ R′    j,t
R′j =   t=1
                      , where T is the number of months (156 months in the baseline specification).
            T

We run a cross-sectional regression of household’s average asset returns on the betas



                                                             27
estimated earlier in equation (8) across all households in each township, one township at
a time.

                  R′j = α + ψβ̂ j + η j .                                                        (9)

With the assumption that the real risk-free rate is zero, the null hypotheses from equation
(9) are that ψ = E[ RM′ ] and that the constant term α is zero. Note that we report the

regression coefficient with the standard error corrected for generated regressor and
heteroskedasticity, following Shanken (1992) and Cochrane (2001).


          The results in Panel A of Table 1 show that the regression coefficient on
households’ beta is positive for all of the regressions except for the township in Buriram.
We then look at a stronger null hypothesis that ψ = E[ RM′ ] comparing the magnitude of

the estimated regression coefficient ψˆ with the township expected return, estimated by

                                     T

                                    ∑ R′       M ,t
the time-series average RM′ =        t=1
                                                      . The table also provides each township’s aggregate
                                           T

expected return. For the two townships in the central region (Chachoengsao and
Lopburi), the regression coefficients are not statistically different from the township
average return (at 10% level of significance), consistent with the prediction from our
model. However, the coefficients are different from the township average return for the
township in Srisaket. The zero constant implication is also satisfied.


                                                        [Table 1]


          To illustrate our results graphically, Figure 1 plots the beta of household j on the
horizontal axis against the expected return on household j’s assets on the vertical axis for
each of the four townships. In general, the figures show a positive relationship between
households’ beta and expected returns. Thus a major implication of the model is
capturing a substantial part of the data. In particular, higher risk, as measured by the co-


                                                            28
movement of household ROA and township ROA, is associated with higher average
return. The positive ψ implication from the model is pervasive in the data at various

levels of aggregation. The more stringent test of ψ = RM′ is more difficult to satisfy.18

Note that this baseline specification is subject to some critiques. We now perform
robustness checks that address these issues below.


                                               [Figure 1]


Time-Varying Risk


         Similar to the traditional CAPM in the finance literature, our empirical strategy
assumes that household betas are time-invariant. This assumption allows us to estimate
household betas from time-series regressions. In reality, household betas could be time-
varying. Our sample consists of households engaged in multiple occupations over the
period of 13 years. It is likely that the composition of household occupations (and hence
assets and their associated risks) of some of our sampled households had changed during
this period. Similarly, the expected aggregate returns E[ RM′ ] could change over time as

well, not least from changes in conditioning factors.


         We explore this issue by conducting our empirical analysis on the subsamples of
60 months (5 years) at a time. Specifically, we first estimate household’s β j and expected

return using the time-series data from month 5 to month 64 (years 1-5) for all households.
We then perform a similar exercise using the time-series data from month 17 to month 76
(years 2-6), and so on until the five-year window ends in month 160 (years 9-13). With



18 One may argue that kinship networks are local and operate better at the village or network levels than at
the township level. We present a similar analysis at the village and network levels in Appendix B, with the
results shown in Tables A.5 and A.6. Overall conclusions remain for most, but not all, of the villages and
networks, suggesting that networks may extend beyond the boundary of villages.


                                                      29
all of the estimated β̂ j,s and expected return from all of the nine subperiods s for all

households j, we finally estimate equation (5) using the pooled household-subperiod
data.19 Panel B of Table 1 presents the second-stage regression results. The table shows
that the main prediction of our model still holds, i.e., higher beta is associated with higher
expected (average) return. Note that allowing for time-varying risk (beta), the prediction
from the model is also satisfied for Buriram. However, the null hypothesis that the
constant term is equal to risk-free rate (assumed to be zero in this paper) is rejected in all
of the four provinces.


Aggregate Human Capital


        The model presented earlier in this paper implies that a household’s beta captures
all of the aggregate, non-diversifiable risk faced by the household. It is possible that there
is omitted variable bias in the estimation of beta if the average return on township total
assets is not the only determinant of the aggregate risk. Aggregate wealth, W, in the
economy-wide resource constraint likely comes from other assets in addition to tangible
capital held by the households in the economy. As shown in Table A.2, labor income
contributes a large share of household income in our sample. Omitting human capital
from the resource constraint implies that the economy-wide average return on physical
assets (both financial and non-financial) might not capture the aggregate non-
diversifiable risk of the economy. We address this issue by performing a robustness
check. Specifically we compute an additional household beta with respect to return to




19This empirical strategy is similar to the empirical CAPM literature by Black, Jensen, and Scholes (1972).
The difference is that instead of moving the window month by month, we move the window 12 months (1
year) at a time.


                                                     30
aggregate human capital, proxied by the change in aggregate labor income of all
households in the economy.20 In particular, the first-stage time-series regression becomes

                  R j,t = α j + β aj RM′ a,t + β jy RM′ y,t + ε j,t

where RM′ a,t represents the return to aggregate physical (non-human) asset and RM′ y,t is the

return to aggregate human capital. The second-stage cross-sectional regression is

                  R′j = α + ψ a β̂ aj + ψ y β̂ jy + η j .

                                                         [Table 2]


         We then extend our previous empirical analysis to include human capital. The first
four columns of Table 2 show that the regression coefficient of beta with respect to
human capital is not statistically significant in our sample. However, after controlling for
the township return to human capital, the regression coefficients of beta with respect to
total tangible capital (financial, inventory, and fixed assets) remain positive and
significant in all of the four townships.


Time-Varying Stochastic Discount Factor


         Similar to the traditional CAPM in the finance literature, parameters that
determine stochastic discount factors are assumed to be time-invariant when we take the
full risk-sharing benchmark to the empirical analysis. In theory, however, they are
determined by the shadow price of consumption goods, which likely moves over time as




20  This approximation strategy is used in the finance literature by Jagannathan and Wang (1996). Their
strategy is based on a simplified ad hoc assumption that labor income, L, follows an autoregressive process
Lt = (1+ g)Lt−1 + ε t . Therefore, human capital, H, defined as the discounted present value of the labor
income stream, is approximated by H t = Lt where r is the discount rate on human capital, and both r
                                       r−g
and g are taken as constants. In this case, the realized capital-gain part of the rate of return on human
capital (not corrected for additional investment in human capital made during the period) will be the growth
of the stock of human capital, which is also the realized growth rate in per capita labor income.


                                                                31
the aggregate consumption of the economy changes.21 In order to capture this time-
varying stochastic discount factor, we provide a further robustness check following a
strategy introduced by Lettau and Ludvigson (2001a and 2001b) who show that these
time-varying parameters are functions of aggregate consumption-wealth ratio. The log
consumption-wealth ratio, cay, in turn depends on three observable variables, namely log
consumption, c; log physical (non-human) wealth, a; and log labor earnings, y. For each
household, we compute five betas with respect to: (1) the aggregate return on tangible

capital, RM′ a,t ; (2) the aggregate return on human capital (as computed in the previous

                                                ! ; (4) the interaction between R′ a and cay
analysis), RM′ y,t ; (3) the predicted value of cay                                      !;
                                                    t                            M ,t        t


                                            ! . 22
and (5) the interaction between RM′ y,t and cay t



R′j,t = α j + β aj RM′ a,t + β jy RM′ y,t + β cay !
                                              j cay t + β j  (
                                                          cay⋅a !
                                                                             )
                                                                cayt ⋅ RM′ a,t + β cay⋅y
                                                                                   j    (! ⋅ R′ y + ε
                                                                                         cay t M ,t     )
                                                                                                      j,t      (10)



         In the final stage we run a cross-sectional regression of households’ average
return on the five betas estimated in equation (10). Namely,

                   R′j = α + ψ a β̂ aj + ψ y β̂ jy + ψ cay β̂ cay
                                                              j   + ψ cay⋅a β̂ cay⋅a
                                                                               j     + ψ cay⋅y β̂ cay⋅y
                                                                                                  j     + ηj   (11)

The results are shown in the last four columns of Table 2. Overall, with the additional
factors in this robustness check, the regression coefficient of market non-human, physical
assets, the main variable from our model, remains positive and significant for all of the
four townships.


5. Idiosyncratic Risk and Return on Assets




21 This point is illustrated clearly in the derivation of equation (4). In this case, the stochastic discount
factor, m ′ = a − bRM′ , is assumed to depend on the time-invariant parameters a and b. However,
parameters a and b are determined by the shadow price of the consumption good,                  µ.

22 Appendix   C provides more information on the estimation procedure of log consumption-wealth ratio.


                                                              32
        The empirical work thus far has abstracted from the presence of idiosyncratic risk
and focused on the implications from the full risk-sharing benchmark. However, there are
reasons why idiosyncratic risk may matter. With any of the departure from complete risk
sharing, the expected return on assets may contain a risk premium that compensates for
residual exposure to idiosyncratic risk.23 We wish to know if this is true for the
households in our sample, and if so, how large that residual exposure is, quantitatively. In
addition, as mentioned earlier, households may be endowed with production technology
that generates the positive relationship between expected return and beta, even in autarky
without risk sharing. We seek to disentangle this.


        We follow Fama and Macbeth (1973) and compute idiosyncratic risk from the
variance of the residuals from each of the household’s time-series regressions in the first
step, i.e., the residuals from equation (8). 24 This strategy is consistent with the
decomposition of total risk, as measured by the variance of the return on assets, into
aggregate (non-diversifiable) and idiosyncratic (diversifiable) components. Since

equations (8) could be rewritten in a matrix form as R′j,t = X /M ,t β j + ε j,t , we have

                  var( R′j ) = E[ β j/ Ω M β j ] + var(ε j )                                      (12)

where Ω M is the variance-covariance matrix of the aggregate variables and β j is a vector

of the regression coefficients from equation (8). The first term of the right hand side of
equation (12) is therefore the aggregate risk while the second term is the variance of the

residual. We consider this variance of the residual, σ 2j , henceforth simply referred as

household sigma, as our measure of household specific idiosyncratic risk because it
summarizes the volatility of the returns that are not captured by aggregate factor

23 In finance literature, Merton (1987) shows that under-diversified investors demand a return compensation
for bearing idiosyncratic risk. Using the exponential GARCH models to estimate expected idiosyncratic
volatilities, Fu (2009) finds a significant and positive relation between the estimated conditional
idiosyncratic volatilities and expected returns.
24 In addition to Fama and MacBeth (1973), a recent study by Calvet, Campbell, and Sodini (2007) also
uses the same risk decomposition strategy as the one in this paper.


                                                          33
(aggregate return on assets). We emphasize that this is a household-by-household
calculation.


                                                    [Table 3]


         Table 3 presents the decomposition of the total risk faced by the median
household in each of the provinces in our sample, based on equation (12). Panel A.1 of
the table uses the beta estimated earlier from the simple specification in equation (8).
Similarly, Panel B.1 uses the betas from the robustness specification in equation (10). The
results shows that a large part of the volatility of the return to enterprise assets comes
from the idiosyncratic component, in all four townships. The orders of magnitude are
large, with the idiosyncratic component capturing at least 80-90% of the risk
decomposition of the median households in three out of four provinces (the exception
being Srisaket). Likewise, the aggregate component can be as low as 2% to 20% in these
three provinces. Of course this finding per se is not inconsistent with the model, which
allows for idiosyncratic risk in the technologies. Indeed it is good in the sense that it
allows us to study the impact of aggregate risk, which one might presume from these
numbers to be small, and of idiosyncratic risk, which one might presume to be large.


         We take the first step and add household sigma computed from regressions (8)

and (10), σ!2j , as an additional explanatory variable to equations (9) and (11), respectively.


         R′j = α + ψ a β!aj + ψ σ σ!2j + η j ,                                                           (13a)


         R′j = α + ψ a β!aj + ψ y β!jy + ψ cay β"
                                                cay
                                                j   + ψ cay⋅a β"
                                                               cay⋅a
                                                               j     + ψ cay⋅y β"
                                                                                cay⋅y
                                                                                j     + ψ σ σ!2j + η j   (13b)

The results in Table 4 show that, in both baseline and robustness specifications, higher
idiosyncratic risks as measured by household sigma are associated with higher average
returns in all of the four townships.25 Note, however, that the coefficients for the beta

25 Though this violates the exclusion restriction of the full risk sharing benchmark, we are now in a position
to compute risk premium for each type of risk and compare.


                                                          34
with respect to the market return on physical assets still remain positive and significant in
three of the townships, with Buriram as the only exception.


                                             [Table 4]


          Indeed, though both aggregate and idiosyncratic risk are positively correlated
with higher expected return, the “prices” of these risks, i.e., their contribution to risk
premia, is now shown to be different. We compute aggregate and idiosyncratic risk
premia from equations (13a) and (13b) as empirically estimated in Table 4. Specifically,
for the simple specification, we have:

       Aggregate Risk Premium = ψ!a β!aj                                                      (14a)


       Idiosyncratic Risk Premium = ψ!σ σ!2j ,                                                (15a)

and for the robustness specification, we have:

       Aggregate Risk Premium= ψ!a β!aj + ψ!y β!jy + ψ"
                                                      cay "
                                                          β cay
                                                            j   + ψ"
                                                                   cay⋅a "
                                                                         β cay⋅a
                                                                           j     + ψ"
                                                                                    cay⋅y "
                                                                                          β cay⋅y
                                                                                            j     (14b)


       Idiosyncratic Risk Premium = ψ!σ σ!2j                                                  (15b)



       In the financial autarky benchmark, households would not differentiate the
idiosyncratic component and the aggregate component of the total fluctuation of the rate
of return. In this case, the risk premia from both components should be proportional to
the contribution of each component’s contribution to the total fluctuation. Panels A.2 and
B.2 of Table 3 present the decomposition of total risk premium (the sum of the aggregate
risk premium and idiosyncratic risk premium) for the simple and the robustness
specifications, respectively. The result shows that, with the exception of Buriram, the
contribution of the idiosyncratic risk premium to the total risk premium is lower than the
contribution of idiosyncratic risk to the total risk (as discussed earlier in Panels A.1 and
B.1 of the same table). Specifically, for the robustness specification, although
idiosyncratic risk accounts for 86.5% and 89.1% of the total risk of the median

                                                  35
households in Chachoengsao and Lopburi, it contributes to only 23.6% and 52.9% of the
total risk premium. Likewise, for the median household in Srisaket, idiosyncratic risk
accounts for 57.2% of the total risk while its premium contributes for only 16.7% of the
total risk premium. We also perform a nonparametric statistical test for the difference in
medians and find that the median percentage contribution of idiosyncratic risk to the total
risk is statistically different from the median percentage contribution of idiosyncratic risk
premium to the total risk premium at 1% level of significance in all provinces except for
Buriram.26 The pattern for lower and upper quartiles is also similar to the median. Finally,
it is important to note that omitted variables could lead to a positive relationship between
expected return and sigma if a component of aggregate risk were mistakenly in sigma.
However, this would work against us. Our empirical results suggest the impact of sigma
is largely diversified, anyway.


        In sum, we cannot treat aggregate and idiosyncratic risks identically when we
analyze risks and returns of household enterprises in developing economies. A household
with high total risk (high variance) may have lower risk premium than another household
if the higher risk is idiosyncratic and diversifiable. Likewise, a household with low total
risk (low variance) could require a higher risk premium if most of the risk is covariate
and non diversifiable.


        To illustrate this point, let us consider two households from Lopburi province in
our sample. During the period of this study, household A’s main occupation was livestock
farming while household B grew beans and sunflowers. Household A’s return on assets
fluctuated far relatively more; the variance of the rate of return on assets for household A
was 1.23 times higher than the variance of household B’s return. The coefficient of
variation was even higher, 2.72 times. However, 99% of the variance of the rate of return
on household A’s assets was from the idiosyncratic component while in contrast

26 One possible explanation for Buriram is that it is the place with the most transition of occupations
(toward higher return) and we have shorter period to use our method. See Pawasuttipaisit and Townsend
(2010).


                                                   36
idiosyncratic risk contributed to only 63% for household B. Consequently, we find that
the risk premium for household A, facing mostly diversified risk was only 0.008
(annualized) percentage point while for B with more aggregate risk it was 1.394, despite
household B’s less volatile return. This example, though deliberately dramatic, is not an
outlier. Below we return to an analysis of risk premia and associated characteristics of
enterprises that deliver statistically significant variation.


6. Risk Sharing: Connecting the Production Approach to the Consumption
Approach


        Reassuringly, our main findings on the production side are largely consistent with
earlier studies on the consumption side that idiosyncratic risk is considerably shared
across households in the these villages. Using consumption data from the same sample as
in this paper, Chiappori, Samphantharak, Schulhofer-Wohl, and Townsend (2014) use
variation in aggregate shocks to estimate the degree of heterogeneity in risk tolerance
among the households and find evidence for full risk sharing. Likewise, Karaivanov and
Townsend (2014) find that the consumption and income data of those in family networks
is consistent with full risk sharing, though tied with moral hazard as best fitting models.
Kinnan and Townsend (2012) show that households linked to one another by gifts of
loans, and hence indirectly if not directly connected to outside financial institutions,
achieve full risk sharing; in contrast, isolated households, especially the poor, are
vulnerable to idiosyncratic income risk. Our larger point is that idiosyncratic risk in most
of these studies is partially, though not completely, insured and this is consistent with
what we are finding in this paper with the data on risk premia from the production side.


        Regarding the actual mechanisms used for smoothing, i.e., financing a deficit or
saving a surplus, households may buy and sell their assets (though this is rare) or use crop
storage inventories (more common). They can also borrow or lend money formally
through financial institutions or informally through village moneylenders, friends, or



                                                37
relatives. Samphantharak and Townsend (2010) provide quantification for these various
smoothing mechanisms using the same Thai data and document the role of gifts among
social networks.27 Our conceptual framework in this paper both combines the production
and consumption sides, as the first-order conditions have made clear, and features the role
of gifts as the primary smoothing mechanism.


                                           [INSERT Table 5]


         We perform further analyses that directly connect production and smoothing
mechanism. For each household, we compute the residual from equation (8) as month by
month idiosyncratic shocks. Then, as reported in Table 5, we regress household’s net gifts
(i.e., gift outflows minus gift inflows) on these idiosyncratic shocks, controlling for
aggregate shocks (capturing common township-time dummies) and household fixed
effects (capturing diverse Pareto weights). Since gifts could also be disguised in the form
of state-contingent loans (as in Udry 1994), we also regress household’s net lending (i.e,
lending minus borrowing), as well as household’s net gifts plus net lending, on the same
set of explanatory variables. The coefficients are all statistically significant at the 1%
level. Finally, we also run the standard risk-sharing regressions with the consumption
data (Townsend 1994). Controlling for aggregate shocks and household fixed effects, we
regress monthly consumption on the same idiosyncratic shocks and find a low but
significant coefficient, significant at 5% level.


         To summarize, the results in Table 5 show that once we control for province-
month fixed effects, which capture the provincial aggregate shocks, household
consumption is positively correlated with household-specific, idiosyncratic shocks. Thus

27 The risk sharing implications of networks have been studied in other economies as well. For example,
using data from the randomized evaluation of PROGRESA program in Mexico, Angelucci, De Giorgi, and
Rasul (2011) find that members of an extended family share risk with each other but not with households
without relatives in the village. They also find that connected households achieve almost perfect insurance
against idiosyncratic risk. Recently, Attanasio, Meghir, and Mommaerts (2015) study group risk sharing in
extended family networks in the US. They find that majority of shocks to household income are potentially
insurable within family networks but they find, in contrast, little evidence that the extended family provides
insurance for such idiosyncratic shocks.


                                                       38
risk sharing is imperfect and households do bear some of their idiosyncratic risk. That is
consistent with the fact that idiosyncratic risk is showing up in the risk premium on the
production side. On the other hand, the coefficient is small, and small in comparison with
coefficients on the other regressions, the way the movement in idiosyncratic shocks is
absorbed by net gifts and lending across the households.


       Finally, we note that the consumption, gift, and lending-borrowing data used in
the analysis in this section are from different modules of the questionnaire than what we
use in the calculation of ROA. Consistency in the empirical findings reassures us that the
main conclusions in this paper are unlikely driven by measurement error in the data. of
course there remains the possibility of measurement error inflating the variance of the
idiosyncratic shocks, but attenuation bias would hit all of the regressions. Thus the
relative comparison of coefficients across regressions remains of interest, confirming the
role of social networks as a key institution in these villages.


7. Returns Net of Risk Premia


       In the development and macroeconomics literatures mentioned earlier in the
introduction, rates of return on assets are usually used as a measure of performance or
productivity of a firm or a household enterprise. These returns to assets however typically
do not take into account that different household enterprises are involved in different
risks and so higher average returns could result from compensation for higher risk and
not productivity.


       Another comparison of two households, C and D, from our sample illustrates this
argument. Both households lived in Srisaket province. The main occupation of both
households was cultivation, although they grew different crops. Household C’s main crop
was rice while household D grew cassava. During the period of our study, the average
annualized monthly real rate of return on assets for household C was 9.06% while the



                                               39
average rate for household D was at 3.93%, i.e., less than half of the rate for household C.
However, looking closely, our analysis shows that household C’s higher return was
largely due to the higher risk and the types of risk it faced. First, household C was
engaged in production activity whose return fluctuated more than household D. In
particular, the variance of the rate of return for household C was 2.26 times higher than
that of household D. Second, while 70% of the total risk faced by household C was
idiosyncratic and could be (partially) diversified away, the diversifiable risk component
accounted for an even greater percentage, 89%, for household D. As a result, the risk
premium of household C was 8.25 percentage points while it was only 1.11 percentage
points for household D. In other words, household C’s higher average return was mainly
the compensation for higher risk exposure that the household faced, both in terms of the
total and in terms of a greater share of nondiversifiable risk. In the end, household C
actually had a lower return net of risk, i.e., after subtracting risk premia, a net of 0.81%,
in comparison to household D at 2.82%.


       The framework in this paper gives us a practical way to compute the risk premia
that contribute to the return on assets and hence the residual return, after adjusting for the
premium, as in the example just given. In the conventional CAPM context, Jensen (1967)
argues that intercepts α j in equations (10) α j can be interpreted as the abnormal return of

an asset, and financial analysts use Jensen’s alpha as a measure of performance of an
asset or a fund manager. We follow this tradition, thinking of α j as how well household j

manages its assets in generating income in excess of risk-free rate adjusting for measured
risk premia.


                                         [Figure 2]


       Figure 2 shows the histograms comparing the return on assets that is not adjusted
for risks with the return adjusted for both aggregate and idiosyncratic (based on the



                                               40
robustness specification). Though risk adjusted returns are naturally shifted to the left,
other aspects of the distribution also change. The modes receive high mass consistently in
the risk-adjusted returns. Further in two provinces the adjusted returns have more mass in
the left tail, and in the other two provinces, in the right tail. The overall point is that the
distributions of the rate of return do change when we adjust for risks, as evident from the
differences in the skewness and the kurtosis of the returns. Table A.7 in the appendix
presents selected descriptive statistics of household alpha.


8. Household Characteristics Associated with Risk Exposure and Return on Assets


         Figure 3 presents a scatter plot displaying for each household its aggregate risk
premium and idiosyncratic risk premium. The figure shows that some households in our
sample were exposed to both high aggregate and idiosyncratic risks (those in the upper-
right corner) while many faced little of both risks (those in the lower-left corner). Still,
there are a large number of households that were mainly exposed to one type of risk, but
not the other (those in the upper-left and in the lower-right corners).28


                                                 [Figure 3]


         Table 6 presents correlations in the data, with different measures of return and risk
of assets as the dependent variable and household’s initial wealth and other demographic
characteristics on the right hand side. Specifically, Panel A presents regression results
when we us the simple measured rate of return on assets (not adjusted for risk) as the
dependent variable. In three out of four provinces, we find that poor households (as
measured by initial wealth) tend to have higher average return on assets. This result might
prompt us to conclude that households in these provinces are financially constrained.

28 Figure 3 also presents two salient findings from our sample. First, there is a positive correlation between
aggregate risk premium and idiosyncratic risk premium (the correlation coefficient is 0.49 and statistically
significant at 1%). Second, there is a large portion of our sampled households with low risk (those near the
origin in Figure 3). In particular, there is variation in aggregate risk premium while the idiosyncratic part is
near zero. This produces a cluster of points on the x-axis.


                                                        41
However, the results in Panel B reveal a different story. Once adjusted for risk, poorer
households in the central region tend to have a lower return on assets while there is no
relationship between wealth and return on assets for the two provinces in the northeast.


       The explanation for these findings is shown in Panels C and D where we examine
the relationship between household characteristics and household beta (aggregate risk
with respect to the market return on physical assets) and household sigma (idiosyncratic
risk). The results highlight the heterogeneity in the risk exposure of households in our
sample. Controlling for household demography, poorer households tend to be more
involved with risky activities, both aggregate (in 3 out of 4 provinces) and idiosyncratic
(in all 4 provinces). We also find that households with younger, less educated, and male
head tend to have more exposure to both aggregate and idiosyncratic risks (although
specific results vary across provinces).


                                            [Table 6]


       One might well ask, what is the mechanism that households choose to make their
income smooth or risky? We further explore the sources of this household risk exposure
(results not shown here). Using the data on the shares of household total revenue from
each production activity as well as the data on each household’s main occupation
(cultivation, livestock, fish and shrimp farming, and non-farm business). We find that
cultivation and non-farm business activities are associated with higher aggregate and
idiosyncratic risk (these are statistically significant at 1%). Cultivation and non-farm
business activities are common in our sample (hence aggregate risk), but at the same
time, there is heterogeneity in the variability of returns within cultivation and within
business activities (hence idiosyncratic risk). Finally, we find that poorer households are
more likely to participate in cultivation and non-farm business activities (again,
statistically significant at 1%). Note also that this finding is unlikely driven by the
difference in risk preferences between rich and poor households as Chiappori,



                                             42
Samphantharak, Schulhofer-Wohl, and Townsend (2014), using the data from the same
household survey as this paper, find that risk aversion was not correlated with household
wealth. This is related to the underlying force of the full risk sharing benchmark, under
which production and consumption activities are separated.


         The result shows how easily one could misinterpret data, if one did not adjust for
risk. One might have impression that relatively poor households have high returns on
assets (as shown in Panel A for all of the provinces except for Lopburi) and thus suffer
from financial constraints. The results here show that the reason why these poor
households have a higher simple rate of return to their business enterprises is from the
fact that they take more risk in their production activities and get compensated
accordingly. Controlling for risks, household enterprises of the poor in the northeast are
not productively different those of the rich, while the poor in the central region tend to
have lower return on assets that the rich. Thus some poor households in our sample, those
of the central region, do seem constrained, but not in the usual, stereotypical sense. Poor
households seem limited in their choices of production activities, as if constrained away
from the activities that have high return net of risk premia and are available only for
richer households.29


9. Conclusion


         We have studied the risk and return of farm and non-farm business enterprises in
village economies with illiquid capital asset markets and limited formal financial
securities. Using data from the Townsend Thai Monthly Survey, conducted in rural and

29  Our findings do not necessarily contradict existing literature that analyzes the gross rate of return,
unadjusted for risk premia, and financial constraints. If all households are in the same occupation or a
sector that has identical aggregate risk, and if idiosyncratic risk is fully diversified, then actual net returns,
adjusted for risk, are simply a downward shifted version of the unadjusted returns. Some on the right tail of
this distribution may have high net returns and thus may be constrained. More generally, however,
with different occupations and differential exposure to risk, high returns on the right tail of the distribution
may be simply the compensation for high risk. Likewise, high rates of growth of net worth for poor
households with high rates of return does not necessarily indicate the presence of financial constraints, as
those with high expected returns, however risky, will on average as a group, experience high growth.


                                                         43
semi-urban villages, we find a stark contrast between the quantity of risk, on the one
hand, and the impact of risk on risk premia, on the other. Although idiosyncratic risk is
the dominant factor in the total risk, it is diversified away to a large extent, and so bears a
low risk premium. In contract, aggregate risk cannot be diversified away and likewise it
captures a much larger share of the total risk premia.


       How is this reversal in quantities and valuations possible? The answer is that the
Thai households in the sample have extensive family networks and engage actively in
gifts and loans, making the economic environment in these village economies with
informal markets and institutions close to the outcome of the standard capital asset
pricing model, even though, again, there are no formal markets and actively traded assets.
With risk sharing conventions in place, idiosyncratic risk is largely, though not entirely,
pooled away. Indeed, we have confirmed active transactions in these networks as
an underlying mechanism. Controlling for aggregate risk, when residual idiosyncratic
returns are low, gifts are incoming, as is borrowing; and when idiosyncratic returns are
high, gifts are outgoing, as is lending.


       Our results, using data on the rates of return from production side, are thus
parallel to those in the consumption risk sharing literature. The latter uses income and
consumption as key variables, showing consumption is largely, though not entirely,
smoothed against idiosyncratic income shocks, once one controls for aggregate shocks.
Gifts and risk sharing networks have been shown in other work to be a key mechanism.
Here in this paper we use the profits from production and the assets used
to generate those profits, to calculate the rates of return. We then show that in the data the
comovement in the rates of return requires compensation in the form of higher expected
return, so that one infers exposure to that aggregate risk. Our analysis allows us to infer
exposure to the idiosyncratic risk in the rate of return as well. This risk requires lower
compensation, so one infers, indirectly, the lower exposure to idiosyncratic shocks.




                                               44
       We also provide an analysis that jointly makes use of production and consumption
panel data, at the level of individual households over time. We use the same idiosyncratic
shocks inferred on the production side in rate of return data in the standard risk sharing
regression for consumption, and examine how consumption moves with these shocks,
controlling for common aggregate shocks and household specific fixed effects. We show
that idiosyncratic shocks do impact household consumption, as we surmise indirectly by
looking risk premia on the production side. This confirms directly that some of the
idiosyncratic risk is borne by the households. However the coefficient of sensitivity to
this idiosyncratic risk, though statistically significant, is estimated to be small. The
impact of an idiosyncratic shock on household’s response through gifts and lending is
larger. In sum, the work here with production data, consumption data, and network
transactions paints a common, confirmatory picture of economic life in these villages.


       Our framework and results have important policy implications: when inferring the
degree of financial constraints and possible targeting, and when inferring underling
productivity and possible misallocation, we need to consider not only the returns but also
risk and risk premia. In particular, as we have emphasized in this paper, we need to
distinguish aggregate and idiosyncratic risk, and how these two components can vary
substantially across households running diverse businesses in different production
sectors. When risk adjustments are common across household, as when there are common
aggregate returns in a sector and idiosyncratic risk is entirely pooled away, then the
distribution of net returns is simply a downward shift of the distribution of returns.
However, when comparing business across sectors or production across different
activities, the adjustments for aggregate and idiosyncratic risks can vary and there is
potentially little association between high returns and underlying productivity. One might
infer that poor households with high returns are financially constrained, but this result can
disappear with risk adjustment. Indeed, the richer households may emerge as the ones
with higher net returns, suggesting obstacles for the poor to leave their current
occupation.



                                              45
References
Angeletos, George-Marios. “Uninsured idiosyncratic investment risk and aggregate
    saving,” Review of Economic Dynamics (10) 1, 2007.
Angelucci, Manuela; Giacomo de Giorgi; and Imran Rasul. “Insurance and Investment
    within Family Networks,” Working Paper, 2011.
Angelucci, Manuela, Dean Karlan, and Jonathan Zinman. "Microcredit Impacts:
    Evidence from a Randomized Microcredit Program Placement Experiment by
    Compartamos Banco." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7(1):
    151-82, 2015.
Asker, John; Allan Collard-Wexler; and Jan De Loecker. “Dynamic Inputs and
    (Mis)Allocation.” Journal of Political Economy, 122(5), 1013-1063, 2014.
Attanasio, Orazio, Britta Augsburg, Ralph De Haas, Emla Fitzsimons, and Heike
    Harmgart. "The Impacts of Microfinance: Evidence from Joint-Liability Lending in
    Mongolia." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7(1): 90-122, 2015.
Attanasio, Orazio; Costas Meghir; and Corina Mommaerts. “Insurance in Extended
    Family Networks,” NBER Working Paper No. 21059, April 2015.
Augsburg, Britta, Ralph De Haas, Heike Harmgart, and Costas Meghir. "The Impacts of
    Microcredit: Evidence from Bosnia and Herzegovina." American Economic Journal:
    Applied Economics, 7(1): 183-203, 2015.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duflo, Rachel Glennerster, and Cynthia Kinnan. "The Miracle
    of Microfinance? Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation." American Economic
    Journal: Applied Economics, 7(1): 22-53, 2015.
Bartelsman, Eric; John Haltiwanger; and Stefano Scarpetta. “Cross-Country Differences
    in Productivity: The Role of Allocation and Selection.” American Economic Review
    103(1): 305-334, 2013.
Beaman, Lori; Dean Karlan; Bram Thuysbaert; and Christopher Udry. “Selection into
    Credit Markets: Evidence from Agriculture in Mali,” Working Paper, February 2015.
Binford, Michael W.; Tae Jeong Lee; and Robert M. Townsend. “Sampling Design for an
    Integrated Socioeconomic and Ecological Survey by Using Satellite Remote Sensing
    and Ordination,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 101(31), August
    2004: 11,517-11,522.
Black F., Jensen, M.C. and Scholes, M. "The Capital Asset Pricing Model: Some
    Empirical Tests" in Jensen, M.C., ed., Studies in the Theory of Capital Markets,
    Praeger, 1972.
Buera, Francisco J. and Yongseok Shin, 2013. "Financial Frictions and the Persistence of
    History: A Quantitative Exploration," Journal of Political Economy, vol. 121(2),
    pages 221 - 272.
Calvet, Laurent; John Y. Campbell; and Paulo Sodini. “Down or Out,” Journal of
    Political Economy 115, 2007.




                                            46
Campbell, John Y. “Consumption-Based Asset Pricing,” Chapter 13 in Handbook of the
    Economics of Finance, edited by George Constantinides, Milton Harris, and Rene
    Stulz, Elsvier, 2003.
Chiappori, Pierre-Andre; Krislert Samphantharak; Sam Schulhofer-Wohl; and Robert
    Townsend. “Heterogeneity and Risk Sharing in Village Economies,” Quantitative
    Economics, Vol.5 No.1, 2014.
Cochrane, John. Asset Pricing. Princeton University Press, 2001.
Crepon, Bruno, Florencia Devoto, Esther Duflo, and William Pariente. “Impact of
    Microcredit in Rural Areas of Morocco: Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation.”
    American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2015.
David, Joel; Hugo Hopenhayn; and Venky Venkateswaran. “Information, Misallocation
    and Aggregate Productivity”, Working Paper, 2014.
De Mel, Suresh; David J. McKenzie; and Christopher Woodruff. “Returns to Capital in
    Microenterprises: Evidence from a Field Experiment,” Quarterly Journal of
    Economics, November 2008.
Dercon, Stefan. Insurance Against Poverty, Oxford University Press, 2004.
Di Tella, Sebastian. “Moral Hazard and the Balance Sheet Channel,” Working Paper,
    MIT, 2015.
Duflo, Esther, Michael Kremer, and Jonathan Robinson. “Nudging Farmers to Use
    Fertilizer: Theory and Experimental Evidence from Kenya.” American Economic
    Review 101 (6): 2350–90, 2011.
Evenson, Robert E., and Douglas Gollin. 2003. Assessing the Impact of the Green
    Revolution, 1960 to 2000. Science 300(5620):758–62, 2003.
Fama, Eugene and James D. MacBeth. “Risk, Return, and Equilibrium: Empirical Tests,”
    Journal of Political Economy, Vol.81, No.3, 1973.
Fu, Fangjian. “Idiosyncratic Risk and the Cross-Section of Expected Stock Returns,”
    Journal of Financial Economics 91, 2009.
Hansen, Lar P. and Kenneth Singleton. “Stochastic Consumption, Risk Aversion, and the
    Temporal Behavior of Asset Returns,” Journal of Political Economy, 1983.
Heaton, John and Deborah Lucas. “Portfolio Choice and Asset Prices: The Importance of
    Entrepreneurial Risk,” Journal of Finance Vol. 55, No. 3, 2000.
Hseih, and Peter Klenow. “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and India.”
    Quarterly Journal of Economics CXXIV, November 2009.
Jagannathan, Ravi and Wang, Zhenyu. “The Conditional CAPM and the Cross-Section of
    Expected Returns,” Journal of Finance 51, 1996.
Jensen, Michael C., The Performance of Mutual Funds in the Period 1945-1964 (May 1,
    1967). Journal of Finance, Vol. 23, No. 2, pp. 389-416, 1967.
Karaivanov, Alexander, and Robert M. Townsend. “Dynamic Financial Constraints:
    Distinguishing Mechanism Design from Exogenously Incomplete Regimes,”
    Econometrica, 2014.
Karlan, Dean, Robert Osei, Isaac Osei-Akoto, and Christopher Udry. “Agricultural
    Decisions after Relaxing Credit and Risk Constraints,” Working Paper, Yale
    University, 2013.

                                          47
Kinnan, Cynthia and Robert M. Townsend. “Kinship and Financial Networks, Formal
    Financial Access and Risk Reduction,” American Economic Review Papers and
    Proceedings 102, 2012.
Lettau, Martin and Sydney Ludvigson. “Consumption, Aggregate Wealth, and Expected
    Stock Returns” Journal of Finance, 2001a.
Lettau, Martin and Sydney Ludvigson. “Resurrecting the (C)CAPM: A Cross-Sectional
    Test When Risk Premia Are Time-Varying” Journal of Political Economy 109, 2001b.
Ligon, Ethan. “Targeting and Informal Insurance,” in Stefan Dercon, editor, Insurance
    Against Poverty, Oxford University Press, 2004.
Ligon, Ethan, and Laura Schechter. “Evaluating Different Approaches to Estimating
    Vulnerability,” Social Protection Discussion Paper Series, Social Protection Unit,
    Human Development Network, The World Bank, 2004.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr. “Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy,” Econometrica 46, 1978.
Mankiw, N. Gregory and Stephen P. Zeldes. “The Consumption of Stockholders and
    Nonstockholders,” Journal of Financial Economics 29, 1991.
McKenzie, David and Christopher Woodruff. “Experimental Evidence on Returns to
    Capital and Access to Finance in Mexico”, World Bank Economic Review, 22(3),
    2008.
Midrigan, Virgiliu and Daniel Xu. “Finance and Misallocation: Evidence from Plant-
    Level Data,” American Economic Review, 104 (2): 422-458, 2014.
Moll, Benjamin. “Productivity Losses from Financial Frictions: Can Self‐Financing
    Undo Capital Misallocation?” American Economic Review, 2014.
Morduch, Jonathan. “Income Smoothing and Consumption Smoothing,” Journal of
    Economic Perspectives, Vol.9 No.3, 1995.
Morduch, Jonathan and Gisele Kamanou. “Measuring Vulnerability,” in Stefan Dercon
    (ed.), Insurance Against Poverty, Oxford University Press, 2003.
Moskowitz, Tobias J. and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen. “The Returns to Entrepreneurial
    Investment: A Private Equity Premium Puzzle?” American Economic Review Vol.92
    No.4, 2002.
Pawasutipaisit and Townsend. “Wealth Accumulation and Factors Accounting for
    Success,” Journal of Econometrics, 2010.
Restuccia, Diego and Richard Rogerson. "Policy Distortions and Aggregate Productivity
    with Heterogeneous Plants," Review of Economic Dynamics, Elsevier for the Society
    for Economic Dynamics, vol. 11(4), pages 707-720, October 2008.
Rosenzweig, Mark R. and Hans P. Binswanger. “Wealth, Weather Risk and the
    Composition and Profitability of Agricultural Investments,” Economic Journal Vol.
    103 Issue 146, l993.
Samphantharak, Krislert and Robert M. Townsend. Households as Corporate Firms: An
    Analysis of Household Finance Using Integrated Household Surveys and Corporate
    Financial Accounting. Cambridge University Press, 2010.
Samphantharak, Krislert and Robert M. Townsend. “Measuring Return on Household
    Enterprises: What Matters Most for Whom?” Journal of Development Economics,
    2012.

                                           48
Shanken, J. On the estimation of beta-pricing models, Review of Financial Studies 5,
   1-33, 1992.
Suri, Tavneet. “Selection and Comparative Advantage in Technology Adoption.”
   Econometrica 79 (1): 159–209, 2011.
Tazhibayeva, Kamilya and Robert M. Townsend. "The Impact of Climate Change on Rice
   Production: Heterogeneity and Uncertainty." MIT Working Paper, 2012.
Tarozzi, Alessandro, Jaikishan Desai, and Kristin Johnson. "The Impacts of Microcredit:
   Evidence from Ethiopia." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7(1):
   54-89. 2015.
Townsend, Robert M. “Risk and Insurance in Village India,” Econometrica, 62(3), May
   1994.
Udry, Christopher. “Risk and Insurance in a Rural Credit Market: An Empirical
   Investigation in Northern Nigeria,” Review of Economic Studies 61, 1994.
Udry, Christopher and Santosh Anagol. "The Return to Capital in Ghana," American
   Economic Review, Vol. 96(2): 388-393, 2006.
Vissing-Jorgensen, Annette. “Asset Market Participation and the Elasticity of
   Intertemporal Substitution.” Journal of Political Economy, August 2002.
Vissing-Jorgensen, Annette and Orazio Attanasio. “Stock Market Participation, Inter-
   temporal Substitution, and Risk Aversion,” American Economic Review 36, 2003.


Appendix
Appendix A: Descriptive Statistics

                                     [Tables A.1-A.4]

Appendix B: Alternative Definitions of the Aggregate Economy

One may argue that kinship networks are local and operate better at the village or
network levels than at the township level. Table A.5 reports the second-stage regression
results when we use villages as aggregates. Despite the smaller number of observations,
the results show that the regression coefficient of household beta is significantly positive
at 10% (or lower) level of significance for 9 of the 16 villages in our sample, with the
only exception of all four villages in Buriram province, two villages in Lopburi, and one
village in Chachoengsao. The result also shows that we cannot reject the null hypothesis
that ψ = R M at 10% level of significance for 5 out of those 9 villages in the sample
(Village 7 in Chachoengsao; Village 4 in Lopburi; and Villages 6, 9, and 10 in Srisaket).

                                       [Tables A.5]

We also perform a similar analysis at the network level. In order to analyze the risk and
return at the network level, we construct kinship network maps for the households in the


                                              49
Townsend Thai Monthly Survey. Specifically, for each of the relatives of the household
head and the spouse (parents and siblings of the head, parents and siblings of the spouse,
and their children) who was still alive and lived within the village, the survey recorded
which building structure as recorded in the initial census he or she lived. With this
information, we constructed a kinship network map for each village by drawing a link
between two households that were family-related related. We present in Table A.6 the
regressions using network as our definition of aggregate economy. We present only the
results for the networks with more than 15 households. There are nine of them. All are
from different villages (four from Lopburi in the central region; two from Buriram and
three from Srisaket in the northeast). Table A.6 shows that the regression coefficient of
household beta is significantly positive for 5 of the 9 networks. For 2 of the 9 networks,
we however cannot reject the null hypothesis that the regression coefficient is equal to the
network’s average return (Networks 602 and 902 in Srisaket).

                                        [Tables A.6]

Appendix C: Time-Varying Stochastic Discount Factor

To show that the consumption-wealth ratio summarizes the expectation of future returns,
Lettau and Ludvigson (2001a) start from the resource constraint in period t analogous to
what presented in Section 2 of this paper, Wt+1 = (1+ rM ,t+1 )(Wt − Ct ) , where Wt , Ct , and
rM ,t+1 are wealth, consumption, and market rate of return in period t. Following Campbell
and Mankiw (1989), the log-linear approximation of this constraint yields
             ⎡∞                          ⎤              W −C
ct − wt ≈ Et ⎢ ∑ ρ ws (rM ,t+s − Δct+s ) ⎥ , where ρW =      or the steady-state investment to
             ⎣ s=1                       ⎦               W
wealth ratio. Define cayt = ct − wt = ct − ω at − (1− ω )yt , where ω is the share of physical
wealth in total wealth. Since we do not observe the share of non-human wealth, ω, we
cannot directly compute the log consumption to wealth ratio, cayt . Instead, we follow
                                                               ! = c* − ω
Lettau and Ludvigson (2001a) and obtain the value of cayt from cay      " a* − θ# y* − δ# ,
                                                                   t t     t       t

where the starred variables are the observed quantities from our data and the hatted
values are the estimated coefficients from the township time-series regression
ct* = δ + ω at* + θ yt* + ε t .

Appendix D: Risk-Adjust Return

                                         [Table A.7]




                                               50
                       Figure 1 Risk and Return: Township as Market                                                                                                                    Figure 2 Histograms of Rate of Return on Assets,
                                   Chachoengsao                                                                  Lopburi                                                               Unadjusted and Adjusted for Risk




                                                                                    20
     30




                                                                                                                                                                                                   Chachoengsao                       Lopburi




                                                                                    10
     20




                                                                                                                                                                                 0.4                               0.4




                                                                              Mean ROA
Mean ROA




                                                                                                                                                                                 0.3                               0.3




                                                                                   0
    10




                                                                                                                                                                                 0.2                               0.2




                                                                                    -10
     0




                                                                                                                                                                                 0.1                               0.1




                                                                                    -20
     -10




                  0      2            4
                                            Beta
                                                    6          8    10                     -2   0                   2
                                                                                                                   Beta
                                                                                                                                        4   6
                                                                                                                                                                                   0                                 0
                             (mean) roa             Fitted values                                   (mean) roa              Fitted values                                                  -12 -8 -4 0 4 8 12 16 20    -12 -8 -4 0 4 8 12 16 20
                                          Buriram                                                                Srisaket
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Buriram                         Srisaket

                                                                                  20
     10




                                                                                                                                                                                 0.4                                  0.4
                                                                                      10
                                                                                                                                                                                 0.3                                  0.3
         5
Mean ROA




                                                                             Mean ROA




                                                                                                                                                                                 0.2                                  0.2
                                                                               0
  0




                                                                                                                                                                                 0.1                                  0.1
                                                                                  -10
     -5




                                                                                                                                                                                   0                                    0
     -10




                                                                                  -20




             -2          0                   2                 4         6                  0   2                    4                  6   8                                              -12 -8 -4 0 4 8 12 16 20   -12 -8 -4 0 4 8 12 16 20
                                            Beta                                                                   Beta

                             (mean) roa             Fitted values                               (mean) roa                  Fitted values
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ROA           ROA, Adjusted for Risks

                                                                                                                                                                                 Remarks Unit of observation is household. ROA is the annualized
             Remarks Unit of observation is household. There are 129 households in                                                                                               monthly rate of return on asset in percentage. ROA adjusted for risk is the
             Chachoengsao, 140 in Lopburi, 131 in Buriram, and 141 in Srisaket. The                                                                                              rate of return adjusted for both aggregate and idiosyncratic components of
             fitted lines correspond to regression results presented in Columns (1)-(4)                                                                                          the total risk faced by the households.
             in Table 1.

                      Figure 3 Scatter Plots Aggregate Risk Premium and                                                                         Idiosyncratic Risk Premium (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                   30
                                 Idiosyncratic Risk Premium
                                                                                                                                                                                 22.5

                                                                                                                                                                                   15

             Remarks Unit of observation is household. The observations are from all                                                                                               7.5
             of the four townships. Aggregate risk premium is computed from equation
             (14b) while idiosyncratic risk premium is computed from equation (15b),                                                                                                   0
             both using estimates from Table 8. The premia are presented in annualized                                                                                                     -3.75   0   3.75 7.5 11.25 15
             monthly percentage return.                                                                                                                                                      Aggregate Risk Premium (%)
Table 1 Risk and Return Regressions: Township as Market

Dependent Variable:                                                      Household’s Mean Return on Assets
                                            Panel A: Constant Beta                                             Panel B: Time-Varying Beta
Region:                         Central                             Northeast                           Central                         Northeast
Township (Province): Chachoengsao       Lopburi             Buriram         Srisaket         Chachoengsao        Lopburi        Buriram          Srisaket
                           (1)              (2)                (3)               (4)              (5)               (6)            (7)              (8)
Beta                   2.135***         2.465***              0.432         2.335***           1.250***         2.307***        0.530**         1.888***
                           (0)              (1)                (0)               (1)              (0)               (0)            (0)              (0)
Constant                 -0.535           -0.503             -0.122            -0.847           -0.325*         -0.631***      -0.782***        -1.114***
                        (0.412)          (0.561)            (0.364)           (0.668)           (0.176)          (0.235)        (0.162)           (0.304)
Observations               129              140                131               141             1,161            1,260          1,179             1,269
R-squared                 0.467            0.210              0.017             0.297            0.330            0.204          0.019             0.260
Township Returns:
  Monthly Average         1.68             2.49               0.15             0.80                1.19             2.40             -0.07            1.04
  Standard Deviation      0.07             0.10               0.10             0.10                0.75             1.47             0.54             0.75

Remarks For columns (1)-(4), unit of observations is household. Beta is computed from a simple time-series regression of household’s adjusted ROA on township’s
ROA over the 156 months from January 1999 to December 2011. Household’s mean adjusted ROA is the time-series average of household adjusted ROA over the same
156 months. For columns (5)-(8), unit of observation is household-time window. Each time window consists of 60 months. The window shifts 12 months (1 year) at a
time. There are 9 moving windows in total for each household. Beta is computed from a simple time-series regression of household’s adjusted ROA on township’s ROA
in each corresponding time window. Household’s mean adjusted ROA is the time-series average of household adjusted ROA over the corresponding time window.
Robust standard errors corrected for generated regressors (Shanken 1992) are reported in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Table 2 Risk and Return Regressions with Human Capital and Time-Varying Stochastic Discount Factor: Township as Market

Dependent Variable:                                                             Household’s Mean Return on Assets
Region:                                           Central                     Northeast                       Central                        Northeast
Township (Province):                    Chachoengsao Lopburi           Buriram       Srisaket      Chachoengsao Lopburi             Buriram         Srisaket
                                              (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)               (5)            (6)            (7)             (8)
Beta with respect to                      1.242***      2.233***       0.564***      1.813***         1.094***       2.005***          0.392        1.893***
 return on market physical capital (ra)       (0)           (0)           (0)           (0)               (0)            (0)            (0)             (0)
Beta with respect to                      0.00177         0.0217        -0.0524        0.149          -0.00542         0.0375       -0.0310           0.179
 return on market human capital (rh)          (0)           (0)           (0)           (0)               (0)            (0)            (0)             (0)
Beta with respect to                                                                                  -0.00441        0.00246        0.0333           0.0789
 residual log consumption (cay)                                                                           (0)            (0)            (0)             (0)
Beta with respect to                                                                                  -0.00533        -0.0304         -0.131          -0.101
 the interaction cay*ra                                                                                   (0)            (0)            (0)             (0)
Beta with respect to                                                                                  0.00134       -0.000574        0.0109          -0.0130
 the interaction cay*rh                                                                                   (0)            (0)            (0)             (0)
Constant                                   -0.307*       -0.584**     -0.757***     -1.080***           -0.156       -0.464**      -0.589***       -1.164***
                                           (0.176)        (0.232)       (0.164)       (0.310)          (0.178)        (0.223)        (0.162)         (0.268)
Observations                                1,161          1,260         1,179         1,269            1,161          1,260           1,179          1,269
R-squared                                   0.329          0.203         0.021         0.270            0.315          0.203           0.049          0.306
Remarks Unit of observation is household-time window. For Columns (1)-(4), beta’s are computed from a multivariate time-series regression of household’s
monthly adjusted ROA on township’s monthly return on market physical capital (ra) and township’s return on human capital (ry), which is proxied by the
monthly growth rate of township’s total labor income. Regressions are performed on moving windows of 60 months. The window then shifts 12 months (1 year)
at a time and there are 9 moving windows in total for each household. Household’s mean adjusted ROA is the time-series average of household adjusted ROA
over the corresponding time window. For Columns (5)-(8), similar analysis is performed, with additional explanatory variables. Residual log consumption is the
residual computed from time-series regression of township’s monthly log food consumption on township’s total physical asset at the beginning of the month and
township’s total labor income during that month. Interaction terms are then defined accordingly. Robust standard errors corrected for generated regressors
(Shanken 1992) are reported in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Table 3 Decomposition of Risk and Risk Premium (Median Households by Province)

Region:                                                 Central                                                             Northeast
Township (Province):               Chachoengsao                          Lopburi                             Buriram                           Srisaket
                            p25        p50      p75               p25      p50        p75          p25        p50          p75          p25      p50       p75

                                                                              Panel A: Baseline Specification

                                                                           A.1: Decomposition of Risk (Variance)
Aggregate Risk              0.3%       1.9%       6.1%         0.5%       2.4%      7.7%         1.8%        6.0%         16.0%      11.1%      34.1%     56.2%
Idiosyncratic Risk         93.9%       98.1%      99.7%       92.3%      97.6%      99.5%       84.0%       94.0%         98.2%      43.8%      65.9%     88.9%

                                                                           A.2: Decomposition of Risk Premium
Aggregate Risk             54.6%       78.4%      95.3%       11.3%      38.5%     58.3%       -52.8%     -18.7%          -5.6%      46.1%      71.2%     86.7%
Idiosyncratic Risk          4.7%       21.6%      45.4%       41.7%      61.5%     88.7%       105.6%     118.7%         152.8%      13.3%      28.8%     53.9%


                                                                            Panel B: Robustness Specification

                                                                         B.1: Decomposition of Risk (Variance)
Aggregate Risk             11.0%       15.1%      22.6%        8.4%      12.0%     19.8%       12.9%       20.3%          26.6%      31.1%      45.0%     59.1%
Idiosyncratic Risk         77.4%       84.9%      89.0%       80.2%      88.0%     91.6%       73.4%       79.7%          87.1%      40.9%      55.0%     68.9%

                                                                          B.2: Decomposition of Risk Premium
Aggregate Risk             43.4%       67.4%      93.7%       -2.2%      45.1%      78.8%       -47.0%     11.6%         64.6%       66.7%      80.5%     90.9%
Idiosyncratic Risk          6.3%       32.6%      56.6%       21.2%      54.9%     102.2%       35.4%      88.4%         147.0%       9.1%      19.5%     33.3%

Number of Observations       129         129        129          140         140       140           131          131        131        141        141       141
Remarks Unit of observation is household. Panel A presents the results from a baseline specification, as shown in equation (8), using the empirical results from
Columns (1)-(4) of Table 1. Panel B presents the results from a full robustness specification, as shown in equation (10), using the empirical results from Columns
(5)-(8) of Table 2. The numbers for each household are the average across estimates from nine different time-shifting windows.
Table 4 Aggregate Risk, Idiosyncratic Risk, and Rate of Return: Township as Market

                                                    Panel A: Baseline Specification                            Panel B: Robustness Specification
Dependent Variable:                                    Household’s Mean ROA                                          Household’s Mean ROA
Region:                                           Central                     Northeast                     Central                       Northeast
Township (Province):                    Chachoengsao Lopburi          Buriram       Srisaket    Chachoengsao Lopburi            Buriram          Srisaket
                                              (1)            (2)          (3)           (4)             (5)            (6)         (7)               (8)
Beta with respect to                       0.903***      1.518***       -0.181      1.334***        0.487***       1.105***      0.0137          1.331***
 return on market physical capital (ra)     (0.311)        (0.305)     (0.349)       (0.354)            (0)            (0)         (0)               (0)
Beta with respect to                                                                                0.00598           0.06      -0.0411            0.0799
 return on market human capital (rh)                                                                    (0)            (0)         (0)               (0)
Beta with respect to                                                                                 -0.0117       -0.00401      0.0106            0.0376
 residual log consumption (cay)                                                                         (0)            (0)         (0)               (0)
Beta with respect to                                                                                 -0.0117        0.0245      -0.0686           -0.0560
 the interaction cay*ra                                                                                 (0)            (0)         (0)               (0)
Beta with respect to                                                                                -0.00166      -0.000644     0.00392           -0.0127
 the interaction cay*rh                                                                                 (0)            (0)         (0)               (0)
Sigma                                      0.216***      0.184***     0.131***      0.205***      0.00428*** 0.00467*** 0.00389***             0.00367***
                                           (0.0499)       (0.0362)    (0.0432)      (0.0361)      (0.000689)      (0.000400) (0.000435)        (0.000296)
Constant                                  -1.999***     -3.132*** -1.576*** -2.745***              -0.489***      -1.535*** -1.356***           -1.491***
                                            (0.433)        (0.695)     (0.509)       (0.589)         (0.171)        (0.214)      (0.151)          (0.237)
Observations                                  129            140          131          141            1,161          1,260        1,179            1,269
R-squared                                    0.558          0.280        0.114        0.459           0.433          0.330        0.196            0.446
Remarks Unit of observation is household-time window. Beta’s are computed from a multivariate time-series regression of household’s monthly adjusted ROA
on township’s monthly return on market physical capital (ra) and township’s return on human capital (rh), and township’s residual log consumption (cay).
Township’s return on human capital (ry) is proxied by the monthly growth rate of township’s total labor income. Township’s residual log consumption is the
residual computed from time-series regression of township’s monthly log food consumption on township’s total physical asset at the beginning of the month and
township’s total labor income during that month. Interaction terms are then defined accordingly. Sigma is the variance of error terms from regressions used to
estimate beta’s for each household-time window. Robust standard errors corrected for generated regressors are reported in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1.
Table 5 Idiosyncratic Income, Consumption, Gift, and Lending

                                                                              Net Gift Outflow
Dependent Variable:              Net Gift Outflow       Net Lending                                   Consumption
                                                                              Plus Net Lending
Idiosyncratic Income                  13.02***            27.67***                40.66***               4.857**
                                       (4.795)             (7.507)                 (9.000)               (2.081)
Province-Month Fixed Effects             Yes                 Yes                     Yes                   Yes
Household Fixed Effects                  Yes                 Yes                     Yes                   Yes
Observations                           81,664              81,712                  81,664                81,712
R-squared                               0.011               0.009                   0.009                 0.014
Number of Households                     541                 541                     541                   541
Remarks: Unit of observation is household-month. Net gift outflow is defined as gift outflow minus gift inflow. Net
lending is defined as lending minus borrowing. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1




                                                                             1
Table 6 Determinants of Rate of Returns and Risks

Region                                     Central                     Northeast                                 Central                         Northeast
Province                       Chachoengsao Lopburi            Buriram        Srisaket               Chachoengsao        Lopburi        Buriram          Srisaket
                                              Panel A: Simple Rate of Return                                      Panel B: Risk-Adjusted Rate of Return
Total Initial Wealth            -0.0140**        0.534***       -0.594**     -2.149***                0.0287***         0.711***          -0.323           -0.109
                                 (0.00694)        (0.0791)       (0.255)       (0.323)                 (0.00806)         (0.0691)        (0.262)          (0.192)
Household Size                     -0.0868       -0.729***       -0.0651        -0.144                    0.182        -0.872***          -0.239        -0.577***
                                   (0.177)         (0.249)       (0.169)       (0.228)                   (0.123)          (0.205)        (0.146)          (0.166)
Age of Household Head           -0.0417**         0.00155        0.00627      0.00231                     0.0217         0.0338*        0.0257**        0.0550***
                                  (0.0201)        (0.0211)      (0.0142)      (0.0209)                  (0.0133)         (0.0174)       (0.0125)         (0.0148)
Education of Household Head         -0.115       -0.469***        0.128      -0.492***                    0.209*       -0.368***          0.0896         -0.252**
                                   (0.136)         (0.120)      (0.0823)       (0.133)                   (0.108)          (0.106)       (0.0746)          (0.108)
Household Head Gender (Male=1)      0.590          -0.597       -0.997**      1.710***                -1.580***            -0.291        -0.685*          -0.0355
                                   (0.444)         (0.510)       (0.415)       (0.510)                   (0.345)          (0.369)        (0.386)          (0.401)
Constant                          4.434**         4.472**         0.101       4.636***                   -2.320*           -0.815       -1.911**          -2.299*
                                   (1.815)         (1.766)       (1.103)       (1.791)                   (1.204)          (1.494)        (0.964)          (1.233)
R-squared                           0.014           0.078         0.022         0.084                     0.026            0.128           0.027            0.080

                                                        Panel C: Aggregate Risk                                           Panel D: Idiosyncratic Risk
Total Initial Wealth                   -0.0261***       -0.00532       -0.178***      -0.831***         -6.902***         -34.73***       -68.39***       -239.2***
                                        (0.00397)        (0.0148)       (0.0572)        (0.0935)          (1.087)           (7.917)         (17.98)        (35.16)
Household Size                           -0.141**         0.0543         0.0622        0.224***         -51.43***            23.16          43.24**          27.56
                                         (0.0695)        (0.0491)       (0.0444)        (0.0526)          (19.67)           (17.68)         (18.51)        (26.59)
Age of Household Head                  -0.0482***      -0.0152***       -0.00635      -0.0115**         -9.930***            -1.943       -4.848***       -9.827***
                                         (0.0108)       (0.00479)      (0.00432)       (0.00540)          (2.391)           (1.529)         (1.549)        (2.270)
Education of Household Head             -0.266***         -0.0172       0.000534       -0.111***        -49.46***            -8.927           9.993        -21.49*
                                         (0.0529)        (0.0158)       (0.0187)        (0.0225)          (10.47)           (5.995)         (6.210)         (11.86)
Household Head Gender (Male=1)           1.766***         0.0687        0.304***       0.789***          319.9***            -109.6          -63.05       153.8***
                                          (0.212)         (0.122)       (0.0936)         (0.117)          (48.73)           (77.08)         (46.39)        (58.81)
Constant                                 4.888***       1.574***        0.847***       2.326***          1,081***          648.4***        505.1***       1,038***
                                          (0.918)         (0.366)        (0.313)         (0.429)          (216.8)           (141.2)         (105.9)        (190.6)
R-squared                                  0.080           0.164          0.043           0.169            0.072             0.050            0.041          0.109
Observations                               1,082           1,195          1,100           1,172            1,082             1,195            1,100          1,172
Remarks Unit of observation is household-round (shifting time window). For each household, beta and sigma are estimated from the regression in equation (6). Beta is
the regression coefficient with respect to aggregate return on physical assets (ra). Sigma is the variance of the error terms from the regression. Household size is the
number of household members aged 15-64. Age of household head was as of the end of December 1998. Initial wealth is in million baht. All regressions include village
fixed effects. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Table A.1 Descriptive Statistics of Household Characteristics

                                      Number of                  Percentiles                Number of                     Percentiles
                                     Observations      25th         50th        75th       Observations        25th          50th          75th
Region                                                                                  Central
Township (Province)                                          Chachoengsao                                           Lopburi
As of December 1998:
   Household size                             129             3.0          4.0         6.0              140     3.0            4.0          5.0
      Male                                    129             1.0          2.0         3.0              140     1.0            2.0          3.0
      Female                                  129             1.0          2.0         3.0              140     1.0            2.0          3.0
      Male, age 15-64                         129             1.0          1.0         2.0              140     1.0            1.0          2.0
      Female, age 15-64                       129             1.0          1.0         2.0              140     1.0            1.0          2.0
   Average age                                129            29.3         36.3        44.5              140    25.6           32.3         42.0
   Maximum years of education                 129             6.0          9.0        12.0              140     4.2            6.0          9.0
   Total Assets (Baht)                        129          380,465     1,109,228 3,636,334              140  336,056      1,074,082     2,387,329
156-Month Average (January 1999-December 2011):
   Monthly Income (Baht)                      129           7,561       13,696       23,637             140   5,836          10,486      20,765
   Total Assets (Baht)                        129          857,892     1,745,109 4,275,229              140  653,339      1,645,757     3,052,390
      Fixed Assets (% of Total Assets)        129            37%          61%         80%               140    40%            59%          71%
   Total Liability (Baht)                     129           8,470       31,455      105,216             140   34,595       121,412       285,300
   Liability to Asset Ratio                   129             0%          2%           6%               140     4%             8%          16%
Region                                                                                        Northeast
Township (Province)                                              Buriram                                            Srisaket
As of December 1998:
   Household size                             131             3.0          4.0         5.0              141     4.0            5.0          6.0
      Male                                    131             1.0          2.0         3.0              141     2.0            2.0          3.0
      Female                                  131             1.0          2.0         3.0              141     2.0            2.0          3.0
      Male, age 15-64                         131             1.0          1.0         2.0              141     1.0            1.0          2.0
      Female, age 15-64                       131             1.0          1.0         2.0              141     1.0            1.0          2.0
   Average age                                131            20.9         27.6        39.3              141    25.2           32.0         36.3
   Maximum years of education                 131             4.0          6.0         8.3              141     5.3            7.0         10.3
   Total Assets (Baht)                        131          356,201      572,491     947,314             141  156,313       387,634       881,455
156-Month Average (January 1999-December 2011):
   Monthly Income (Baht)                      131           2,073        3,677       5,584              141   2,160          3,672        5,276
   Total Assets (Baht)                        131          503,434      741,882    1,114,981            141  317,444       577,064      1,048,213
      Fixed Assets (% of Total Assets)        131            39%          57%         69%               141    35%            63%          75%
   Total Liability (Baht)                     131           24,316      56,805      109,264             141   23,471         42,932      75,531
   Liability to Asset Ratio                   131             3%          8%          17%               141     4%             9%          17%
Remarks The unit of observations is household. Average age and maximum years of education across household members within a given household. Assets,
liabilities, and income are in nominal value. Fixed assets include equipment, machinery, building, and land.
Table A.2 Revenue from Production Activities (% by Township)

Region:                                                                 Central                               Northeast
Township (Province):                                     Chachoengsao              Lopburi           Buriram            Srisaket
Production Activities
  Cultivation                                                 13.2%                 39.4%             13.5%              33.7%
  Livestock                                                   21.0%                 22.8%              1.0%               1.1%
  Fish and Shrimp                                             17.6%                 0.0%               0.3%               1.6%
  Non-farm Business                                           28.8%                 19.7%             59.2%              28.6%
  Wage Earning                                                18.4%                 15.2%             22.6%              27.9%
Number of Sampled Households                                   129                   140                131               141
Remarks The unit of observations is township. The percentage of revenue is the revenue of each production activity from all
households in our sample divided by the total revenue from all activities in the township. The revenues are computed from all of the
156 months (January 1999 to December 2011).




Table A.3 Descriptive Statistics of Networks in Village and Township

Region                                                                Central                              Northeast
Township (Province)                                         Chachoengsao        Lopburi            Buriram            Srisaket
Number of Observations                                          129                140               131                 141
% of Households with relatives living in the same...
   Village                                                     50.4%              76.4%             80.9%              87.9%
   Township                                                    87.8%              88.4%             97.1%              94.0%
Remarks The unit of observation is household. Relatives are defined as parents of household head, parents of household head's
spouse, siblings of household head or of household head's spouse, or children of household head. Network variables are computed as
of August 1998 (the initial baseline survey, i.e. Month 0).
Table A.4 Descriptive Statistics of Return on Assets: Quartiles by Township

                               Number of                   Percentiles                   Number of                   Percentiles
                              Observations       25th       50th           75th         Observations       25th        50th           75th

Region:                                                                           Central
Province (Township):                             Chachoengsao                                                  Lopburi
  Mean                             129           -1.72     0.38           3.99               140           -1.67        1.46         4.53
  Standard Deviation               129            4.38     7.56           16.61              140           10.16       16.51         24.77
  Coefficient of Variation         129            2.02     3.14           5.46               140           3.27         4.65         8.85

Region:                                                                          Northeast
Province (Township):                                 Buriram                                                   Srisaket
  Mean                             131           -1.32        0.28         1.56              141            0.21         1.99           4.29
  Standard Deviation               131            8.38       13.92        22.59              141           10.16        16.78          26.87
  Coefficient of Variation         131            4.03        8.70        17.48              141            4.03         5.92          11.52
Remarks Unit of observations is households. ROA is rate of return on household’s total asset, computed by household’s net income (net of
compensation to household labor) divided by household’s average total assets over the month. ROA is real return, adjusted by regional Consumer
Price Index from the Bank of Thailand, and reported in annualized percentage. Mean, standard deviation, and coefficient of variation of ROA are
computed from monthly ROA for each household over 156 months (January 1999 to December 2011). The percentiles are across households in
each township.
Table A.5 Risk and Return Regressions: Village as Market

Dependent Variable:                                                          Household’s Mean ROA
Province:                                      Chachoengsao                                                               Lopburi
Village:                    02               04                07              08                01               03                    04         06
Beta                    2.473***         3.232***          6.741***          0.720              2.163            3.185               4.399***   4.884***
                            (0)              (1)               (2)            (1)                (4)              (3)                   (1)        (1)
Constant                  -1.105           -0.333            -0.739          1.162             -0.827            0.312                 0.257     -1.629
                         (0.899)          (0.756)           (0.821)         (0.984)            (1.434)          (0.873)               (0.572)    (1.503)
Observations                35               36                27              31                34               29                    37         40
R-squared                  0.449            0.702             0.446          0.036              0.012            0.126                 0.472      0.337
Village Returns:
   Monthly Average         1.09             1.48               4.13          0.73               2.03             2.49                  2.48        2.85
   Standard Deviation      0.14             0.08               0.50          0.12               0.17             0.34                  0.14        0.33

Province:                                           Buriram                                                               Srisaket
Village:                    02               10                  13            14                01               06                    09         10
Beta                       0.827           0.547               0.217          0.697           2.759***         3.680***              1.557**     1.902*
                            (1)             (2)                 (1)            (1)               (1)              (2)                   (1)        (1)
Constant                  -0.628           0.346               0.684         -0.541           -2.407**          -0.558                0.735      -1.748
                         (0.417)          (1.197)             (0.831)       (0.688)            (1.172)          (1.661)              (1.001)     (1.907)
Observations                34               28                  34            35                38               42                    39         22
R-squared                  0.022           0.010               0.003          0.014             0.510            0.387                0.114       0.149
Village Returns:
   Monthly Average         -0.14            1.56               0.36          -0.52              -0.57            1.88                  0.87        0.95
   Standard Deviation      0.11             0.14               0.23          0.17                0.16            0.12                  0.13        0.15

Remarks Unit of observations is household. Beta is computed from a simple time-series regression of household adjusted ROA on village ROA over the 156 months
from January 1999 to December 2011. Household’s mean adjusted ROA is the time-series average of household adjusted ROA over the same 156 months. Standard
errors corrected for generated regressors (Shanken 1992) are reported in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Table A.6 Risk and Return Regressions: Network as Market

Dependent Variable:                                         Household’s Mean ROA
Region:                                                            Central
Province:                                                          Lopburi
Village:                        01                            03                     04                      06
Network:                        03                            03                     06                      01
Beta                          -3.088                        3.265                7.366***                5.189***
                             (4.302)                       (4.033)                (2.383)                 (0.881)
Constant                       0.433                        1.523                  0.123                   -1.655
                             (1.448)                       (1.244)                (0.865)                 (1.799)
Observations                    16                            18                     20                      33
R-squared                      0.012                        0.041                  0.464                   0.345
Network Returns:
  Monthly Average              2.03                         2.46                       2.52                 2.85
  Standard Deviation           0.20                         0.41                       0.13                 0.35

Region:                                                            Northeast
Province:                              Buriram                                         Srisaket
Village:                        13                  14                 01               06                   09
Network:                        03                  03                 03               02                   02
Beta                           1.373               0.728           2.842***          3.832**              1.540**
                             (0.988)             (1.046)            (0.722)          (1.484)              (0.618)
Constant                      -0.249              -0.460            -2.205*           -0.452               0.554
                             (0.694)             (0.794)            (1.226)          (1.845)              (1.025)
Observations                    23                  27                 23               37                   36
R-squared                      0.184               0.015             0.365            0.374                0.134
Network Returns:
  Monthly Average              0.38               -0.52             -0.58              1.88                 0.87
  Standard Deviation           0.20               0.16               0.14              0.13                 0.13

Remarks Unit of observations is household. Beta is computed from a simple time-series regression of household’s adjusted
ROA on network’s ROA over the 156 months from January 1999 to December 2011. Household’s mean adjusted ROA is the
time-series average of household adjusted ROA over the same 156 months. Standard errors corrected for generated
regressors (Shanken 1992) are reported in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Table A.7 Descriptive Statistics of Household Alpha: Township as Market

    Province         Number of                       Standard                                        Percentiles
                                        Mean
                    Observations                     Deviation Skewness Kurtosis             25th       50th         75th
                                                Panel A: Return on Assets, Not Adjusted for Risks
Central
 Chachoengsao            129             1.90           6.51         1.14        4.64        -1.72       0.38        3.99
 Lopburi                 140             1.37           6.31        -0.93        5.46        -1.67       1.46        3.16
Northeast
 Buriram                 131             0.30           3.49         0.24        4.79        -1.32       0.28        1.39
 Srisaket                141             2.83           5.87         0.75        5.53         0.21       1.99        4.29

                                          Panel B: Return on Assets, Adjusted for Aggregate Risks
Central
 Chachoengsao            129             0.68           5.52         0.44        5.17        -1.75       -0.15       2.59
 Lopburi                 140             0.28           5.81        -1.47        7.05        -1.98       1.00        3.16
Northeast
 Buriram                 131            -0.28           3.60        -0.02        4.54        -1.94       -0.27       1.39
 Srisaket                141            -0.11           4.84         0.24        5.76        -1.43       -0.08       1.18

                                 Panel C: Return on Assets, Adjusted for Aggregate and Idiosyncratic Risks
Central
  Chachoengsao            129           -0.49         4.52         -0.305        6.09       -2.21        -0.42       1.469
  Lopburi                 140           -1.54         5.27          -1.87        8.12       -3.49        -0.12       1.493
Northeast
  Buriram                 131           -1.36         3.52          -0.73        4.38       -2.75        -0.75       0.54
  Srisaket                141           -1.49         4.16         -0.677        5.70       -2.55        -0.72       0.313
Remarks Unit of observations is households. Panel A reports descriptive statistics of rate of return without adjusting for
any risk (but adjusted for household’s own labor). Panel B report rate of return adjusted for aggregate risks, where risk
premium is computed from market’s mean ROA (ra), market return on human capital (ry), residual consumption (cay),
and their interactions cay*ra and cay*rh, as defined in equation (24) in the text. Panel C report rate of return adjusted for
aggregate risks, where risk premium is computed from market’s mean ROA (ra), market return on human capital (ry),
residual consumption (cay), and their interactions cay*ra and cay*rh, as defined by equation (14b), as well as
idiosyncratic risk from sigma, as defined by equation (15b) in the text. For each household, the return in Panels B and C
is averaged across 9 shifting time windows. *** p<0.01.
