                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   THE OUTPUT AND WELFARE EFFECTS OF GOVERNMENT SPENDING SHOCKS
                      OVER THE BUSINESS CYCLE

                                             Eric Sims
                                           Jonathan Wolff

                                        Working Paper 19749
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19749


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2013




This paper previously circulated as "The Output and Welfare Effects of Fiscal Shocks over the Business
Cycle." We are grateful to Rudi Bachmann, Bob Flood, Tim Fuerst, Robert Lester, Michael Pries,
Jeff Thurk, and seminar participants at Notre Dame, the University of Texas at Austin, the University
of Mannheim, Purdue University, Miami University, Eastern Michigan University, Dickinson College,
Montclair State University, and the Fall 2013 Midwest Macro Meetings for several comments which
have substantially improved the paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Eric Sims and Jonathan Wolff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
The Output and Welfare Effects of Government Spending Shocks over the Business Cycle
Eric Sims and Jonathan Wolff
NBER Working Paper No. 19749
December 2013, Revised July 2015
JEL No. E0,E1,E2,E3,E31,E6,E62

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper studies the state-dependence of the output and welfare effects of shocks to government
purchases in a canonical medium scale DSGE model. When monetary policy is characterized by a
Taylor rule, the output multiplier (the change in output for a one unit change in government spending)
is countercyclical but close to constant across states of the business cycle, whereas the welfare multiplier
(the consumption equivalent change in a measure of aggregate welfare for the same change in government
spending) is quite volatile and procyclical. These results are robust to different means of fiscal finance.
When the nominal interest rate is unresponsive to economic conditions, such as would be the case
at the zero lower bound, both the output and welfare multipliers are larger and move significantly more
across states than under a Taylor rule. The welfare multiplier is still procyclical under passive monetary
policy, albeit less so than under a Taylor rule.


Eric Sims
Department of Economics
University of Notre Dame
723 Flanner Hall
South Bend, IN 46556
and NBER
esims1@nd.edu

Jonathan Wolff
University of Notre Dame
434 Flanner Hall
Notre Dame, IN 46556
jwolff2@nd.edu
1       Introduction
The recent Great Recession has led to renewed interest in fiscal stimulus as a tool to fight recessions.
There nevertheless seems to be a lack of consensus concerning some fundamental questions. How
large is the government spending multiplier? Does it vary in magnitude over the business cycle?
What are the welfare implications of government spending shocks? Is countercyclical government
spending desirable? This paper seeks to provide some answers to these questions.
    We study the effects of government spending shocks in an estimated medium scale New Keyne-
sian dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) model along the lines of Christiano, Eichen-
baum, and Evans (2005) and Smets and Wouters (2007). The model features price and wage
stickiness, capital accumulation, several sources of real inertia, and a number of shocks. It also
includes government spending shocks and a rich fiscal financing structure. The potential benefits of
government spending are modeled by assuming that government spending enters the utility function
of households. Our paper departs from most of the existing literature along two key dimensions.
First, we solve the model via higher order perturbation as opposed to linearization, which allows
us to investigate whether there are important state-dependent effects of changes in government
spending. Second, rather than focusing solely on how government spending shocks affect output,
we also study how changes in government spending impact a measure of aggregate welfare. In
doing so, we adopt the following terminology. We define the “output multiplier” as the change in
output for a one unit change in government spending, which is the standard definition of the fiscal
multiplier. The “welfare multiplier” is defined as the change in aggregate welfare for a one unit
change in government spending, which we express in consumption equivalent units.
    When monetary policy is characterized by a Taylor rule and government spending is financed
via lump sum taxes, the output multiplier is about 0.9 and is close to constant across states.
While we do find that the multiplier is countercyclical in the sense that it co-varies negatively with
the level of output, its movements across states are quantitatively small. The welfare multiplier,
in contrast, is quite volatile across states.1 It tends to be low during recessions and high in
expansions, and its correlation with the level of output is about 0.4. The procyclicality of the
welfare multiplier suggests that countercyclical government spending is undesirable in the model.
When government spending is financed via changes in distortionary tax rates, the output multiplier
is smaller but varies more across states than when government finance comes via lump sum taxes.
While it is robustly countercyclical, the maximum variation in the output multiplier across states
is never more than about 0.1 when fiscal finance comes through changes in distortionary taxes.
    1
    For reasons that will be made clearer in Section 2, it is difficult to identify the sign and magnitude of the welfare
multiplier. We assume that government spending enters household utility in an additively separable way. This
means that the parameters which map government spending into utility are irrelevant for equilibrium dynamics and
therefore impossible to identify empirically. It is therefore not possible to determine whether the welfare multiplier is
on average positive or negative or what its magnitude is. For this reason, our focus is on the state-dependence of the
welfare multiplier, not its absolute magnitude. Our baseline approach is to set the parameter mapping government
spending into utility in such a way as to normalize the welfare multiplier to zero evaluated in the non-stochastic
steady of the model. This normalization does not affect any of our results concerning the state-dependence of the
welfare multiplier.



                                                           1
Distortionary tax finance tends to heighten the procyclicality of the welfare multiplier across states,
making countercyclical government spending even less desirable than under lump sum taxes. The
welfare multiplier is most strongly procyclical conditional on “supply shocks” and is less procyclical
conditional on “demand shocks.”
    Much of the renewed interest in fiscal policy has been driven by the recent period of low
interest rates and the recognition that government spending may be substantially more effective at
stimulating output when monetary policy is in a passive regime (e.g. Krugman, 1998; Eggertson
and Woodford, 2003; and Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo, 2011). We simulate the effects of a
passive monetary policy regime by assuming that the nominal interest rate is pegged at a fixed value
for a number of periods, after which time policy reverts to a Taylor rule. The output multiplier
is larger on average when the interest rate is pegged and can be substantially greater than one.
The welfare multiplier is also larger on average under an interest rate peg relative to the Taylor
rule. Both the output and welfare multiplier are significantly more volatile across states under an
interest rate peg. For example, when the interest rate is pegged for two years, we find that the
output multiplier varies between 0.7 and 1.8. Unlike the case where monetary policy is governed by
a Taylor rule, this suggests that a first order solution method may be inadequate for studying the
output effects of changes in government spending in a passive monetary regime, a point which has
been made elsewhere (e.g. Braun, Koerber, and Waki, 2012). Even though the welfare multiplier
is on average higher when monetary policy is passive, it is still procyclical, although its correlation
with output is less positive than when monetary policy is governed by a Taylor rule. Though a
passive monetary policy regime may be more likely in periods of depressed output, and the welfare
multiplier is on average significantly higher during such periods, the welfare benefits of government
spending arise not from output being low per se but rather from the passivity of monetary policy.
    A robust conclusion from our analysis is that the welfare multiplier is procyclical. This result
casts doubt on the desirability of countercyclical government spending as a general policy pro-
scription, though there may exist some circumstances in which it is welfare-improving to increase
government spending when output is low. A second result is that the output multiplier does not
vary much across states conditional on being in an active monetary policy regime. These con-
clusions are of course dependent upon the nature of the model. We have not attempted to write
down a model where countercyclical government spending is desirable, or a model which delivers
large state-dependent output effects of changes in government spending. Rather, we have simply
taken a canonical workhorse model parameterized to provide a good fit to recent US data and
have investigated the state-dependence of the output and welfare effects of government spending
shocks within that model. A different model, or different assumptions about the details of the
workhorse model, could deliver different results. For example, in our model we assume that gov-
ernment expenditure is unproductive and enters the utility function of households in an additively
separable way. It would be interesting to see how our results might differ if government spending
were productive or if government spending interacted with household utility in different ways, such
as being complementary with private consumption.
    Our paper is related to a growing literature on fiscal policy multipliers. There is a large em-


                                                  2
pirical literature that seeks to estimate fiscal output multipliers using reduced form techniques.
Using orthogonality restrictions in estimated vector auto-regressions (VARs), Blanchard and Per-
otti (2002) identify shocks by ordering government spending first in a recursive identification, and
report estimates of spending multipliers between 0.9 and 1.2. Mountford and Uhlig (2009) use sign
restrictions in a VAR and find a multiplier of about 0.6. Ramey (2011) uses narrative evidence
to construct a time series of government spending “news,” and reports multipliers in the range of
0.6-1.2. This range aligns well with a number of papers that make use of military spending as an
instrument for government spending shocks in a univariate regression framework (see, e.g. Barro,
1981; Hall, 1986 and 2009; Ramey and Shaprio, 1998; Barro and Redlick, 2011; and Eichenbaum
and Fisher, 2005). The bulk of this empirical literature suggests that spending multipliers are in
the neighborhood of 1, which aligns with the average output multiplier in our model under an
active monetary policy regime.
    There is also a limited but growing literature that seeks to estimate state-dependent multipliers
using econometric techniques. A drawback of this approach is that there are limited time series
observations, particularly during periods of economic slack. Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2012)
estimate a regime-switching VAR model and find that the output multiplier is highly countercylical
and as high as 3 during recessions and as low as 0 during expansions. Bachmann and Sims (2012)
and Mittnik and Semmler (2012) also analyze non-linear time series models and reach similar
conclusions. Nakamura and Steinsson (2014) consider a regression model that allows the multiplier
to vary with the level of unemployment, and find that the multiplier is substantially larger when
unemployment is high. Shoag (2015) also finds that the multiplier is higher when the labor market
is characterized by significant slack.
    Ramey and Zubairy (2014) analyze a new historical US data set and estimate a state-dependent
time series model. They find no evidence that the output multiplier varies with the amount of slack
in the economy. This result is broadly consistent with our results for the output multiplier under
a Taylor rule, which we find to be close to constant across states. One criticism they make of the
existing empirical literature on state-dependent multipliers concerns the conversion of elasticities
into multipliers. Most empirical work uses logs of variables, and estimates the elasticity of output
with respect to government spending. This elasticity is then converted to a multiplier by post-
multiplying by the inverse of the average government spending share of output. Ramey and Zubairy
(2014) argue that this approach is likely to make the output multiplier artificially high in recessions
because the government spending share of output is countercyclical. Our analysis suggests that this
criticism is quantitatively important. In particular, if we were to convert elasticities into multipliers
using a fixed government spending share, we would find that the output multiplier varies between
0.8 and 1.1 across states, whereas in fact it is close to constant when monetary policy is characterized
by a Taylor rule.
    Another strand of the literature looks at the magnitude of fiscal multipliers within the context
of DSGE models. Baxter and King (1993) is an early contribution. Zubairy (2014) estimates a
medium-scale DSGE model similar to the one presented in the current paper and finds the output
multiplier to be about 1.1. Coenen, et al (2012) calculate fiscal multipliers in seven popular DSGE


                                                   3
models, and conclude that the output multiplier can be far in excess of one. Cogan, Cwik, Taylor
and Wieland (2010) and Drautzberg and Uhlig (2011) conclude, in contrast, that the multiplier
is likely less than unity. Leeper, Traum, and Walker (2011) use Bayesian prior predictive analysis
not to produce a point estimate for the output multiplier, but rather to provide plausible bounds
on it in a fairly general DSGE model. As noted by Parker (2011), almost all of the work on fiscal
multipliers in DSGE models is based on linear approximations, which necessarily cannot address
the state-dependence of multipliers.
     Another related literature studies the output multiplier and its interaction with the stance of
monetary policy. In particular, there is a growing consensus that the output multiplier can be
substantially larger than normal under a passive monetary policy regime, such as the recent zero
lower bound period. Early contributions in this regard include Krugman (1998), Eggertson and
Woodford (2003), and Christiano (2004). Woodford (2011) conducts analytical exercises in the
context of a conventional New Keynesian model without capital to study the output multiplier,
both inside and outside of a zero lower bound episode. Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2011)
analyze the consequences of the zero lower bound for the government spending multiplier in a
DSGE model and find the multiplier can exceed 2. Though they are mostly focused on the output
multiplier, they do briefly examine welfare, and find that it is optimal to substantially increase
government spending at the zero lower bound. Nakata (2013) reaches a similar conclusion that it
is optimal to increase government spending when the zero lower bound binds. Our analysis echoes
these findings in that we find that the welfare multiplier is on average larger under an interest rate
peg than when monetary policy follows a Taylor rule. Our paper differs from this literature in
emphasizing the heightened state-dependence of both the output and welfare multipliers under a
passive monetary policy regime.
     The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 considers a stripped down version
of the medium scale DSGE model we use for quantitative analysis to try and develop some intuition
for how (if at all) the output and welfare multipliers might vary across states. We derive analytic
expressions for the output and welfare multipliers and discuss different forces at work. A key
insight is that the welfare multiplier ought to be procyclical if the equilibrium is efficient. The
more distorted the equilibrium is, the more countercyclical that distortion is, the larger is the
output multiplier, and the more countercyclical is the output multiplier, the more likely it is for
the welfare multiplier to be countercyclical. Section 3 presents the full medium scale DSGE model
and estimates a subset of its parameters to fit recent US data. Section 4 carries out our primary
quantitative exercises, examining how the output and welfare multipliers vary across states in the
estimated DSGE model. The final section concludes.


2    Intuition in a Simple NK Model
This section seeks to build some intuition for how the output and welfare effects of government
spending shocks might vary over the state of the business cycle. We do so in a simple, textbook
version of the sticky price New Keynesian (NK) model. This framework is a special case of the


                                                  4
more developed model in the next section which features capital, wage rigidity, several sources of
real rigidity, and a variety of shocks. While it is ultimately a quantitative question as to how the
output and welfare effects of government spending shocks vary over states of the business cycle,
the intuition from this section will serve to elucidate several different forces which are at work.
    The subsections below briefly lay out the problems of the different actors, characterize optimal
decision rules, and discuss equilibrium and aggregation. We then use the optimality conditions to
derive analytic expressions for the output and welfare effects of changes in government spending.

2.1   Household
We assume that there exists a representative household who receives utility from consumption and
government spending and disutility from labor via the function U (Ct , Nt , Gt ). The household takes
the time path of government spending as given. The utility function has the following properties:
UC > 0, UCC < 0, UN < 0, UN N ≤ 0, UG > 0, and UGG ≤ 0. For simplicity, assume that flow
utility is additively separable in these arguments, so that the cross-partial derivatives are all zero.
The household maximizes the present discounted value of flow utility subject to a standard flow
budget constraint. It can save in one period riskless bonds which pay nominal interest rate, it :
                                                     ∞
                                                     X
                                     max        E0         β t U (Ct , Nt , Gt )
                                   Ct ,Nt ,Bt
                                                     t=0

                                                      s.t.
                                  Bt − Bt−1                          Bt−1
                           Ct +             ≤ wt Nt + Πt − Tt + it−1
                                      Pt                              Pt
     Here Bt−1 is the stock of bonds with which the household enters a period, wt is the real wage,
Pt is the price level, Πt is lump sum profit distributed from firms, and Tt is a lump sum tax. The
first order conditions for the household problem are:

                                                 λt = UC                                           (1)

                                                −UN = λt wt                                        (2)

                                  λt = β(1 + it )Et λt+1 (1 + πt+1 )−1                             (3)

    Equation (1) shows that the marginal utility of consumption equals the Lagrange multiplier on
the flow budget constraint, which we denote by λt . The standard static labor supply first order
condition is given by (2). The Euler equation for bonds is given by (3), where 1 + πt = PPt−1
                                                                                           t
                                                                                              is the
inflation rate.

2.2   Firms
Production is broken into two sectors. There exist a continuum of firms indexed by j ∈ [0, 1] who
produce output, Yt (j). This differentiated output is transformed into aggregate output, Yt , by a
competitive final goods firm using the bundler:

                                                       5
                                           Z    1            p −1
                                                                              −1
                                                                                 p
                                                                               p
                                    Yt =             Yt (j)    p
                                                                       dj             ,    p > 1             (4)
                                             0

    The parameter p denotes the elasticity of substitution among different goods. Profit maximiza-
tion yields a downward-sloping demand for each variety and an aggregate price index:
                                                                            −p
                                                                  Pt (j)
                                            Yt (j) =                                  Yt                      (5)
                                                                   Pt
                                                              Z    1
                                             1−
                                            Pt p        =              Pt (j)1−p dj                          (6)
                                                               0

    The production function for producers of differentiated goods is linear in labor input, subject
to a common productivity disturbance, At :

                                                     Yt (j) = At Nt (j)                                       (7)

   Firms have some market-power in setting the price of their own good, but are price-takers in
the market for labor. Cost-minimization implies that all firms face the same real marginal cost,
equal to the ratio of the real wage to the marginal product of labor:

                                                                        wt
                                                        mct =                                                 (8)
                                                                        At
    Firms are not freely able to adjust their price each period. There is a 1 − θp , θp ∈ [0, 1),
probability that a firm can change its price in a period. Non-updated prices can be indexed to
lagged inflation at ζp ∈ [0, 1]. Thus, a firm’s price in period t is given by:
                             (
                                 Pt# (j)                                        if Pt (j) chosen optimally
                  Pt (j) =                                                                                    (9)
                                 (1 + πt−1 )ζp Pt−1 (j)                         otherwise
    Firms given the opportunity to update their price will do so to maximize the present discounted
value of flow profits, where discounting is by the stochastic discount factor of the household as well as
the probability that a price chosen in period t will still be charged in the future. It is straightforward
                                                                                                Pt#
to show that all updating firms will choose the same reset price, Pt# . Letting 1 + πt# = Pt−1      denote
reset price inflation, the optimality conditions for updated prices are:

                                                1 + πt#     p x1,t
                                                        =                                                    (10)
                                                1 + πt    p − 1 x2,t

                        x1,t = λt mct Yt + θp βEt (1 + πt )−ζp p (1 + πt+1 )p x1,t+1                       (11)

                       x2,t = λt Yt + θp βEt (1 + πt )ζp (1−p ) (1 + πt+1 )p −1 x2,t+1                     (12)




                                                                   6
2.3   Policy
Monetary policy is set according to a standard Taylor-type rule in which the interest rate reacts to
deviations of inflation from an exogenous target, π ∗ , and to output growth. The exogenous variable
ei,t is a shock to the monetary policy rule and follows a standard normal distribution, with si the
standard deviation of the shock. The steady state nominal interest rate is 1 + i∗ = β −1 (1 + π ∗ ):

            it = (1 − ρi )i∗ + ρi it−1 + (1 − ρi ) (φπ (πt − π ∗ ) + φy (ln Yt − ln Yt−1 )) + si ei,t   (13)

   The parameter 0 ≤ ρi < 1 is a smoothing parameter, and φπ and φy are non-negative coefficients.
We restrict attention to parameter configurations supporting a determinate equilibrium. We assume
that the government issues no debt and balances its budget each period with lump sum taxes.

                                                   Gt = Tt                                              (14)

    Government spending is assumed to follow a stationary AR(1) process in the log, with G∗
the steady state level of spending. The exogenous shock eg,t is drawn from a standard normal
distribution with standard deviation sg :

                       ln Gt = (1 − ρg ) ln G∗ + ρg ln Gt−1 + sg eg,t ,      0 ≤ ρg < 1                 (15)

2.4   Market-Clearing and Equilibrium
Market-clearing requires that the household holds no bonds, that total labor demanded by firms
equals household labor supply, and that firms produce sufficient output to meet demand at their
price. These conditions give rise to a standard aggregate resource constraint and production func-
tion:

                                                Yt = Ct + Gt                                            (16)
                                                         At Nt
                                                  Yt =                                                  (17)
                                                          vtp
    In the production function, vtp is a measure of price dispersion which potentially drives a wedge
between aggregate labor supply and labor used in production by firms. It can be written recursively
in terms of inflation rates:
                                                                                        
                    vtp = (1 + πt )p (1 − θp )(1 + πt# )−p + θp (1 + πt−1 )−p ζp vt−1
                                                                                     p
                                                                                                        (18)

    Using properties of Calvo pricing, the expression for the aggregate price level, (6), can be written
in terms of inflation rates:

                      (1 + πt )1−p = (1 − θp )(1 + πt# )1−p + θp (1 + πt−1 )ζp (1−p )                (19)




                                                         7
   We assume that the exogenous processes for productivity, At , is stationary mean zero AR(1)
processes in the log:

                               ln At = ρa ln At−1 + sa ea,t ,    0 ≤ ρa < 1                          (20)

     Given initial values of endogenous state variables, equations (1)-(3), (8), (10)-(12), (13), and
                                                                                             
(15)-(20), in conjunction with the usual transversality conditions, determine the values of λt , Ct , Nt ,
Gt , wt , it , πt , mct , At , πt# , x1,t , x2,t , Yt , vtp .
     Since there is a representative household, we can define aggregate welfare, Wt , recursively as the
expected presented discounted value of flow utility, given optimally chosen sequences of consumption
and labor and the exogenous sequence of government spending:

                                    Wt = U (Ct , Nt , Gt ) + βEt Wt+1                                (21)

2.5   The Output and Welfare Multipliers
                                                           dYt
We can derive expressions for the “output multiplier,” dG    t
                                                               , and the “welfare multiplier,” dW
                                                                                               dGt , by
                                                                                                 t


totally differentiating the equilibrium conditions about a point (not necessarily the non-stochastic
steady state). The output multiplier is commonly referred to as the fiscal multiplier; we will
typically refer to it as the output multiplier since it is our objective to differentiate between the
output and welfare effects of government spending shocks.
    The expressions for the output and welfare multipliers are given below. Variables without
subscripts denote the point about which the approximation is taken, and it is understood that
the partial derivative functions are dependent on the values of the relevant variables. A complete
derivation and some further discussion is available in the Appendix.


                                                                                d ln vtp
                                                                         
   dYt         −UCC mcA                 UC A        dmct           UN N N
       =         vp           +        vp                +         vp                                (22)
   dGt     −UN N A − UCC mcA     −UN N A − UCC mcA dGt       −UN N A − UCC mcA dGt
         |          {z       } |            {z         } |              {z             }
                  Efficiency                  Inefficiency                     Price Dispersion

                                                     ∞
                                                  X dUt+j
                                         dWt
                                             = Et  βt                                                (23)
                                         dGt          dGt+j
                                                     j=0

                                                   v p dYt          d ln vtp
                                                             
                          dUt
                              = UG − UC + UC + UN          + UN N                                    (24)
                          dGt                      A dGt             dGt
                               |   {z  } |      {z       } |     {z        }
                                 Efficiency       Inefficiency      Price Dispersion

    The welfare multiplier, (23), is simply the expected present discounted value of current and
future “utility multipliers,” given by (24). For building intuition, it suffices to focus on the effect
of changes in government spending on flow utility. There are multiple different ways one might
express these multipliers. In our presentation, the expressions for both the output and utility
multipliers are split into three additive components. We refer to these different components as
“Efficiency,” “Inefficiency,” and “Price Dispersion,” respectively. The efficiency terms show what


                                                     8
each multiplier would equal if prices were flexible and the equilibrium allocation were efficient; in
an efficient, flexible price allocation, real marginal cost and price dispersion would both be one
at all times.2 The inefficiency terms capture the fact that the equilibrium in the sticky price NK
model is distorted, and that changes in government spending can affect both output and utility by
altering the level of distortion in the economy. The price dispersion term captures how changes in
government spending impact output and utility through an effect on price dispersion.
    Focus first on the expression for the output multiplier, (22). If the allocation were efficient,
the inefficiency and price dispersion terms would both be zero, leaving only the efficiency term.
Given assumptions on preferences, this term must be positive and less than one. If we consider
instead an inefficient allocation in which prices are sticky, the terms involving the reactions of real
marginal cost and price dispersion to changes in government spending become relevant. Since the
term multiplying dmcdGt is positive, an increase in government spending that increases real marginal
                       t


cost results in a larger output multiplier relative to the flexible price case. How exactly marginal
cost reacts to a change in government spending is of course dependent on the exact nature of
the monetary policy rule; for most plausible specifications of monetary policy, marginal cost rises
when government spending increases. This means that the output multiplier ought to be bigger
the stickier are prices. Considering now the price dispersion component, we see that the term
multiplying the response of log price dispersion to government spending is negative. This means
that if an increase in government spending raises price dispersion then the output multiplier would
be smaller than if price dispersion were fixed. For most plausible specifications of monetary policy,
increases in government spending will raise the inflation rate. In an inflationary state, an increase
in inflation raises price dispersion, while the reverse would be true in a deflationary state. In the
region of a zero inflation state, d ln vtp ≈ 0, and this term could be ignored altogether.
    It is not particularly straightforward to use (22) to make any concrete predictions about how the
output multiplier will vary across states. Any state-dependence of the output multiplier will depend
on the third derivatives of the utility function, UCCC and UN N N , as well as any non-linear reactions
of real marginal cost and price dispersion to changes in government spending. The reactions of
real marginal cost and price dispersion in turn depend on the monetary policy rule as well as other
details of the model. We leave it as an open quantitative question for the next section how (if at
all) the output multiplier moves across states.
    Focus next on the expression for the utility multiplier, (24). The first term is simply the
difference between the marginal utilities of government spending and private consumption, and is
what the utility multiplier would equal in an efficient allocation. The second term is the product
of the output multiplier and a term which measures the level of inefficiency in the economy. If the
allocation were efficient, then the marginal utility of consumption would equal the marginal utility
of labor divided by the marginal product of labor, and this term would equal zero. In the NK
model absent some kind of tax subsidy, the equilibrium allocation is inefficient due to monopolistic
competition and price rigidity, so this term will typically be positive. The final term is a function
of the reaction of price dispersion to a change in government spending. Given assumptions on
  2
      This would obtain if p → ∞ (so that firms have no market power) and θp = 0 (so that prices are fully flexible).


                                                           9
preferences, the term multiplying the reaction of price dispersion is negative.
    Without knowing the function mapping government spending into utility, it is impossible to
sign the utility multiplier – it could be highly positive if Gt is very low or negative if Gt is high.
We can, however, use this expression to think about state-dependence in the utility multiplier.
In recessions the marginal utility of consumption is high. Other things being equal, this would,
through the efficiency term, tend to make the utility multiplier relatively low in a recession and high
in an expansion, i.e. procyclical. Focus next on the inefficiency term. Empirically, the US economy
appears to be relatively inefficient in recessions (i.e. the labor wedge, as defined in Chari, Kehoe,
                                                                                            p
and McGrattan, 2007, is countercylical). This would tend to make the term UC + UN vA relatively
big in a downturn. Since the output multiplier is positive, this countercylical level of inefficiency
would work in the opposite direction of the efficiency term, working to make the utility multiplier
                                                                p
countercyclical. Also, given a positive value of UC + UN vA , any state-dependence in the output
multiplier would work to make the utility multiplier move in the same direction as the output
multiplier. Finally, the price dispersion term would have effects on the utility multiplier similar
as in the case of the output multiplier. In the region of a zero inflation state, price dispersion is
second order and this term equals zero. In an inflationary state, increases in government spending
will raise price dispersion which would work to lower the utility multiplier and vice-versa.
    Given the different forces at work it is difficult to draw any concrete general conclusions from
these analytic expressions for the output and utility multipliers. It is ultimately a quantitative
question as to how much (if at all) these multipliers vary over the business cycle, a task we take
up next in a more empirically realistic version of this model with capital accumulation and several
other features. Before proceeding, we can, however, use these analytic expressions to make a few
predictions. First, if the allocation is close to efficient, then the utility multiplier (and hence the
welfare multiplier) ought to be procyclical. Second, the utility multiplier (and hence the welfare
multiplier), will be less procyclical (i) the more countercyclical is the overall level of distortion
in the economy, (ii) the bigger is the output multiplier, and (iii) the more countercyclical is the
output multiplier. Third, through the dispersion terms, one might expect both the output and
welfare multipliers to co-vary negatively with the inflation rate; though some caution is in order
with this conclusion, as the inflation rate might be correlated with other terms in the expressions
not related to the dispersion effect. Fourth, the co-movement of the welfare multiplier with output
ought to depend on the kind of shock responsible for output being high or low. In particular, we
would expect adverse “demand shocks” to be associated with low output, a relatively inefficient
allocation, and low inflation.3 A relatively inefficient allocation would mean that the “Inefficiency”
term in the utility multiplier expression would be relatively strong, while low inflation means that
the inflation generated by an increase in government spending would lower price dispersion. Both
of these effects would tend to make the welfare multiplier relatively high when output is low. The
reverse would be true if output is low due to adverse “supply shocks.” We would therefore expect
the welfare multiplier to be most procyclical conditional on supply shocks and less so conditional
   3
     We adopt the common terminology and think of a “demand shock” as a shock which moves output and inflation
in the same direction and a “supply shock” as a shock which moves output and inflation in opposite directions.


                                                     10
on demand shocks.


3     A Medium Scale DSGE Model
This section considers a “medium scale” dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) model,
similar to the models in Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005) and Smets and Wouters (2007).
The model can be thought of as an extension of the simple NK model in the previous section to
include capital, wage rigidity, some sources of real inertia, and several more shocks. The model
also allows for a more general treatment of fiscal finance. Where different from the simpler model,
we describe the decision problems and optimality conditions characterizing the equilibrium. We
then estimate the model using Bayesian maximum likelihood so as to have a realistic parameter
configuration before quantitatively investigating the state-dependence of the output and welfare
multipliers.

3.1   Households
Rather than a representative household as in Section 2, there exist a continuum of households
indexed by h ∈ [0, 1]. These households supply differentiated labor to a labor “bundling” firm
which produces a homogeneous labor input that is used in production. The technology which
bundles heterogenous labor input is given by:
                                     Z    1                          w−1
                                                        w −1          w
                              Nt =             Nt (h)    w       dh         ,   w > 1           (25)
                                       0

    Nt (h) denotes labor from household h and Nt is aggregate labor input. The parameter w > 1
is the elasticity of substitution among different varieties of labor. Profit-maximization gives rise to
a downward-sloping demand curve for each variety of labor:
                                                                    −w
                                                         wt (h)
                                      Nt (h) =                              Nt                    (26)
                                                          wt
   Here wt (h) is the real wage charge by household h and wt is the aggregate real wage. The zero
profit-condition for the labor bundler implies an aggregate real wage index:
                                                    Z        1
                                      wt1−w =                   wt (h)1−w dh                    (27)
                                                         0

    Households have identical preferences which are additively separable in consumption, labor, and
government spending, the latter of which the households take as given. Households are subject to
Calvo type wage rigidity as in Erceg, Henderson, and Levin (2000). Each period, there is a 1 − θw
probability that a household can adjust its nominal wage, with θw ∈ [0, 1). Non-updated wages
may be indexed to lagged inflation at ζw ∈ [0, 1]. We assume that households have access to a
full set of state-contingent securities which insure them against idiosyncratic wage risk arising from
imperfect wage flexibility. Given separability between consumption and labor, this means that all


                                                             11
households will make identical non-labor choices. As such, we suppress formal dependence on h
in writing the household problem with the exception of labor and wage variables. The fact that
preferences are separable in government spending implies that while government spending affects
utility, the manner in which it does so will be irrelevant for household behavior and equilibrium
allocations.
    The household problem can be written:
                                                       ∞
                                                                                          Nt (h)1+χ
                                                       X                                                 
                          max                     E0         β t νt ln(Ct − bCt−1 ) − ψξt           + ϕGt
            Ct ,It ,ut ,Kt+1 ,Bt ,wt (h),Nt (h)                                            1+χ
                                                       t=0

                                                                 s.t.
                       Bt                                                                       Bt−1
   (1 + τtc )Ct + It +    ≤ (1 − τtk )Rt ut Kt + (1 − τtn )wt (h)Nt (h) + Πt − Tt + (1 + it−1 )                  (28)
                       Pt                                                                        Pt
                                                      
                                                    It
                             Kt+1 = Zt 1 − S                It + (1 − δ(ut ))Kt                                  (29)
                                                   It−1
                                                    wt (h) −w
                                                          
                                         Nt (h) =                 Nt                                             (30)
                                                       wt
                      (
                        wt# (h)                                     if wt (h) chosen optimally
             wt (h) =              ζ           −1
                                                                                                                 (31)
                        (1 + πt−1 ) (1 + πt ) wt−1 (h)
                                     w                              otherwise

    The household discounts future utility flows by β ∈ (0, 1). The parameter b ∈ [0, 1) is a measure
of internal habit formation. The Frisch labor supply elasticity is given by the inverse of χ ≥ 0,
and ψ > 0 is a scaling parameter. The parameter ϕ ≥ 0 scales the utility households receive from
government spending. We assume that government spending enters utility linearly.4 The exogenous
variables νt and ξt are preference shocks with mean one, the former an intertemporal preference
shock which impacts the relative discounting of future utility flows and the latter a labor supply
shock.
    The flow budget constraint is given by (28). Consumption is denoted by Ct , physical capital
by Kt , investment in new physical capital by It , and utilization of capital by ut . The household
enters a period with a stock of nominal bonds, Bt−1 , which pay out nominal interest rate it−1 . The
price level is Pt . Households lease capital services, the product of utilization and physical capital,
to firms at competitive real rental rate Rt . Lump sum profit distributed to households by firms is
given by Πt , while Tt is a lump sum tax paid to the government. The variables τtc , τtk , and τtn are
distortionary and potentially time-varying consumption, capital, and labor taxes, respectively.
    The capital accumulation equation is given by (29). The exogenous variable Zt is an exogenous
shock to the marginal efficiency of investment. S(·) is an investment adjustment cost as in Chris-
tiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005) and δ(·) is a time-varying depreciation rate on capital as a
function of utilization. We assume that these functions are given by:
   4
    We have also experimented with allowing curvature in the function mapping government spending into utility.
This has very little effect on the co-movements of the welfare multiplier across states. The reason is simple – in the
data, government spending is not very volatile and acylical, so assuming a constant marginal utility of government
spending is fairly innocuous.


                                                                  12
                                                                        2
                                              It          κ        It
                                     S                  =                −1 ,       κ≥0                (32)
                                             It−1         2       It−1
                                                                   δ2
                            δ(ut ) = δ0 + δ1 (ut − 1) +               (ut − 1)2 ,   δ0 , δ1 , δ2 > 0   (33)
                                                                   2
    Constraint (30) requires that a household’s labor supply meet demand, given the household’s
real wage, wt (h). Constraint (31) describes wage-setting. The variable wt (h)# is the optimal wage
that a household given the opportunity to adjust its wage would choose. For non-labor choices, the
optimality conditions, which are common across all households, are:

                                                        1                      1
                              (1 + τtc )λt = νt                − βbEt νt+1                             (34)
                                                    Ct − bCt−1             Ct+1 − bCt
                                         λt = β(1 + it )Et λt+1 (1 + πt+1 )−1                          (35)

                               (1 − τtk )λt Rt = µt (δ1 + δ2 (ut − 1))                        (36)
                              h                                                i
                                            k
                      µt = βEt λt+1 (1 − τt+1  )Rt+1 ut+1 + (1 − δ(ut+1 ))µt+1                (37)
             "              2                         #
                                                                                       It+1 2
                                                                                     
                  κ   It                It          It                       It+1
 λ t = µt Z t 1 −         −1 −κ              −1          + βEt µt+1 Zt+1 κ        −1          (38)
                  2 It−1              It−1        It−1                        It        It

    In these conditions λt is the Lagrange multiplier on the flow budget constraint and µt is the
multiplier on the capital accumulation equation. In terms of labor supply and wage-setting, it is
straightforward to show that all households given the opportunity will adjust to the same real wage,
wt# . It is given by:

                                                       w f1,t
                                                        wt# =                                          (39)
                                                    w − 1 f2,t
                           !w (1+χ)                   #
                                                          !w (1+χ)              −w (1+χ)
                       wt              1+χ           wt+1             (1 + πt )ζw
      f1,t   = νt ξt ψ               Nt    + βθw Et                                          f1,t+1    (40)
                       wt#                            wt#              1 + πt+1
                                         !w                #
                                                                !w              1−w
                                n    wt                   wt+1        (1 + πt )ζw
                f2,t = λt (1 − τt )          Nt + βθw Et                                 f2,t+1        (41)
                                     wt#                  wt#          1 + πt+1

3.2     Firms
As in the simpler model, production is broken into two sectors, with a representative final goods
producer and a continuum of intermediate producers indexed by j ∈ [0, 1]. The final goods sector
is identical to the simpler model, generating the same downward-sloping demand for each variety
of intermediate good, (5), and the price index, (6).
    The production function for the producer of variety j is given by:
                                       n                            o
                                           b t (j)α Nt (j)1−α − F, 0 ,
                           Yt (j) = max At K                                            0<α<1          (42)



                                                                  13
    This production function differs from the simpler model along three dimensions: (i) capital
services, K
          b t , or the product of physical capital and utilization, is a factor of production; (ii) there
are diminishing returns in labor; and (iii) there is a fixed cost to production, F . At is again an
exogenous productivity shock common to all firms. These firms are price-takers in the markets for
labor and capital services. Cost-minimization implies that all firms have the same real marginal
cost and hire capital services and labor in the same ratio:

                                                  wt1−α Rtα
                                    mct =                   (1 − α)α−1 α−α                              (43)
                                                     At
                                                  K
                                                  bt     α wt
                                                     =                                                  (44)
                                                  Nt   1 − α Rt
   Firms are not freely able to adjust their price in each period in exactly the same way as in the
simpler model. The pricing problem and optimal decision rules are identical to that setup, given
by equations (9)-(12) from the previous section.

3.3   Policy
We assume that monetary policy is characterized by the same Taylor rule as in the previous section,
(13). Different from the simpler model, we allow for a more general treatment of fiscal finance. The
government budget constraint is:
                                        Z    1
                    Bg,t−1                                                                Bg,t Bg,t−1
          Gt + it−1        = τtc Ct +            τtn wt (h)Nt (h)dh + τtk Rt K
                                                                             b t + Tt +       −         (45)
                     Pt                  0                                                Pt    Pt
     Bg,t−1 is the stock of nominal debt with which the government enters period t. We define
       B
bg,t = Pg,t t
              as real debt. Government expenditure plus interest payments on outstanding debt must
equal tax collections plus issuance of new debt. The tax instruments follow AR(1) processes with a
non-negative response to the deviation of real government debt from an exogenous long run target
level, b∗g . We assume that there are no exogenous shocks to the tax rates. Some or all of the tax
instruments must react sufficiently to debt so as to satisfy a condition that the path of government
debt be non-explosive:

                          τtc = (1 − ρc )τ c + ρc τt−1
                                                   c
                                                       + (1 − ρc )γc (bg,t−1 − b∗g )                    (46)

                         τtn = (1 − ρn )τ n + ρn τt−1
                                                  n
                                                      + (1 − ρn )γn (bg,t−1 − b∗g )                     (47)

                         τtk = (1 − ρk )τ k + ρk τt−1
                                                  k
                                                      + (1 − ρk )γk (bg,t−1 − b∗g )                     (48)

                        Tt = (1 − ρT )T + +ρT Tt−1 + (1 − ρT )γT (bg,t−1 − b∗g )                        (49)

    τ c , τ n , τ k , and T are the steady state values of the tax rates. The autoregressive parameters
are restricted such that 0 ≤ ρl < 1, for l = c, n, k, T , and the coefficients on lagged debt must
be non-negative, γl ≥ 0, for l = c, n, k, T . Government spending is assumed to follow the same
stationary AR(1) process in the log as in the simpler model, given by (15).


                                                         14
3.4      Market-Clearing and Equilibrium
Market-clearing requires that households hold all government debt and that firms meet demand at
their prices. These conditions give rise to a standard aggregate resource constraint and production
function:5

                                                 Yt = C t + I t + G t                                             (50)
                                                            b α N 1−α
                                                         At Kt    t
                                                  Yt =                                                            (51)
                                                              vtp
    In the production function vtp is a measure of price dispersion which potentially drives a wedge
between aggregate factor supply and factors used in production by firms. It is given by the same
process as in the simpler model of Section 2, (18). The expression for the evolution of aggregate
inflation is also the same as in the simpler model, given by (19). K  b t is the aggregate supply of
capital services and is given by:

                                                     K
                                                     b t = ut Kt                                                  (52)

       Using properties of Calvo wage-setting, the real wage index can be written:
                                                                                           1−w
                                                                      (1 + πt−1 )ζw
                                                                  
                          wt1−w   = (1 −   θw )wt#,1−w   + θw                     wt−1                          (53)
                                                                         1 + πt
   Given the demand curve for each variety of labor and the real wage index, the integral in the
government budget constraint can be eliminated, leaving:



         Gt + it−1 bg,t−1 (1 + πt )−1 = τtc Ct + τtn wt Nt + τtk Rt K
                                                                    b t + Tt + bg,t − bg,t−1 (1 + πt )−1          (54)

    We assume that process for exogenous productivity is the same as in the simpler model, (20).
We assume that the investment shock, Zt , and the two preference shocks, νt and ξt , all follow
stationary mean zero AR(1) processes in the log:

                                    ln Zt = ρz ln Zt−1 + sz ez,t ,        0 ≤ ρz < 1                              (55)

                                     ln νt = ρν ln νt−1 + sν eν,t ,      0 ≤ ρν < 1                               (56)

                                     ln ξt = ρξ ln ξt−1 + sξ eξ,t ,      0 ≤ ρξ < 1                               (57)

       In total, the model has six stochastic shocks – shocks to productivity; the marginal efficiency of
   5
    It is common to model the cost of capital utilization as a resource cost, for example as in Christiano, Eichenbaum,
and Evans (2005), as opposed to faster depreciation as we do here. Earlier versions of this paper used the resource
cost specification and our results concerning state-dependence are similar. The advantage of this specification, aside
from being more consistent with the NIPA accounts, is that the output multiplier cannot exceed unity if the sum of
consumption and investment does not rise after an increase in government spending, which is not true when utilization
appears in the aggregate resource constraint.


                                                           15
investment; an intertemporal preference shock, νt ; an intratemporal labor supply shock, ξt ; a mone-
tary policy shock, and the government spending shock. Given initial values of the endogenous state
variables, equations (10)-(13), (15), (18)-(20), (29), (34)-(41), (43)-(44), (46)-(52), and (53)-(57),
along with the usual transversality conditions, determine the values of Ct , It , ut , Kt , Gt , νt , ξt , τtc , τtn ,
                                                                                                          

τtk , Rt , it , πt , λt , µt , wt# , wt , Nt , f1,t , f2,t , mct , K
                                                                   b t , π # , x1,t , x2,t , Tt , bg,t , Yt , v p , Zt , At .
                                                                          t                                    t


3.5     Estimation
Our approach is to first calibrate a number of parameters that are closely tied to long run moments
of the data. We then estimate the remaining parameters via Bayesian maximum likelihood.
    As a benchmark, we assume that all distortionary taxes are constant at zero, which implies
that the exact mix between lump sum tax and bond finance is irrelevant. We can thus ignore the
parameters governing the tax processes altogether, and do not need to specify the steady state
level of government debt.6 While this is undoubtedly unrealistic, it is fairly common to ignore
distortionary tax rates in estimation of medium scale DSGE models. We will consider robustness
to different financing regimes below.
    Other calibrated parameters include β, α, δ0 , δ1 , δ2 , p , w , ψ, π ∗ , F, G∗ . These values are
                                            

shown in Table 1. We set β = 0.995 and α = 1/3. The elasticity of substitution among goods and
labor are set to p = w = 11, which implies steady state price and wage markups of 10 percent.
We set δ0 = 0.025 and then pick δ1 so as to normalize steady state utilization to unity. We set
δ2 = 0.01, which implies that utilization is highly volatile and is consistent with a number of other
studies. The scaling parameter on the disutility of labor is set to ψ = 6, which implies steady
state labor hours between 0.3 and 0.5 for plausible values of other parameters; to first order, this
parameter is irrelevant for dynamics and only serves to scale variables. We assume zero trend
inflation; alternatively, we could have assumed complete wage and price indexation to a non-zero
level of trend inflation. The fixed cost, F , is set so that profits are zero in steady state. The steady
state value of government spending is chosen so that the the steady state ratio of government
spending to output is 0.20. Because utility from government spending is additively separable, the
parameter ϕ is irrelevant for equilibrium dynamics and need not be specified for the estimation.
    The remaining parameters are estimated using Bayesian maximum likelihood. The observ-
able variables in our estimation are the quarterly growth rates of output, consumption, and hours
worked per capita, as well as the levels of the inflation rate, the nominal interest rate, and the
government-spending output ratio. Nominal output is defined as the headline NIPA number, nom-
inal consumption is constructed as the the sum of non-durables and services consumption, and
nominal government spending is measured as government consumption expenditures and gross in-
vestment. We use the GDP implicit price deflator to transform the nominal series into real, and
also divide by the civilian non-institutionalized population aged sixteen and over to put them in
per capita terms. The inflation rate is defined as the log first difference of the GDP deflator. The
   6
   Without distortionary taxes it is without loss of generality to set Tt = Gt , so that none of the parameters of the
lump sum tax processes need be given values.



                                                            16
hours series is total hours worked in the non-farm business sector expressed in per capita units.
The interest rate is measured by the three month Treasury Bill rate. The sample period is 1984q1-
2008q3. The beginning date is chosen because of the sharp break in volatility in the early 1980s
associated with the “Great Moderation” while the end date is chosen so as to exclude the zero
lower bound period.
    The prior and posterior distributions of the estimated parameters are shown in Table 2. Overall
the estimated parameters seem quite reasonable and are generally in line with the existing literature.
The estimated model generates second moments that are close to their empirical counterparts. In
terms of accounting for business cycle dynamics, the shock to the marginal efficiency of investment
is the most important shock, accounting for 55 percent of the unconditional variance of output
growth. This is in line with Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti (2010). The productivity shock
is much less important, accounting for a little less than 10 percent of the variance of output growth.
The labor supply preference shock explains about 25 percent of the variance of output growth. The
intertemporal preference and government spending shocks each account for roughly 5 percent of
the variance of output growth. The monetary policy shock accounts for only 1 percent of the
unconditional variance of output growth.


4    Quantitative Analysis
In this section we conduct quantitative analysis on the estimated model. We compute output and
welfare multipliers at different points in the state space and analyze how they vary across the
business cycle. We also consider the effects of an interest rate peg (meant to capture the effects of
the zero lower bound) as well as different means of government finance.
    To compute the welfare multiplier we must first specify a measure of aggregate welfare. Unlike
the representative household model in Section 2, this is not completely innocuous because of the
heterogeneity among households due to staggered wage-setting. We define welfare at time t for a
particular household, Vt (h), as the present discounted value of flow utility given optimizing behavior.
This can be written recursively:

                                                    Nt (h)1+χ
                                                                  
                  Vt (h) = νt ln(Ct − bCt−1 ) − ψξt           + ϕGt + βEt Vt+1 (h)                      (58)
                                                     1+χ
                                                                                           Z    1
    We define aggregate welfare, Wt , as the sum of welfare of across agents, i.e. Wt =             Vt (h)dh.
                                                                                            0
This can be written in terms of aggregate variables:
                              "                                       #
                                                             1+χ
                                                           N
                    Wt = νt       ln(Ct − bCt−1 ) − ψξt vtw t    + ϕGt + βEt Wt+1                       (59)
                                                           1+χ

    In this expression vtw is a measure of wage dispersion. It can be written:




                                                   17
                                           !−w (1+χ)                                   −w (1+χ)
                                     wt#                           wt−1 (1 + πt−1 )ζw
                                                               
                 vtw   = (1 − θw )                      + θw                                          w
                                                                                                     vt−1          (60)
                                     wt                             wt     1 + πt

When solving the model, we simply include (59) and (60) as equilibrium conditions and analyze
how Wt reacts to changes in government spending.
     Given the calibrated and estimated parameters from the previous section (we use the mode of
the posterior distribution), we solve the model using either a second or third order approximation
about the non-stochastic steady state. In a higher order approximation impulse response functions
to shocks will depend on the initial value of the state vector, st−1 . We compute impulse responses of
output and aggregate welfare to a government spending shock at different points in the state space
via simulation. The initial states from which the impulse responses are computed are either the
non-stochastic steady state (which can be solved for analytically) or are produced via simulating
states using the policy functions. Formally, the impulse response function of a vector of endogenous
variables xt to shock m is IRFm (h) = {Et xt+h − Et−1 xt+h | st−1 , ebm,t = em,t + sm }, where h ≥ 0 is
the forecast horizon. Numerically, we compute the impulse responses as follows. Given an initial
value of the state, st−1 , we compute two sets of simulations of the endogenous variables using the
same draws of shocks. In one simulation we add sm to the realization of shock m in period t. We
compute the simulations out to a forecast horizon of H, which we set to 20. We repeat this process
T times, average over the realized values of the endogenous variables at forecast horizons up to H,
and take the difference between the average simulations with and without the extra sm shock in
period t. We use a value of T = 150.
                             dYt
     The output multiplier, dG  t
                                  , is defined as the change in output for a one unit change in govern-
ment spending. We compute the multiplier by taking the ratio of the impulse response of output
on impact to the impact response of government spending to a spending shock (“impact” meaning
h = 0). For most specifications of the model, the impact response of output corresponds to the
largest response to a spending shock at any forecast horizon. The welfare multiplier is defined as
dWt
 dGt . We compute the welfare multiplier as the impact response of aggregate welfare to the impact
response of government spending to a spending shock. To make the units of the welfare multiplier
interpretable and comparable to the output multiplier, we divide this by the steady state marginal
utility of consumption. This gives the welfare multiplier the interpretation as the units of steady
state consumption households would have to be given in one period to produce an equivalent change
in welfare as the spending shock.7
     The parameter ϕ, which scales the utility households receive from government spending, is
irrelevant for equilibrium output dynamics but is critical in terms of scaling the magnitude of the
welfare multiplier. Since there is no way to identify the value of this parameter, we choose its value
so as to normalize the welfare multiplier evaluated in the steady state to zero. In this way we can
   7
     An alternative would be to divide by the marginal utility of consumption at a particular point in the state
space. We have done this and our results are similar. Our preference for using the steady state marginal utility of
consumption is because the ultimate object of interest is dW
                                                          dGt
                                                             t
                                                               . The division by marginal utility of consumption is just
to re-scale the multiplier and give it more interpretable units, and it makes most sense to re-scale by a fixed factor
(steady state marginal utility) as opposed to a time-varying factor (marginal utility in a particular state).


                                                          18
think of government spending as being optimal in the steady state in the sense that a small change
in government spending has no effect on welfare. This normalization does not affect any of our
results concerning the movements in the welfare multiplier across different states.

4.1   Baseline Results
Table 3 shows output and welfare multipliers in three different states. We show these numbers
for both a second order and third order approximation. The rows labeled “Steady State” show
multipliers when the economy initially sits in the non-stochastic steady state. The rows labeled
“Recession” and “Expansion” show multipliers in “typical” recessions and expansions. To generate
these states we simulate 10,000 periods and average over realizations of the state when output is
in its lower and upper 20th percentiles, respectively. We then compute multipliers starting from
these average realizations of the state.
     In the non-stochastic steady state the output multiplier is 0.91 and the welfare multiplier is,
by construction, 0. In a typical recession the output multiplier is slightly higher than 0.91 and it
is slightly lower than 0.91 in a typical expansion, suggesting that the output multiplier is coun-
tercyclical. Nevertheless, the differences in the output multiplier in the three different states are
very small. In contrast, the welfare multiplier is negative in a typical recession and positive in a
typical expansion (-0.21 in a typical recession and 0.19 in a typical expansion under a second order
approximation). This is suggestive that the welfare multiplier is procyclical and significantly more
volatile than the output multiplier. There is little important difference in the values of either the
output or welfare multipliers across second or third order approximations.
     Table 4 shows some statistics on the output and welfare multipliers from a simulation. For this
exercise we simulate 10,000 periods starting from the non-stochastic steady state. At each point
in the simulated state space we compute the output and welfare multipliers. For the purposes of
generating these statistics the first 100 periods of the simulation are dropped so as to limit the
influence of the assumed starting position of the state. We again conduct this exercise for both a
second and third order approximation.
     We focus first on the results from the second order approximation. The mean output multiplier
across simulations is 0.91, very close its value evaluated in the steady state. The output multiplier
is close to constant – its standard deviation is 0.0037, with a minimum value of 0.89 and a maximum
value of 0.93. The average welfare multiplier is -0.015, slightly below its steady state value. It is two
orders of magnitude more volatile than the output multiplier, with a standard deviation of 0.30, a
minimum value of about -1, and a maximum of about 1. The output multiplier is countercyclical
– its correlation with the simulated level of output is -0.4. The welfare multiplier, in contrast,
is procyclical, with a correlation with output of about 0.4. The two multipliers are negatively
correlated with each other (correlation of -0.3), and both multipliers are negatively correlated with
the inflation rate, the welfare multiplier more strongly so than the output multiplier.
     The results using a third order approximation are qualitatively similar to those from a second
order solution. Both multipliers are slightly more volatile under a third order approximation,


                                                   19
though the differences are not large. The cyclicalities of the multipliers are virtually identical as in
the second order approximation. The distribution of both multipliers is slightly skewed to the left
under the third order approximation, with the minimum and maximum values of both multipliers
smaller relative to the second order approximation. In particular, the skewness coefficients of the
output and welfare multipliers in the third order approximation are -0.45 and -0.35, respectively,
whereas the skewness coefficients in the second order approximation are both approximately zero.
    Figure 1 plots the simulated values of the output and welfare multiplier over the first 1000
periods of the simulation used to generate the statistics in Table 4. The gray shaded regions are
“recessions” defined to be periods when output is in its bottom 20th percentile. Focusing on the
axis scaling it is clear that the output multiplier moves very little while the welfare multiplier is
quite volatile. During most of the periods identified as recessions the output multiplier is high and
tends to rise. In contrast, the welfare multiplier tends to be low in recessions.
    Interestingly, the elasticity of output with respect to government spending, dd ln    ln Yt
                                                                                            Gt , is quite
                                                                                            dYt
volatile and countercyclical across states, much more so than the output multiplier, dGt . Ramey
and Zubairy (2014) note that empirical work on state-dependent multipliers often computes elas-
ticities and converts them to multiplier form by post-multiplying by the average ratio of output to
government spending. They argue that this approach is likely to overstate the movements in the
                                            Yt
multiplier across states. This is because G   t
                                                is countercyclical, so post-multiplying by the average
ratio biases the output multiplier up in a recession and down in an expansion. Our analysis confirms
that this criticism is likely to be quantitatively important. In particular, if we were to compute
multipliers by converting elasticities using the average output-spending ratio, the output multiplier
would range between about 0.8 and 1.1 across states, when in fact the actual multiplier is close to
constant.
    Even though the medium scale DSGE model is markedly more complicated than the simple
NK model, we can nevertheless tie the quantitative results concerning the state-dependence of
the output and welfare multipliers back to the intuition developed in Section 2.8 Although the
model features significant time-varying distortions resulting from monopoly power and price and
wage stickiness, the basic intuition from a simple efficient allocation seems to carry over, with the
welfare multiplier procylical. Both multipliers are negatively correlated with the inflation rate,
consistent with the intuition from the price dispersion terms in (22) and (24). The fact that the
output multiplier is close to constant suggests that there is not much loss from using a first order
approximation to study the output effects of government spending shocks. The welfare multiplier,
in contrast, is quite volatile. The fact that it is procyclical suggests that there is not a strong case
to be made for countercyclical government spending in the context of this model.
   8
    We should be clear that the expressions for the output and welfare multiplier derived in Section 2 would not be
identical in this model due to the presence of capital, wage rigidity, habit formation, and variable utilization. One
can derive expressions that highlight the same forces in the medium scale model, but they are substantially more
complicated and not as straightforward to use for intuition. The Appendix to this paper derives these expressions in
the medium scale model.




                                                         20
4.2    Interest Rate Peg
In our baseline analysis we assume that monetary policy is conducted via a conventional Taylor
rule. Much of the renewed interest in fiscal policy has been driven by the recent period of very
low interest rates and the recognition that fiscal policy may be substantially more effective when
monetary policy is in a passive regime.
    In this section we analyze the effects of passive monetary policy for the state-dependence of
the output and welfare multipliers. In particular, we simulate the effects of a passive monetary
regime, such as would be the case at the zero lower bound, by assuming that the central bank pegs
the nominal interest rate at a fixed value for a number of periods, after which time it reverts to a
conventional Taylor rule. Formally, such a policy is characterized by:

           (
               it−1                                                                                             if h < H
  it+h =                                                                                                                   (61)
               (1 − ρi )i∗ + ρi it+h−1 + (1 − ρi ) (φπ (πt+h − π ∗ ) + φy (ln Yt+h − ln Yt+h−1 )) + si ei,t+h   if h ≥ H

    In this specification H ≥ 0 is the length of the peg; H = 0 corresponds to the case of the normal
Taylor rule. We assume that the length of the interest rate peg is deterministic and known by all
agents. Our results are similar when using a stochastic peg length. For a discussion on the merits
of a stochastic versus deterministic peg, see Carlstrom, Fuerst, and Paustian (2014).
    For the sake of brevity we focus on peg lengths of four and eight quarters. For these exercises we
solve the model using a second order approximation. Since an interest rate peg can be understood as
a temporary deviation from normal monetary policy, we do not pick ϕ to set the welfare multiplier
to zero when the economy sits in steady state but the interest rate is pegged; rather, ϕ is chosen
so that the welfare multiplier equals zero in steady state when policy is conducted according to
the estimated Taylor rule. We simulate data from the model characterized by the Taylor rule and
at each point in the state space compute the output and welfare multipliers under an interest rate
peg.9 Table 5 presents statistics from these simulations.
    Under both the four and eight quarter peg, the steady state output multiplier is higher than
under the conventional Taylor rule. The difference is much more marked for the eight quarter
peg, with a steady state output multiplier of 1.20 (as opposed to 0.91 under a Taylor rule and
0.98 under a four quarter peg).10 In terms of the intuition from the stripped down version of the
model, the higher output multiplier obtains because an increase in government spending has a
much bigger effect on real marginal cost when the nominal interest rate is fixed. The higher output
multipliers in steady state under an interest rate peg translate into larger steady state welfare
   9
     This is a subtle but important point worth reemphasizing. The model economy is much more volatile under an
interest rate peg than when policy follows the Taylor rule. If we simulated states from the model where policy follows
a peg the distribution of states would be much wider, which would tend to inflate the volatility across states in the
multipliers. For the exercises in this section we use exactly the same states as we do in our baseline exercises, with
the only difference being the deterministic peg on interest rates.
  10
     The average values of the multiplier under these different peg lengths are somewhat smaller than what often
obtains in versions of the model without capital but are very similar to the estimates from the multiplier at the zero
lower bound in the medium scale model of Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2011). In particular they find that
the multiplier under a four quarter interest rate peg is similar to the Taylor rule multiplier (about 0.9) and that the
multiplier under an eight quarter interest rate peg is about 1.2, just as in our model.


                                                                21
multipliers. Recalling that ϕ is fixed so that the welfare multiplier is zero under a Taylor rule, a
larger output multiplier results in a larger welfare multiplier via the “Inefficiency” term in (24) –
since the economy is distorted on average, a higher output multiplier because of passive monetary
policy makes government spending relatively more attractive, other things being equal. For both
the output and welfare multipliers, the average multipliers are slightly higher than the steady state
multipliers, with the differences between means and steady state substantially larger for the welfare
multiplier, particularly under an eight quarter peg.
     A key result in Table 5 is that both the output and welfare multipliers are more volatile across
states under an interest rate peg than when policy is governed by the Taylor rule. This is evident for
the four quarter peg, but is particularly stark for an eight quarter peg. Under an eight quarter peg,
the standard deviation of the output multiplier is 0.13 (compared to 0.004 under a Taylor rule), while
the volatility of the welfare multiplier is 9.4 (compared to 0.3 under the Taylor rule). The output
multiplier ranges from a minimum of 0.7 to a maximum of 1.8. Interestingly, the output multiplier is
mildly procyclical (compared to countercyclical under the Taylor rule), though its correlation with
the simulated level of output is not large. The welfare multiplier is also mildly procyclical, with a
correlation with the simulated level of output of 0.05. That the welfare multiplier is less procylical
than under the Taylor rule makes sense in light of the analytic expression for the welfare multiplier
in the simpler NK model – a larger average output multiplier means that the “Inefficiency” term
in the welfare multiplier expression is stronger, which counteracts the procyclicality of the welfare
multiplier induced by the “Efficiency” term. Nevertheless, the higher output multiplier working
through the “Inefficiency” term is not strong enough to flip the correlation of the welfare multiplier
with simulated output to negative. Both the output and welfare multipliers are negatively correlated
with the simulated level of inflation, more strongly so than under the Taylor rule. This makes sense
in light of the price dispersion terms in the analytic expression for the output and welfare multipliers
in Section 2 – under an interest rate peg, inflation, and hence price dispersion, increases significantly
more after a government spending increase than under a Taylor rule.
     The simulation results in Table 5 calculate output and welfare multipliers under an interest
rate peg at many different states, most of which feature a positive nominal interest rate far away
from zero. One might wonder how, if at all, our results would change if we restricted attention
to low interest rate states where the zero lower bound is likely to be binding. Table 6 restricts
attention to states where the simulated interest rate is negative, and computes output and welfare
multipliers assuming four and eight quarter deterministic interest rate pegs. About nine percent of
the simulated states in our baseline analysis feature a negative nominal rate; this frequency would
be significantly lower, and more in line with the observed frequency of zero interest rates, if we had
assumed positive trend inflation.
     The main difference evident between the results in Table 6 (states where the zero lower bound
would be binding) and Table 5 (all states) is that both the mean output and welfare multipliers
are higher in low interest rate states relative to all states. For example, in a low interest rate state
under an eight quarter peg the mean output multiplier is 1.28 and the mean welfare multiplier
is 6.42 (compared to mean multipliers of 1.21 and 0.71 in all states). The reason that the mean


                                                   22
multipliers are both higher in low interest rate states is because inflation is on average low when
the interest rate is at zero. When inflation is low, the extra inflation caused by an increase in
government spending actually lowers price dispersion; from the analytical approximations for the
output and welfare multipliers in Section 2, a negative effect on price dispersion pushes both the
output and welfare multipliers up. Aside from the higher mean values of the multipliers, the results
from the simulations conditioning on low interest rate states are otherwise similar to the results in
Table 5. In particular, the volatilities of both multipliers are similar, as are the correlations of the
multipliers with simulated output and inflation.
    There are a couple of key take-aways from these exercises under an interest rate peg. First, there
is substantially more state-dependence in both the output and welfare multipliers than when policy
is governed by a Taylor rule, particularly in the case of an eight quarter peg. This suggests that
linear approximations may be inadequate for studying the effects of government spending shocks
on output at the zero lower bound, which does not seem to be the case when policy is governed by
the Taylor rule. Second, while the welfare multiplier is higher under an interest rate peg than a
Taylor rule, it is still positively correlated with the level of output (albeit this correlation is smaller
than in our baseline exercises, consistent with the intuition developed in Section 2). While the zero
lower bound may be more likely to arise in periods where output is low, and the welfare multiplier
is on average much higher during such periods, the large welfare benefits of government spending
result not from output being low per se but rather because of the passivity of monetary policy.

4.3    Government Financing
In our baseline analysis we assume that all government finance is from lump sum taxes. This
facilitates comparison with the literature and in some sense gives government spending shocks
their “best chance” to stimulate both output and welfare, but is empirically unrealistic. In this
section we consider robustness to different forms of government finance. We revert to assuming
that monetary policy is characterized by the estimated Taylor rule.
    We consider five different financing regimes, with results shown in Table 7. The different
financing regimes are labeled (i)-(v) and are shown in rows. In all of these specifications the steady
state values of the distortionary tax rates are set to τ n = 0.20, τ c = 0.05, and τ k = 0.10. We fix
the steady state government debt to GDP ratio at 0.5. The steady state value of lump sum taxes is
then chosen to make the government budget constraint hold in steady state. In (i) we assume that
the distortionary tax rates are fixed at their steady state values, with variable financing coming
from lump sum taxes, with γT = 0.1 and ρT = 0.11 In the remainder of the specifications we assume
that lump sum taxes are fixed, with γT = 0. Specification (ii) assumes that all three tax rates react
to deviations of debt from steady state quickly, with γl = 0.1 and ρl = 0 for l = n, c, k. In (iii) the
coefficients on debt are the same, but tax rates react more gradually to deviations of debt from
steady state, with ρl = 0.9 for l = n, c, k. Specifications (iv) and (v) assume that only the labor
  11
     If all variable government finance is from lump sum taxes, then the timing of lump sum taxes is irrelevant, and
it is therefore without loss of generality to assume that ρT = 0.



                                                        23
income tax reacts to debt, with γc = γk = 0. In (iv) labor income taxes react quickly, with γn = 0.1
and ρn = 0. In (v) the response is more gradual, with ρn = 0.9. The table is structured similarly
to Table 4, with statistics based on 10,000 periods simulated from the model. For each different
specification the value of ϕ is chosen to normalize the welfare multiplier to zero in steady state.
    Row (i) of Table 7 considers the case where steady state distortionary taxes are positive but these
tax rates are fixed, with all other variable finance coming from lump sum taxes. Unsurprisingly this
makes little difference relative to our baseline case. The only small differences are that the welfare
multiplier is slightly less volatile and a little more procyclical. Overall, though, the presence of
fixed distortionary taxes has very little effect on any of the results.
    There are more substantial differences relative to our baseline exercise when lump sum taxes
are unavailable and variable finance comes through changes in distortionary tax rates. There are
several interesting results to highlight. First, the average output multipliers tend to be lower when
distortionary taxes adjust to finance government deficits. This is intuitive since increases in any
of the three tax rates have a depressing effect on private spending. Interestingly, the output mul-
tipliers are smaller when the increase in taxes is more delayed, as in specifications (iii) and (v).
Second, there is substantially more state-dependence in both the output and welfare multipliers
when distortionary taxes adjust. In particular, the volatility of the output multiplier is between
two and three times as big in these specifications relative to our baseline exercise, and the output
multiplier varies by as much as 0.1 across states (relative to about 0.03 in our baseline). The welfare
multiplier is also substantially more volatile. Third, the output multiplier is countercyclical and
the welfare multiplier is procyclical, just as in our baseline exercises. The presence of distortionary
tax finance only serves to strengthen these cyclicalities – in all of these specifications, the output
multiplier is more countercyclical, and the welfare multiplier more procyclical, relative to the base-
line. The heightened procyclicality of the welfare multiplier is quite intuitive. In all specifications
where distortionary tax rates react to finance government expenditure, the output multiplier is
smaller relative to the case where lump sum taxes are used. The smaller output multiplier makes
the “Inefficiency” term in the welfare multiplier expression weaker, thereby resulting in a more
procyclical welfare multiplier.

4.4   Parameters
We also consider the robustness of our results to a few select parameters. Results are shown in Table
8. Rows indicate parameters whose values are different than our baseline exercise. All other non-
listed parameters are fixed at their baseline calibrated or estimated values. Government finance is
through lump sum taxes and monetary policy follows the estimated Taylor rule. In all specifications
the parameter ϕ is chosen so that the welfare multiplier equals zero evaluated in steady state. The
model is solved via a second order approximation. All numbers in the Table represent statistics
generated via a 10,000 period simulation of the model, discarding the first 100 observations.
    The first row considers the case where prices and wages are both flexible, i.e. θp = θw = 0. This
results in a lower steady state value of the output multiplier than in our baseline exercise (0.88


                                                  24
here vs. 0.91 in the baseline). The lower value of the output multiplier is to be expected based
on the intuition from the analytic expression for the output multiplier in Section 2. When prices
and wages are flexible, real marginal cost is fixed, which unambiguously results in a lower output
multiplier. Interestingly, the output multiplier is about twice as volatile with flexible prices and
wages relative to the baseline case, and is also slightly more countercyclical, though it still varies
little across states in an absolute sense. The welfare multiplier is about as volatile with flexible
prices and wages as in the baseline case. It is more procyclical here, however. This makes sense
in light of the analytic expression for the welfare multiplier. When prices and wages are flexible,
the overall level of distortion in the economy is not time-varying, which weakens the effect of the
“Inefficiency” term in the analytic expression for the welfare multiplier.
     The next row considers the case in which there is no variable capital utilization, which occurs
when the parameter δ2 → ∞ (in practice we set this parameter equal to 1000). Given that variable
utilization is a significant source of amplification, it is unsurprising that the output multiplier is
lower in this specification than in our baseline (steady state multiplier of 0.86 as opposed 0.91).
It is, however, slightly more volatile across states than in our baseline exercise, but is a little less
countercyclical. The output multiplier is nevertheless still close to constant. The welfare multiplier
is also slightly more volatile with no variable utilization, and is again procyclical, with a correlation
with simulated output of 0.64. This correlation is substantially higher than in our baseline. The
intuition for this higher correlation with output is that the lower output multiplier weakens the
“Inefficiency” term in the analytic expression for the welfare multiplier derived in Section 2.
     The middle row in the table, labeled χ = 0.5, considers the case when labor supply is more
elastic (the Frisch labor supply elasticity is the inverse of χ). This has the effect of increasing the
output multiplier relative to our benchmark case (0.94 instead of 0.91 evaluated in steady state).
The volatility of the output multiplier is slightly lower than in our baseline, though the output
multiplier is again approximately constant. The welfare multiplier is roughly as volatile as in our
baseline analysis, and remains procyclical.
     The next row, labeled ρg = 0.8, considers the case when government spending shocks are less
persistent than in the baseline. This results in a higher value of the mean output multiplier (0.95,
compared to about 0.91 in the baseline). When government spending shocks are less persistent,
the negative wealth effect on consumption is smaller, and so there is less crowding out of private
expenditure, resulting in a larger multiplier. With a lower value of ρg both the output and welfare
multipliers are substantially less volatile than in our baseline exercise. The output multiplier is
about as countercyclical, but the welfare multiplier is much less procyclical. The smaller degree of
procyclicality in the welfare multiplier is to be expected because of the higher output multiplier in
conjunction with the “Inefficiency” term in the analytic approximation for the welfare multiplier
from Section 2. Nevertheless, the welfare multiplier remains mildly procyclical, with a correlation
coefficient with simulated output of about 0.10.
     The final row in Table 8 considers a more aggressive monetary policy, with reaction coefficient
on inflation of φπ = 4 (instead of 2.1, as in our baseline). The results from the simulation are in
a sense the mirror image of what happens under an interest rate peg, albeit on a much smaller


                                                   25
scale. The more active monetary policy rule results in a slightly lower average output multiplier.
The volatilities of the output and welfare multipliers are about the same as in our baseline exer-
cise. The output multiplier is mildly countercyclical and the welfare multiplier is procyclical, and
the procyclicality of the welfare multiplier is slightly stronger here than in the baseline exercise
(correlation with simulated output of 0.48 as opposed to 0.37 in the baseline).
    We also consider the effects of different shocks in driving our results. For these exercises we
generate states conditioning on particular shocks. For example, consider the neutral productivity
shock. We set the variances of the investment, labor supply, intertemporal preference, and monetary
shocks to zero, keep the variance of the government spending shock at its estimated value, and solve
for the standard deviation of the productivity shock to generate the same volatility of the level of
output as in the baseline estimated model. All other parameters are held fixed at their calibrated
or estimated values, all government finance is lump sum, and monetary policy is characterized by
a Taylor rule. We then generate 10,000 periods of artificial data from the model with the altered
shock variances, and compute the output and welfare multipliers at each point in the simulated
state space. We do this for each of the five shocks other than government spending. Results are
summarized in Table 9.
    In terms of movements across states there is not much difference conditional on different shocks
for either multiplier. The output multiplier is close to constant and the welfare multiplier is quite
volatile. Though the differences relative to our baseline analysis are small, the output multi-
plier differs most across states conditional on the investment and intertemporal preference shocks
(standard deviations of 0.0052 and 0.0065, compared to 0.0037 in the baseline), while the welfare
multiplier is most volatile conditional on the intertemporal preference shock (standard deviation of
0.4049, compared to 0.3044 in the baseline). The output multiplier is countercyclical conditional
on all shocks, though it is most negatively correlated with simulated output conditional on the
productivity shock. The welfare multiplier is negatively correlated with inflation conditional on all
shocks.
    The most interesting difference evident in Table 9 relative to our baseline analysis is the cyclical-
ity of the welfare multiplier conditional on different shocks. The welfare multiplier is most strongly
procyclical conditional on the productivity and labor supply shocks, is mildly procyclical condi-
tional on the investment shock, and is countercyclical conditional on the preference and monetary
shocks. This finding accords with the intuition from the simpler version of the model discussed in
Section 2 that the welfare multiplier ought to be most procyclical conditional on “supply shocks”
and less procylical conditional on “demand shocks” (the investment, intertemporal preference, and
monetary shocks are “demand shocks” in that they are associated with output and inflation moving
in the same direction). The reason that we estimate the welfare multiplier to be procyclical with all
shocks is that the preference and monetary shocks are not estimated to be particularly important
driving forces for output. The most important shock for the dynamics of output is the investment
shock, and while this does move output and inflation in the same direction, the welfare multiplier
is still mildly procyclical conditional on this shock. While countercyclical government spending is
not desirable in the model in an average sense, these results nevertheless do suggest that there may


                                                   26
be particular episodes when output is low due to adverse demand conditions where countercyclical
government spending may be beneficial from the perspective of social welfare.


5    Conclusion
The objective of this paper has been to study how the output and welfare effects of changes
in government spending vary over the business cycle in a canonical medium scale DSGE model.
The output multiplier is countercyclical but moves very little across states when monetary policy
is characterized by a Taylor rule. There is substantially more state-dependence in the output
multiplier under an interest rate peg. The welfare multiplier is robustly procyclical. This result casts
doubt on the desirability of countercyclical government spending as a general policy proscription.
    We conclude by reiterating the caveat that our results are dependent on the structure of the
model. We have not sought to write down a model to deliver particular results, but rather to study
the question of how the output and welfare effects of changes in government spending vary across
states in a version of a popular model in wide use by academics and central bankers. A different
model may yield different results, and we plan to pursue several extensions in future research.




                                                  27
References
  Auerbach, Alan and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. 2012. “Measuring the Output Responses to Fiscal
    Policy.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 4(2), 1-27.
  Bachmann, Rüdiger, and Eric R. Sims. 2012. “Confidence and the Transmission of Government
     Spending Shocks.” Journal of Monetary Economics 59(3), 235-249.
  Barro, Robert J. 1981. “Output Effects of Government Purchases.” Journal of Political Economy
     89(6): 1086-1021.
  Barro, Robert J., and Charles J. Redlick. 2011. “Macroeconomic Effects from Government
     Purchases and Taxes.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(1), 51-102.
  Baxter, Marianne and Robert G. King. 1993. “Fiscal Policy in General Equilibrium.” American
     Economic Review 83(3), 315-334.
  Blanchard, Oliver, and Roberto Perotti. 2002. “An Empirical Characterization of the Dynamic
     Effects of Changes in Government Spending and Taxes on Output.” The Quarterly Journal
     of Economics 117(4), 1329-1368.
  Braun, R. Anton, Lena Mareen Koerber, and Yuichiro Waki. 2012. “Some Unpleasant Properties
     of Log-Linearized Solutions When the Nominal Rate is Zero.” Federal Reserve Bank of
     Atlanta Working Paper 2012-5a.
  Carlstrom, Charles, Timothy Fuerst, and Matthias Paustian. 2014. “Fiscal Multipliers Under an
     Interest Rate Peg of Deterministic versus Stochastic Duration.” Journal of Money, Credit,
     and Banking 46(6): 1293-1312.
  Chari, VV, Patrick J. Kehoe, and Ellen R. McGrattan. 2007. “Business Cycle Accounting.”
    Econometrica 75(3), 781-836.
  Christiano, Lawrence J. 2004. “The Zero Bound, Zero-Inflation Targeting, and Output Col-
     lapse.” Working paper, Northwestern University.
  Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L. Evans. 2005. “Nominal Rigidities
     and the Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy.” Journal of Political Economy
     113(1), 1-45.
  Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo. 2011. “When is the Govern-
     ment Spending Multiplier Large?” Journal of Political Economy 119(1), 78-121.
  Coenen, Günter, Christopher Erceg, Charles Freedman, Davide Furceri, Michael Kumhof, René
     Lalonde, Douglas Laxton, Jesper Lendé, Annabelle Mourougane, Dirk Muir, Susanna Mur-
     sula, Carlos de Resende, John Roberts, Werner Roeger, Stephen Snudden, Mathias Tra-
     bandt, and Jan in’t Veld. 2012. “Effects of Fiscal Stimulus in Structural Models” American
     Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 4(1), 22-68.
  Cogan, John F., Tobias Cwik, John B. Taylor, and Volker Wieland. 2010. “New Keynesian
     Versus Old Keynesian Government Spending Multipliers.” Journal of Economic Dynamics

                                             28
   and Control 34(3), 281-295.
Drautzburg, Thorsten and Harald Uhlig. 2011. “Fiscal Stimulus and Distortionary Taxation.”
   ZEW-Centre for European Economic Research Discussion Paper No. 11-037.
Eichenbaum, Martin and Jonas Fisher. 2005. “Fiscal Policy in the Aftermath of 9/11.” Journal
   of Money, Credit, and Banking 37(1), 1-22.
Eggertsson, Gauti B. and Michael Woodford. 2003. “ The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and
   Optimal Monetary Policy.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1: 212-219.
Eggertsson, Gauti B. 2011. “What Fiscal Policy is Effective at Zero Interest Rates?” NBER
   Macroeconomic Annual 2010, University of Chicago Press, 2011.
Erceg, Christopher, Dale Henderson, and Andrew Levin. 2000. “Optimal Monetary Policy with
   Staggered Wage and Price Contracts.” Journal of Monetary Economics 46(2): 281-313.
Hall, Robert E. 1986. “The Role of Consumption in Economic Fluctuations” in Robert J.
   Gordon, ed., The American Business Cycle: Continuity and Change, University of Chicago
   Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research, pp. 237-255.
Hall, Robert E. 2009 “By How Much Does GDP Rise if the Government Buys More Uutput?”
   NBER Working Paper 15496.
Justiniano, Alejandro, Giorgio Primiceri, and Andrea Tambalotti. 2010. “Investment Shocks
   and Business Cycles.” Journal of Monetary Economics 57(2), 132-145.
Krugman, Paul. 1998. “It’s Baaack: Japan’s Slump and the Return of the Liquidity Trap.”
   Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2: 137-187.
Leeper, Eric M., Nora Traum, and Todd B. Walker. 2011. “Clearing up the Fiscal Multiplier
   Morass.” NBER Working Paper 2011.
Mittnik, Stefan and Willi Semmler. 2012. “Regime Dependence of the Fiscal Multiplier.” Journal
   of Economic Behavior and Organization 83, 502-522.
Mounford, Andrew, and Harald Uhlig. 2009. “What are the Effects of Fiscal Policy Shocks?”
  Journal of Applied Econometrics 24(6), 960-992.
Nakamura, Emi and Jon Steinsson. 2014. “Fiscal Stimulus in a Monetary Union: Evidence from
   US Regions.” American Economic Review 104(3), 753-792.
Nakata, Taisuke. 2013. “Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy with Occasionally Binding Zero
   Bound Constraints.” Working Paper.
Parker, Jonathan. 2011. “On Measuring the Effects of Fiscal Policy in Recessions.” Journal of
   Economic Literature 49(3), 703-718.
Ramey, Valerie A., and Matthew D. Shapiro. 1998. “Costly Capital Reallocation and the Effects
  of Government Spending.” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 48: 145-
  194.


                                            29
Ramey, Valerie A. 2011. “Identifying Government Spending Shocks: It’s all in the Timing.”
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(1), 1-50.
Ramey, Valerie A. and Sarah Zubairy. 2014. “Government Spending Multipliers in Good Times
  and in Bad: Evidence from US Historical Data.” NBER Working Paper 20719.
Shoag, Daniel. 2015. “The Impact of Government Spending Shocks: Evidence on the Multiplier
   from State Pension Plan Returns.” Working paper, Harvard University.
Smets, Frank and Raf Waters. 2007. “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A Bayesian
  DSGE Approach.” American Economic Review 97(3), 586-606.
Woodford, Michael. 2011. “Simple Analytics of the Government Expenditure Multiplier.” Amer-
  ican Economics Journal: Macroeconomics 3(1), 1-35
Zubairy, Sarah. 2014. “On Fiscal Multipliers: Estimates from a Medium Scale DSGE Model.”
   International Economic Review 55(1): 169-195.




                                          30
                                       Table 1: Calibrated Parameters

                                          Parameter                  Value
                                                 β                  0.995
                                                 α                   1/3
                                                δ0                  0.025
                                                δ1            Normalize u∗ = 1
                                                δ2                  0.01
                                                p                    11
                                                w                    11
                                                ψ                      6
                                                F             Normalize Π∗ = 0
                                                                           ∗
                                                G∗          Steady State YG∗ = 0.2
                                                π∗                     0
                                          τ , τ k, τ n
                                           c
                                                                       0
                                          γc , γk , γn                 0
                                          ρ c , ρk , ρn                0

Note: This table shows the values of calibrated parameters. The rational for these values is described in the text. As a
benchmark, we assume that all government finance is lump sum; as such, we set the parameters of the distortionary tax
processes (including the steady state values) all to zero. Because the timing of lump sum finance is irrelevant, we assume that
Tt = Gt , and therefore do not need to specify values of steady state government debt or the parameters governing the process
for lump sum taxes.




                                                              31
                    Table 2: Estimated Parameters

                                         Prior                     Posterior
 Parameter         Dist.            Mean         SD       Mode      Mean        SD
      b            Beta             0.50      0.20         0.82      0.82      0.0571
      χ            Gamma             1.00     0.50         1.08      1.07      0.0474
      κ            Gamma             4.00     1.00         5.24      5.77      0.9897
     θw            Beta             0.66      0.10         0.50      0.52      0.0861
     θp            Beta             0.66      0.10         0.70      0.69      0.0373
     ζw            Beta             0.50      0.20         0.28      0.37      0.2027
     ζp            Beta             0.50      0.20         0.04      0.07      0.0323
     φπ            Normal            1.70     0.30         2.09      2.08      0.1904
     φy            Normal            0.12     0.05         0.18      0.18      0.0430
     ρi            Beta             0.60      0.10         0.81      0.81      0.0195
     ρa            Beta             0.60      0.10         0.90      0.89      0.0217
     ρz            Beta             0.60      0.10         0.68      0.65      0.0672
     ρν            Beta             0.60      0.10         0.64      0.62      0.1255
     ρξ            Beta             0.60      0.10         0.80      0.76      0.0639
     ρg            Beta             0.60      0.10         0.94      0.94      0.0129
     si            Inv. Gamma       0.001     0.010       0.0013    0.0013     0.0001
     sa            Inv. Gamma       0.005     0.010       0.0048    0.0049     0.0004
     sz            Inv. Gamma       0.005     0.010       0.0480    0.0554     0.0106
     sν            Inv. Gamma       0.001     0.010       0.0237    0.0264     0.0067
     sξ            Inv. Gamma       0.001     0.001       0.0758    0.0996     0.0320
     sg            Inv. Gamma       0.001     0.010       0.0083    0.0084     0.0006
Note: The log-posterior density at the mode is 2563.16. The variables used in the
estimation are the growth rates of output, consumption, and labor hours, and the levels
of the interest rate, the inflation rate, and the government spending to output ratio.
The construction of these series is described in the text. The sample period for the
estimation is 1984q1 - 2008q3.




                                         32
                                 Table 3: Output and Welfare Multipliers
                                          Across the State Space

                                                     Steady State         Recession         Expansion
                        2nd Order
                          Output Multiplier              0.9099             0.9135            0.9079
                          Welfare Multiplier             0.0000            -0.2106            0.1857
                        3rd Order
                          Output Multiplier              0.9099             0.9124            0.9065
                          Welfare Multiplier             0.0000            -0.1847            0.1944
                    Note: This table shows output and welfare multipliers in three different states: the
                    non-stochastic steady state, the average state in a recession, and the average state
                    in an expansion. The numbers outside of steady state are generated from simulating
                    10,000 periods (starting from the non-stochastic steady state). We define “recession”
                    and “expansion” to mean the lower and upper 20th percentile of simulated output, av-
                    erage the simulated state vector in recessions and expansions so defined, and compute
                    output and welfare multipliers starting from those averaged state vectors. The panel
                    labeled “2nd Order” solves and simulates the model via a second order approximation,
                    while the panel labeled “3rd Order” solves and simulates the model via a third order
                    approximation. The parameter ϕ is chosen so as to normalize the welfare multiplier
                    to be zero evaluated in the non-stochastic steady state.



                   Table 4: Output and Welfare Multipliers from Simulations

                                  Min          Max           Mean           Std       Corr w/ Output        Corr w/ Inflation
   2nd Order
     Output Multiplier           0.8949        0.9270       0.9102        0.0037            -0.4412                -0.1591
     Welfare Multiplier         -1.0300        1.0357      -0.0149        0.3044             0.3747                -0.5401
   3rd Order
     Output Multiplier           0.8895        0.9213       0.9085        0.0040            -0.4357                -0.1989
     Welfare Multiplier         -1.3984        0.8425      -0.0123        0.3159             0.3527                -0.4982
Note: The numbers in this table are moments based on simulating the model at the estimated parameter values for 10,000
periods starting from the non-stochastic steady state. At each point in the simulated states space, we compute output and welfare
multipliers. The first 100 periods of the simulation are dropped so as to limit the influence of the assumed starting position. The
column labeled “2nd Order” solves and simulates the model via a second order approximation, while the column labeled “3rd
Order” does so via a third order approximation.




                                                              33
                    Table 5: Output and Welfare Multipliers from Simulations
                                       Interest Rate Peg

                                   Min           Max            Mean           Std       Corr w/ Output          Corr w/ Inflation
   4 Quarter Peg
     Output Multiplier           0.9623         0.9932         0.9772         0.0040            0.2302                 -0.7278
     Welfare Multiplier         -2.3291         2.7157         0.1547         0.6257            0.1676                 -0.8197
   8 Quarter Peg
     Output Multiplier           0.6935          1.7801        1.2053         0.1317            0.1754                 -0.6637
     Welfare Multiplier        -36.8072         40.7726        1.0389         9.4459            0.0522                 -0.7312
Note: This table shows multiplier statistics for interest rate pegs of four and eight quarters, respectively. The parameter ϕ is chosen
so that the welfare multiplier is zero in steady state under a Taylor rule, not under the interest rate peg. The table is structured
similarly to Table 4. The numbers in this table are moments based on simulating the model under the standard Taylor rule at the
estimated parameter values for 10,000 periods starting from the non-stochastic steady state. At each point in the simulated state
space, we compute output and welfare multipliers where monetary policy is characterized by an interest rate peg for the specified
number of quarters. To be specific, we assume that the interest rate is fixed at its previous period’s value for either 4 or 8 quarters,
after which time monetary policy reverts to the Taylor rule. The first 100 periods of the simulation are dropped so as to limit the
influence of the assumed starting position. These numbers are all generated from a second order approximation. The steady state
output multipliers are 0.9770 and 1.2018 for the four and eight quarter pegs, respectively. For the welfare multiplier the steady state
multipliers are 0.1326 and 0.7053, respectively.



                    Table 6: Output and Welfare Multipliers from Simulations
                                Interest Rate Peg, Binding ZLB

                                   Min           Max            Mean           Std       Corr w/ Output          Corr w/ Inflation
   4 Quarter Peg
     Output Multiplier           0.9682         0.9932         0.9796         0.0041            0.2231                 -0.7193
     Welfare Multiplier         -1.1661         2.1015         0.6309         0.5659            0.1736                 -0.7783
   8 Quarter Peg
     Output Multiplier           0.8910          1.7801        1.2752         0.1295            0.1469                 -0.6409
     Welfare Multiplier        -21.6945         40.7726        6.4192         9.0931            0.0301                 -0.7087
Note: This table shows multiplier statistics for interest rate pegs of four and eight quarters, respectively. The parameter ϕ is chosen
so that the welfare multiplier is zero in steady state under a Taylor rule, not under the interest rate peg. The numbers in this
table are moments based on simulating the model under the standard Taylor rule at the estimated parameter values for 10,000
periods starting from the non-stochastic steady state. We restrict attention to states where the simulated nominal interest rate is
negative. At each point in the restricted simulated state space, we compute output and welfare multipliers where monetary policy
is characterized by an interest rate peg for the specified number of quarters. To be specific, we assume that the interest rate is fixed
at its previous period’s value for either 4 or 8 quarters, after which time monetary policy reverts to the Taylor rule. These numbers
are all generated from a second order approximation.




                                                                34
                    Table 7: Output and Welfare Multipliers from Simulations
                                  Different Financing Regimes

                                     Min           Max          Mean            Std       Corr w/ Output         Corr w/ Inflation
   Financing Regime (i)
     Output Multiplier             0.8971         0.9276        0.9115        0.0036            -0.4743                 -0.1429
     Welfare Multiplier           -0.9333         0.9395       -0.0130        0.2728             0.4381                 -0.5387
   Financing Regime (ii)
     Output Multiplier             0.8045         0.8700        0.8345        0.0076            -0.5506                 -0.2068
     Welfare Multiplier           -1.5060         1.4303       -0.0419        0.4559             0.6119                 -0.4836
   Financing Regime (iii)
     Output Multiplier             0.7111         0.8134        0.7597        0.0122            -0.5876                 -0.2034
     Welfare Multiplier           -1.4588         1.3926       -0.0273        0.4285             0.5054                 -0.5251
   Financing Regime (iv)
     Output Multiplier             0.8565         0.8942        0.8739        0.0045            -0.5017                 -0.0908
     Welfare Multiplier           -1.5668         1.4060       -0.0464        0.4644             0.6252                 -0.4459
   Financing Regime (v)
     Output Multiplier             0.7226         0.8234        0.7715        0.0119            -0.4856                 -0.1026
     Welfare Multiplier           -1.7599         1.6704       -0.0156        0.5256             0.5446                 -0.4661
Note: Rows labeled “Financing Regime” (i)-(v) correspond to different fiscal financing regimes. In all rows steady state distortionary
taxes are set to τ n = 0.20, τ k = 0.10, and τ c = 0.05 and the steady state government debt to output ratio is fixed at 0.5. Row (i)
considers the case where steady state distortionary taxes are positive but fixed, with all other variable finance coming from lump
sum taxes, with γT = 0.1. The rest of the rows assume lump sum taxes are fixed, with γT = 0. Row (ii) has all three distortionary
taxes reacting to deviations of debt from target, with γl = 0.1 for l = n, c, k and ρl = 0 for l = n, c, k. Row (iii) is similar to (ii),
but assumes that tax rates react to debt with a lag, with ρl = 0.9 for l = n, c, k. In rows (iv) and (v) we assume that variable tax
finance comes from labor income taxes alone. Row (iv) assumes that γn = 0.1 and ρn = 0, with γc = γk = 0. Row (v) is the same
but instead assumes ρn = 0.9. The table is otherwise structured similarly to Table 4. For each different specification the parameter
ϕ is chosen to normalize the welfare multiplier to zero in steady state. The numbers in this table are moments based on simulating
the model at the estimated parameter values for 10,000 periods starting from the non-stochastic steady state. At each point in the
simulated states space, we compute output and welfare multipliers. The first 100 periods of the simulation are dropped so as to limit
the influence of the assumed starting position. These numbers are all generated from a second order approximation. The steady
state output multipliers are 0.9112, 0.8335, 0.7583, 0.8736, and 0.7703 for financing regimes (i)-(v).




                                                               35
                   Table 8: Output and Welfare Multipliers from Simulations
                                    Parameter Robustness

                                  Min           Max           Mean           Std       Corr w/ Output         Corr w/ Inflation
   θp = θw = 0
     Output Multiplier           0.8534        0.9103        0.8755         0.0064           -0.5198                 -0.3975
     Welfare Multiplier         -0.9784        1.0446        0.0096         0.3109            0.5679                 -0.2322
   δ2 = 1000
     Output Multiplier           0.8426        0.8825        0.8629         0.0047           -0.3221                  0.2013
     Welfare Multiplier         -1.3832        1.4344       -0.0323         0.4009            0.6416                 -0.5563
   χ = 0.5
     Output Multiplier           0.9253        0.9511        0.9371         0.0031           -0.5968                 -0.1412
     Welfare Multiplier         -1.0318        1.0955       -0.0161         0.3166            0.5056                 -0.5857
   ρg = 0.8
     Output Multiplier           0.9448        0.9639        0.9545         0.0023           -0.3473                 -0.2099
     Welfare Multiplier         -0.7060        0.5669       -0.0078         0.1807            0.1032                 -0.7450
   φπ = 4
     Output Multiplier           0.8820        0.9219        0.8995         0.0045           -0.4180                 -0.3825
     Welfare Multiplier         -0.9590        1.0116       -0.0100         0.2949            0.4760                 -0.4917
Note: The rows in this table correspond to different values of selected parameters. All parameters other than those listed in each
row are fixed at their baseline values from Table 1 and Table 2. In each specification the parameter ϕ is chosen so as to normalize
the value of the welfare multiplier to zero in steady state. The table is otherwise structured similarly to Table 4, and the exercises
underlying the numbers is identical to our baseline exercise. The steady state output multiplier is 0.8756 when θw = θp = 0, 0.8626
when δ2 = 1000, 0.9368 when χ = 0.5, 0.9544 when ρG = 0.8, and 0.8922 when φπ = 4.




                                                               36
                   Table 9: Output and Welfare Multipliers from Simulations
                                   Conditioning on Shocks

                                  Min          Max           Mean           Std       Corr w/ Output         Corr w/ Inflation
   Productivity shock
     Output Multiplier          0.9003        0.9197         0.9102       0.0027            -0.7763                -0.2778
     Welfare Multiplier        -1.1087        1.0670        -0.0188       0.2983             0.7217                -0.4325
   Labor supply shock
     Output Multiplier          0.9025        0.9195         0.9104       0.0024            -0.6916                 0.2749
     Welfare Multiplier        -1.2431        1.0598        -0.0296       0.3159             0.4523                -0.7406
   Investment shock
     Output Multiplier          0.8894        0.9296        0.9099        0.0052            -0.2960                -0.1485
     Welfare Multiplier        -0.7206        0.9296        0.0531        0.2817             0.1159                -0.0683
   Preference shock
     Output Multiplier          0.8883        0.9380         0.9108       0.0065            -0.5573                -0.6444
     Welfare Multiplier        -1.8184        1.0544        -0.0447       0.4049            -0.1048                -0.1302
   Monetary shock
    Output Multiplier           0.8955        0.9297         0.9127       0.0045            -0.0537                 0.5174
    Welfare Multiplier         -1.6168        0.5135        -0.1669       0.2542            -0.4343                -0.6160
Note: In the different rows we condition on particular shocks in generating states from which to compute multipliers. In particular,
in each row we set the variances of all but the listed shock and the government spending shock to zero, and solve for the magnitude
of the listed shock to generate the same volatility of the level of output as in the baseline estimated model. We then generate
10,000 periods of simulated data from the model driven by just the listed shock and the government spending shock, and compute
the output and welfare multipliers at each point in the simulated state space. All parameters other than the shock variances are
fixed at their baseline values from Table 1 and Table 2. In generating these statistics the first 100 periods from each simulation
are dropped. The models are solved via a second order approximation.




                                                              37
                                      Figure 1: Simulated Output and Welfare Multipliers

                              0.93
     Output Multiplier



                              0.92

                              0.91

                               0.9

                              0.89

                                     100   200   300    400     500       600       700        800       900       1000




                                1
         Welfare Multiplier




                               0.5


                                0


                              −0.5


                                −1
                                     100   200   300    400    500        600       700        800       900       1000
                                                              Period


Note: This figure plots simulated time series for the output multiplier (upper panel) and welfare multiplier (lower panel). These
simulations are conducted using the estimated parameter values starting from the non-stochastic steady state. Vertical gray-
shaded areas denote periods when the level of output is in its lowest 20th percentile, meant to proxy for periods of recession.
A second order solution method is used to generate the multipliers in this figure.




                                                              38
A     Appendix
This Appendix provides a detailed derivation of the expressions for the output and utility multipliers
presented in the text, equation (22) and (24), respectively. We start with the output multiplier.
Combining household optimality conditions (1) and (2) with firm optimality condition (8) yields:

                                            −UN = UC mct At                                       (A.1)

   Here it is understood that FX is the partial derivative of a function F with respect to X
evaluated at some point. Totally differentiating about a point (denoted by the lack of a time
subscript), we have:

                                   −UN N dNt = UCC mcAdCt + UC Admct                              (A.2)

    Here we have made use of the assumption of separability in utility and have held At fixed at
some value A (since it is exogenous and unaffected by changes in government spending). Totally
differentiating the expression for the aggregate production function, (17), yields:

                                                  vp        dv p
                                          dNt =      dYt + N pt                                   (A.3)
                                                  A         v
    Totally differentiating the aggregate resource constraint, (16) yields:

                                            dCt = dYt − dGt                                       (A.4)

    Combining (A.3) and (A.4) with (A.2), we have:

                                 vp        dvtp
                                               
                   −UN N            dYt + N p = UCC mcA [dYt − dGt ] + UC Admct                   (A.5)
                                 A         v
                                                                         dvtp
   Dividing by dGt and simplifying (with the notation that d ln vtp ≈    vp )   yields the expression in
the text:


                                                                               d ln vtp
                                                                        
  dYt         −UCC mcA                 UC A        dmct           UN N N
      =         vp           +        vp                +         vp                    (A.6)
  dGt     −UN N A − UCC mcA     −UN N A − UCC mcA dGt       −UN N A − UCC mcA dGt

   Since UCC < 0 and UN N ≤ 0, the first term in brackets must be positive and less than one.
Since UC > 0, the term in brackets multiplying dmc
                                                dGt is positive. Given that UN N ≤ 0, the term in
                                                   t

                      d ln v p
brackets multiplying dGtt is negative.
    Next, consider the utility multiplier. Totally differentiate flow utility about a point, making use
of the assumption of separability:

                                     dUt = UC dCt + UN dNt + UG dGt                               (A.7)

    Use (A.3) and (A.4) above:


                                                    39
                                                          vp        dvtp
                                                                        
                       dUt = UC [dYt − dGt ] + UN            dYt + N p + UG dGt                    (A.8)
                                                          A         v
   Dividing by dGt and simplifying yields the equation in the text:

                                                   v p dYt        d ln vtp
                                                     
                        dUt
                            = [UG − UC ] + UC + UN         + UN N                                  (A.9)
                        dGt                        A dGt           dGt
     In an efficient allocation the marginal rate of substitution between labor and consumption would
equal the marginal product of labor, so −UN = UC A       t
                                                       vtp
                                                           . This means that the middle term in brackets
would equal zero if the allocation were efficient. This middle term in (A.9) can be related to the
“labor wedge” as defined by Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan (2007). In particular, relative to an
efficient neoclassical model we can think about the labor wedge like a distortionary tax which drives
a wedge between the wage and the marginal product of labor: −UN = UC (1 − τt ) A         t
                                                                                       vtp
                                                                                           . Re-arranging
terms, we can isolate τt as:

                                                         vtp
                                                            
                                              1
                                        τt =     UC + UN                                          (A.10)
                                             UC          At
    In other words, the middle term in brackets in (A.9) is proportional to the labor wedge as
defined in Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan (2007).
    It is also possible to proceed similarly in deriving expressions for the output and utility mul-
tipliers in the medium scale model of Section 3. These are substantially more complicated than
in the simpler model but reduce to the expressions from the simpler model under some parameter
restrictions. Begin by defining flow utility in the social welfare function as follows:

                          U (Ct , Nt , Gt ) = u(Ct − bCt−1 ) + vtw h(Nt ) + g(Gt )                (A.11)

    Using the functional forms assumed in the text we would have u(Ct −bCt−1 ) = νt ln(Ct −bCt−1 ),
               Nt1+χ
h(Nt ) = ψνt ξt 1+χ  , and g(Gt ) = νt ϕGt . It is necessary to write the expression this way to take
into account the effect of wage dispersion on utility. The total derivative of flow utility about a
point is:

                           dUt = uC dCt + v w hN dNt + h(N )dvtw + gG dGt                         (A.12)

   Totally differentiating the aggregate production function, (51), yields an expression for dNt :

                                       vp                dv p   α N b
                        dNt =                     dYt + N pt −      dKt                           (A.13)
                                (1 − α)AKb α N −α        v     1−αK
                                                                  b

   Combining this with (A.12) and re-arranging yields the following expression for the utility
multiplier:




                                                    40
                                   vp                         d ln vtp
                                                       
  dUt                   w                      dYt    w
      = gG − uC + uC + v hN                        + v hN N
  dGt                       (1 − α)AKb α N −α dGt              dGt
                                                         d ln vtw      dIt           α N dK
                                                                                          bt
                                           + v w h(N )            − uC     − v w hN            (A.14)
                                                          dGt          dGt          1−αK
                                                                                       b dGt

    The first three terms in (A.14) are analogous to the “Efficiency,” “Inefficiency,” and “Price
Dispersion” terms in the expression for the utility multiplier for the stripped down version of the
model. The first term measures the difference between the marginal utilities of government spending
and private consumption; the second term is the sum of the marginal utility of consumption and
the marginal utility of labor divided by the marginal product of labor, all multiplied by the output
multiplier; and the third term is the marginal utility of labor times labor times the reaction of
log price dispersion to a change in government spending. There are three new terms which arise
due to wage stickiness and the presence of investment and capital accumulation. Since h(N ) < 0,
the term multiplying the reaction of log wage dispersion to a change in government spending is
negative, so that if government spending increases wage dispersion the utility multiplier is lower.
This effect is analogous to the impact on utility of the reaction of price dispersion. The next term
is the marginal utility of consumption times the reaction of investment to government spending.
The final term is a positive coefficient (since hN < 0) times the reaction of capital services to a
change in government spending. If wages were flexible all terms related to wage dispersion would
drop out. If in addition α = 0 (no capital), then the first three terms would look identical to those
presented in the text. Though the welfare multiplier is again equal to the present discounted value
of utility multipliers, some care must be taken when going between the two concepts, since changes
in Ct will impact future utility multipliers because of the evolution of the habit stock.
    Deriving a clean expression for the output multiplier is particularly complicated by the presence
of wage rigidity and the auxiliary variables related to wage-setting. To simplify things, we adopt the
notation that µw t is the inverse wage markup over the marginal rate of substitution. This markup
is potentially time-varying because of wage stickiness. Formally:

                                                       −hN
                                           µw
                                            t wt =                                             (A.15)
                                                        λt
   Here −h λt is the marginal rate of substitution between labor and consumption. This is simply a
             N


shorthand way to capture the dynamics associated with optimal wage-setting governed by equations
(39)-(41) in the text. If we combine this condition with the cost-minimization condition for the
optimal choice of labor by firms, we get:

                                 −hN = λt µw               b α −α
                                           t mct (1 − α)At Kt Nt                               (A.16)

   Totally differentiating this about a point yields:




                                                  41
                                        !α                                  !α                             !α
                       w            K
                                    b
                                                       w                K
                                                                        b                              K
                                                                                                       b
  − hN N dNt = mcµ (1 − α)A                  dλt + λµ (1 − α)A                   dmct + λmc(1 − α)A             dµw
                                                                                                                  t
                                    N                                   N                              N
                           + λmcµw α(1 − α)AK
                                            b α−1 N α dK                    b α N −α−1 dNt (A.17)
                                                       b t − λmcµw α(1 − α)AK

   The Lagrange multiplier on the household’s budget constraint can be written as:

                                             λt = uC − βbuC (+1)                                           (A.18)

    Here it is understood that uC (+1) is the derivative of the flow utility function with respect to
its argument evaluated in period t + 1. Totally differentiating this expression yields:

                           dλt = uCC + βb2 uCC (+1) dCt − βbuCC (+1)dCt+1
                                                  
                                                                                                           (A.19)

   The total derivative of the aggregate resource constraint is:

                                         dYt = dCt + dIt + dGt                                             (A.20)

   Combining (A.20), (A.19), and (A.17) with (A.13) and re-arranging terms yields the following
expression for the output multiplier:


 dYt            dmct      d ln vtp      dK
                                         bt      dIt     dµw     dYt+1      dGt+1      dIt+1
     = θ 1 + θ2      + θ3          + θ4     + θ1     + θ5 t + θ6       − θ6       − θ6       (A.21)
 dGt             dGt       dGt          dGt      dGt     dGt      dGt        dGt        dGt

   Where these coeffficients are:

                                                            α
                                                             K
                                 −mcµw (1 − α)A                   uCC + βb2 uCC (+1)
                                                             b                            
                                                             N
θ1 = h                                       i                                             α
                                  b α N −α−1               vp                                 K
         −hN N   + λmcµw α(1 − α)AK                                    − mcµw (1 − α)A            (uCC + βb2 uCC (+1))
                                                                                              b
                                                     (1−α)AKb α N −α                          N


                                                                        α
                                                                        K
                                                     λµw (1 − α)A
                                                                        b
                                                                        N
θ2 = h                                           i                                         α
                                b α N −α−1                 vp                                 K
         −hN N + λmcµw α(1 − α)AK                                      − mcµw (1 − α)A            (uCC + βb2 uCC (+1))
                                                                                              b
                                                     (1−α)AKb α N −α                          N



                                                                      
                                   N hN N − λmcµw α(1 − α)AKb α N −α−1
θ3 = h                                       i                            α
                                  b α N −α−1    vp            w (1 − α)A K
         −hN N   + λmcµw α(1 − α)AK                     − mcµ                 (uCC + βb2 uCC (+1))
                                                                          b
                                                 b α −α
                                                     (1−α)AK N            N




                                                        42
                                      λmcµw α(1 − α)AK  b α−1 N α + α N
                                                                    1−α K
θ4 = h
                                                                         b
                                             i                                α
                                                  v p
         −hN N                    b α N −α−1
                 + λmcµw α(1 − α)AK                         −  mcµ w (1 − α)A K
                                                                              b
                                                                                  (uCC + βb2 uCC (+1))
                                                    b α −α
                                                  (1−α)AK N                   N



                                                                     α
                                                                     K
                                                  λmc(1 − α)A
                                                                     b
                                                                     N
θ5 = h                                        i                                        α
                                b α N −α−1              vp                             K
         −hN N + λmcµw α(1 − α)AK                                   − mcµw (1 − α)A          (uCC + βb2 uCC (+1))
                                                                                       b
                                                  (1−α)AKb α N −α                      N



                                                             α
                                                              K
                                      −mcµw (1 − α)A                 βbuCC (+1)
                                                              b
                                                              N
θ6 = h                                       i                                         α
                                  b α N −α−1      vp                                   K
         −hN N   + λmcµw α(1 − α)AK                                 − mcµw (1 − α)A          (uCC + βb2 uCC (+1))
                                                                                       b
                                                  (1−α)AK N −α
                                                   bα                                  N


    These expressions are algebraically complicated but nevertheless intuitive. Given assumptions
on preferences, θ1 is positive and bound between zero and one. The parameter θ2 is positive and
θ3 is negative. This means that the output multiplier is increasing in the response of real marginal
cost and decreasing in the reaction of price dispersion to an increase in government spending, just
as in the simpler version of the model. Coefficient θ4 is positive, so the multiplier is bigger the more
capital services react to a change in government spending, and hence the multiplier will be bigger
the less costly is variable capital utilization. The parameter θ5 is positive. This plays an analogous
role to the response of real marginal cost to a government spending shock. If the wage markup
falls when government spending increases, then µw       t increases, which makes the output multiplier
bigger. Given that uCC < 0, the coefficient θ6 is positive. This means that the multiplier is bigger
the more future output reacts and is smaller the more future government spending and investment
react to a change in current government spending.
    This expression for the output multiplier would reduce to the expression in the text under some
parameter restrictions. If wages are flexible and w → ∞ (so that there is no market power in
                                                    dµw
wage-setting), then µw  t = 1 at all times, so that dGt = 0. If b = 0 (no habit formation), then θ6 = 0
                                                      t


and the coefficients on reactions of future endogenous variables to changes in current government
spending drop out. If α = 0 (so that capital is not productive), then θ4 = 0 and there would be no
                       dIt
investment, so that dG    t
                            = 0. This would then leave just the first three terms. With competitive
wage-setting, no habit formation, and no capital, the expressions for θ1 , θ2 , and θ3 would reduce
to exactly the same expressions presented in the text.




                                                     43
