                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                BUSINESS LITERACY AND DEVELOPMENT:
    EVIDENCE FROM A RANDOMIZED CONTROLLED TRIAL IN RURAL MEXICO

                                        Gabriela Calderon
                                         Jesse M. Cunha
                                        Giacomo De Giorgi

                                        Working Paper 19740
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19740


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2013




We thank Shauna Cozad, Marina Kutyavina, Paul Feldman, and especially José Maria (Chema) Gardoni,
Alejandro Maza, and Carla Roa for excellent research assistance. We are especially indebted to Leticia
Jaraegui and the staff of CREA. Helpful comments were made by Pascaline Dupas, Rema Hanna,
Dean Karlan, Asim Khwaja, Neale Mahoney, Anant Nyshandham, Jon Robinson, Mark Rosenzweig,
Fabiano Schivardi, Chris Udry, and seminar participants at UCLA, Harvard-MIT, Yale, USC, Cal-Poly
San Luis Obispo, NY-Fed, IFPRI, the IDB, and the EIEF. We gratefully acknowledge funding from
Stanford Center for International Development, the Freeman Spogli Institute, the Michelle R. Clayman
Insti- tute for Gender Research, the Social Science Research Council, the Graduate Research Opportunity
(Studies and Diversity Program of the School of Humanities and Sciences, Stanford University), and
SEED. Giacomo De Giorgi acknowledges financial support from the Spanish Ministry of Economy
and Competitiveness, through the Severo Ochoa Programme for Centres of Excellence in R&D (SEV-
2011-0075). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Gabriela Calderon, Jesse M. Cunha, and Giacomo De Giorgi. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Business Literacy and Development: Evidence from a Randomized Controlled Trial in Rural
Mexico
Gabriela Calderon, Jesse M. Cunha, and Giacomo De Giorgi
NBER Working Paper No. 19740
December 2013
JEL No. C93,I25,O12,O14

                                              ABSTRACT

A large share of the poor in developing countries run small enterprises, often earning low incomes.
This paper explores whether the poor performance of businesses can be explained by a lack of basic
business skills. We randomized the offer of a free, 48-hour business skills course to female entrepreneurs
in rural Mexico. We find that those assigned to treatment earn higher profits, have larger revenues,
serve a greater number of clients, are more likely to use formal accounting techniques, and more likely
to be registered with the government. Indirect treatment effects on those entrepreneurs randomizedout
of the program, yet living in treatment villages, are economically meaningful, yet imprecisely measured.
We present a simple model of experience and learning that helps interpret our results, and consistent
with the theoretical predictions, we find that "low-quality" entrepreneurs are the most likely to quittheir
business post-treatment, and that the positive impacts of the treatment are increasing in entrepreneurial
quality.


Gabriela Calderon                                    Giacomo De Giorgi
&HQWUDO%DQNRI0H[LFR                               Departament d'Economia i d'Historia Economica
Ave. 5 de Mayo 2,                                    Edifici B, Office B3-1122
Centro, Cuauhtémoc, 06059                            Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona
CiudadGH0p[LFR'LVWULWR)HGHUDO                   08193 Bellaterra, (Barcelona)
0p[LFR                                              Spain
gabriela.calderon@banxico.org.mx                     and NBER
                                                     giacomo.degiorgi@gmail.com
Jesse M. Cunha
Naval Postgraduate School
Graduate School of Business
and Public Policy
555 Dyer Rd
Monterey, CA 93943
jcunha@nps.edu
1. Introduction
    Self-employed, non-agricultural workers make up about 45 percent of the labor force in lower
income countries, and private sector led growth is often stressed as an engine of creating jobs and
spurring growth (World Development Report 2013). A persistent puzzle, however, is the observa-
tion that micro-entrepreneurs, females in particular, in developing countries often do not run their
businesses efficiently; for example, through the misallocation of capital and labor in the firm (see
Mckenzie and Woodruff (2012) for a review of this literature). Given the importance of entrepreneur-
ship in the development process, especially amongst women, it is of utmost importance to understand
both how business decisions are made and if poor decisions are caused by a lack of business literacy
and managerial knowledge.
    In response to this perceived underperformance of female entrepreneurs, a considerable number
of NGOs around the world provide business training; however, there is yet little evidence that this
type of intervention is needed or effective. Among economists, there is an increasing interest in
understanding the links between the variation in firm profits and financial and managerial practices
in developing countries (see de Mel, Mckenzie and Woodruff (2009a); Karlan and Valdivia (2011);
and Bloom et al. (2013)). At the same time, more research is required to understand the way poor
entrepreneurs make their investment decisions (de Mel, McKenzie and Woodruff, 2008).
    In this paper, we analyze the effects of providing business training to small and micro female
entrepreneurs through a Randomized Controlled Trial. The experiment was conducted in the poor,
rural Mexican state of Zacatecas and includes about 900 entrepreneurs who are engaged in many
different activities, such as making and selling food, making craft items, or selling consumer goods
in small shops. A random subset of these entrepreneurs were offered a free, 48-hour business training
course which focused on simple business concepts, such as identifying unit costs, the importance of
recording sales, and pricing to maximize profits, and emphasized the practical application of these
concepts in the entrepreneurs’ own business. Our research aims to answer two questions: (i) Is the
policy intervention of classroom training effective at improving business outcomes? (ii) Can we shed
light on the possible mechanisms through which the intervention worked?
    In regards to the first question, we find that the offer of classes raises profits, revenues, and the
number of clients served for those women who were invited to the treatment. We also find that the
intervention led to an increase in the use of formal accounting techniques as well as an increase in the


                                                   2
likelihood of formally registering with the government, which requires paying taxes but also allows
firms to issue legal bills of sale. Treated firms were able to reduce their costs and change the mix of
products they sold: specifically, they increased the number of items sold, dropping higher cost, lower
price goods and adding lower cost higher price goods. Furthermore, we collected two rounds of post-
intervention data, one year and 2.5 years post-program implementation, and find that the effect of the
treatment does not diminish into the medium run.
    In order to shed light on the possible mechanisms driving our results, we develop a simple con-
ceptual framework along the lines of Karlan, Knight and Udry (2012). We think of the entrepreneur
in this context as an experimenter with a noisy signal of her productivity who faces the outside option
of quitting her business. The offer of business classes lower the cost of (or introduce) a new, more
expensive, yet potentially profitable, technology for running one’s business, i.e., a set of new manage-
rial and accounting practices. The entrepreneur then decides whether to adopt this more productive
and expensive technology. However, the technology is risky, entrepreneurs are heterogeneous in their
ability (or productivity), the technology is only profitable for those with high ability, and ability is
only partially observable to the entrepreneur. Through the adoption of the new technology, irrespec-
tive of the outcome, the entrepreneur learns her own productivity which informs her decision about
whether to continue running the business, and with which technology.
    This model offers two testable implications: first, amongst treated entrepreneurs, the probability
of quitting one’s business should be higher for those with lower ability, and second, the effect of
the treatment on profits should be higher for those with greater ability. Bringing these predictions
to the data, and proxying for ability with the level of pre-treatment profits, we find that low ability
entrepreneurs are indeed more likely to quit their businesses as a result of the training, and the largest
positive effects are recorded amongst the “best” entrepreneurs.
    A further contribution of our study is that the randomization was conducted at both the village
and intra-village levels, which allows us to study spillover and general equilibrium effects on non-
participants in program villages (Miguel and Kremer (2004); Angelucci and De Giorgi (2009)). It is
unclear whether the indirect treatment effects should be positive or negative; for example, treated sub-
jects may implement better business practices and capture market share at the expense of non-treated
entrepreneurs, or, treated subjects may share their knowledge with non-treated subjects, intentionally
through conversation or unintentionally if the new business practices are observable (such as new



                                                    3
menus, changes to the product mix, or changes in prices). Regardless, it is clear that the presence
or absence of indirect treatment effects have important implications for the global effectiveness of
development policies.
    In terms of profits, we detect negative, although not statistically significant, spillover effects of the
treatment, which seem to arise from an increase in costs, and not from a fall in revenues. This result,
together with the finding that treated firms face lower costs, suggests that the control and treated
women purchase their inputs from different suppliers (which are more costly for the control group in
treatment villages) or that suppliers have latitude to set differentiated prices. Combing the direct and
indirect effects, a back-of-the-envelope cost and benefit analysis developed in Section 6 suggests that
the intervention is extremely cost effective.
    Our paper contributes to the growing literature on the effects of business literacy training on
firms profitability. For example, empirical evidence is presented by Field, Jayachandran and Pande
(2010) in India, Karlan and Valdivia (2011) and Valdivia (2011) in Perú, Drexler, Fischer and Schoar
(2011) in the Dominican Republic, Berge, Bjorvatn and Tungodden (2011) in Tanzania, Bruhn and
Zia (2011) in Bosnia-Herzegovina, and Giné and Mansuri (2011) in Pakistan, and Fairlie, Karlan and
Zinman (2012) in the United States.
    At the same time, our intervention is distinct from this literature in several important ways. First,
the pedagogy focuses on the practical application of the skills and topics in the entrepreneurs’ own
businesses. Second, the training is intensive, with a total of 48 hours of classes over 6 weeks. Com-
pared with other training programs, the course is relatively long and intensive; for example many
programs associated with microfinance organizations last only 30 minutes, added on to weekly or
monthly borrower meetings (Mckenzie and Woodruff (2012)). Third, the entrepreneurs in our sample
do not receive any other treatment, for example, none are involved in micro-finance or other targeted
business interventions.1 This last feature is important because it allows us to isolate the indepen-
dent effect of business training, something that is not possible with much of the existing literature
(e.g., Field, Jayachandran and Pande (2010), Karlan and Valdivia (2011), Drexler, Fischer and Schoar
(2011)).2
    Our paper also relates to the work of Nyshadham (2013), who provides theoretical arguments
   1 Only  4.5 percent of our sample had received a loan from a microfinance institution or the government in the previous
12 months.
   2 Indeed, de Mel, Mckenzie and Woodruff (2012) find substantial complementarities between business training and the

availability of credit amongst female entrepreneurs in Sri Lanka.


                                                            4
on the effects of business literacy training on entrepreneurial decision making, and to the growing
literature on the effects of management services in developing countries (Bloom et al. (2013); Bruhn,
Karlan and Schoar (2012); Karlan, Knight and Udry (2012)).
      The remainder of the paper is as follows: Section 2 describes the business literacy training and our
experimental design; Section 3 develops a conceptual framework to help interpret the main findings;
Section 4 describes the data and the sample; 5 presents the empirical methodology and discusses the
main effects of the intervention; and Section 6 concludes.


2. Description of the Business Literacy Training and Experiment

2.1    The business literacy classes
      In 2009, we partnered with the NGO CREA to develop and implement a business literacy training
program for small, female headed firms in the retail or production sector. CREA operates in small
villages in the Mexican state of Zacatecas, a high-altitude, dry, and agricultural region. While there is
good road access to all villages in which CREA operates, the inhabitants are none-the-less isolated in
most of their daily activities as villages are geographically isolated, separated by farms and arid land.
      The training program consists of two four-hour classroom meetings per week and runs for six
weeks - a total classroom time of 48 hours. The classes are designed to be small and inclusive, with
two instructors and a class size of no more than 25 entrepreneurs; all instructors are experienced
local university professors, graduate, and undergraduates students. Furthermore, the program is free
to invitees. In fact, CREA offers participants several incentives to further encourage participation,
including: a completion certificate from CREA, the Institute for Women of Zacatecas (a government
agency), and the Autonomous University of Zacatecas (the local university); in-class raffles for small
prizes (e.g., a CREA hat or stationary supplies) each week conditional on attendance and homework
completion; and the promise of acceptance in future CREA courses conditional on regular attendance.
      The business literacy course covers six main topics, each taught in separate weekly modules. The
first consists of understanding costs (e.g., the difference between unit, marginal, fixed, and total costs)
and how they should be measured. The second covers how to optimally set prices. In this module,
emphasis is placed on the concepts of profit maximization and pricing to reflect marginal costs, rather
than average or fixed costs, as well as the concepts of demand and competition. The third module
reviews the basic legal rights and obligations of small business owners. Since the vast majority of
participants own informal businesses, this module includes a discussion of the costs and benefits of

                                                     5
formally registering a business with the government. The fourth module covers general business
organization and the choice of products to produce or sell. The fifth covers marketing, including
concepts related to knowing and responding to competition. The final module is a discussion of how
to be an effective salesperson.
      The content and teaching style of CREA’s course is intentionally simplified in order to be under-
standable to the population at hand, the majority of whom have low levels of formal education. As
such, classes emphasize practical examples and encourage students to relate the concepts to their own
businesses. For each module, students received a 30 page “textbook” which discusses (1) the impor-
tance of the concept, (2) the definition of the concept, (3) examples of how to compute or use the
concept (e.g., how to do basic business accounting or compute unitary costs), (4) in-class exercises,
and (5) exercises for homework. In-class instruction follows this structure, first introducing the main
concepts, then applying those concepts to simple examples that are relevant to the participants’ own
businesses.3

2.2    Experimental design and population of study
      Our experimental design contains two-stages. In the first, villages were randomized into either
treatment or control, and in the second, entrepreneurs within treatment villages were randomized to
receive or not receive an invitation to attend the classes. This design allows us to estimate the direct
effect of the program, by comparing invitees in treatment villages to entrepreneurs in control villages,
as well as the indirect effects of the program, by comparing those not invited to attend classes in
treatment village to entrepreneurs in control villages.
      Working with CREA, we selected a sample of entrepreneurs by first choosing villages, and then
conducting a census of the female entrepreneurs in those villages who produced or sold goods. Our
original sample frame included all villages in the state of Zacatecas that met three criteria: that they
(i) had between 100 and 500 female entrepreneurs who sold goods or provided services, as identified
by the 2005 Mexican census, (ii) are within a two hour drive from the City of Zacatecas, and (iii)
had less than 1500 households (also identified by the 2005 Mexican census).4 This selection process
identified 25 villages. In order to accommodate our survey budget as well as CREAs institutional
capacity, we randomly drew a sample of 17 villages from this set of 25 to be included in the study.
   3 An  in-class example and exercise can be seen in Apendix Figure 1.
   4 The  second criterion was necessary to ensure that the CREA instructors who lived in Zacatecas City would be able to
reach treated villages.



                                                           6
    Within chosen villages, we identified female entrepreneurs that produced and/or sold goods with
a modified snowball sampling technique as follows: First, we contacted the elected village leader
(the comisario or presidente municipal, a mayor-like position) and asked him/her to introduce us to
at least three knowledgable local women (the ”seeds”). Second, we asked this group to list all of the
women in the village that (i) work for themselves and (ii) sell a good. None of the local seed women
were entrepreneurs themselves, and enumerators emphasized to the seed women the importance of
identifying as close to a census of women entrepreneurs as possible. This process yielded about
50 female entrepreneurs per village, to whom we applied a pre-intervention questionnaire between
July and September of 2009.5 We did not have the resources to survey male entrepreneurs, which
limits our ability to estimate the full indirect effects of treatment (spillover and general equilibrium
effects). However, our experience in these villages is that the majority of the goods that are sold by
women are not also sold by men, in which case we would indeed be capturing the entire market.
Importantly, none of the entrepreneurs we surveyed report selling their goods outside of their own
village, suggesting it is unlikely that there are program spillovers across villages.
    In order to assign subjects to treatment, we used information on business activity and demograph-
ics from the pre-treatment survey to perform the random assignment at both the village and intra-
village levels. In early October 2009, eligible entrepreneurs were contacted in person by a CREA
staff member informing them of their selection into the program. Classes began in late October and
ran through December 2009, and attendance was recorded by the teachers.


3. A Simple Model of Entrepreneurial Experimentation and Business Literacy
    To understand the potential effects of this intervention, we propose a simple theoretical framework
which models entrepreneurs as experimenters with imperfect knowledge of their ability. This model
is based on Karlan, Knight and Udry (2012) and captures two key components of our intervention: (i)
accounting practices and (ii) “business” skills. At the same time, and differently from Karlan, Knight
and Udry (2012) we allow for the outside option of quitting one’s business.
    Entrepreneurs are assumed to maximize their lifetime consumption subject to the resource con-
straint in the following programming problem:
   5 Theremaining female entrepreneurs identified by the 2005 Mexican census were either in the service sector or were
farmers who did not retail their produce.




                                                          7
                                                      ∞
                                      max V ≡ E0 ∑ β t U(cit , wi )                                                       (1)
                                        cit
                                                       0
                                      s.t. cit ≤ πit                                                                      (2)

                                       where πit = f (xi , αi ) − xi and πi0 = wi − xi                                    (3)


where cit is entrepreneur i’s consumption in period t and w is her initial wealth. We assume no credit
markets are available, so consumption can not exceed per period profits πit . Revenues, f (xi , αi ), are
a function of the management technology the entrepreneur uses, xi , and her productivity (i.e., her
type), αi . Costs, also denoted by x, are indexed directly to the choice of management technology. The
entrepreneur receives no revenue in the initial period (t = 0), yet must incur the cost of her choice of
management technology in that period.
    For simplicity, we assume that there are only two types of technology, new and old, denoted by
xh and xl respectively, which cost xh and xl (with xh > xl ). For the more productive types of en-
trepreneurs, the more expensive technology is more profitable than the less expensive technology,
while for less productive types, the reverse is true: that is, πi (xh ) − xh > πi (xl ) − xl only for en-
trepreneurs of above a certain productivity type, say, α h . If no management technology is chosen, the
entrepreneur quits her business and incurs no cost, in which case xi = 0 and she receives the outside
option pay-out πi0 . As will become clear, we think of the business literacy classes as lowering the
costs of, or introducing, the new management technology (xh ) for those who attend the classes.6
    Reflecting the environment in our experimental setting, we assume that the entrepreneurs do not
know their type with certainty ex-ante, but believe they are either a high productivity type with prob-
ability phi , a low productivity type with probability pli , and very low productivity type (the type that
will quit her business) with probability p0i , with ∑ j=0,l,h pij = 1. Choosing the new technology, how-
ever, will reveal the type of the entrepreneur ex-post as follows: if the more expensive management
process succeeds, it returns πih and the entrepreneur knows she is of type α h or greater; if it returns πil
the entrepreneur knows she is of type [α l , α h ); and if it returns profits that are low enough, the very
unsuccessful entrepreneur realizes that her type is lower than α l , and quits her business to receive the
outside option, πi0 . Thus, experimentation informs the entrepreneur whether she is: (i) a “good”; (ii)
   6 We assume that a non-empty set of entrepreneurs has sufficient initial wealth to experiment with the new technology if
they so wish. Recall that there is no credit market available or alternatively that the technologies are not collateralizable.



                                                              8
a “bad”; or (iii) a “non” entrepreneur.
    The entrepreneur’s value function is as follows:




V ≡ max =               U(w − x) +
     x=xl ,xh ,0
                                                                                                                           
                        1[x = xh ]β phV (π h (xh ), α ≥ α h ) + pl V (π l (xh ), α l ≤ α < α h ) + p0V (π 0 (xh ), α < α l ) +

                         1[x = xl ]βV (π l , α) +

                         1[x = 0]βV (π 0 , α < α l )


The entrepreneur will decide to invest in the new technology rather than sticking with the old tech-
nology if the following condition holds:



                                               β
                   u(cl ) − u(w − xh ) < ph        u(ch ) + β pl u(π l (xh )) + β p0 u(π 0 (xh )) +
                                              1−β
                                                    β2                  β2              β
                                                pl       u(cl ) + p0          u(c0 ) −        u(cl )
                                                   1−β               1−β               1−β

That is, she will choose to experiment if she is sufficiently optimistic about ph .7
    Importantly, the new technology has a (positive) option value; that is, it offers the opportunity
to learn one’s type and possibly increase profits (become a “good” entrepreneur) if her type is high
enough. Because of the positive option value, the entrepreneur may in fact choose to experiment even
if the first-period expected (net) return from adopting the new technology is lower than the net return
of the old technology, i.e. phi πih (xh ) + pli πil (xh ) + p0i πi0 (xh ) < πil (xl ). The reason is that:



                                                                                    β2  h            
 u(cl ) − u(w − xh ) + β u(cl ) − ph u(ch ) − pl u(π l (xh )) − p0 u(π 0 (xh )) < ph      u(c ) − u(cl ) .
                                                                                     1−β

The term on the left hand side is the option value. This relationship implies that even if the second
term on the right hand side is positive and fairly large it could still be that the option value is large
and positive.
   7A similar problem applies to the decision of adopting the old technology, i.e., the decision to become an entrepreneur.
We do not investigate this decision here as our baseline sample consists of entrepreneurs.



                                                             9
    Furthermore, if we maintain that high ability entrepreneurs are better off using the new technol-
ogy, low ability entrepreneurs are better off sticking to the old technology, and the lowest ability types
are best off by quitting, as follows:




                         V (x0 , α ≤ α l ) > V (xl , α ≤ α l ) > V (xh , α ≤ α l )

                        V (x0 , α > α h ) < V (xl , α > α h ) < V (xh , α > α h )

                               V (xl , α l < α ≤ α h ) > V (xh , α l < α ≤ α h )

                              V (xl , α l < α ≤ α h ) > V (x0 , α l < α ≤ α h ).


Then some entrepreneurs will quit their businesses when they discover their type. These ex-post
choices can be summarized graphically for a given set of parameter values, as in Figure 2. It is clear
that the value functions are ordered according to the above inequalities, implying that an entrepreneur
would quit her business if her type is in the leftmost portion of the horizontal axis (α), she would
employ the old technology for intermediate values of her type (α), and she would employ the new
technology in the right part of the graph.
    Under the assumption that the probability of success is positively related to one’s ability, i.e.
ph is positively related to α, the treatment will induce less optimistic entrepreneurs to try the new
technology relative to the control. This implies that the average difference between the treated and
control groups in quit rates and profits cannot be signed ex-ante, as some of the treated are low ability
types who are “trying out” the new technology. Thus, the average effect of the treatment (i.e., offering
business literacy classes) is ambiguous on firm profits and quit rates, as we would require knowledge
of the distribution of types and beliefs in the population, as well as the relative productivity gains the
new technology offers. Ultimately, it is an empirical matter whether:




                              Pr(Quit|T = 1) − Pr(Quit|T = 0) T 0

                                        E(π|T = 1) − E(π|T = 0) T 0,


    where T = 1 for invited entrepreneurs in treatment villages, and 0 otherwise.
    However, from the model, we do know that amongst the high ability entrepreneurs (α > α h ),

                                                      10
mean profits should increase amongst the treated relative to the controls:


                           E(π|T = 1, α > α h ) − E(π|T = 0, α > α h ) > 0.                           (4)

Furthermore, we also know that amongst the low ability entrepreneurs (α ≤ α l ) we should see “ex-
cess” quitting amongst treatment group relative to the control group:


                        Pr(Quit|T = 1, α < α l ) − Pr(Quit|T = 0, α < α l ) > 0.                      (5)

      Testing these two predictions requires knowledge of α. As we do not observe productivity di-
rectly, we proxy for productivity with pre-treatment profits, π0 . Thus, the two testable implications of
this model are that the intention to treat effect on quitting should be non-increasing in pre-treatment
profits and the intention to treat effect on profits should be non-decreasing in pre-treatment profits:

                                   ∂ {E(π|T = 1) − E(π|T = 0)}
                                                                ≥0                                    (6)
                                                 ∂ π0
                            ∂ {Pr(Quit|T = 1) − Pr(Quit|T = 0)}
                                                                ≤ 0.                                  (7)
                                            ∂ π0

      In our empirical analysis below, we first explore the overall effects of the program and we then
test these implications of this model of entrepreneurial decision making.


4. Data and Sample

4.1    Data
      Our data includes an array of indicators of business performance, entrepreneurial ability, and
socio-economic characteristics. In addition to the pre-intervention survey, two waves of data were
collected post-intervention, approximately 18 months apart (the first between July and September
2010 and the second between March and May of 2012). These multiple post-intervention waves
allow us to both analyze longer run impacts and increase the statistical power to detect significant
program effects (McKenzie, 2012). All interviews were conducted by local enumerators with the
stated purpose of studying female-run micro enterprises; intentionally, no connection was established
with CREA or the intervention.
      Our main measures of business performance include self-reports of profits, revenues, and the
number of clients served, all from the last day the entrepreneur worked. Many women do not work

                                                   11
the full week or regular hours; as such, they might be better able to remember daily figures rather than
compute figures from a longer time horizon.
    While evidence from other developing countries suggests that self-reported measures of aggre-
gate business activity are as accurate as formal accounting figures (de Mel, Mckenzie and Woodruff,
2009b), we nonetheless also collected data on the individual goods sold in the enterprise at baseline
and in the first followup. We first asked the entrepreneur to list all of the goods that she sold (up to a
maximum of 14).8 We then asked for each good the number of units sold on the last day worked, the
unit price, and the unit cost.
    As the goods reported on in each survey round represent the contemporaneous stock of goods for
sale, this data is an unbalanced panel at the good level. As such, it contains three types of goods:
new goods for sale, old goods that were no longer sold, and goods that were sold both pre- and
post-intervention. From this data, we first calculate aggregate measures of the stock of goods an
entrepreneur sold, including total revenue, total profit, the total number of goods sold, and the mean-
across-all-goods of both unit cost and price. These aggregate measures are useful because they capture
optimizing decisions in terms of product stock, which could have been affected by the intervention;
for example, a woman may learn that one product is losing money and drop that product; she may also
decide to sell a new product with a larger profit margin. At the same time, this information provides
a set of alternative measures of business performance which allows us to claim that non-classical
measurement error is not the key to our findings.
    We also use the good-specific data to examine how the product mix changes over time in response
to the business training. Specifically, we examine treatment effects on total revenues, total profit,
mean unit cost, and mean price amongst (i) the goods that the entrepreneur decided to stop selling
(dropped goods), (ii) the goods that she continued to sell over both rounds (kept goods), and (iii) the
goods she decided to start selling in the first post-intervention round (added goods).
    Several other outcomes will give us further insight into how the intervention affects the perfor-
mance of the business, including: the number of employees (both paid and unpaid), the number of
co-owners, the average number of hours worked per week by the owner, and whether the entrepreneur
is registered with the government agency in charge of collecting taxes and regulating business activ-
ity, the Secretary of Finance and Public Credit (Secretaria de Hacienda y Credito Publico, SCHP).
   8 Approximately six percent of the sample reported selling 14 goods; thus six percent of the sample could have had more

than 14 different goods for sale, information which we do not capture.



                                                           12
In order to directly examine the effect of the training classes on our subjects’ business-math knowl-
edge, we administered a simple exercise related to production and sales.9 This same question was
applied both pre- and post-treatment. We score each of the four sections as either correct or incorrect,
summing to create a total score for the exercise. Furthermore, we asked the entrepreneurs how they
kept accounts for their business, whether through personal notes or a formal accounting method, or
whether they did not keep any accounts.
      To capture important heterogeneity in our sample pre-treatment, we also collected data on the
owner’s age, education, asset ownership (e.g. type of dwellings and number of rooms), risk aversion,
reservation wages, credit availability and the cost of credit, the type of activity the woman is engaged
in, the age of the business in months, and the size of business investments. Finally, in both post-
intervention surveys, we elicited a firm’s survival by asking if the entrepreneur still sells any goods.
Naturally, we do not observe these business-related outcomes for firms who quit their enterprise.

4.2    Sample and summary statistics
      Our working sample includes 17 villages - seven treatment and ten pure control - and a total of
875 entrepreneurs: 164 eligible for and offered the treatment, 189 controls in treatment villages, and
522 in pure control villages. Figure 1 contains the distribution of the types of goods a firm sold,
pre-intervention. The majority of firms (about 65 percent) were involved in the sale of food, either
prepared (e.g., cheese, bread) or ready-to-eat (e.g., tacos, hamburgers, gorditas); general grocery store
owners and other re-sale comprise a little over 25 percent of the sample; and handicrafts and clothing
sum-up to about 10 percent.
      Table 1 contains mean pre-intervention characteristics by treatment group, along with p-values
from F-tests of their equality, and suggests that the randomization was successful in that the pre-
intervention characteristics are for the most part indistinguishable across groups. For one variable,
there is a significant difference across groups at the 5 percent level: more businesses were registered
with the government in the control group than the treatment group.
      This data paints a sobering picture of the economic lives of these entrepreneurs. Daily profits
average around 140 pesos (approximately $11 USD), with a large variation (the standard error of the
mean is 16 pesos).10 Revenues are about four times the size of profits, and it is interesting to note
this is the same order of magnitude as found amongst firms in Sri Lanka by de Mel, Mckenzie and
  9 This   exercise can be seen in Appendix Figure 2.
  10 The   dollar peso exchange rate in 2008-2009 was approximately 13 Mexican pesos to 1 U.S. dollar.


                                                            13
Woodruff (2009b).
      Business owners are on average 46 years old and have about six years of education. Approx-
imately one third have a temporary roof on their residence (e.g., thatch or cardboard), an indirect
measure of permanent income. Owners work for about 40 hours per week on average, and the total
value of the capital stock (the replacement value of business capital) is about $570. Interestingly, the
entrepreneurs in our sample seem to have access to credit that would allow them to replace the busi-
ness capital at a high (albeit common for this type of population) six percent monthly interest rate.11
Businesses are small: on average there are 1.6 workers including the owner, and employees work
only about one quarter of the hours the owner works (about 10 hours per week). About 60 percent
of businesses have no workers other than the owner. The average age of a firm is about seven years,
again with large variation.
      Importantly, the women in our sample know how to make basic calculations, but are less proficient
at determining profits or optimally setting prices. For example, 93 percent said that they know how to
make simple math calculations (not shown in the table), while the average score on the math exercise
was 39 percent, or less than two out of the four questions answered correctly.12 Less than five percent
of entrepreneurs (one percent in the treatment group and four percent in the control) keep formal
business accounts, and only about one fifth of the sample is registered with the government.

4.3    Take-up of classes
      Classes were offered to the selected invitees by a CREA staff member who visited the en-
trepreneur’s home or business. Importantly, CREA made the intentional decision to not pre-screen
invitees on the basis of the stated desire to accept the classes. As such, amongst the 164 entrepreneurs
who were offered the classes, about 35 percent (57 entrepreneurs) did not attend any classes. Amongst
those who did attend at least one class, an average of six classes were attended out of the 12 offered.
Take-up and attendance rates are similar in magnitude to other business literacy interventions in the
literature (Mckenzie and Woodruff, 2012).
      Appendix Table 1 compares the mean pre-intervention characteristics of entrepreneurs who at-
tended classes and those who did not, and shows that no variables are significantly different across
groups at the five percent level. However, despite this lack of significant difference (partly driven by
  11 Replacement  value of business capital was self-reported by the entrepreneur.
  12 Analyzing the questions of the math exercise separately, less than 50 percent could calculate profits correctly and only
18 percent could calculate the optimal price to set.



                                                            14
the small sample size), attendees appear to be less successful entrepreneurs than non-attendees. For
example, daily profits and revenues are about 50 percent higher for entrepreneurs who did not attend
classes. Again, such findings are consistent with the literature (see, for example, Drexler, Fischer and
Schoar (2011) and de Mel, Mckenzie and Woodruff (2012)).
      In order to investigate the effect of treatment (being offered the class) on the treated (class atten-
dees), we can instrument attendance status (which is presumably endogenous) with treatment status
(which is exogenous due to randomization). However, for parsimony and a cleaner interpretation of
the results, we instead focus on the Intent to Treat parameter to study the direct effect of the program,
which compares eligible to ineligible entrepreneurs.

4.4    Attrition
      Some entrepreneurs attrited from our sample between the baseline and the first and second fol-
lowup surveys; importantly, however, attrition rates do not vary significantly across treatment groups
(on average). Specifically, at the time of the first post-intervention survey, sample attrition was 12.8
percent in the treatment compared to 15.3 percent in the control (p-value = 0.58). During the second
followup survey, we were able to survey some of the attrited entrepreneurs from the first followup,
while some new subjects attrited: relative to the baseline sample, attrition in the second followup was
16.5 percent in the control group compared to 18.3 percent in the treatment group (p-value = 0.77).
Virtually all of the attrited entrepreneurs either moved out of the village or were not available on the
day of the interview; only three subjects ever refused to participate.13


5. Empirical Strategy and Results
      To isolate the causal impact of the business training classes, we estimate a series of difference-in-
differences models of the following form:




                      yit = α + β Ti + δ Post t + γ(Ti ∗ Postt ) + λWave2t + Xi Ω + εit                                  (8)


where y is the outcome interest, T is an indicator for living in a treatment village, Post is an in-
  13 Comparing entrepreneurs who ever attrited with those who did not reveals that, pre-intervention, attrited entrepreneurs

have less education, have significantly lower revenues, employ fewer workers, and are less likely to produce goods rather
than re-sell goods (see Appendix Table 2); these relationships hold equally in both the treatment and control groups (results
available upon request).



                                                            15
dicator for the post-intervention period, Wave2 is an indicator for the first post-intervention survey,
X is a vector of pre-intervention business and demographic characteristics, and ε is an error term.
Pre-intervention characteristics are included as covariates to increase precision, and we only include
covariates that were used in the randomization algorithm; below, we demonstrate that results are
robust to the exclusion of these controls.14
      Several issues are of note: First, the direct effect of the offer of treatment, or the Intent to Treat
(IT T ) effect, is identified by γ when equation 8 is estimated on the sample of all entrepreneurs in
control villages and entrepreneurs in the treatment villages who were offered the classes (this identi-
fication strategy is immune from within-village spillover effects). The indirect effect of the offer of
treatment, or the Indirect Treatment Effect (IT E), is identified by γ when equation 8 is estimated on
the sample of all entrepreneurs in the control villages and entrepreneurs in the treatment villages who
were not offered the classes.
      Second, with two post-intervention survey waves, we are able to estimate models that permit dif-
ferent treatment effects over time. However, as shown below, estimated treatment effects do not differ
significantly across the two post-intervention survey waves, and so we pool the post-intervention sur-
veys together in order to increase statistical power, while including Wave2 to absorb any time-specific
effects.
      Finally, statistical inference is complicated by the small number of clusters (i.e., villages), imply-
ing that the standard (asymptotic) method for computing standard errors will be incorrect. We thus
report both p-values representing asymptotic, clustered standard errors (at the village level) as well as
p-values computed using the wild bootstrap of Cameron, Gelbach and Miller (2008).15

5.1    The direct effect of classes on firm survival and main business related outcomes
      We first explore the effect of business literacy classes on firm survival. In each post-intervention
survey wave, an entrepreneur was asked if she still runs her business, and we define a firm as quitting
accordingly. Column 1 of Table 2 shows the IT T on the likelihood of quitting one’s business is an
insignificant 1.4 percentage points, suggesting that the offer of classes did not differentially induced
  14 These pre-intervention covariates include: the number of workers in the business; the age and sector of the enterprise;
the replacement value of business capital; whether the entrepreneur states that she lacks business skills; whether she is risk
averse; her age, education, and number of rooms in her home; and her score on the business skills exercise.
  15 Randomization inference (Rosenbaum, 2002) can also be used to construct hypothesis tests of treatment effects; how-

ever, because our treatment effects are large, the power of randomization inference can be low. Regardless, we have
implemented permutation tests for a subset of outcomes, finding p-values that are similar in magnitude to wild bootstrap
p-values.



                                                             16
entrepreneurs to quit their business on average. However, many firms did quit their businesses over
our survey period implying we do not observe business related outcomes (such as profits and rev-
enues). Specifically, by the first and second followup surveys, 18.6 and 41.1 percent of the sample
had stopped running their business respectively.16 This firm survival rate is small, but not abnormal
for small businesses. For example, the five year survival rate for small businesses, of similar age to
our sample, in the U.S. and other OECD countries is about 50-70% (see Bartelsman, Scarpetta and
Schivardi (2003) and U.S. Small Business Administration (2012)).
    Columns 2-4 of Table 2 contain IT T s, estimated by equation 8, for the logarithm of three main
business outcomes: self-reported profits, revenues, and the number of clients served in the last day the
entrepreneur worked. The IT T for the logarithm of last day’s profits (column 2) is 0.215, implying
the offer of the business literacy classes has a positive effect on daily profits of about 23 percent.
This effect is significant at the six percent level when using asymptotic, clustered standard errors
and significant at the nine percent level when using wild bootstrapped, clustered standard errors.
The corresponding Treatment on the Treated Effect (not reported) is larger by a factor of about 1.5
(= 1/0.65). This effect of business training on profits is large (both the IT T and the T T E), yet com-
parable to other studies in the literature (Bruhn, Karlan and Schoar (2012); Mckenzie and Woodruff
(2012)).
    Columns 3 and 4 of Table 2 show that treatment effects on revenues and the number of clients
served are on the same order of magnitude as for profits – the IT T for revenues is 0.251, significant
at the five percent level with wild bootstrap p-values, while the IT T for clients served is 0.218,
significant at the 12 percent level with wild bootstrap p-values. It appears that the increase in revenues
and the number of clients served is at least part of the explanation for the observed increase in profits;
we return to probe these mechanisms in more detail below.
    To address concerns with multiple hypothesis testing (Romano and Wolf, 2005), we create a stan-
dardized measure of the three main business outcomes presented in Table 2: profits, revenues, and
clients served in the last day worked. As in Kling, Liebman and Katz (2007), we first standardize
each of the variables independently with respect to the baseline control group and then take the av-
erage across the standardized measures. Column 5 of Table 2 shows that this standardized outcome
  16 Perhaps  not surprisingly, there are significant differences between those who ever quit and those who did not (see
Appendix Table 3); for example, compared to non-quitters, quitters were younger in age, worked fewer hours in their
business, had fewer employees, and had been in business for less time. Furthermore, these relationships hold equally in
both the treatment and control groups (results available upon request).



                                                          17
increased by 0.154 standard deviations amongst those offered treatment, significant at the 5 percent
level.
      It is also important to note that the estimated treatment effects are of similar magnitude in both
the short run (one year post-intervention) and the medium run (2.5 years after the intervention). Table
3 contains by-wave IT T s estimated from a version of equation 8 that includes indicators for each
post-intervention wave, and their interaction with the treatment indicator. In general, point estimates
of the IT T in wave 3 are of similar magnitude as in wave 2, yet are more noisy, and we can not reject
the hypothesis that the IT T s are equal across waves. This latter result is rather important as it shows
that the one time intervention appears to have long lasting positive effects which do not seem to decay
2.5 years after the intervention.

5.2      Robustness of the main results
      Our estimated treatment effects are robust to various alternative specifications, as demonstrated
in Table 4 for the main business outcomes. First, columns 1, 4, and 7 replicate the estimates in Table
2, but exclude pre-program covariates. Perhaps not surprisingly, given the randomization, the point
estimates do not change meaningfully yet p-values increase as we lose precision. (While not shown
in the table, the point estimate on quitting one’s business also does not change meaningfully when
covariates are excluded.)
      Second, we test the robustness of the logarithmic transformation of the outcome when it equals
zero in levels, i.e., when the entrepreneur has no revenue, no profit, or serves no clients. In columns
2, 5, and 8 of Table 4, we impute zero profits, revenues, and number of clients served with a small,
strictly positive number (specifically, one peso of profit and revenue and 0.1 clients); again, point
estimates and p-values are very similar to those in Table 2, suggesting that there is little information
lost by excluding those observations with zero profits, revenues, or clients served in the logarithmic
specifications.
      Third, columns 3, 6, and 9 contain IT T s estimated using the level of the outcomes as opposed to
the logarithm. While using the levels of these outcomes is not a preferred specification as their distri-
butions are skewed, the magnitude and sign of the estimated IT T s are consistent with the logarithmic
transformation. Specifically, the offer of business classes increased the last day’s profits by 48.6 pe-
sos, significant at the 10 percent level (wild bootstrap p-value); last day’s revenues by an insignificant
65.2 pesos; and the number of clients served in the last day by an insignificant 1.6 clients. Finally,


                                                   18
while the rates of attrition are not differential across treatment groups (see Section 4.4), we show
in a final robustness check in Appendix A that our results are largely robust to potential differential
attrition across treatment groups by applying Lee’s Bounds (Lee, 2009).

5.3    Possible mechanisms driving the main results
      Having established the large and significant effect of business literacy classes on business profits,
we now turn to explore why these results arose. Two mechanisms were already presented in Table
2: self-reported revenues in the last day worked increased, as did the self-reported number of clients
served in the last day worked. Our good-specific data provides a separate way to estimate treatment
effects on profits and revenues, and IT T s for these outcomes are presented in the first two columns
of Table 5. We find that the log of the mean good-specific profit and revenue increased by 16.6 and
23.7 log points, respectively. Although insignificant at conventional significance levels, these point
estimates are similar in magnitude to those for self-reported profits and revenues (and recall that we
only observe these measures in the baseline and the first post-intervention surveys).17 Column 3 of
Table 5 shows that entrepreneurs marginally increased the number of goods they sold as a result of
the offer of classes: the IT T on the logarithm of the number of goods sold is 0.116 (approximately
1 extra good for sale), with a wild bootstrapped p-value of 0.155. Interestingly, it appears that the
observed increase in profits is coming from reduced costs rather than increased prices: the IT T for the
logarithm of the mean unit cost of items sold is -0.293 log points (column 4, wild bootstrap p-value
= 7) while the IT T for the log of mean unit price is 0.004 (column 5, strongly insignificant).
      It is also interesting to note that program invitees seem to be changing the composition of the
goods they sell. In particular, Table 6 contains IT T s for the outcomes calculated from the good-
specific questionnaire, but restricts the sample to those goods that were either (i) dropped between
the baseline and first post-intervention survey, (ii) kept across both surveys, or (iii) added in the first
post-intervention survey. Although these results are somewhat only suggestive given the low-power
of our tests at the good-by-good level, they suggest that entrepreneurs who were offered the treatment
dropped goods with low profits, revenues, and prices; kept goods with high profits and revenues
and low costs; and added goods with high revenues and low costs. This analysis suggests that our
  17 Having  two measures of business profits and revenues - one self-reported and one calculated from the good specific
data - allows us to test whether the extent of measurement error in these outcomes is systematically linked to the offer of
classes. Specifically, we cannot reject the equality of the correlations in the two measures for either profits or revenues
between the control and treatment groups in the ex-post period, nor in a difference-in-differences specification. These
results are inconsistent with systematic measurement error being the main driver of the positive ITTs. We thank Rema
Hanna for suggesting this testing strategy.


                                                           19
entrepreneurs are endogenously changing their goods portfolio as a response to the business training,
in a manner consistent improving their overall performance, and as taught in the classes.
      Table 7 contains several other business related outcomes of interest. Column 1 presents the IT T
on the percent of correct answers on the business practices exercise, and it seems that the program
did not necessarily make entrepreneurs more business savvy, with a large but insignificant effect of
5.6 percentage points (on a pre-treatment mean of about 40 percent). However, it does appear that
the offer of classes significantly and meaningfully increased the use of formal accounting practices:
column 2 shows that 4.7 percentage points more entrepreneurs used formal accounting methods post-
treatment (wild bootstrapped p-value = 0.07). This is a large effect, considering that only one percent
of treated entrepreneurs (and four percent of control entrepreneurs) used formal accounting practices
pre-intervention. Although the effect is insignificant, the large point estimate on the number of hours
worked per week by the owner (2.6 hours per week, column 3) is consistent with higher returns from
entrepreneurship. There does not appear to be a significant effect of the program on the size of the
enterprise, as measured by the number of employees (column 3), or on the number of hours worked
per week by employees (column 4).
      Finally, invitees are 8.6 percentage points more likely to register their business with a government
agency (column 6); again, this is a large effect, representing an increase over pre-intervention regis-
tration levels of about 40 percent. The CREA course included a thorough discussion of the pros and
cons of registering ones business, and this positive point estimate suggests that, upon learning this
information, registering is an optimal decision for some entrepreneurs.

5.4    Spillover and general equilibrium effects of business literacy classes
      We now turn to estimates of the Indirect Treatment Effects, estimated by equation 8 on the sample
that excludes any entrepreneurs who were invited to the classes, and presented in Table 8. To the
extent that villages are segmented, these estimates identify the local spillover and general equilibrium
effects of the intervention.
      First, there is no evidence of a significant IT E on quitting one’s business. Furthermore, it is clear
that very few of IT Es on business related outmodes are in Table 8 are significantly different from
zero. However, the magnitude of many of the estimates are large and economically meaningful. In
particular, the IT E on the logarithm of self-reported last day’s profit is negative and rather large in
magnitude, implying a decrease in profits of about 11 percent for control entrepreneurs in treatment


                                                     20
villages relative to entrepreneurs in control villages. This point estimate is about half of the increase
in profits realized by treatment entrepreneurs in treatment villages (approximately 23 percent, Table
2), and suggests the overall effect of the program on the profits of female entrepreneurs in treatment
villages is about 12 percent. IT Es on the last day’s revenue and the number of clients are positive
(just as the direct treatment effects), yet small in magnitude, approximately one quarter to one third
the magnitude of the direct treatment effects. Not surprisingly given the opposing signs on the point
estimates, the IT E on the standardized measure is essentially zero (0.013, wild bootstrap p-value =
0.866).
    Reassuringly, calculated profits and revenues from good-specific data yields very similar IT Es
to the self-reported measures, although these estimates are more precisely estimated (wild bootstrap
p-values of 0.164 and 0.137, respectively). There does not appear to be an indirect effect on the
number of goods for sale, but the IT E on the logarithm of the mean unit cost is 0.221 and close
to marginal significance (wild bootstrap p-value = 0.139). Interestingly, this estimate is of similar
magnitude to the direct effect (-0.293, Table 5), but of the opposite sign. It is not clear why these
estimates should be so divergent, but perhaps if factor markets are not perfectly competitive, those
offered treatment were able to purchase input materials from lower-cost suppliers, leaving those not
offered the treatment to purchase inputs from higher-cost suppliers. It is theoretically ambiguous as
to whether we would expect the indirect effect on prices of the control entrepreneurs to be positive or
negative. The point estimate suggests a small, yet insignificant positive indirect effect of the treatment
on the logarithm of the mean unit price (0.072, wild bootstrap p-value = 0.326).
    It is reasonable to believe, given the small size of these villages, that treated entrepreneurs interact
with non-treated entrepreneurs, perhaps sharing lessons learned in the business literacy classes. There
do not appear to be spillover effects on business knowledge (as measured by our business practices
exercise), but there does appear to be a large and statistically significant impact on the use of formal
accounting methods: relative to the control villages, 5.7 percentage points more control entrepreneurs
in treatment villages use formal accounting methods, significant at the 3 percent level (wild bootstrap
p-value), however given their business outcomes the ineligibles don’t seem to act upon the adoption
of formal accounting or simply could not properly perform such formal accounting. This estimate is
even larger than the positive direct effect of the treatment (a 4.7 percentage point increase, Table 7).
However, unlike the direct effect, there is not a positive effect on the likelihood of being registered



                                                    21
with the government; in fact, the IT E on this outcome is a negative 3.7 percentage points (wild
bootstrap p-value = 0.337).
      There is not a significant indirect effect on the number of employees, but there is a significant
increase in the hours worked by the owner (3.9 hours per week, an increase of about 10 percent
over baseline) and a large-in-magnitude but slightly less significant increase in the hours worked by
employees (2.3 hours per week, an increase of about 20 percent over baseline). Perhaps the untreated
entrepreneurs in treatment villages have increased the hours worked in order to compensate for the
decrease in profits (note that no entrepreneurs in our sample stated that they subtract the opportunity
cost of their time from revenues in calculating profits).

5.5    Testing the empirical predictions of the model of entrepreneurial experimentation
      The results presented above on the entire sample are useful for understanding the overall effect
of the business training program. However, the model presented in section 3 offers further insight
into how the program may differentially affect our entrepreneurs. In particular, the predictions are
that the IT T on quitting should be non-increasing in pre-treatment profits and the IT T on profits
should be non-decreasing in pre-treatment profits. We now test these predictions empirically. For
ease of presentation, we split our sample into those above and below the median of the last day’s
pre-treatment profit, and present separate IT T s estimated by equation 8.

Differential likelihood of quitting by baseline profits
      The first two columns of Table 9 speak to the prediction that entrepreneurs of lower ability should
be more likely to quit their businesses upon trying the new management technologies taught in class.
Lowering the cost of adopting this technology induces lower ability (lower α) entrepreneurs to try the
technology, and these “excessive” experimenters will rapidly realize they are not good entrepreneurs
once they keep better accounting and try out different business practices. They therefore quit their
enterprise. While not statistically significant, an economically meaningful differential in terms of
quitting is apparent: column 1 of Table 9 shows that those below the median of pre-treatment profits
are 1.9 percentage points more likely to quit while those above the median (column 2) are 4.8 per-
centage points less likely to quit, relative to the control. This differential (7.1 percentage points) is
large, representing about 14 percent of the post-treatment quit rate amongst control firms.
      We further explore the hypothesis that the treatment will induce the low ability entrepreneurs to
quit by looking at the distribution of pre-treatment profits. First, we present the distributions of pre-


                                                    22
treatment (baseline) profits in the whole sample compared to the distribution of pre-treatment profits
amongst those who did not quit by the second followup survey: Figure 3 contains these distributions
for the treatment and control group separately. It is clear that the survived sample (i.e., those who
did not quit) is similar in terms of baseline profits to the whole sample in the control group. In the
treatment group, however, the distribution of the survived sample is significantly shifted to the right
consistent with the prediction that those with the lowest ability (pre-treatment profits) will be induced
to quit upon learning they are in fact a low ability type.18
    Second, we use a parametric framework to statistically test whether treated entrepreneurs in the
far left tail of pre-treatment profits indeed have a high propensity to quit than similar control en-
trepreneurs. In the context of the model, the exercise we undertake amounts to searching for where
α l is located within the distribution of baseline profits. In practice, we conduct a grid search over
percentiles of the distribution of baseline profits by regressing an indicator for quitting by the second
followup survey on a treatment indicator, an indictor for being a given percentile of the last day’s
profits pre-treatment, and the interaction of these two indicators. Columns 1-3 of Table 10 shows
the results of this exercise for the 1st, 3rd, and 5th lowest percentiles of pre-treatment profits. The
interaction term is large and significant for the 1st and 3rd percentiles, and smaller in magnitude and
insignificant for the 5th percentile. Thus, it appears α l is around the 3rd percentile of pre-treatment
profits, and the quit rate for treatment entrepreneurs in this lower 3 percentiles is 35.4 percentage
points higher than the control. (Interaction terms for all percentiles greater than 5 are insignificant.)
Furthermore, if we consider that attrition is a possible result of treatment, we can define successful
businesses as those that did not quit or attrited by the second followup survey. Columns 4-6 of Table
10 present results of this exercise using this outcome and it is clear results are similar in magnitude
(naturally, with the opposite sign) to those presented above. A further test of the model intuition on
the effect of learning one’s ability on quitting is that the IT E 0 s for quitting and attrition are essentially
zero, consistently with a learning story. While if the mechanism at work were to be one of enhanced
competition between firms in a given village we should see higher exits in control firms in treatment
villages than in control villages, while that is not the case empirically.
  18 Kolmogorov-Smirnov    tests for the equality of the distribution functions in Figure 3 yield p-values of 0.07 in the
treatment group and 0.97 in the control group.




                                                          23
Differential effects on profits by baseline profits
    The remainder of Table 9 speaks to the second prediction of the model, that the treatment effect
on profits should be increasing in the ability of the entrepreneur. Comparing IT T s in the samples
above and below the median of pre-treatment profits, we see quite striking differences: by-and-large
the positive effects of the intervention consistently arise from those above the median of pre-treatment
profits. Although we cannot reject the equality of the effects between the top and bottom half of the
baseline profits distribution, it is clear that the point estimates are economically quite different from
each other, and the IT T s are only statistically different from zero amongst those above the median of
pre-treatment profits. For example, the IT T on last day’s profits is 0.254 for those above the median
and 0.053 for those below the median.
    A similar, albeit less statistically precise, story emerges when we look at the outcomes constructed
from the good-specifc data in Table 11. While none of these estimates are significantly different from
zero at more than the five percent level, point estimates suggest economically meaningful differential
impact consistent with the predictions of our model. Specifically, last day’s profits increased by
34.3 log points for those above the median and fell by 11.2 log points for those below the median.
Similarly, treatment effects on the last day’s revenues and the number of goods for sale are larger in
magnitude for those above the median than for those below. Mean unit cost appears to have fell for
both those above and below the median of pre-treatment profits, while the null overall effect on the
mean unit price is masked by a slight increase in price amongst those above the median and a slight
decrease for those below the median.
    Finally, Table 12 shows another striking result: the positive treatment effect on the use of formal
accounting practices is concentrated completely amongst the most able entrepreneurs: the IT T for
those above the median of pre-treatment profits is 0.09 compared to 0.007 for those below the median,
although neither of these estimates are significantly different from zero. There is a small differential
in terms of knowledge gains as measured by our business practices exercise, no differential in terms
of hours worked per week by the owner, but a large differential in terms of hours worked per week by
employees: close to a 6 hour increase for those above the median compared to a 5 hour decrease for
those below the median. These effects on hours worked by employees seem to be driven by differen-
tial hiring practices. There is little differential effect in terms of registering with the government.
    Conscious of the fact that treatment effects are by-and-large not statistically distinguishable be-



                                                    24
tween those with high and low ability (e.g., above and below the median of pre-treatment profits), the
economically large differences in point estimates for many business-related measures lends support
to the predictions of our theoretical model.


6. Conclusions
    A large literature on enterprises in developing countries finds that firms are often run inefficiently
(see for example Bloom et al. (2013); Bruhn, Karlan and Schoar (2012)), this could have multiple
causes from the lack of credit market, to goods market imperfections and so on. Amongst those
reasons it could be that entrepreneurs lack the basic business skills required to run an enterprise, such
as an understanding of costs, sales, profits, price setting, marketing, and competition.
    Recent years have seen a series of interventions offering business or financial training to en-
trepreneurs. Our intervention is unique in several ways, and thus offers new insights into our under-
standing of the effect of business literacy classes on enterprise performance. First, the intervention is
very intensive, lasting six weeks with two, four-hour classes per week for a total instruction time of
48 hours; this is more than double many of the prior studies in this literature (e.g., Drexler, Fischer
and Schoar (2011) and Karlan and Valdivia (2011). Second, our experimental design involves offer-
ing classes to a random subset of the population of micro-enterprises while not providing any other
intervention (such as credit) beside business literacy training. This implies our findings are valid for
a broad class of businesses, and identify the effects of the classes uniquely. Third, our survey de-
sign includes two post-intervention surveys (one year and 2.5 years post-intervention), which allows
us to explore both the short and medium run effects of the training. Fourth, we are able to detect
village-level spillover and general equilibrium effects thanks to our experimental design.
    Our results indicate that a basic training in business management and accounting is capable of sig-
nificantly increasing profits. This increase appears to be driven by a combination of higher revenues,
lower costs, more clients served, and an increased use of formal accounting methods. Importantly,
knowledge gained through the intervention does not appear to fade, as we observe positive effects
persisting into the medium run.
    These positive program impacts, however, must be weighed against the costs of running the busi-
ness literacy classes in order to justify the intervention. In fact, a simple comparison of costs and
benefits shows the program is indeed very cost-effective. First, the cost of running the CREA classes
is extremely low, as local teachers were hired for a modest wage, minimal materials were provided to

                                                   25
the students, and community centers were used to hold classes at no-cost. Specifically (and using US
dollars for convenience), each of seven treatment villages had two teachers who taught for a total of
48 hours and were paid $10 per hour yielding $6720 (=7 x 2 x 48 x $10) in salaries. While only 65
percent of invitees came to class, the classrooms would have accommodated all invitees, so if CREA
were to replicate the program, the appropriate per-invitee cost of teacher’s salaries with 164 invitees
is $49.97 (=$6720 / 164). Materials (photocopies of lessons, pens, paper, calculators, and CREA logo
hats that were used as prizes) totaled about $5 per participant; inflating the latter costs to the invitees,
the total per-invitee cost of CREA’s program is $57.66 (=$49.97 + $7.79).
    Second, a back-of-the-envelope calculation shows that the benefits in terms of increased profits
far outweigh these costs: The IT T on the logarithm of daily profits is 0.215, which implies the offer
of classes increased daily profits by 23.4 percent (=exp(0.215)). The mean pre-treatment daily profit
in the treatment group was $10.2, implying the offer of treatment increased daily profits by $2.38
(=$10.2 x 23.4%). Pre-treatment, entrepreneurs in the treatment group reported working an average
of 5.17 days per week. We do not know how many weeks are worked per year, but given that some
of the businesses are seasonal (such as selling certain handicrafts or seasonal foods), a conservative
assumption is that the average entrepreneur works half the year, or 26 weeks. Using a seven percent
annual discount rate, the present discounted value of the increased profits due to the program is
$4394.50 (= ($2.38 x 5.17 x 26)/0.07). It should be clear that it would be difficult to find a scenario
under which increased profits do not outweigh the program costs, even if we were to include the
opportunity cost of missed work when taking the classes, or to count as a program cost the negative
indirect treatment effect on the profits of control firms in treatment villages.
    Furthermore, our results are consistent with the predictions derived from our simple model of
entrepreneurial experimentation: that only high-quality entrepreneurs will benefit from the business
training, while very low quality entrepreneurs quit their business once the training helps them realize
they are ill-suited to entrepreneurship. This is an important result which might have important long-
run implications in terms of firm and market dynamics, in particular if bad firms have negative effects
on potentially good firms, e.g. pricing below cost. For example, the faster disappearance of bad firms
might allow good firms to grow to a scale that is more efficient (Hsieh and Klenow (2009) and Hsieh
and Klenow (2010)).
    Finally, an important finding is that the large positive direct effect of the program on firm profits



                                                    26
is mitigated by a large negative (albeit imprecisely estimated) indirect effect on the profits of control
firms in treatment villages. The negative indirect effect seems to arise from input market imperfec-
tions so that if the policy were to be scaled up it would not necessarily have negative spillover effects
as long as there are enough suppliers of intermediate-production inputs. Estimated indirect treatment
effects do not suggest a large effect on the demand side for the untreated entrepreneurs in the treat-
ment villages, therefore if the policy were to be scaled up, as long as suppliers do not react increasing
prices, we should expect effects of similar magnitudes to the one estimated here. Also notice that
the increase in profits for treated firms comes only partially from savings on production costs, while
about 50 percent of the effect is explained by changes in managerial practices and changes in the
menu of goods. Several open questions remain for future research, including: Why is the supply
market imperfect? Is there an alternative policy which would increase competition amongst suppliers
and therefore reduce production costs?




                                                   27
References
Angelucci, Manuela, and Giacomo De Giorgi. 2009. “Indirect Effects of an Aid Program: How Do
 Cash Transfers Affect Ineligibles’ Consumption?” American Economic Review, 99(1): 486–508.

Bartelsman, Eric, Stefano Scarpetta, and Fabiano Schivardi. 2003. “Comparative Analysis of
  Firm Demographics and Survival: Micro-Level Evidence for the OECD Countries.” OECD Pub-
  lishing OECD Economics Department Working Papers 348.

Berge, Lars Ivar, Kjetil Bjorvatn, and Bertil Tungodden. 2011. “Human and financial capital for
  microenterprise development: Evidence from a field and lab experiment.” NHH Dept. of Economics
  Discussion Paper, , (1).

Bloom, Nicholas, Benn Eifert, Aprajit Mahajan, David McKenzie, and John Roberts. 2013.
  “Does management matter? Evidence from India.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(1): 1–
  51.

Bruhn, Miriam, and Bilal Zia. 2011. “Stimulating Managerial Capital in Emerging Markets: The
  Impact of Business and Financial Literacy for Young Entrepreneurs.” The World Bank, Policy re-
  search Working Paper.

Bruhn, Miriam, Dean S Karlan, and Antoinette Schoar. 2012. “The impact of consulting services
  on small and medium enterprises: Evidence from a randomized trial in mexico.” Yale University
  Economic Growth Center Discussion Paper, , (1010).

Cameron, A Colin, Jonah B Gelbach, and Douglas L Miller. 2008. “Bootstrap-based improve-
  ments for inference with clustered errors.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(3): 414–
  427.

de Mel, Suresh, David J. McKenzie, and Christopher Woodruff. 2008. “Returns to Capi-
  tal in Microenterprises: Evidence from a Field Experiment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  123(4): 1329–1372.

de Mel, Suresh, David J. Mckenzie, and Christopher Woodruff. 2009a. “Are Women more credit
  Constrained? Experimental Evidence on Gender and Microenterprise Returns.” AEJ, Applied Eco-
  nomics, 1(3): 1–32.

de Mel, Suresh, David J. Mckenzie, and Christopher Woodruff. 2009b. “Measuring Microen-
  terprise Profits: Must We Ask How the Sausage is Made?” Journal of Development Economics,
  88(1): 19–31.

de Mel, Suresh, David J. Mckenzie, and Christopher Woodruff. 2012. “Business Training and Fe-
  male Enterprise Start-up, Growth, and Dynamics Experimental evidence from Sri Lanka.” Mimeo.

Drexler, Alejandro, Greg Fischer, and Antoinette Schoar. 2011. “Keeping it Simple: Financial
  Literacy and Rules of Thumb.” Mimeo, MIT.

Fairlie, Robert, Dean Karlan, and Jonathan Zinman. 2012. “Behind the GATE Experiment:
  Evidence on Effects of and Rationales for Subsidized Entrepreneurship Training.” NBER-WP, ,
  (17804).


                                               28
Field, Erica, Seema Jayachandran, and Rohini Pande. 2010. “Do Traditional Institutions Con-
  strain Female Entrepreneurship? A Field Experiment on Business Training in India.” The American
  Economic Review P&P, 100(2): 125–129.

Giné, Xavier, and Ghazala Mansuri. 2011. “Money or Ideas? A Field Experiment on Constraints
  to Entrepreneurship in Rural Pakistan.” Mimeo.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai, and Peter J Klenow. 2009. “Misallocation and manufacturing TFP in China and
  India.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4): 1403–1448.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai, and Peter J Klenow. 2010. “Development accounting.” American Economic
  Journal: Macroeconomics, 2(1): 207–223.

Karlan, Dean, and Martin Valdivia. 2011. “Teaching Entrepreneurship Impact of Business Training
 on Microfinance Clients and Institutions.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 93(2): 520–527.

Karlan, Dean, Ryan Knight, and Christopher Udry. 2012. “Hoping to win, expected to lose:
 Theory and lessons on micro enterprise development.” National Bureau of Economic Research.

Kling, Jeffrey R., Jeffrey B. Liebman, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2007. “Experimental Analysis of
  Neighborhood Effects.” Econometrica, 75(1): pp. 83–119.

Lee, David S. 2009. “Training, Wages, and Sample Selection: Estimating Sharp Bounds on Treatment
  Effects.” The Review of Economic Studies, 76(3): pp. 1071–1102.

McKenzie, David. 2012. “Beyond baseline and follow-up: The case for more T in experiments.”
 Journal of Development Economics, 99(2): 210–221.

Mckenzie, David, and Christopher Woodruff. 2012. “What are we learning from business training
 and entrepreneurship evaluations around the developing world?” The World Bank Policy Research
 Working Paper Series 6202.

Miguel, Edward, and Michael Kremer. 2004. “Worms: Identifying Impacts On Education And
 Health In The Presence Of Treatment Externalities.” Econometrica, 72(1): 159–217.

Nyshadham, Anant. 2013. “Learning about Comparative Advantage in Entrepreneurhsip: Evidence
  from Thailand.” working paper.

Romano, Joseph P., and Michael Wolf. 2005. “Stepwise Multiple Testing as Formalized Data
  Snooping.” Econometrica, 73(4): pp. 1237–1282.

Rosenbaum, Paul. 2002. “Covariance Adjustment in Randomized Experiments and Observational
  Studies.” Statistical Science, 17(3): 286–327.

U.S. Small Business Administration. 2012. “Frequently Asked Questions about Small Businesses.”
  Office of Advocacy, September, 2012.

Valdivia, Martin. 2011. “Training or Technical Assistance? A Field Experiment to Learn What
  Works to Increase Managerial Capital for Female Microentrepreneurs.” Unpublished.




                                                29
                       Figure 1: Sectors of micro-enterprise activity pre-treatment

    40
    30
Percent
20  10
    0




     Ready-to-eat food                                 Prepared food                               Clothing
                                 Grocery                                     Handicrafts                      Other resale
            Note: Sample includes all 875 pre-intervention observations.




                                               Figure 2: Entrepreneurial choice.
                                                                                               New Technology
                                                                                                         h
                                                                                                     V(x )

                        Quit                                        Old Technology


                                                                l
                                                          V(x )

                   0
   V(w,p)




             V(x )




                                           l                                                   h
                                                                                         




                                                                     30
Figure 3: The distribution of baseline (log) daily profits amongst the whole and survived samples of
the treatment and control groups

                                              Treatment firms
        .4
    .1 .2 .3
      Density
        0




                0               2                          4                           6           8
                                                  ln(Last day's profit)

                                      Survived to wave 3                      Quit in wave 3



                                                  Control firms
        .3
         .2
    Density
    .1  0




                0           2                 4                           6                    8   10
                                                  ln(Last day's profit)

                                      Survived to wave 3                      Quit in wave 3




                                                   31
                       Table 1: Pre-treatment characteristics, by treatment group
                                                       Treatment                   Control             (1)=(3)
                                                   Mean         (s.e.)       Mean          (s.e.)     7pYvalue     N
                                                    (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)      (6)
Personal)Characteris/cs
                                           Age     46.04        (0.48)        45.67       (0.53)        0.64     869
                           Years7of7educa=on        5.96        (0.32)        6.07        (0.13)        0.75     846
        Roof7is7made7of7temporary7material          0.33        (0.09)        0.32        (0.05)        0.92     844
   Score7on7math7exercise7(percent7correct)         0.39        (0.04)        0.47        (0.03)        0.11     864
             Keeps7formal7business7accounts         0.01        (0.01)        0.04        (0.01)        0.12     873
         Weekly7hours7worked7in7enterprise         39.43        (3.19)        39.19       (1.65)        0.95     866
                  Reserva=on7wage,7monthly 2,986.29             (92.06)     2,974.28     (140.90)       0.94     696
          Maximum7loan7available7if7needed 8,703.94           (1,079.86)    9,016.38 (1,951.88)         0.92     689
   Monthly7interest7rate7on7a7poten=al7loan         5.48        (0.62)        6.43        (0.32)        0.20     506


Business)Characteris/cs
                     Produces7goods7for7sale        0.62        (0.03)        0.67        (0.04)        0.28     875
                              Last7day's7proﬁt     132.24       (16.06)      154.92       (22.61)       0.47     760
                           Last7day's7revenue      456.16       (55.18)      405.96       (35.89)       0.54     840
                  Number7of7clients7last7day7      14.03        (1.47)        14.43       (1.16)        0.79     808
 Total7number7of7workers,7including7owner7          1.58        (0.05)        1.66        (0.03)        0.16     864
        Weekly7hours7worked7by7employees           10.27        (2.27)        10.49       (0.84)        0.92     872
                      Age7of7business7(years)       6.77        (0.84)        7.62        (0.65)        0.42     874
      Replacement7value7of7business7capital 8,062.61          (1,009.51)    9,238.82 (1,023.20)         0.33     875
            Registered7with7the7government            0.15        (0.03)       0.21          (0.03)      0.04       847
Notes:7Sample7includes7all7subjects7interviewed7in7the7baseline7survey.7Asympto=c7robust7standard7errors7in7
parentheses7clustered7at7the7village7level;7column757reﬂects7wild7bootstrapped7pYvalues.7All7monetary7variable7are7
measured7in7Mexican7Pesos7(~137pesos7/717U.S.7dollar).7Reserva=on7wage7is7the7minimum7stated7monthly7wage7a7
women7would7accept7in7order7to7quit7her7business.7Government7registra=on7is7with7the7Secretary7of7Finance7and7Public7
Credit7(SHCP).




                                                       32
                  Table 2: The effects of business training on main business outcomes

                                      Quit%her%         ln(Last%day's%    ln(Last%day's% ln(#%clients%
                     Outcome(=        business             profit)          revenue)       last%day)       Standardized
                                        (1)                  (2)               (3)            (4)               (5)


Intention%to%Treat%(ITT)%effect        0.014                0.215             0.251          0.218             0.154
         p+values,(Asymptotic         (0.691)              (0.060)           (0.038)        (0.082)           (0.051)
      p+value,(Wild(Bootstrap         (0.694)              (0.090)           (0.052)        (0.120)           (0.049)
PreIprogram%covariates                  Yes                  Yes              Yes             Yes               Yes
Observations                           1,836                1,183            1,357           1,312             1,127

Notes:%%Sample%excludes%subjects%who%were%not%offered%treatment%in%treatment%villages.%%The%sample%in%column%1%
includes%all%firms%in%the%first%and%second%followIup%surveys.%The%samples%in%coumns%2I5%include%all%firms%in%the%baseline%
survey%and%surviving%firms%in%the%two%followIup%surveys.%%The%standardized%outcome%is%constructed%as%the%mean%of%
standardized%zIscores%of%the%last%day's%profits,%the%last%day's%revenue,%and%the%number%of%clients%in%the%last%day%worked%
(see%text).%%Covariates%include%the%following%preIprogram%characteristics:%number%of%workers,%age%of%the%enterprise,%
sector,%replacement%value,%lack%of%business%skills,%risk%aversion,%age,%education,%number%of%rooms,%and%score%on%a%
business%skills%exercise.%%Both%methods%of%calculating%pIvalues%allow%for%intraIvillage%(cluster)%correlation.




                              Table 3: The effects of business training by wave
%%%%

                               Quit%her%           ln(Last%day's% ln(Last%day's%       ln(#%clients%
                     Outcome(= business               profit)       revenue)             last%day)       Standardized
                                 (1)                    (2)            (3)                  (4)               (5)
 ITT%wave%2                           0.013            0.220              0.240           0.231             0.154
         p+values,(Asymptotic        (0.807)          (0.054)            (0.027)         (0.043)           (0.038)
      p+value,(Wild(Bootstrap        (0.810)          (0.117)            (0.109)         (0.131)           (0.074)
 ITT%wave%3                           0.019            0.216              0.279           0.193             0.157
         p+values,(Asymptotic        (0.739)          (0.325)            (0.162)         (0.339)           (0.249)
      p+value,(Wild(Bootstrap        (0.760)          (0.200)            (0.217)         (0.206)           (0.152)

H0:%ITT%wave%2%=%ITT%wave%3,%
pNvalue,%Wild%bootstrap              0.996             0.986             0.871            0.876             0.975
 Observations                        1,836             1,183             1,357            1,312             1,127
Notes:%%Sample%excludes%subjects%who%were%not%offered%treatment%in%treatment%villages.%%The%sample%in%column%1%
includes%all%firms%in%the%first%and%second%followNup%surveys.%The%samples%in%coumns%2N5%include%all%firms%in%the%
baseline%survey%and%surviving%firms%in%the%two%followNup%surveys.%%The%standardized%outcome%is%constructed%as%the%
mean%of%standardized%zNscores%of%the%last%day's%profits,%the%last%day's%revenue,%and%the%number%of%clients%in%the%last%
day%worked%(see%text).%%Covariates%included%(see%text).%%Both%methods%of%calculating%pNvalues%allow%for%intraNvillage%
(cluster)%correlation.




                                                          33
 %%%%
                                                           Table 4: Robustness of the main effects

                           Variable(=             Last%day's%proﬁt                         Last%day's%revenue                          #%clients%last%day
                                                   Log,%imputed%                             Log,%imputed%                              Log,%imputed%
                   Transforma0on(=(       Log          zeros         Level          Log          zeros          Level          Log          zeros           Level
                                          (1)            (2)          (3)           (4)            (5)           (6)           (7)            (8)            (9)
     Inten?on%to%Treat%(ITT)%eﬀect  0.163              0.203         48.579        0.226         0.250        65.177          0.251          0.205           1.625
34




              p2values,(Asympto0c (0.128)             (0.062)        (0.166)      (0.067)       (0.031)       (0.533)        (0.068)        (0.093)         (0.435)
           p2value,(Wild(Bootstrap (0.180)            (0.112)        (0.101)      (0.083)       (0.090)       (0.535)        (0.080)        (0.121)         (0.476)
     PreGprogram%covariates                             Yes           Yes                         Yes            Yes                          Yes            Yes
     Imputa?on%indicator                                Yes                                       Yes                                         Yes
     Observa?ons                         1,183         1,246         1,246         1,357         1,388          1,388        1,312          1,336           1,336
     Notes:%%Sample%excludes%subjects%who%were%not%oﬀered%treatment%in%treatment%villages.%The%standardized%outcome%is%constructed%as%the%mean%of%
     standardized%zGscores%(see%text).%Covariates%included%(see%text).%%Both%methods%of%calcula?ng%pGvalues%allow%for%intraGvillage%(cluster)%correla?on.
                                        Table 5: Possible mechanisms
                                                      Outcomes(calculated(from(goodGspeciﬁc(data

                                         ln(Last(day's((ln(Last(day's( ln(#(goods(      ln(Mean(      ln(Mean(
                            Outcome(=       proﬁt)        revenue)      for(sale)       unit(cost)   unit(price)
                                              (1)            (2)           (3)             (4)           (5)

    Inten@on(to(Treat((ITT)(eﬀect            0.166          0.237         0.116           G0.293       0.004
                 p+value,(Asympto3c         (0.460)        (0.142)       (0.138)         (0.037)      (0.938)
             p+value,(Wild(Bootstrap        (0.496)        (0.170)       (0.155)         (0.074)      (0.922)
    Observa@ons                               834          1,071          1,429           979          1,406
    Notes:((Sample(excludes(subjects(who(were(not(oﬀered(treatment(in(treatment(villages.(Covariates(included(
    (see(text).((Both(methods(of(calcula@ng(pGvalues(allow(for(intraGvillage((cluster)(correla@on.(




    ((((



Table 6: Effects on goods that were dropped across waves, kept across waves, and added post-
intervention
                                    Inten%on'to'Treat'          p0value,'          p0value,'Wild'
                        Goods,that,     (ITT)'eﬀect            Asympto%c             Bootstrap       Observa%ons
 Outcome:               were:,               (1)                   (2)                  (3)              (4)
 ln(Last'day's'proﬁt)   Dropped            00.476                (0.271)              (0.158)            120
                        Kept               0.202                 (0.567)              (0.684)            467
                        Added              00.035                (0.853)              (0.872)             97
 ln(Last'day's'revenue) Dropped            00.364                (0.357)              (0.861)            129
                        Kept               0.171                 (0.600)              (0.734)            650
                        Added              0.245                 (0.211)              (0.220)            282
 ln(Mean'unit'cost)     Dropped            00.039                (0.802)              (0.917)            147
                        Kept               00.300                (0.090)              (0.045)            533
                        Added              00.072                (0.732)              (0.955)            109
 ln(Mean'unit'price) Dropped               00.207                (0.277)              (0.464)            160
                        Kept               0.009                 (0.878)              (0.992)            732
                        Added              00.027                (0.827)              (0.980)            319
 Notes:'All'sample'excludes'subjects'who'were'not'oﬀered'treatment'in'treatment'villages.''Dropped'goods'
 speciﬁca%ons'use'data'from'the'pre0treatment'wave'only.''Kept'goods'speciﬁca%ons'use'data'from'the'pre0
 treatment'wave'and'ﬁrst'post0treatment'wave.''Added'goods'speciﬁca%ons'use'data'from'the'ﬁrst'post0treatment'
 wave'only.''Covariates'included'(see'text).'Both'methods'of'calcula%ng'p0values'allow'for'intra0village'(cluster)'
 correla%on.'




                                                         35
                                      Table 7: Possible mechanisms

                               %"correct"    Uses"    Hours"     Hours"
                              on"business" formal" worked"per" worked"per"       Registered"
                               prac/ces"" accoun/ng" week"by" week"by" #"emp=     with"the"
                     Outcome(= exercise    methods    owner    employees loyees government"
                                  (1)         (2)      (3)        (4)      (5)       (6)

Inten/on"to"Treat"(ITT)"eﬀect        0.055        0.047        2.578        0.652        0.085       0.086
          p+value,(Asympto3c        (0.400)      (0.054)      (0.335)      (0.866)      (0.429)     (0.010)
      p+value,(Wild(Bootstrap       (0.416)      (0.070)      (0.345)      (0.905)      (0.472)     (0.030)
Observa/ons                          1,210        1,432        1,411        1,143        1,419       1,402
Notes:""Sample"excludes"subjects"who"were"not"oﬀered"treatment"in"treatment"villages."Covariates"included"(see"
text).""Both"methods"of"calcula/ng"p=values"allow"for"intra=village"(cluster)"correla/on."




""""




                                                      36
                              Table 8: The indirect effects of business training


                                                      Indirect)Treatment) p2value,)   p2value,
                                                          Eﬀect)(ITE)    Asympto;c Wild)Bootstrap                  Obs.
Outcome:                                                       (1)           (2)         (3)                        (4)

Quit)her)business                                              20.029           (0.508)          (0.514)          1,907

Main-business-outcomes
)))ln(Last)day's)proﬁt)                                        20.110           (0.363)          (0.340)          1,250
)))ln(Last)day's)revenue)                                      0.056            (0.548)          (0.555)          1,430
)))ln(#)clients)last)day)                                      0.073            (0.593)          (0.595)          1,371
)))Standardized                                                0.013            (0.846)          (0.866)          1,189

Outcomes-calculated-from-good5speciﬁc-data
)))ln(Last)day's)proﬁt)                                        20.120           (0.423)          (0.164)           874
)))ln(Last)day's)revenue)                                      0.128            (0.137)          (0.137)          1,113
)))ln(#)goods)for)sale)                                        0.015            (0.802)          (0.796)          1,495
)))ln(Mean)unit)cost)                                          0.221            (0.127)          (0.139)          1,031
)))ln(Mean)unit)price)                                         0.072            (0.294)          (0.326)          1,474
Other-business-outcomes
)))Percent)correct)on)business)prac;ces)exercise               0.001            (0.987)          (0.942)          1,239
)))Uses)formal)accoun;ng)methods                               0.057            (0.008)          (0.033)          1,501
)))Hours)worked)per)week)by)owner                              3.956            (0.050)          (0.078)          1,479
)))Hours)worked)per)week)by)employees                          2.289            (0.461)          (0.131)          1,194
)))Number)of)employees                                         0.016            (0.804)          (0.786)          1,485
)))Registered)with)the)government                              20.037           (0.313)          (0.337)          1,473

Notes:))Sample)excludes)subjects)who)were)oﬀered)treatment)in)treatment)villages.)The)standardized)outcome)is)
constructed)as)the)mean)of)standardized)z2scores)of)the)last)day's)proﬁts,)the)last)day's)revenue,)and)the)number)of)
clients)in)the)last)day)worked)(see)text).))Covariates)included)(see)text).)Both)methods)of)calcula;ng)p2values)allow)for)
intra2village)(cluster))correla;on.




                                                          37
              Table 9: Effects of training amongst those above and below the median of pre-intervention profits

                                 Quit9her9             ln(Last9day's9       ln(Last9day's9    ln(#9clients9last9
                  Outcome(=      business                 profit)             revenue)              day)           Standardized
          Sample(=(…(median(
                              Below Above             Below Above           Below Above       Below Above          Below Above
             baseline(profits
                               (1)      (2)             (3)           (4)    (5)     (6)        (7)      (8)        (9)       (10)
     Intention9to9Treat9(ITT)9
     effect                    0.019 @0.048 @0.053 0.254 0.036 0.276 0.073 0.447               0.004 0.246
38




         p6values,(Asymptotic (0.754) (0.271) (0.739) (0.074) (0.872) (0.068) (0.675) (0.009) (0.969) (0.006)
      p6value,(Wild(Bootstrap (0.748) (0.298) (0.776) (0.058) (0.848) (0.070) (0.672) (0.020) (0.888) (0.006)
     Below9=9Above,9p6value,(
                                 0.921                        0.605            0.840               0.671                  0.799
     Wild(Bootstrap
     Observations             825     753              547        551       551      607       597       562       527        521
     Notes:99Sample9excludes9subjects9who9were9not9offered9treatment9in9treatment9villages.9The9standardized9outcome9is9
     constructed9as9the9mean9of9standardized9z@scores9of9the9last9day's9profits,9the9last9day's9revenue,9and9the9number9of9
     clients9in9the9last9day9worked9(see9text).9Covariates9included9(see9text).99Both9methods9of9calculating9p@values9allow9for9
     intra@village9(cluster)9correlation.
                    Table 10: Quitting and attrition by treatment and baseline profits
                      Outcome(=(                Quit:the:enterprise                       Did:not:quit:or:attrite
 Lowest(...(of(last(day's(profits(=(      1%            3%          5%                1%           3%             5%
                                          (1)           (2)         (3)               (4)          (5)            (6)
Treated                                  0.004         0.006        0.011            20.013        20.014        20.018
             p7values,(Asymptotic       (0.950)       (0.933)      (0.879)          (0.808)       (0.793)       (0.744)
          p7value,(Wild(Bootstrap       (0.922)       (0.960)      (0.912)          (0.988)       (0.985)       (0.982)
Lowest:...:of:last:day's:profits:pre2
treatment                             20.033           0.008        20.006           0.031        20.000         0.016
             p7values,(Asymptotic (0.768)             (0.945)      (0.966)          (0.718)       (0.996)       (0.883)
          p7value,(Wild(Bootstrap (0.750)             (0.952)      (0.926)          (0.965)       (1.000)       (0.985)
Treated::x::Lowest:...:of:last:day's:
profits::pre2treatment                0.393            0.354        20.143           20.399        20.369        20.013
              p7values,(Asymptotic (0.005)            (0.009)      (0.703)          (0.008)       (0.015)       (0.968)
           p7value,(Wild(Bootstrap (0.002)            (0.002)      (0.732)          (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.988)
Observations                              463           463          463              553           553           553
Notes::***:p<0.01,:**:p<0.05,:*:p<0.1
All:columns:include:only:a:single:survey:wave,:and:excludes:subjects:who:were:not:offered:treatment:in:treatment:
villages.::An:entrepreneur:is:defined:as:quitting:the:enterprise:if:she:is:not:running:her:business:in:the:second:
followup:survey,:and:she:is:defined:as:not:quitting:or:attriting:if:she:did:not:quit:or:attrite:in:the:second:followup:
survey.::Covariates:included:(see:text).::Both:methods:of:calculating:p2values:allow:for:intra2village:(cluster):
correlation.




                                                          39
              Table 11: Effects of training amongst those above and below the median of pre-intervention profits

                                                        Outcomes9calculated9from9good?speciﬁc9data
                              ln(Last9day's9          ln(Last9day's9  ln(#9goods9for9  ln(Mean9unit9           ln(Mean9unit9
                    Outcome(=    proﬁt)                 revenue)           sale)           cost)                  price)
            Sample(=((…(median( Below Above         Below Above         Below Above        Below Above         Below Above
               baseline(proﬁts
                                 (1)   (2)            (3)      (4)        (5)        (6)     (7)        (8)      (9)     (10)
     Inten8on9to9Treat9(ITT)9
40




     eﬀect                     ?0.112 0.343 ?0.047 0.179 0.019 0.152 ?0.235 ?0.202 ?0.119 0.075
         p6values,(Asympto;c (0.749) (0.161) (0.857) (0.330) (0.860) (0.088) (0.313) (0.361) (0.219) (0.589)
      p6value,(Wild(Bootstrap (0.261) (0.275) (0.207) (0.235) (0.894) (0.098) (0.326) (0.450) (0.226) (0.618)
     Below9=9Above,9p6value,(
                                      0.338              0.567               0.914              0.892               0.503
     Wild(Bootstrap
     Observa8ons                   369      363       481      444       635      593        430      420       626      579
     Notes:99Sample9excludes9subjects9who9were9not9oﬀered9treatment9in9treatment9villages.9The9standardized9outcome9is9
     constructed9as9the9mean9of9standardized9z?scores9(see9text).9Covariates9included9(see9text).99Both9methods9of9calcula8ng9p?
     values9allow9for9intra?village9(cluster)9correla8on.




     9999
                         Table 12: Effects of training amongst those above and below the median of pre-intervention profits

                                      %9correct9on9
                                        business9            Uses9formal9      Hours9worked9      Hours9worked9                         Registered9with9
                                       prac8ces99            accoun8ng9         per9week9by9       per9week9by9                               the9
                         Outcome(=      exercise              methods             owner             employees         #9employees        government9
                 Sample(=(…(median
                                     Below Above           Below Above         Below Above        Below Above        Below Above         Below Above
                    (baseline(proﬁts
                                      (1)      (2)           (3)       (4)       (5)      (6)       (7)      (8)       (9)      (10)      (11)     (12)
41




     Inten8on9to9Treat9(ITT)9eﬀect       0.035    0.119     0.007    0.090     1.410    1.496     @5.019 5.814       @0.149 0.236        0.095    0.069
                p6values,(Asympto;c (0.541) (0.192) (0.774) (0.039) (0.655) (0.632) (0.092) (0.386) (0.140) (0.285) (0.130) (0.306)
            p6value,(Wild(Bootstrap (0.544) (0.240) (0.750) (0.214) (0.662) (0.618) (0.204) (0.224) (0.124) (0.306) (0.174) (0.298)
     Below9=9Above,9p6value,(Wild(
                                             0.937              0.924               0.243              0.000              0.003               0.878
     Bootstrap
     Observa8ons                          542      501       633      599       625      590        505      480       626      594       630      597
     Notes:99Sample9excludes9subjects9who9were9not9oﬀered9treatment9in9treatment9villages.9The9standardized9outcome9is9constructed9as9the9mean9of9
     standardized9z@scores9(see9text).9Covariates9included9(see9text).99Both9methods9of9calcula8ng9p@values9allow9for9intra@village9(cluster)9correla8on.
   FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION ONLY

   APPENDIX


A. Bounds on Intention to Treat Effects
    As discussed in Section 4.4 of the text, our sample of entrepreneurs shrinks overtime due to
sample attrition. While the mean attrition rates do not differ significantly between the treatment and
control groups, we nonetheless present in this appendix the results of bounding exercises that accounts
for possible non-random attrition across groups.
    We estimate bounds using a modified version of Lee’s methodology (Lee, 2009) that allows us
to maintain our difference-in-differences estimation strategy. Specifically, lower and upper bounds
are calculated by first using Lee’s methodology to trim each post-intervention period independently,
and then estimating our difference-in-difference model with this trimmed data and the full pre-
intervention sample. Table 4 contains both upper and lower bounds on the IT T s calculated in this
manner, for all of the main business-related outcomes. Perhaps not surprisingly, given the small
and insignificant differential attrition across treatment groups, estimated bounds are tightly centered
around estimated treatment effects.




                                                  42
Appendix Figure 1: An in-class example (Panel A) and an in-class exercise (Panel B) used in CREAs
business literacy course.
      Panel A
      Supose that Belen has a store that sells beauty products. She sells makeup, hair
      products, and products for nails. Below is a list of articles that she sold today:

                           Belen’s Beauty Products
              No.            Article              Unit Price   Subtotal
              3              Nail files                    $10          $30
              1              Anti-dandruf shampoo          $30          $30
              2              Eye shadow                    $20          $40

                                                             TOTAL           $100


      As we can see in this bill of sale, Belen sold 3 nail files for 10 pesos each (3 x $10),
      generating a revenue of 30 pesos, 1 anti-dandruff shampoo for 30 pesos (1 x $30)
      gererating a revenue of 30 pesos, and 2 eye shadows for 20 pesos each (2 x $20)
      generating a revenue of 40 pesos. In total, Belen had revenue of 100 pesos today.

      Panel B
      Leticia has a business selling pineapple candy that she produces herself along with a
      small store in which she sells her candies and many other food items, from fruit and
      vegetables to cookies, flour, soda, etc. Leticia needs you to help her calculate her
      revenue from September 17th. Below is a list of products that she sold. Please
      calculate the revenue for each item and then calculate her total revenue.

                             Lety’s Corner Store
                           Sales on September 17th
              No.            Article                    Unit Price   Subtotal
              20             Pineapple candy            $3.50
              5              Kilos of tomatoes          $6
              10             Kilos of onion             $5
              4              Kilos of orange            $10
              6              Gansitos Marinela ®        $4
              8              Bottles of Coca-Cola ®     $5

                                                        TOTAL




                                                   43
Appendix Figure 2: The applied math question given to entrepreneurs in the baseline and followup
surveys
 Section 10 Exercise
 Now we are going to do an exercise, but I want to let you know that the numbers
 are invented, as is the example. If you have any questions, please ask me.

                       If they do no answer of don't want to answer, STOP, and leave
                                           the other parts blank.

 Part 1: Imagine that you produce 5 tablecloths every week and that each tablecloth
 costs 10 pesos.

 Suppose the first week you sell                1   tablecloth
 The second week you sell                       2   tablecloths
 The third week you sell                        2   tablecloths
 and the fourth week you sell                   5   tablecloths

 a) How many tablecloths do you have left over at the end
 of the month?

 b) What is your income for this month?


 Part 2: Each week, you spend 5 pesos for cloth and 5 pesos in salaries in order to
 make tablecloths. Each month has 4 weeks.

 c) How much are your profits at the end of the month?
 That is, how much money do you earn this month?

 d) If your profits were to be zero for this month, what price
 should you have set for your tablecloths?




                                              44
Appendix Table 1: Pre-treatment characteristics of treatment group entrepreneurs, by attendance sta-
tus
                                                        AUended                 Did6not6aUend           (1)=(3)
                                                    Mean         (s.e.)       Mean         (s.e.)      6pXvalue     N
                                                     (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)      (6)
Personal)Characteris/cs
                                            Age     46.98        (0.91)       44.25        (1.80)        0.35     163
                           Years6of6educa<on        6.07         (0.41)        5.76        (0.44)        0.58     161
         Roof6is6made6of6temporary6material          0.38        (0.11)        0.22        (0.07)        0.09     160
   Score6on6math6exercise6(percent6correct)          0.39        (0.05)        0.38        (0.06)        0.76     164
             Keeps6formal6business6accounts          0.01        (0.01)        0.02        (0.02)        0.68     164
         Weekly6hours6worked6in6enterprise          37.84        (4.02)       42.43        (4.03)        0.34     162
                  Reserva<on6wage,6monthly 3,064.04            (140.02)      2,808.85     (271.85)       0.48     128
          Maximum6loan6available6if6needed 8,479.91           (1,595.83)     9,190.24 (1,792.58)         0.87     130
   Monthly6interest6rate6on6a6poten<al6loan         5.94         (0.64)        4.38        (1.07)        0.21     101


Business)Characteris/cs
                      Produces6goods6for6sale        0.67        (0.02)        0.53        (0.08)        0.14     164
                              Last6day's6proﬁt     110.83       (28.90)       177.91      (43.62)        0.36     141
                            Last6day's6revenue     337.85       (75.24)       690.53      (243.80)       0.29     158
                  Number6of6clients6last6day6       13.76        (1.86)       14.55        (3.65)        0.82     152
  Total6number6of6workers,6including6owner6         1.64         (0.06)        1.48        (0.13)        0.32     159
        Weekly6hours6worked6by6employees            11.85        (2.86)        7.32        (3.21)        0.29     164
                       Age6of6business6(years)      6.68         (0.66)        6.94        (1.63)        0.85     164
      Replacement6value6of6business6capital 7,441.43          (1,310.72)     9,228.68 (1,819.19)         0.42     164
            Registered6with6the6government          0.16         (0.04)       0.11         (0.03)       0.27      160
Notes:66Sample6includes6all6women6assigned6to6treatment6who6did6not6aUrite6postXinterven<on.66Asympto<c6robust6
standard6errors6in6parentheses6clustered6at6the6village6level;6column656reﬂects6wild6bootstrapped6pXvalues.6All6monetary6
variable6are6measured6in6Mexican6Pesos6(~136pesos6/616U.S.6dollar).6Reserva<on6wage6is6the6minimum6stated6monthly6
wage6a6women6would6accept6in6order6to6quit6her6business.6Government6registra<on6is6with6the6Secretary6of6Finance6and6
Public6Credit6(SHCP).




                                                         45
         Appendix Table 2: Pre-treatment characteristics of entrepreneurs, by attrition status
                                                      Ever6aXrited              Never6aXrited           (1)=(3)
                                                    Mean          (s.e.)      Mean         (s.e.)      6pYvalue     N
                                                     (1)           (2)         (3)          (4)           (5)      (6)
Personal)Characteris/cs
                                           Age      44.89         (1.04)      46.04        (0.44)        0.28     869
                           Years6of6educa<on        6.33          (0.21)       5.95        (0.14)        0.09     846
         Roof6is6made6of6temporary6material         0.28          (0.05)       0.33        (0.06)        0.23     844
   Score6on6math6exercise6(percent6correct)         0.43          (0.03)       0.46        (0.03)        0.34     864
             Keeps6formal6business6accounts         0.03          (0.01)       0.03        (0.01)        0.93     873
         Weekly6hours6worked6in6enterprise          42.34         (2.42)      38.14        (1.47)        0.11     866
                  Reserva<on6wage,6monthly 3,076.29             (215.29)     2,942.19     (146.24)       0.66     696
          Maximum6loan6available6if6needed 7,316.22             (1,004.10)   9,559.86 (2,112.11)         0.33     689
   Monthly6interest6rate6on6a6poten<al6loan         6.66          (0.31)       6.10        (0.37)        0.23     506


Business)Characteris/cs
                      Produces6goods6for6sale       0.62          (0.04)       0.68        (0.03)        0.03     875
                              Last6day's6proﬁt     123.16        (11.78)     160.35       (23.28)        0.11     760
                            Last6day's6revenue     347.61        (20.98)     439.45       (38.20)        0.04     840
                  Number6of6clients6last6day6       14.18         (1.21)      14.42        (1.05)        0.80     808
 Total6number6of6workers,6including6owner6          1.56          (0.05)       1.68        (0.04)        0.08     864
        Weekly6hours6worked6by6employees            10.35         (1.24)      10.48        (1.13)        0.93     872
                       Age6of6business6(years)      6.55          (0.70)       7.79        (0.70)        0.17     874
      Replacement6value6of6business6capital 7,298.10            (1,066.35)   9,628.18 (1,163.03)         0.18     875
            Registered6with6the6government          0.20          (0.04)      0.20         (0.03)        0.52     847
Notes:66Sample6includes6all6subjects6interviewed6in6the6baseline6survey.66A6subject6"ever6aXrited"6if6they6were6not6
surveyed6in6either6the6ﬁrst6or6second6postYtreatment6survey.66Asympto<c6robust6standard6errors6in6parentheses6
clustered6at6the6village6level;6column656reﬂects6wild6bootstrapped6pYvalues.66All6monetary6variable6are6measured6in6
Mexican6Pesos6(~136pesos6/616U.S.6dollar).66Reserva<on6wage6is6the6minimum6stated6monthly6wage6a6women6would6
accept6in6order6to6quit6her6business.6Government6registra<on6is6with6the6Secretary6of6Finance6and6Public6Credit6(SHCP).




                                                           46
        Appendix Table 3: Pre-treatment characteristics of entrepreneurs, by quitting status

                                                          Ever7quit                Did7not7quit           (1)=(3)
                                                     Mean          (s.e.)       Mean          (s.e.)     7pZvalue      N
                                                      (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)       (6)
Personal)Characteris/cs
                                             Age     44.31        (0.58)        47.39        (0.68)        0.00      822
                            Years7of7educa=on         6.22        (0.16)         5.85        (0.20)        0.14      799
         Roof7is7made7of7temporary7material           0.38        (0.06)         0.26        (0.05)        0.00      797
   Score7on7math7exercise7(percent7correct)           0.45        (0.03)         0.46        (0.03)        0.61      816
             Keeps7formal7business7accounts           0.02        (0.01)         0.04        (0.01)        0.12      825
          Weekly7hours7worked7in7enterprise          35.91        (2.07)        42.18        (1.41)        0.02      818
                  Reserva=on7wage,7monthly 2,674.93              (137.15)     3,219.42      (188.06)       0.03      656
          Maximum7loan7available7if7needed 8,883.73             (3,032.90)    9,378.14 (1,152.20)          0.96      651
   Monthly7interest7rate7on7a7poten=al7loan           6.19        (0.45)         6.21        (0.35)        0.99      479


Business)Characteris/cs
                      Produces7goods7for7sale         0.70        (0.04)         0.64        (0.03)        0.10      827
                               Last7day's7proﬁt     126.03        (12.11)      174.10        (36.18)       0.21      722
                            Last7day's7revenue      378.42        (42.16)      456.31        (45.64)       0.22      793
                   Number7of7clients7last7day7       14.12        (1.41)        14.70        (1.15)        0.72      763
 Total7number7of7workers,7including7owner7            1.57        (0.03)         1.75        (0.06)        0.02      816
        Weekly7hours7worked7by7employees              9.22        (0.97)        12.45        (1.39)        0.04      824
                       Age7of7business7(years)        6.30        (0.71)         8.77        (0.71)        0.01      826
      Replacement7value7of7business7capital 7,875.72            (1,113.79)    10,825.34 (1,137.04)         0.01      827
             Registered7with7the7government          0.14         (0.03)        0.27         (0.03)        0.00      800
Notes:7Sample7includes7all7subjects7interviewed7in7the7baseline7survey7that7did7not7aWrite.77A7subject7"ever7quit"7if7they7
were7not7running7their7business7in7either7the7ﬁrst7or7second7postZtreatment7survey.77Asympto=c7robust7standard7errors7
in7parentheses7clustered7at7the7village7level;7column757reﬂects7wild7bootstrapped7pZvalues.77All7monetary7variable7are7
measured7in7Mexican7Pesos7(~137pesos7/717U.S.7dollar).77Reserva=on7wage7is7the7minimum7stated7monthly7wage7a7
women7would7accept7in7order7to7quit7her7business.7Government7registra=on7is7with7the7Secretary7of7Finance7and7Public7
Credit7(SHCP).




                                                         47
                  Appendix Table 4: Lee’s bounds on the Intention to Treat Effects

                                                     Lower&Lee& p.value,&                Upper&Lee& p.value,&
                                                     bound&on&& Wild&                    bound&on&& Wild&
                                                        ITT     bootstrap Obs.              ITT     bootstrap Obs.
Outcome:                                                (1)        (2)     (3)              (4)        (5)     (6)

Main-business-outcomes
&&&ln(Last&day's&proﬁt)                                 0.154       (0.242)    1,178       0.340       (0.010)    1,177
&&&ln(Last&day's&revenue)                               0.165       (0.180)    1,349       0.359       (0.012)    1,350
&&&ln(#&clients&last&day)                               0.145       (0.300)    1,305       0.337       (0.016)    1,301
&&&Standardized                                         0.125       (0.096)    1,122       0.207       (0.010)    1,122

Outcomes-calculated-from-good5speciﬁc-data
&&&ln(Last&day's&proﬁt)                                0.104        (0.702)     832        0.313       (0.162)     831
&&&ln(Last&day's&revenue)                              0.143        (0.310)    1,067       0.334       (0.116)    1,067
&&&ln(#&goods&for&sale)                                0.024        (0.716)    1,415       0.432       (0.008)    1,380
&&&ln(Mean&unit&cost)                                  .0.361       (0.028)     976        .0.205      (0.192)     976
&&&ln(Mean&unit&price)                                 .0.060       (0.284)    1,400       0.067       (0.300)    1,400
Other-business-outcomes
&&&Percent&correct&on&business&pracQces&exercise       0.017        (0.792)    1,197       0.157       (0.052)    1,180
&&&Uses&formal&accounQng&methods                       .0.025       (0.078)    1,419       0.940       (0.004)    1,266
&&&Number&of&employees                                 0.001        (0.974)    1,411       0.964       (0.026)    1,308
&&&Hours&worked&per&week&by&owner                      .1.283       (0.640)    1,396       3.705       (0.232)    1,403
&&&Hours&worked&per&week&by&employees                  .3.558       (0.406)    1,138       14.362      (0.078)    1,081
&&&Registered&with&government&agency                   .0.144       (0.006)    1,349       0.626       (0.000)    1,276
&&&Quit&her&business                                   .0.321       (0.002)    1,734       0.585       (0.000)    1,661

Notes:&Sample&excludes&subjects&who&were&not&oﬀered&treatment&in&treatment&villages.&Lower&and&upper&bounds&are&
calculated&by&ﬁrst&using&Lee's&methodology&to&trim&each&post.intervenQon&period&independently,&and&then&esQmaQng&our&
diﬀerence&in&diﬀerence&model&with&this&trimmed&data&and&the&full&pre.intervenQon&sample.&&Covariates&included&(see&text).&
Wild&bootstrap&p.values&allow&for&intra.village&(cluster)&correlaQon.




                                                       48
