                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    DEMOCRACY, REDISTRIBUTION AND INEQUALITY

                                           Daron Acemoglu
                                            Suresh Naidu
                                           Pascual Restrepo
                                          James A. Robinson

                                        Working Paper 19746
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19746


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2013




Prepared for the Handbook of Income Distribution edited by Anthony Atkinson and François Bourguignon.
We are grateful to the editors for their detailed comments on an earlier draft and to participants in
the Handbook conference in Paris, particularly to our discussant José-Víctor Ríos-Rull. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Daron Acemoglu, Suresh Naidu, Pascual Restrepo, and James A. Robinson. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Democracy, Redistribution and Inequality
Daron Acemoglu, Suresh Naidu, Pascual Restrepo, and James A. Robinson
NBER Working Paper No. 19746
December 2013
JEL No. O10,P16

                                              ABSTRACT

In this paper we revisit the relationship between democracy, redistribution and inequality. We first
explain the theoretical reasons why democracy is expected to increase redistribution and reduce inequality,
and why this expectation may fail to be realized when democracy is captured by the richer segments
of the population; when it caters to the preferences of the middle class; or when it opens up disequalizing
opportunities to segments of the population previously excluded from such activities, thus exacerbating
inequality among a large part of the population. We then survey the existing empirical literature, which
is both voluminous and full of contradictory results. We provide new and systematic reduced-form
evidence on the dynamic impact of democracy on various outcomes. Our findings indicate that there
is a significant and robust effect of democracy on tax revenues as a fraction of GDP, but no robust
impact on inequality. We also find that democracy is associated with an increase in secondary schooling
and a more rapid structural transformation. Finally, we provide some evidence suggesting that inequality
tends to increase after democratization when the economy has already undergone significant structural
transformation, when land inequality is high, and when the gap between the middle class and the poor
is small. All of these are broadly consistent with a view that is different from the traditional median
voter model of democratic redistribution: democracy does not lead to a uniform decline in post-tax
inequality, but can result in changes in fiscal redistribution and economic structure that have ambiguous
effects on inequality.


Daron Acemoglu                                       Pascual Restrepo
Department of Economics, E18-269D                    Department of Economics, E18-776H
MIT                                                  MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue                              77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139                                  Cambridge, MA 02139
and CIFAR                                            pascual@mit.edu
and also NBER
daron@mit.edu                                        James A. Robinson
                                                     Harvard University
Suresh Naidu                                         Department of Government
Columbia University                                  N309, 1737 Cambridge Street
SIPA and Department of Economics                     Cambridge, MA 02138
MC 3328                                              and NBER
420 West 118th Street                                jrobinson@gov.harvard.edu
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
sn2430@columbia.edu
1     Introduction

Many factors influence the distribution of assets and income that a market economy generate.
These include the distribution of innate abilities and property rights, the nature of technology, and
the market structures that determine investment opportunities and the distribution of human and
physical capital.
    But any market system is embedded in a larger political system. The impact of the political
system on distribution depends on the laws, institutions and policies enacted by that system. What
institutions or policies a political system generates depends on the distribution of power in society
and how political institutions and mobilized interests aggregate preferences. For example, we expect
institutions that concentrate political power within a narrow segment of the population—typical
of nondemocratic regimes—to generate greater inequality.1
    There are several mechanisms through which such an impact might operate. One would be
the enactment of policies benefiting the politically powerful at the expense of the rest of society,
including policies pushing down wages by repression and other means. In Apartheid South Africa
prior to 1994, for example, the political system dominated by the minority white population intro-
duced government regulations on the occupation and residential choices of black Africans in order
to reduce their wages (e.g., by reducing competition for white labor and by forcing blacks into
unskilled occupations, see Lundahl, 1982 and Wilse-Samson, 2013). Another mechanism is the one
highlighted by Meltzer and Richard’s seminal (1981) paper. Building on earlier research by Romer
(1975) and Roberts (1977), they developed a model where extensions of the voting franchise, by
shifting the median voter towards poorer segments of society, increase redistribution and reduce
inequality.2
    Despite these strong priors, the empirical literature is very far from a consensus on the rela-
tionship between democracy, redistribution, and inequality. Several works have reported a negative
relationship between democracy and inequality using specific historical episodes or cross-national
studies. Acemoglu and Robinson (2000) argued this was the case based on the economic history of
19th-century Europe and some 20th-century Latin American examples. An important study by Ro-
drik (1999) presented evidence from a panel of countries that democracy is associated with higher
real wages and higher labor share in national income. Lindert (1994, 2004) provided evidence from
OECD countries indicating a linkage between democratization and public spending, particularly on
education; Persson and Tabellini (2003) presented similar cross-national evidence; and Lapp (2004)
pointed to a statistical association between democratization and land reform in Latin America.
   1
     Nondemocracies tend to be dominated by the rich either because the rich wield sufficient power to create such a
regime or because those who can wield power for other reasons subsequently use this power to become rich.
   2
     Historically, the fear of expected redistribution has been one of the factors motivating the opposition to democracy
(see Guttsman, 1967).


                                                           1
Other papers point in the opposite direction, however. Sirowy and Inkeles (1990) and Gradstein
and Milanovic (2005) have argued that the cross-national empirical evidence on democracy and
inequality is ambiguous and not robust. Scheve and Stasavage, (2009, 2010, 2012) have claimed
that there is little impact of democracy on inequality and policy among OECD countries, and Gil,
Mulligan, and Sala-i-Martin (2004) have forcefully argued that there is no relationship between
democracy and any policy outcome in a cross section of countries (Perotti, 1996, was an earlier
important paper with similar negative findings).
    In this chapter we revisit these issues theoretically and empirically. Theoretically, we point
out why the relationship between democracy, redistribution and inequality may be more complex
than the above expectations might suggest. First, democracy may be “captured”or “constrained
”. In particular, even though democracy clearly changes the distribution of de jure power in
society (e.g., Acemoglu and Robinson, 2006), policy outcomes and inequality depend not just on
the de jure but also the de facto distribution of power. For example, Acemoglu and Robinson
(2008) argue that, under certain circumstances, those who see their de jure power eroded by
democratization may sufficiently increase their investments in de facto power (e.g., via control
of local law enforcement, mobilization of non-state armed actors, lobbying, and other means of
capturing the party system) in order to continue to control the political process. If so, we would
not see an impact of democratization on redistribution and inequality.3 Similarly, democracy may
be constrained by either other de jure institutions such as constitutions, conservative political
parties, and judiciaries, or by de facto threats of coups, capital flight, or widespread tax evasion by
the elite.
    Second, we suggest that democratization can result in “Inequality-Increasing Market Opportu-
nities”. Nondemocracy may exclude a large fraction of the population from productive occupations
(e.g., skilled occupations) and entrepreneurship (including lucrative contracts) as in Apartheid
South Africa or the former Soviet block countries. To the extent that there is significant hetero-
geneity within this population, the freedom to take part in economic activities on a more level
playing field with the previous elite may actually increase inequality within the excluded or re-
pressed group and consequently the entire society.4
    3
      Relatedly, there could be reasons for dictators to redistribute and reduce inequality to increase the stability of
that regime (e.g., Acemoglu and Robinson, 2001, and Albertus and Menaldo, 2012, more generally). Plausible cases
of this would be the land reform implemented by the Shah of Iran during his White Revolution of 1963 to help him
become more autonomous from elites (McDaniel, 1991), the agrarian reforms made by the Peruvian military regime
in the early 1970s (Chapter 2 of Seligmann, 1995), or the educational reforms in 19th-century oligarchic Argentina
(Ellis, 2011).
    4
      Our data show that inequality has in fact increased in South Africa between 1990 and 2000 (or 2005) and
in ex-Soviet countries between 1989 and 1995 (or 2000), periods that bracket their democratic transitions in 1994
and 1989 respectively. This is probably, at least in part, driven by the increase in inequality amongst previously
disenfranchised blacks and repressed citizens (for details on the post-democracy distributions of income see Whiteford
and van Seventer, 2000, for South Africa and Milanovic, 1998, for ex-Soviet countries).



                                                           2
   Finally, consistent with Stigler’s “Director’s Law” (1970), democracy may transfer political
power to the middle class—rather than the poor. If so, redistribution may increase and inequality
may be curtailed only if the middle class is in favor of such redistribution.
   After reviewing the fairly large, but inconclusive, prior literature on this topic, the rest of this
chapter examines the empirical impact of democracy on tax revenues as a percentage of GDP
(as an imperfect measure of redistribution) and on inequality as well as a number of additional
macro variables. Our objective is not to estimate some structural parameters or the “causal”
effect of democracy on redistribution, but to uncover whether there is a robust correlation between
democracy, and redistribution and inequality, and to undertake a preliminary investigation of how
this empirical relationship changes depending on the stage of development and various other factors
potentially influencing how democracy operates.
   The previous literature has used several different approaches (e.g., cross-sectional regressions,
time-series and panel data investigations) and several different measures of democracy. We believe
that cross-sectional (cross-national) regressions and regressions that do not control for country fixed
effects will be heavily confounded with other factors likely to be simultaneously correlated with
democracy and inequality. We therefore focus on a consistent panel of countries, and investigate
whether countries that become democratic redistributed more and reduce inequality relative to
others. We also focus on a consistent definition of democratization based on Freedom House
and Polity indices, building on the work by Papaioannou and Siourounis (2008). One of the
problems of these indices is the significant measurement error, which creates spurious movements
in democracy. To minimize the influence of such measurement error, we create a dichotomous
measure of democracy using information from both the Freedom House and Polity data sets as
well as other codings of democracies to resolve ambiguous cases. This leads to a 0-1 measure
of democracy for 184 countries annually from 1960 (or post-1960 year of independence) to 2010.
We also pay special attention to modeling the dynamics of our outcomes of interest, taxes as a
percentage of GDP and various measures of structural change and inequality.
   Our empirical investigation uncovers a number of interesting patterns (why many of these results
differ from some of the existing papers in the literature is discussed after they are presented). First,
we find a robust and quantitatively large positive effect of democracy on tax revenues as a percentage
of GDP (and also on total government revenues as a percentage of GDP). The long-run effect of
democracy in our preferred specification is about a 16 percent increase in tax revenues as a fraction
of GDP. This pattern is robust to various different econometric techniques and to the inclusion of
other potential determinants of taxes, such as unrest, war, and education.
   Second, we find a positive effect of democracy on secondary school enrollment and the extent
of structural transformation (e.g., an impact on the nonagricultural share of employment and the


                                                   3
nonagricultural share of output).
    Third, however, we find a much more limited effect of democracy on inequality. In particular,
even though some measures and some specifications indicate that inequality declines after democ-
ratization, there is no robust pattern in the data (certainly nothing comparable to the results on
taxes and government revenue). This may reflect the poorer quality of inequality data. But we
also suspect it may be related to the more complex, nuanced theoretical relationships between
democracy and inequality pointed out above.
    Fourth, we investigate whether there are heterogeneous effects of democracy on taxes and in-
equality consistent with these more nuanced theoretical relationships. The evidence here points
to an inequality-increasing impact of democracy in societies with a high degree of land inequality,
which we interpret as evidence of (partial) capture of democratic decision making by landed elites.
We also find that inequality increases following a democratization in relatively nonagricultural soci-
eties, and also when the extent of disequalizing economic activities is greater in the global economy
as measured by U.S. top income shares (though this effect is less robust). These correlations are
consistent with the inequality-inducing effects of access to market opportunities created by democ-
racy. We also find that democracy tends to increase inequality and taxation when the middle
class are relatively richer compared to the rich and poor. These correlations are consistent with
Director’s Law, which suggests that democracy allows the middle class to redistribute from both
the rich and the poor to itself. Our results suggest the need for a more systematic investigation of
the conditions under which democracy does indeed reduce inequality and increase redistribution.
    The chapter proceeds as follows. In the next section we discuss the theoretical connections
between democracy, redistribution and inequality. In Section 3 we provide a survey of the exist-
ing empirical literature on the impact of democracy on taxes, redistribution, inequality and some
other reduced-form dependent variables potentially associated with inequality (e.g., average calo-
ries per person, life expectancy and infant mortality). Section 4 then describes our econometric
methodology and data. Section 5 presents our new findings, and Section 6 concludes.


2    Theoretical Considerations

In this section, we illustrate some of the linkages between democracy and inequality. We will
discuss the impact of democracy, modeled as a broader franchise, relative to a nondemocratic
regime modeled as a narrower franchise or controlled by a small group. This broadening of access
to political power is what our primary cross-country empirical measures of democracy attempt to
capture, and is arguably the most important feature of a democratic regime.




                                                  4
2.1    The Redistributive and Equalizing Effects of Democracy

We start with the standard “equalizing effect” of democracy, first emphasized formally in Meltzer
and Richard’s seminal (1981) study (see also Acemoglu and Robinson, 2006). Democratization,
by extending political power to poorer segments of society, will increase the tendency for pro-poor
policy, naturally associated with redistribution and thus reduce inequality.
    Suppose that society consists of agents distinguished only with respect to their endowment of
income, denoted by yi for agent i, with the distribution of income in the society denoted by the
function F (y) and its mean by ȳ. The only policy instrument is a linear tax τ imposed on all
agents, with the proceeds distributed lump-sum again to all agents. We normalize total population
to 1 without loss of any generality.
    The government budget constraint, which determines this lump-sum transfer T , takes the form

                                                T ≤ τ ȳ − C(τ )ȳ,                                               (1)

where the second term captures the distortionary costs of taxation. C(τ ) is assumed to be differ-
entiable, convex and nondecreasing with C ′ (0) = 0.
    Each agent’s post-tax income and utility is given by

                                         ŷi = (1 − τ )yi + τ ȳ − C(τ )ȳ.                                       (2)

This expression immediately makes it clear that preferences over policy—represented by the linear
tax rate τ —satisfy both single crossing and single-peakedness (e.g., Austen-Smith and Banks, 1999).
Hence the median voter theorem, and its variants for more limited franchises (see e.g., Acemoglu,
Egorov and Sonin, 2012) hold.5
    Suppose, to start with, that there is a limited franchise such that all agents with income above
yq , the q th percentile of the income distribution, are enfranchised and the rest are disenfranchised.
Consider a “democratization” which takes the form of yq decreasing, say to some yq′ < yq , so that
more people are allowed to vote. Let the equilibrium tax rate under these two different political
institutions be denoted by τq and τq′ , and the resulting post-tax income distribution by Fq and Fq′ .
Then from the observation that the median of the distribution truncated at yq′ is always less than
the median for the one truncated above yq > yq′ , the following result is immediate:




   5
     Namely, if we assume that policy choices are made by either a direct democracy procedure choosing the Condorcet
winner (if one exists) or as a result of competition between two parties choosing (and committing to) their platforms,
the equilibrium will coincide with the political bliss point of the median-ranked voter.
  As Austen-Smith and Banks (1999) discuss in detail these types of results, though powerful, are rather special and,
among other things, rely on the assumption that the policy space is unidimensional.


                                                          5
Proposition 1 (Redistributive Effects of Democracy) Suppose that starting from only those
above yq being enfranchised there is a further democratization so that now those above yq′ < yq
are enfranchised. This democratization leads to higher taxes (τq′ ≥ τq ), higher redistribution and
a more equal distribution of post-tax income in the sense that Fq′ is more concentrated around its
mean than Fq .

    A few comments about this proposition are useful. First, this result is just a restatement of
Meltzer and Richard’s (1981) main result. Second, the first part of the conclusion is stated as
τq′ ≥ τq , since if both yq and yq′ are above the mean, with standard arguments, τq′ = τq = 0.
Third, the second part of the conclusion does not state that Fq is it mean-preserving spread of,
or is second-order stochastically dominated by Fq′ because higher taxes may reduce mean post-tax
income due to their distortionary costs of taxation. Instead, the statement is that Fq′ is more
concentrated around its mean than Fq , which implies the following: if we shift Fq′ so that it has the
same mean as Fq , then it second-order stochastically dominates Fq (and thus automatically implies
that standard deviation and other measures of inequality are lower under Fq′ than under Fq ).
    Finally, the result in the proposition should be carefully distinguished from another often stated
(but not unambiguous) result, which concerns the impact of inequality on redistribution. Persson
and Tabellini (1994) and Alesina and Rodrik (1994), among others, show that, under some ad-
ditional assumptions, greater inequality leads to more redistribution in the median voter setup
(which in these papers is also embedded in a growth model). This result, however, is generally not
true.6 It applies under additional assumptions on the distribution of income, such as a log normal
distribution, or when the gap between mean and median is used as a measure of inequality (which
is rather non-standard). In contrast, the result emphasized here is unambiguously true.
    This result of Meltzer and Richards (1981) is the basis for the hypothesis that democracy should
increase taxation and income redistribution and reduce inequality. In the model the only way that
redistribution can take place is via a lump-sum transfer. This is obviously restrictive. For example,
it could be that individuals prefer the state to provide public goods (Lizzeri and Persico, 2004) or
public education. Nevertheless, the result generalizes, under suitable assumptions, to the cases in
which the distribution takes place through public goods or education.
    We next discuss another possible impact of democracy and why its influence on redistribution
and inequality may be more complex than this result may suggest.
     6
       Consider the following counterexample. In society A, 1/3 of the population has income 2, 1/3 has income 3
and the remaining 1/3 has income 7. If everyone is enfranchised, the Condorcet winner is a tax rate τ A > 0 with
C ′ (τ A ) = 1/4. In society B, 1/3 of the population has income 0, 1/3 has income 4 and the remaining 1/3 has income
8. If everyone is enfranchised, the Condorcet winner is a tax rate τ B = 0. Society B has a lower tax rate, and hence
less redistribution despite being more unequal (the distribution of income in society A second-order stochastically
dominates the distribution of society B).




                                                         6
2.2   Democracy and the Structural Transformation

The logic of Proposition 1 applies when the main political conflict involves the tax rate but not
other policy instruments. One of the most important alternatives, emphasized by Moore (1966) and
by Acemoglu and Robinson (2006) in the economics literature, is the combination of policies used to
create abundant (and cheap) labor for the rural sector (see also Llavador and Oxoby, 2005). Many
nondemocratic agrarian societies use explicit and implicit limits on migration out of the rural sector,
together with labor repression, to keep wages low and redistribute income from the population to the
politically powerful landed elites. Even industrial sectors in 19th century England used the Master
and Servant law to prosecute workers and repress trade unions, and it was only repealed following
an expansion of the franchise to workers and de-criminalization of workers’ organizations (Naidu
and Yuchtman 2013). For example, in rural Africa land is often controlled by traditional rulers
and chiefs and not held as private property and people moving away from particular chieftainces
lose rights over land, inhibiting migration. In Sierra Leone, forced labor controlled by chiefs was
common in rural areas prior to the civil war in 1991 (e.g., Acemoglu, Reed and Robinson, 2014).
We may expect that these policies will be relaxed or lifted when political power shifts either to
industrialists, who would benefit from migration out of the rural sector into the industrial one, or
to poorer segments of society who are bearing the brunt of lower wages (see Acemoglu, 2006, for a
political economy analysis of wage repression and the impact of democracy on it).
   To model these issues in the simplest possible way, suppose that there is a single policy in-
strument denoted by η ∈ R+ capturing the extent of barriers against mobility out of the rural
sector. Suppose now that yi denotes the land endowment of agent i, so that post-policy income
(and utility) of an agent is given by

                                         ŷi = ω(η) + υ (η) yi ,                                   (3)

where ω (η) can be interpreted as the impact of this policy on wage income (thus it applies agents
with no land endowment) and naturally we assume that ω (η) is decreasing. On the other hand,
υ (η) is the impact of its policy on land rents, and is thus increasing. This formulation can also be
easily extended to include industrialists who may also be opposed to high values of η which would
reduce the supply of labor to their sector.
   Inspection of (3) immediately reveals that preferences over η satisfy single crossing, and thus
the median voter theorem again applies. This leads to the following result:




                                                   7
Proposition 2 (Democracy and Structural Transformation) Consider the model outlined in
this subsection. Suppose that starting from only those above yq being enfranchised, there is a further
democratization so that now those above yq′ < yq are enfranchised. This democratization leads to
lower mobility barriers out of the rural sector (ηq′ ≤ ηq ) and a more equal distribution of income
(in the sense that Fq′ is more concentrated around its means than Fq ).

    This proposition highlights that the same reasoning that leads to the redistributive and equal-
izing effects of democracy also weighs in favor of lifting barriers that are against the interest of the
middle class and the poor. An important implication of this might be a push towards the structural
transformation out of agriculture and into industry and cities that might have been partly arrested
artificially by the political process before democratization. An illustrative example of this is the
impact of the 1832 Reform Act in Britain which enfranchised urban manufacturing elites in the
newly industrializing cities such as Birmingham and Manchester. This led directly to the abolition
of the Corn Laws in 1846 which was a huge distortionary subsidy to landowners (Schonhardt-Bailey,
2006).
    It is also straightforward to apply this reasoning to other policies related to redistribution and
structural transformation, such as investment in mass schooling, which we may also expect to be
boosted by democratization.

2.3      Other Considerations

Obviously, the simple model presented in the previous two subsections leaves out many mechanisms
which might influence the extent of redistribution in a democracy and other forces which can shape
the political equilibrium (Putterman, 1996, provides an overview of many ideas).7
    Several papers have investigated how social mobility influences the demand for redistribution
even in a democracy (Wright, 1996, Bénabou and Ok, 2001, Alesina and La Ferrara, 2005, Carter
and Morrow, 2012). When rates of social mobility are high and tax policy is sticky, people who
are poor today may not support high rates of taxation and redistribution because they worry that
it will negatively impact them should they become rich in the future. Relatedly Piketty (1995)
suggests that different beliefs about how distortionary taxation can be self-fulfilling and lead to
multiple equilibria, some with low inequality and a lot of redistribution, and others with high
inequality and little redistribution (see also Bénabou, 2001, 2008, Bénabou and Tirole, 2006 and
    7
      We have also left out a discussion of several other important issues that have been raised in theoretical analysis
of redistribution in democracy. In particular, there is a growing and vibrant literature on redistribution in a dynamic
context, including Krusell and Rı́os-Rull and Quadrini (1997), Krusell and Rı́os-Rull (1999), Hassler et al. (2003),
Battaglini and Coate (2008), and Acemoglu, Egorov and Sonin (2012). Overviews of other aspects of democratic
policy-making are provided in Drazen (2000), Persson and Tabellini (2000), Acemoglu and Robinson (2006) and
Besley (2007). The political economy literature on the emergence of democracy is also beyond the scope of our
chapter, and we refer the reader to the extensive discussions in Acemoglu and Robinson (2006).


                                                           8
Alesina and Angeletos, 2005). Thus a democratic society could result in an equilibrium with little
redistribution.
   Alternatively, it could be that social cleavages or identities may be such as to reduce the
likelihood that a coalition favoring redistribution would form (Roemer, 1998, Lee, 2003, Frank, 2005,
Roemer, Lee and Van der Straeten, 2007, De la O and Rodden, 2008, Shayo, 2009). For example, in
Roemer’s model there is a right-wing political party that does not like taxation and redistribution
and a left-wing political party that does. People are ideologically predisposed towards one or other
of the parties, but they also care about religion, as do the parties. If the right wing party is catholic,
a poor catholic may vote for it even if it does not offer the tax policy that the voter wishes. Another
reason that the above model may fail to characterize the political equilibrium accurately is because
ethnic heterogeneity limits the demand for redistribution (Alesina, Baqir and Easterly, 1999, Alesina
and Glaeser, 2004). Daalgard, Hansen and Larsen (2005) argue that institutions, particularly ones
which influence the efficiency of the state, will influence the demand for redistribution. Finally,
recent work has tied the extent of social capital to the extent of redistribution in the form of a
welfare state with societies with high levels of trust, such as in Scandinavia having the greatest
amount of redistribution (Algan, Cahuc and Sangnier, 2013).
   Another idea, due to Moene and Wallerstein (2001), is that most redistribution under democracy
does not take the form of transfers from rich to poor but of social insurance. Moene and Wallerstein
develop a model to show that the comparative statics of this with respect to inequality may be
very different from the Meltzer-Richard model.
   In the rest of this section, we will instead focus on what we view as the first-order mechanisms
via which democracy may fail to increase redistribution or reduce inequality.

2.4   Why Inequality May Not Decline: Captured Democracy and Constraints
      on Redistribution

In contrast to Propositions 1 and 2, greater democratization may not always reduce inequality. In
this and the next two subsections, we discuss several mechanisms for this.
   The first possible reason is that even though democracy reallocates de jure power to poorer
agents, richer segments of society can take other actions to offset this by increasing their de facto
power. This possibility, first raised in Acemoglu and Robinson (2008), can be captured in the
following simple way here. Suppose that the distribution of income has mass at two points, the rich
elite, which is initially enfranchised, and the rest of the citizens which make up the majority of the
population and are initially disenfranchised. Suppose, in addition, that the rich elite can undertake
costly investments to increase its de facto power (meaning the power they control outside those that
are strictly institutionally sanctioned, such as their influence on parties’ platforms via lobbying or



                                                    9
repression through control of local law enforcement or non-state armed actors; see Acemoglu and
Robinson, 2006, 2008, Acemoglu, Santos and Robinson, 2013, Acemoglu, Robinson and Torvik,
2013). If they do so, they will “capture the political system,” for example, control the political
agenda of all parties. Suppose also that this type of capture is costly, with cost denoted by Γ > 0.
Then clearly, when there is a limited franchise, the elite will not need to incur the cost for doing
so. Once there is enfranchisement, if this cost is not too large, they will find it beneficial to incur
this cost, and may then succeed in setting the tax rate at their bliss point, rather than putting up
with the higher redistribution that the majority of citizens would impose.
   This reasoning immediately implies the following result:

Proposition 3 (Captured Democracy) Suppose that the elite can control the political system
after democratization at cost Γ > 0. Then if Γ is less than some Γ̄, they will prefer to do so, and
democratization will lead to no change in taxes and the distribution of income.

   This proposition, in a simple way, captures the main idea of Acemoglu and Robinson (2008),
even though the specific mechanism for capture is somewhat different. In Acemoglu and Robinson,
each elite agent individually contributes to their collective de facto power, which needs to be greater
in democracy to exceed the increased de jure power of poor citizens. Under some conditions, the
main result of Acemoglu and Robinson (2008) is that the probability of the elite controlling political
power is invariant to democratization—or more generally may not increase as much as it may have
been expected to do due to the direct effect of the change in de jure power.
   A related channel to Proposition 3 is that democracy may be highly dysfunctional, or effectively
captured, because its institutional architecture is often chosen by previous restricted franchises or
dictatorships. Acemoglu, Ticchi and Vindigni (2011) develop a model where the elite can take
control of democracy by forming a coalition in favor of the continuation of patronage, keeping the
state weak.
   Other mechanisms include de jure constitutional provisions that restrict the scope for redis-
tribution (e.g. a cap on τ ) that remain unaltered during democratization. For instance, Siavelis
(2000) and Londregan (2000) argue that the constitution imposed by the Pinochet government in
Chile prior to the transition to democracy was a way to constrain future redistribution. Another is
the threat of a future coup preventing democracy from pursuing high redistribution. Ellman and
Wantchekeon (2000) discuss how fear of a military coup induced voters to support the right-wing
ARENA party, taking redistribution off the political agenda, and also suggest that similar forces
operated in electing Charles Taylor in Liberia in 1997 (see also Acemoglu and Robinson, 2001).
An alternative mechanism is the threat of capital flight increasing the cost of redistribution (in



                                                  10
the reduced-form model here, this would mean an increase in C(τ )).8 Moses (1994) argues that
this was the case for Sweden in 1992, and Campello (2011) and Weyland (2004), among others,
suggest that capital flight restrained redistribution in new Latin American democracies (see also
Acemoglu and Robinson, 2006). Mohamed and Finnoff (2003) similarly argue that capital flight
constrained redistribution in post-Apartheid South Africa (see also Alesina and Tabellini 1989 and
Bardhan, Bowles, and Wallerstein 2006). All of these constraints would reduce the potential impact
of democracy on inequality.
    An implication of Proposition 3 and our discussion is that democracy may change neither fiscal
policy nor the distribution of income. Nevertheless, it is also useful to note that a variant of this
model can lead to an increase in taxes without a major impact on inequality. Suppose, for example,
that the elite can use its de facto power to redirect spending towards itself (e.g., towards some public
goods that mostly benefit the elite such as investments in elite universities rather than in primary
or secondary education), but would have a more limited ability to control taxes. In that case, a
variant of Proposition 3 would apply whereby democracy might be associated with an increase in
taxation, but may not have a major impact on inequality. Moreover, in the Acemoglu, Ticchi and
Vindigni model mentioned above, democracy may increase taxes in order to use this as payments
to state employees, but still not increase redistribution or reduce inequality.
    Another variant of this result where elites can block democratization ex-ante, rather than cap-
turing democracies ex-post, shows how selection bias can effect the correlation between democracy
and the extent of redistribution observed. If elites can block democratizations that would be highly
redistributive, then the only democratizations that are observed would be those that are not partic-
ularly redistributive, and we would see no correlation between democracies and increased taxation
or redistribution.
    A number of empirical studies present empirical evidence consistent with these mechanisms.
Larchinese (2011), for example shows that the democratization of Italy in 1912, though it had a
large positive effect on the number of people who voted, had little impact on which parties were
represented in the legislature, something he interprets as consistent with the democracy being
captured by old elites. Berlinski and Dewan (2011) similarly show that the British Second Reform
Act of 1868, though it greatly expanded voting rights, did not have a significant immediate impact
on representation.
    Anderson, Francois and Kotwal (2011) show that in Maharashtra in Western India, areas where
the traditional Maratha landlords are powerful, for example as measured by their extent of land-
holdings, have democratic equilibria which are far more pro-landlord and anti-poor because the
   8
     A related idea, proposed by Dunning (2008), is that if the main source of tax revenues is from natural resource
rents, not personal income or wealth taxes, the elite has less incentive to oppose or capture democracy.




                                                        11
Maratha elites control voting behavior via their clientelistic ties to workers. See also Baland and
Robinson (2008, 2012) on Chile, McMillan and Zoido, (2004), on Peru, Pettersson-Lidbom and
Tyrefors (2011) on Sweden, and Albertus and Menaldo (2013) for a cross-country empirical study
of how the strength of elites at the time of democratization influences how redistributive democracy
is.
      There is also qualitative historical evidence on the redistributive constraints faced by democra-
cies. Writers since James Madison have argued that the U.S. constitution is an effective bulwark
against redistribution (Beard, 1913, McGuire, 2003, Holton, 2007). Others have noted that the
constitution was a large obstacle to slave emancipation (Einhorn 2006, Waldstreicher 2009), and
Dasgupta (2013) argues that the Indian constitution has been a key component in elites maintaining
control of land reform projects.

2.5     Why Inequality May Not Decline: Inequality-Increasing Market Opportu-
        nities

Our second mechanism for an ambiguous effect of democracy on inequality is inspired by the
experiences of South Africa and Eastern Europe. In South Africa, the end of Apartheid in 1994
has been associated with an increase in inequality. This is partly because the black majority now
takes part in economic activities from which it was previously excluded, and earnings are more
dispersed in these activities than the low-skill, manual occupations they were previously confined
to. Likewise in Eastern Europe after 1989 the collapse of communism created new opportunities
for people who were previously trapped in sectors of the economy where they could not use their
skills and talents optimally (Atkinson and Mickelwright, 1992, Flemming and Mickelwright, 2000).
      To incorporate this possibility, let us return to the model of structural transformation presented
above. Suppose that yi denotes the “skill” endowment of agent i, and is strictly positive for all
agents. Now η ∈ {0, 1} denotes a policy instrument preventing people from moving into some
potentially high-productivity activity, with η = 1 representing such prevention and η = 0 as its
cessation. Post-policy income of agent i is

                                 ŷi = υ(η)yi I (yi > yq ) + (1 − η)yi + w0 ,

where υ (η) denotes the return to agents above the q th > .5 percentile of the distribution (e.g.,
the landowners) from preventing the rest of the population entering into the high-productivity
activities (e.g., banning black workers in South Africa from skilled occupations). The indicator
function I (yi > yq ) makes sure that this term only applies to agents above the q th percentile. In
view of this, it is natural to assume that υ (η = 1) > υ (η = 0) + 1 so that the very rich benefit from
this policy. In addition, if η = 1, then the remaining workers just receive a baseline wage w0 > 0.
In contrast, if η = 0, they are able to take part in economic activities, and in this case, some of

                                                     12
them will be more successful than others, and here, this is just assumed to be a function of their
type, yi .
    The median voter theorem still applies in this formulation, and following democratization ex-
tending the franchise sufficiently, the political process will lead to a switch to η = 0. However,
this formulation also makes it clear that the increased market opportunities for agents below the
q th percentile will create inequality among them. This effect can easily dominate the reduction in
inequality resulting from the fact that the very rich no longer benefit from restricting access for the
rest of the population. We summarize this result in the next proposition:

Proposition 4 (Implications of Inequality-Inducing Market Opportunities) In the model
described in this subsection, suppose there is an increase in democracy. If a sufficient number of
voters are enfranchised, this will lead to a switch from η = 1 to η = 0, but the implications for
inequality are ambiguous.

2.6    Why Inequality May Not Decline: The Middle Class Bias

The third possible reason for a limited impact of democracy on inequality is that, with additional tax
instruments, greater democratization may empower the middle class (loosely and broadly defined),
which can then use its greater power to redistribute to itself. Suppose society now consists of three
groups, the rich elite with income yr , the middle class with income ym < yr , and the poor with
income yp < ym . Let the proportions of these three groups be, respectively, δr , δm and δp . Consider
an extension of the baseline model where there are two types of transfers, the lump-sum transfer, T ,
as before, and a transfer specifically benefiting the middle class, denoted by Tm . The government
budget constraint is then:
                                      T + δm Tm ≤ τ ȳ − C(τ )ȳ.                                  (4)

    Now suppose that starting with the rich elite in power there is a democratization, which makes
the median voter an agent from the middle class. This will be the case if there is a limited franchise
extension only to the middle class and δr < δm (the middle classes are more populous than the
rich), or there is a transition to full democracy but the middle class contains the median voter (i.e.,
δr + δp < δm ). Clearly, when only the elite is empowered there will be zero taxation (because, given
the available fiscal instruments, the elite cannot redistribute to itself). With the middle class in
power, there will be positive taxation and redistribution to the middle class using the instrument
Tm . The resulting income distribution may be more or less equal (it will be more equal if the
middle class is much poorer than the rich, and less equal if the middle classes are much richer than
the poor).
    In this case, the impact of democracy on inequality is generally ambiguous and depends on
the specific measure of inequality under consideration, the cost of taxation and the pre-democracy

                                                  13
distribution of income. It can be shown that, focusing on the Gini coefficient, when the poor are
numerous and not too poor relative to the rich, that is, when

                                                     δp          δr
                                                          yp >        yr ,                                           (5)
                                                   1 − δp      1 − δr

inequality increases under democracy.9 Intuitively, in this case, taxes hurt the poor who also do
not benefit from the transfers. When the poor are more numerous and richer, they bear more of
the burden of taxation, and this can increase inequality.
       Furthermore, whether democratization increases or reduces inequality depends on the shares
of income accruing to the rich and the poor before democracy. When either (5) holds or when C
is sufficiently convex that the tax choice of the middle class is not very elastic, an increase in the
share of income of the rich or a decrease in the share of income of the poor makes it more likely
that democracy will reduce inequality.10 These results are summarized in the next proposition.




   9
       In particular, the Gini coefficient under autocracy is

                                         GA = δp − δr + sr (δm + δr ) − sp (δp + δm ),

where the s’s denote the income shares of the rich and the poor. The Gini coefficient under democracy can be computed
with the same formula but using the post-tax income shares of the rich and the poor, e.g., sbg = sg (1−τ D )/(1−C(τ D )),
as
                                                1 − τD                           1 − τD
                           G D = δp − δr + sr             (δ m +  δ r ) −  s p             (δp + δm ).
                                              1 − C(τ D )                      1 − C(τ D )
The change in the Gini due to democratization is then
                                      D                                    D              
                                        τ − C(τ D )                            τ − C(τ D )
                      GD − GA = sp                      (δ p + δ m ) −  s r                    (δm + δr ).
                                         1 − C(τ D )                            1 − C(τ D )

Noting that τ D > C(τ D ), the result follows.
  10
     First note that higher shares of income of the rich and the poor always increase the preferred tax rate of the
                D             D
middle class dτ
              dsr
                  > 0 and dτdsp
                                > 0. Next, following on from footnote 9, the impact of the share of income of the rich
on the change in the Gini is

                        d                                                                          dτ D
                           (GD − GA ) = −H(τ D )(δm + δr ) + [sp (δp + δm ) − sr (δm + δr )]H ′D )      ,
                       dsr                                                                         dsr
where H(τ ) = (τ − C(τ ))/(1 − C(τ )) is the share of revenue taken by the government in taxes, which is increasing
provided that C ′ (τ ), C(τ ) < 1, and τ > C(τ ), which are automatically satisfied when τ is to the right of the peak
of the Laffer curve. The first term, corresponding to the incidence of taxation on the rich, is always negative. The
second term is also negative when (5) does not hold (otherwise higher taxes, creating more resources to be transferred
                                                      D
to the middle class, are dis-equalizing), or when dτdsr
                                                        > 0 is small, which follows when C is sufficiently convex (so
that taxes do not respond significantly to an increase in sr ).
   Similarly, the impact of the share of income of the poor on the changing Gini is given by

                         d                                                                         dτ D
                            (GD − GA ) = H(τ D )(δp + δm ) + [sp (δp + δm ) − sr (δm + δr )]H ′D )      .
                        dsp                                                                        dsp
The first term is now positive because inequality increases when the poor bear more of the tax burden. The second
effect is also positive when (5) holds or when C is sufficiently convex.


                                                                14
Proposition 5 (Modified Director’s Law) In the model described in this subsection, suppose
there is limited enfranchisement to the middle class and δr < δm , or there is a transition to full
democracy and δr + δp < δm . Then there will be an increase in taxes but the effect on inequality—
measured by the Gini coefficient—is ambiguous. If (5) holds, democracy increases inequality. More-
over, if either (5) does not hold or C is sufficiently convex, then a larger share of income of the rich
(which always increases taxes) makes it more likely that inequality will decline under democracy. If
either (5) holds or C is sufficiently convex, then a larger share of income of the poor (which also
always increases taxes) makes it more likely that inequality will increase under democracy.

   We refer to this result as the “Modified Director’s Law” since it relates to an idea attributed to
Aaron Director by Stigler (1970) that redistribution in democracy involves taking from the poor and
the rich to the benefit of the middle class (one can derive a similar result in a model of probabilistic
voting when the middle class has a larger density for the distribution of its valence term, Persson
and Tabellini, 2000, Section 7.4).
   This result is also related to what Aidt, Daunton and Dutta (2009) call the “retrenchment
effect” of democratization. They show that local franchise expansion in 19th-century Britain to the
middle class often reduced expenditure on public good provision since the middle class bore the
brunt of property taxes which financed local public good provision. In their model an expansion of
voting rights, by reducing public good provision and taxes on the middle class, can thus increase
inequality. Relatedly, Fernandez and Rogerson (1995) show how an equilibrium like this could arise
in a political economy model of taxation and educational subsidies.
   An important contrast between this result and Proposition 3 is on taxes. In Proposition 3,
democracy neither increases taxes nor reduces inequality (but note the contrast with extended
versions of the captured democracy mechanism). Here democracy increases taxes, but because the
additional revenue is used for the middle class, it may not reduce inequality.

2.7   Discussion and Interpretation

The theoretical ideas presented so far suggest that in the most basic framework, we expect democ-
racy to increase redistribution and reduce inequality. We may also expect a boost to structural
transformation from democratization. However, several factors militate against this tendency. The
elite—the richer segments of society—who stand to lose from increased redistribution can attempt
to increase their de facto power to compensate for their reduced de jure power under democracy.
As we have seen, this can limit redistribution and/or the potential reduction in inequality. Alterna-
tively, consistent with Director’s Law, democracy may indeed increase taxes but use the resulting
revenues for redistribution to the middle class, thus not necessarily reduce inequality. Finally,
democracy may also be associated with the opening up of new economic opportunities to a large

                                                  15
segment of society, which can be an additional source of inequality.
    After reviewing the prior empirical literature, we will investigate the impact of democracy
on redistribution and inequality. We will, in particular, study whether the effect of democracy on
redistribution and inequality is heterogeneous and whether it depends on the economic and political
forces we have highlighted in this section. In line with the theoretical mechanisms here, we expect
the captured democracy effect to be stronger if the elite has more to lose from democracy, for
example, if it is more vested in land or other assets that will lose value when wages increase and
nondemocratic policies useful for these assets are lifted. Additionally, we expect the position of the
middle class in the distribution of income to shape the type and extent of redistribution observed in
democracy. Finally, we also expect the inequality-inducing market opportunity effect to be stronger
when frontier technologies and global economic activities are more human or physical capital-biased
and when society is more urbanized and presents greater opportunities for entrepreneurship and
capitalist development. These are some of the ideas we will investigate in greater detail in the
empirical analysis.


3     A Brief Overview of Related Literature

In this section, we survey the literature on the effect of democracy on redistribution and inequality.
Our emphasis will be on the empirical literature, though we also discuss some of the theoretical
ideas that have played an important role in this literature (several theoretical contributions have
already been discussed in the previous section).

3.1   Democracy, Taxes and Redistribution

In the basic model of the policy effects of democracy proposed by Meltzer and Richard (1981) an
expansion of democracy should lead to greater tax revenues and redistribution. We first consider the
tax and spending part of this. While Gil, Mulligan, and Sala-i-Martin (2004) found no correlation
between tax revenues and different components of government spending and democracy in a cross-
sectional specification we discuss below, there are many studies which do find such results.
    This is certainly true of the more historical studies, for example Lindert (2004), Gradstein
and Justman (1999a), and Acemoglu and Robinson (2000). Aidt, Dutta, and Loukoianova (2006)
and Aidt and Jensen (2009b) examine the impact of democratization measured by the proportion
of adults who could vote in a cross-national panel consisting of 12 Western European countries
over the period 1830-1938, and in a sample of 10 Western countries over the period 1860 to 1938,
respectively. The latter paper, for example, finds robust positive effects of suffrage on government
expenditure as a percentage of GDP and also tax revenues as a percentage of GDP.
    One would expect that democracy would not only change the total amount of tax revenues, but


                                                   16
also what taxes were used for. For instance, one might expect democracy to switch towards more
progressive taxation. Aidt and Jensen (2009b) investigated the impact of suffrage on tax incidence.
They found, somewhat paradoxically, that suffrage expansion led to lower direct taxes and higher
indirect taxes. Aidt and Jensen (2009a) investigated the determinants of the introduction of an
income tax. They reported a non-linear relationship with suffrage, indicating that an expansion of
the franchise starting from very restrictive levels reduces the probability that an income tax will
be introduced, but also that this probability increases significantly at higher levels of the franchise.
   Scheve and Stasavage (2010, 2012) also adopt a long-run approach using data from OECD
countries and find no correlation between democracy and either tax progressivity and the rate
of capital taxation. Instead, consistent with Tilly (1991) and Besley and Pearson (2012), they
emphasize the importance of warfare, a topic to which we return later.
   An important study by Lindert (1994) found an impact of democracy on various types of social
spending in a panel data consisting of European and North American countries as well as Japan,
Australasia, Argentina, Brazil and Mexico and spanning the period from 1880 to 1930. In his 2004
book, Lindert summarizes his findings as: “Conclusion #1: There was so little social spending of
any kind before the twentieth century mainly because political voice was so restricted,” (Lindert,
2004, p. 22)
   A lot of research is consistent with this. Huber and Stephens (2012) build a panel dataset
1970-2007 for Latin America and measure democracy by the cumulative years a country has been
democratic since 1945 and estimate pooled OLS models without fixed effects. They find the history
of democracy is significantly positively correlated with education spending, health spending and
social security and welfare spending. In a panel data of 14 Latin American countries four 1973-
97, Kaufman and Segura-Ubiergo (2001) show that democracy, as measured by the dichotomous
measure introduced by Przeworski, Alvarez, Cheibub and Limongi (2000), is positively correlated
with government expenditure on health and education but not with other components of spending.
Brown and Hunter (1999) also focus on Latin America within a panel between 1980 and 1992. They
examine the impact of democracy, coded as a zero-one dichotomous measure based on Przeworski et
al. (2000), on social spending per-capita. They also examine various types of interactions between
democracy and other variables such as GDP per-capita and the growth rate in GDP per-capita.
Their basic findings suggest that democracies have greater social spending than autocracies.
   Using a broader set of countries and a panel between 1960 and 1998, Persson and Tabellini
(2003) also find some evidence that democracy, as measured by the Gastil index and the Polity
score, has positive effects on government expenditure and government revenues as well as welfare
and social security spending as percentages of GDP.
   Though most studies tend to focus on a broad measure of democracy, an interesting literature


                                                  17
has examined female enfranchisement more specifically. The main focus of this research has been
on whether enfranchising women has an additional or differential impact on government taxation
or spending. Lindert (1994) showed that female enfranchisement had an independent effect on
social spending and this finding has held up well (see Aidt and Dallal, 2008, for similar results
for a later period). Lott and Kenny (1999) studied the expansion of women’s voting rights in the
United States between 1870 and 1940 and found that it coincided with increases in per-capita state
revenues and expenditures. Miller (2008) also examined this process showing that female suffrage
increased health spending and led to significant falls in infant mortality.
   Of all the research on this topic only the paper by Aidt and Jensen (2013) provides an identifi-
cation strategy to tackle the fact that democracy is endogenous. Building on the theoretical ideas
in Acemoglu and Robinson (2000, 2006) and their previous work (Aidt and Jensen, 2011), they
argue that ‘revolutionary threat’ measured by revolutionary events in other countries is a viable
instrument for democracy in a panel of Western European countries between 1820 and 1913. Using
this source of variation they find that democracy, as measured by the extent of suffrage (proportion
of the adult population which is enfranchised), has a robust positive effect on government spending
relative to GDP.
   In this light, the paper by Gil, Mulligan, and Sala-i-Martin (2004) appears an outlier in finding
no effects of democracy on tax revenues as a percentage of GDP and spending. Nevertheless,
there are econometric problems with all of these papers. Specifically, there is little attention to
identification problems and most studies that use panel data do not include country fixed effects,
thus confounding the effect of democracy with country-specific factors potentially correlated with
democracy and redistribution. Though the important study of Aidt and Jensen (2013) moves the
literature a long way forward, their empirical model controls for many endogenous variables on
the right side and does not deal with the possibility that revolutionary events in other countries
might capture other correlated effects impacting the outcomes of interest (see the discussion of this
possibility in Acemoglu, Naidu, Restrepo and Robinson, 2013).

3.2   Democracy and Inequality

There is an even larger reduced-form empirical literature on the relationship between democracy
and inequality, most of it by sociologists and political scientists rather than economists. This has
typically delivered ambiguous results. Early work, which consisted mostly of simple cross-national
regressions of measures of inequality (usually the income Gini coefficient) on various measures of
democracy, was surveyed by Sirowy and Inkeles (1990). They concluded “the existing evidence
suggests that the level of political democracy as measured at one point in time tends not to be
widely associated with lower levels of income inequality” (p. 151).


                                                 18
    Much of this literature, however, also suffers from the econometric problems of the type discussed
in the last subsection, most importantly, the possibility that omitted factors are affecting both
inequality and democracy, and reverse causation from inequality to democracy may be present
(e.g., Muller, 1988).
    Muller (1988) using a larger dataset than the previous literature found that there was a negative
correlation between the number of years a country had been democratic and inequality, which he
interpreted as evidence that democracy had to be in place for long enough for inequality to fall.
Yet the robustness of his results were challenged by Weede (1989) (see the response by Muller,
1989). Others, such as Simpson (1990), Burkhart (1997) and Justman and Gradstein (1999b)
claimed that there was a non-linear reduced-form relationship between democracy and inequality
with inequality being low at low and high levels of democracy and higher for intermediate levels.
The plethora of results is what led Sirowy and Inkeles to be skeptical, though they do suggest that
there may be some evidence in favor of the history of democracy mattering for inequality (Muller’s
original finding has been replicated in many subsequent studies, e.g. by Huber, Nielsen, Pribble
and Stephens, 2006, and Huber and Stephens, 2012, Table 5.10). Nevertheless, there are good
reasons for being skeptical about these findings, since the impact of the history of democracy is
identified in models that do not include fixed effects, and obviously, it will capture the impact of
these omitted fixed effects. More generally, this is just a special case of the difficulty of identifying
duration dependence and unobserved heterogeneity—a difficulty that this literature neither tackles
nor recognizes—and differences amongst countries and not representing a true causal relationship.
    Three more recent studies used better data and exploited the time as well as the cross-sectional
dimensions to investigate the impact of democracy on inequality. Rodrik (1999) showed that either
the Freedom House of Polity III measure of democracy were positively correlated with average
real wages in manufacturing and the share of wages in national income (in specifications that
also control for productivity, GDP per capita and a price index). He illustrated this both in a
cross-section and a panel of countries using country fixed effects. He also presented evidence that
political competition and participation at large were important parts of the mechanisms via which
democracy worked.11 Scheve and Stasavage (2009) used a long-run panel 1916-2000 for 13 OECD
countries with country fixed effects and find that universal suffrage, measured as a dummy, had no
impact on the share of national income accruing to the top 1%. Perhaps consistent with a variant
of the (upper) middle class bias argument we provided above, they found that there is actually a
statistically significant positive correlation between the universal suffrage dummy and what they
called the ‘Top10-1’ share, which is the share of income accruing to people between the 90th and
  11
     We will return to Rodrik’s study below, and particularly in Appendix A, to explain the contrast between his and
our results.




                                                        19
99th percentiles of the income distribution divided by the share accruing to the people above the
99th percentile. Finally, Li, Squire and Zou (1998) used pooled OLS to show that an index of civil
liberties is negatively correlated with inequality (greater civil liberties, lower inequality) though
they do not investigate the relationship between inequality and more conventional measures of
democracy.
   Though this research has been dominated by studies which examine the average effect of democ-
racy, Lee (2005) uses a panel data random effects model to argue that there are heterogeneous effects
of democracy on inequality. The panel is unbalanced and covers 64 countries between 1970 and
1994. In particular, he argues that there is a significant interaction between the size of government
as measured by tax revenues as a percentage of GDP and democracy. The paper finds that while
there is a significant positive correlation between a democracy and inequality the interaction be-
tween democracy dummy and the size of government, is significant and negative suggesting that for
large enough levels of government democracy reduces inequality. Lee interprets this as measuring
state strength (similarly to Cheibub, 1998, and Soifer, 2013).

3.3    Education and Democracy

The impact of democracy on education has also been examined both historically and using con-
temporary cross-national data and some of the results were noted in the last section. The work of
Lindert (2004, Chapter 5) is again central and as with his work on social spending, Lindert presents
evidence that the historical emergence of democracy is connected with educational expansion. A
complementary historical study by Engerman and Sokoloff (2005, 2011) points out that within the
Americas there is a close connection between the extent of democracy, measured by voting rights,
the proportion of adults that voted and an effective secret ballot, and measures of education such
as literacy rates.
   A great deal of econometric work supports this research using various measures of education.
Baum and Lake (2001), for example, found that secondary school gross enrollment rates also in-
creased with increases in democracy across the developing world, “particularly among regimes that
have experienced large changes in democracy” (p. 613) (see also Baum and Lake, 2003). Brown
and Hunter (2004) focusing on 17 Latin American countries between 1980 and 1997 find that the
Polity index is positively correlated with total educational expenditures per-capita and also with
the share of expenditures going into primary education. This finding mirrors the earlier one of
Brown (1999) who found that various dichotomous measures of democracy created from the Polity
dataset and the measure of Przeworski et al. (2000) were positively correlated with primary school
enrollment. Huber and Stephens (2012) also find robust evidence in Latin America for a positive
correlation between the history of democracy and educational spending (see also Avelino, Brown


                                                 20
and Hunter, 2005).
   These issues have also been intensively studied in sub-Saharan Africa. Stasavage (2005a) ex-
amined the impact of democratization in the 1990s in Africa on education using a measure of
democracy similar to Przeworski et al. (2000) and presented evidence that democracy increases
total educational spending as a percentage of GDP. He also found evidence of increases in spending
on primary education as a percentage of GDP though this was not robust to the use of country
fixed effects. Stasavage (2005b) provides a case study of democratization and educational expan-
sion in Uganda. More recent research by Harding and Stasavage (2013) reconfirms the impact
of democracy on primary education, this time looking at primary enrollment and shows that the
likely channel runs through a greater probability that democratic governments will abolish primary
school fees.
   Gallego (2010) presents one of the few attempts to develop an identification strategy to examine
the impact of democracy on education. There are many reasons why this is important. Most
obviously, there is the issue of whether or not there is reverse causation from education to democracy.
Though the results of Acemoglu, Johnson, Robinson and Yared (2005) reduce this concern, the
above papers deal with this at best by using lagged democracy as an explanatory variable. Gallego
follows Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2001, 2002) and uses their data on the historical settler
mortality of Europeans and indigenous population density in 1500 as instruments for democracy
and finds that democracy in 1900, measured by the Polity score, has a significant causal effect
on primary school enrollment in 1900. Gallego recognizes that the exclusion restriction of his
instrument may be violated but provides a very careful discussion of the potential biases which
this involves and how this works against the findings he focuses on, and argues that he estimates
a lower bound on the effect of democracy on education.
   Using a broad sample of over 100 countries between 1960 and 2000, Ansell (2010) uses panel data
regressions with and without country fixed effects to examine the impact of democracy, measured
by the Polity score, on various components of educational spending. He also instruments for
democracy using lagged democracy and the levels of democracy in neighboring countries. He finds
that democracy has a positive and significant effect on total educational spending as a percentage of
GDP, and on educational spending as a percentage of the government budget. Using cross-national
regressions he also finds a negative correlation between democracy and private educational spending
as a percentage of GDP and also between democracy and primary school expenditure per student
by the government. He argues, contrary to Stasavage, that democracy tilts educational spending
away from primary and towards secondary and tertiary education.
   The likely reconciliation of all these results is that which type of education democracy produces
depends on what forces democracy unleashes and who wields power in democracy. In Uganda, when


                                                  21
President Museveni allowed democratization, he did so in a society lacking a large middle class
who could dominate educational spending decisions. Hence as Stasavage showed, primary school
enrollment increased. But in a large cross-national sample, the relationship may be dominated
by dictatorships that spend more on primary schooling and democracies that focus on secondary
schooling (see also Gradstein, Justman and Meier, 2004, and Ansell, 2010, for relevant models).
   This may also account for the results in recent work by Aghion, Persson and Rouzet (2012)
which uses a long but unbalanced panel of 137 countries between 1830 and 2001, and reports a
negative correlation between the Polity score and primary school enrollment.

3.4   Democracy and Health Outcomes

There is also some other work on the impact of democracy on health outcomes. These are potentially
related to inequality, because rapid improvements in health outcomes tend to come at the bottom
of the distribution. Many studies, for example, find that democracy is positively correlated with life
expectancy (see McGuire, 2010, for an overview and case study and econometric evidence). Besley
and Kudamatsu (2006) show this in a panel data model for the post-war period but without using
country fixed effects. Wigley and Akkoyunlu-Wigley (2011) in a complementary study have shown
that life expectancy is positively correlated with the history of democracy of a country. Kudamatsu
(2012) showed in the context of democratic transitions in Africa that health outcomes improved in
countries which democratized compared to those that did not.
   Blaydes and Kayser (2011) looked at the relationship between democracy and average calories
per-capita interpreted as a proxy for inequality, because calories consumed decline very quickly
with income. Using a trichotomous measure of democracy based on the Polity IV dataset (where
greater than 7 is a democracy, less than -7 is an autocracy and everything in between a ‘hybrid
regime’), they show in a panel data model with country fixed effects that democracy is positively
correlated with average calories consumption.
   Gerring, Thacker and Alfaro (2012) find using panel data from 1960 to 2000 that while the
current level of democracy, as measured by the Polity score, is not robustly correlated with in-
fant mortality, there is a strong negative correlation between the history of democracy and infant
mortality—the more a country has experienced democracy in the past, the lower is infant mortality
currently. Contrary to these findings, Ross (2006) using panel data from 1970 to 2000, and using
the Polity score, the Przeworski et al. (2000) dichotomous measure of democracy and the history
of democracy as independent variables, finds no robust correlation between any of them and infant
and child mortality. A possible reconciliation of these findings is that, as mentioned above, the
history of democracy is nothing but a proxy for the omitted fixed effects, and Ross obtains different
results from Gerring et al. because he controled for fixed effects. Another confounding factor is


                                                 22
that this literature in general does not control for the dynamics of democracy and GDP per capita
and the endogeneity of democratization (see Acemoglu, Naidu, Restrepo and Robinson, 2013).

3.5   The Intensive Margin

All the papers discussed so far use various national level measures of democracy, usually based on
well know databases created by political scientists. An important complementary direction is to
investigate within-country variation exploiting other measures of “effective” enfranchisement.
   In this context, particularly interesting is Fujiwara’s (2011) study of changes in the voting
technology in Brazil in the 1990s. These, by making it much simpler and easier for illiterate people
to vote, massively enfranchised the poor. Fujiwara estimates the effect of this change by exploiting
differences in the way the policy was rolled out. He shows that the consequence of the reform
was a change in government spending in a pro-poor direction, particularly with respect to health
expenditures, and that infant mortality fell as a result. Baland and Robinson (2008, 2012) examine
another related reform, the introduction of an effective secret ballot in Chile in 1958. Though they
do not directly study any policy outcomes, they do show that the reform led to large increases in
the vote share of left-wing parties and a significant fall in land prices which they argue is consistent
with this democratizing reform moving the political equilibrium to one with more pro-poor policies.
   Martinez-Bravo, Padró-i-Miquel, Qian and Yao (2012) study the effects of elections in China on
redistribution and public good provision. They use variation in the introduction of village elections
in China, controlling for village and year fixed effects as well as province-level trends. They find
that village chairmen experience higher turnover, and become more educated and less likely to be
Communist Party members following the introduction of elections. They also find that taxes and
public goods increase as a result of the elections. In particular, irrigation increases more in villages
with more farmland, and public education more in villages with more children. They also find that
income inequality is reduced, and less land is leased to elite-controlled enterprises.
   Naidu (2011) examined the impact of the disenfranchisement of blacks in the U.S. south via
poll taxes and literacy tests in the period after the end of Reconstruction. He finds that this
reversal of democracy reduced the teacher-student ratio in black schools by 10-23%, with no signif-
icant effects on white teacher-student ratios. Also, consistent with Baland and Robinson’s results,
disenfranchisement increased farm values.
   Relatedly, using state-level data Husted and Kenny (1997) examine the impact of the abolition
of literacy tests and poll taxes in the United States over the period 1950-1988 and find that this
was associated with a significant increase in welfare expenditures but not other types of government
expenditures. Using county-level data, Cascio and Washington (2012) find that expansion of voting
rights in the South resulted in increased state-transfers to previously disenfranchised counties.


                                                  23
Besley, Persson and Sturm (2010), on the other hand, show that the abolition of literacy tests
and poll taxes was associated with increased political competition in US states. Increased political
competition between the Republicans and Democrats reduced government tax revenues relative to
state income and increased infrastructure expenditure relative to other components of government
expenditure.


4         Econometric Specification and Data

Given the conflicting results in the previous literature, we next undertake an empirical investigation
to provide what we view to be some basic robust facts about the relationship between democracy,
redistribution and inequality.
         In this section, we describe our econometric specifications and our main data. Our approach is to
estimate a canonical panel data model with country fixed effects and time effects while also modeling
the dynamics of inequality and redistribution. Both fixed effects and allowing for dynamics (e.g.,
mean reversion) are important. Without fixed effects, as already noted above, several confounding
factors will make the association between democracy and inequality (or redistribution) difficult to
interpret. Moreover, we will see that there are potentially important dynamics in the key outcome
variables, and failure to control for this would lead to spurious relationships (or make it difficult to
establish robust patterns even when such patterns do exist).
         Some of the papers we mentioned above have adopted a set-up similar to this, for example
Rodrik (1999), Ross (2006), Scheve and Stasavage (2009), Aghion, Persson and Rouzet (2012) and
Aidt and Jensen (2013), but without modeling the dynamics in inequality or redistribution. In
addition, several of these papers suffer from the “bad control” problem; for example Scheve and
Stasavage (2009) control for both suffrage and education in their investigation of the determinants
of the top income shares. If democracy influences inequality via its impact on education then
such an empirical model is bound to find that democracy is not correlated with inequality. Even
the pioneering paper by Aidt and Jensen (2013) controls for many endogenous variables on the
right-side of the regression including the Polity score of the country.12

4.1        Econometric Specification

Consider the following simple econometric model:

                                zit = ρzit−1 + γdit−1 + x′it−1 β + µt + ψi + uit ,                           (6)
    12
    A more desirable approach would be to develop an instrument for democracy. We believe that the only credible
papers on this topic are Gallego (2010), Aidt and Jensen (2013), and our own work, Acemoglu, Naidu, Restrepo and
Robinson (2013). We do not pursue these directions since this would take us too far from our purpose of surveying
and interpreting the literature and presenting what we believe to be the robust correlations in the data.



                                                       24
where zit is the outcome of interest, which will be either (log of) tax revenue as a percentage
of GDP or total revenue as a percentage of GDP as alternative measures of taxation, education,
structural change, or one of several possible measures of inequality. The dependent variables
with significant skewness in their cross-country distribution, in particular tax to GDP ratio, total
government revenues to GDP ratio, agricultural shares of employment and income and secondary
enrollment, will be in logs, which makes interpretation easier and allows the impact of democracy
to be proportional to the baseline level. All of the results emphasize in this paper hold also in
specifications using levels rather than logs, but these are not reported to conserve space. Lags
in this specification will always mean 5-year lags: dit−1 is democracy 5 years ago. The lagged
value of the dependent variable on the right-hand side is included to capture persistence (and mean
reversion) in these outcome measures, which may be a determinant of democracy or correlated
with other variables that predict democracy. The main right-and side variable is dit , a dummy
for democracy in country i in period t whose construction will be described in detail below. This
variable is lagged by one period (generally a 5-year interval) because we expect its impact not to be
contemporaneous. All other potential covariates, as well as interaction effects which are included
later, are in the vector xit−1 , which is lagged to avoid putting endogenous variables on the right
hand side of the regression. In our baseline specification, we include lagged GDP per capita as
a covariate for several reasons. First, as we show in Acemoglu, Naidu, Restrepo and Robinson
(2013), democracy is much more likely to suffer from endogeneity concerns when the lagged effects
of GDP per capita are not controlled for. Second, there we also show that democracy has a major
effect on GDP per capita and changes in GDP per capita may impact inequality independently of
the influence of democracy on this variable. In all cases, we also report specifications that do not
control for GDP per capita to ensure that the results we report are not driven by the presence of
this endogenous control.
   Finally, the ψi ’s denote a full set of country dummies and the µt ’s denote a full set of time
effects that capture common shocks and trends for of all countries. uit is an error term, capturing
                                                                      
all other omitted factors, with E uit |zit−1 , dit−1 , x′it−1 , µt , ψi = 0 for all i and t. We estimate
the above equation excluding the Soviet Union and its satellite countries because the dynamics
of inequality and taxation following the fall of the Soviet Union are probably different than other
democratizations. In some cases this restriction is irrelevant because there is not sufficient data for
these countries. When there is, we also report results including these countries.
   Our estimation framework controls for two key sources of potential bias. First, it controls for
country fixed effects, which take into account that democracies are different from nondemocracies
in many permanent characteristics that we do not observe and that may also affect inequality and




                                                  25
taxation.13 Second, it allows for mean-reverting dynamics and persistent effects in the dependent
variable that may be endogenous to democracy.14
       The simplest way of estimating (6) is by OLS and imposing ρ = 0, and this is the most common
regression in the prior literature which has used panel data. But, as already pointed out above, if
ρ > 0, this specification may lead to biased estimates and will not correctly identify the long-run
effect of democracy on the outcome of interest. A second alternative is to estimate this equation by
OLS (which is just the standard within-group estimator removing the fixed effects by eliminating
the mean of country i). This estimator is not consistent when the number of time periods is
finite, because the regressor zit−1 is mechanically correlated with uis for s < t, and this will induce
a downward bias in the estimate of ρ (e.g., Wooldridge, 2002, chapter 11). However, the bias
becomes smaller as the number of periods grows, holding ρ constant, so for large enough T or low
enough ρ it becomes negligible (Nickell, 1981).
       Our preferred estimation strategy is to deal with this econometric problem using a standard
generalized method of moments (GMM) estimator along the lines of Holtz-Eakin, Newey and Rosen
(1988) and Arellano and Bond (1991). This involves differencing equation (6) with respect to time

                            ∆zit = ρ∆zit−1 + γ∆dit−1 + ∆x′it−1 β + ∆µt + ∆uit ,                                     (7)

where the fixed country effects are removed by time differencing. Although equation (7) cannot be
estimated consistently by OLS either, in the absence of serial correlation in the original residual, uit
(i.e., no second order serial correlation in ∆uit ), zit−2 and all further lags, and thus also dit−2 and
all further lags, are uncorrelated with ∆uit , so can be used as instruments for ∆zit−1 , incorporating
them as moment conditions in a GMM procedure.
       An alternative procedure removes country fixed effects by taking forward orthogonal differences.
In particular, for variable wit , this is given by
                                            s                                 !
                                    f od       Tit               1X
                                   wit   =                 wit −       wis        ,
                                              Tit+1              T s>t

where Tit is the number of times wis appears in the data for s > t. Forward orthogonal differences
also remove the fixed effects. In the absence of serial correlation in the original residual, zit−1 ,
dit−1 , x′it−1 and all further lags are orthogonal to the transformed error term ufitod , so can be used
to form moment conditions in a GMM procedure. Moreover, if the original residuals were i.i.d.,
then the transformed error term will also be i.i.d.15
  13
      For instance, democracies may have more pluralistic institutions or stronger states, which may independently
affect inequality and taxation.
   14
      For instance, crisis, turmoil, social unrest, or increases in inequality could trigger a democratization, and also
have a persistent effect on the path of our dependent variable. In this case, it becomes important to control for the
dynamics of taxes or inequality by adding their lag on the right-hand side.
   15
      Estimates of the model obtained by taking forward orthogonal differences are different from the first difference


                                                          26
    We will implement this using Arellano and Bond’s GMM estimator with different subsets of
moments, and after taking first differences or forward orthogonal differences of the data. As Newey
and Windmeijer (2009) show, using the full set of moments in two-step GMM may lead to the
“too many instruments” bias, since the number of potential moments one could use to estimate
the dynamic panel model is quadratic in the time dimension. Thus, we experiment by restricting
the number of lags used to form moments in the estimation. In addition to restricting the number
of moments, we focus on one-step GMM estimators with naive weighting matrices that assume
the original residuals are i.i.d.16 Despite the potential loss in efficiency, these estimators have the
advantage that they are consistent when T (the time dimension of the panel) and N (the number
of countries) are large, even if the number of moments also becomes large (see Alvarez and Arellano
2003).
    As the above description indicates, the source of bias in the estimation of (6) with OLS is that
the persistence parameter ρ is not estimated consistently when the time dimension does not go
to infinity, and this bias translates into a bias in all other coefficient estimates. If we knew the
exact value of ρ and could impose it, the rest of the parameters could be estimated consistently
by OLS. Motivated by this observation, we also report OLS estimates of equation (6) imposing a
range of values of ρ, which show that our main results are robust to any value of ρ between 0 and
1, increasing our confidence in the GMM estimates.
    In all cases, we first focus on results using a five-year panel, where we take an observation
every five years from 1960 to 2010. This is preferable to taking averages, which would introduce
a complex pattern of serial correlation, making consistent estimation more difficult. The five-year
panel is a useful starting point since we expect many of the results of democracy on the tax to
GDP ratio (henceforth, short for tax revenue as a percentage of GDP) and inequality not to appear
instantaneously or not even in one or two years. In the case of inequality measures, this is also
the highest frequency we can use.17 For the tax to GDP ratio, the annual data are available, and
we also estimate annual panels, which are similar to (6) except that in that case we include up
to twelve annual lags of both the lagged dependent variable and the democracy measure on the
right-hand side.
estimates only in unbalanced panels or when not all Arellano and Bond moments are used, in which case different
lags give different moments and these may match dynamics differently.
  Yet another alternative is Blundell and Bond’s (2000) system GMM, which works with the level equation (rather
than the difference equation as in (7) above) and uses first differences of the dependent variable as instruments for
the lagged level. For consistency, this estimator thus requires that the initial value of the dependent variable, in this
case democracy, is uncorrelated with the fixed effects. This is unlikely to be a good assumption in our context given
the historically-determined nature of both democracy and inequality/redistribution.
  16
     When we take first differences of the data, the weighting matrix has 1 on the main diagonal and -0.5 on the
sub-diagonals below and above it. When we take forward orthogonal differences, the weighting matrix is the identity
matrix.
  17
     Our inequality data from SWIID provides yearly observations for the GINI coefficient, but they are five-year
moving averages of observations around that specific year, making them inappropriate for an annual panel.


                                                           27
   Finally, it is worth reiterating that in all of our estimates, if democracy is correlated with other
changes affecting taxes or inequality, our estimates will be biased. The point of the GMM estimator
is to remove the mechanical bias resulting from the presence of fixed effects and lagged dependent
variables, not to estimate “causal effects” which would necessitate a credible source of variation in
changes in democracy, which we do not use in this paper.

4.2   Data and Descriptive Statistics

We construct a yearly and a five year panel of 184 countries from independence or 1960, whichever
is later, through to 2010, though not all variables are available for all countries in all periods. We
extend the recent work by Papaioannou and Siourounis (2008) by constructing a new measure of
democratization which combines information from Freedom House and Polity IV—two of the more
widely used sources of data about political rights and democracy. We create a dichotomous measure
of democracy in country c at time t, dct , as follows. First, we code a country as democratic during
a given year if: Freedom House codes it as “Free”, or “Partially Free” and it receives a positive
Polity IV score. If we only have information from one of Polity or Freedom House, we use additional
information from Cheibub, Gandhi, and Vreeland (2010, henceforth CGV) and Boix, Miller and
Rosato (2012, henceforth BMR). In these cases, we code an observation as democratic if either
Polity is greater than 0, or Freedom House codes it as “Partially Free ”or “Free”and at least one
of CGV or BMR code it as democratic. We are interested in substantive changes in political
power, and so we give priority to the expert codings of Polity and Freedom House, rather than the
procedural codings of CGV and BMR.
   We omit periods where a country was not independent. Finally, many of the democratic transi-
tions captured by this algorithm are studied in detail by Papaioannou and Siourounis (2008), who
code the exact date of the democratization. When we detect a democratization that is also in their
sample (in the same country and generally within 4 years of the year obtained by the previous
procedure), we modify our democracy dummy to match the date to which they trace back the
event using historical sources.
   The Papaioannou and Siourounis measure of democracy captures permanent changes in political
institutions, and they find that this correlates with subsequent economic growth. One limitation of
their measure is that they define permanent changes by looking at democratizations that are not
reversed in the future, which raises the possibility of endogeneity of the definition of democracy
to subsequent growth or other outcomes that stabilize democracy. In addition, it means that they
have no variation coming from transitions from democracy to autocracy. Our measure retains the
focus on large changes in political regimes while not using any potentially endogenous outcome to
classify democratizations.


                                                 28
       Our resulting democracy measure is a dichotomous variable capturing large changes in political
institutions. Our sample contains countries that are always democratic (dct = 1 for all years) like
the United States and most OECD countries; countries that are always autocratic (dct = 0 for all
years) like Afghanistan, Angola, and China; countries that transition once and permanently into
democracy like Dominican Republic in 1978, Spain in 1978, and many ex-Soviet countries after
1991. But different from Papaioannou and Siourounis, we also have countries that transition in
and out of democracy like Argentina, which is coded as democratic from 1973 to 1975, falls back to
nondemocracy and then democratizes permanently in 1983. For more details on our construction
of the democracy measure, see Acemoglu, Naidu, Restrepo and Robinson (2013). In Appendix B,
we show robustness of our main results to other measures of democracy constructed by Cheibub,
Gandhi, and Vreeland (2010) and Boix, Miller and Rosato (2012).
       We combine this measure of democratization with national income statistics from the World
Bank economic indicators. We use government taxes to GDP and revenues to GDP ratios measures
obtained from Cullen Hendrix covering over 127 countries yearly from 1960 to 2005 (Hendrix, 2010).
These data come from a project now updated by Arbetman-Rabinowitz, Kugler, Abdollahian,
Johnson and Kang (2011), and puts together in a consistent way information from the World
Bank (for 1960-1972), the IMF Government Financial Statistics historical series, the IMF new GFS
and complementary national sources.18 Other dependent variables we explored include secondary
schooling enrollment, agricultural shares of employment and GDP from the World Bank; and our
inequality data that will be described below.19
       Our additional covariates include a measure of average intensity of foreign wars over the last five
years, constructed from Polity IV and ranging from 0 (no episodes) to 10 (most intense episodes); a
measure of social unrest from the SPEED project at the University of Illinois averaging the number
of events over the last five years;20 and the fraction of the population with at least secondary school-
ing from the Barro-Lee dataset. In order to explore interactions we use data on the nonagricultural
share of employment in 1968 from Vanhanen (2013).21 We also use the top 10 percent share of
income in the United States from the World Top Incomes Database (Alvaredo, Atkinson, Piketty
and Saez, 2010)22 . Finally, we construct the average ratio between the share of income held by the
top 10 percent relative to the bottom 50 percent, and the ratio between the share of income held by
the bottom 10 relative to the bottom 50 percent before 2000 using the World Inequality Indicators
Database. From now on we will refer to these measures as the top and bottom share of income.23
  18
     http://thedata.harvard.edu/dvn/dv/rpc/faces/study/StudyPage.xhtml?globalId=hdl:1902.1/16845
  19
     In the Appendix we consider manufacturing wages, compiled by Martin Rama from UNIDO statistics and aver-
aged over 5-year intervals.
  20
     http://www.clinecenter.illinois.edu/research/speed-data.html
  21
     http://www.fsd.uta.fi/en/data/catalogue/FSD1216/meF1216e.html
  22
     http://topincomes.g-mond.parisschoolofeconomics.eu/
  23
     The World Inequality Indicators Database reports income shares created using different proxies for income,


                                                      29
    There is some debate on the construction and standardization of inequality measures, partic-
ularly Gini coefficients, across countries. We use the data in the Standardized World Inequality
Indicators Database (SWIID), constructed by Frederick Solt (Solt, 2009). This database uses the
Luxembourg Income Study together with the World Inequality Indicators Database in order to con-
struct a comprehensive cross-national panel of Gini coefficients that are standardized across sources
and measures. One advantage of this dataset is that it provides both the net Gini, after taxes and
transfers, and the gross Gini coefficients. We have experimented with a number of other measures
of Gini coefficients, but none have the standardized sample coverage of the SWIID. In particular,
we also created a panel with data every five years using observations for the Gini coefficient from
the World Income Inequality Database (WIID) and CEDLAS (for Latin American countries), and
obtained very similar results.
    Descriptive statistics for all variables used in the main sample are presented in Table 1, sepa-
rately by our measure of nondemocracy and democracy (observations in a country that was non-
democratic at the time or democratic). In each case, we report means, standard deviations, and also
the total number of observations (note that our sample is not balanced). The summary statistics
show that democracies tend to be significantly more economically developed than non-democracies,
with much higher GDP per capita, more education, and smaller agricultural shares of employment
(both on average in the sample and in 1968) and GDP. These patterns are relatively well known
and are sometimes interpreted as support for modernization theory (but see Acemoglu, Johnson,
Robinson and Yared, 2008, 2009 on why this cross sectional comparison is misleading).
    The differences in tax to GDP ratios and revenue to GDP ratios are much smaller; both vari-
ables are roughly 4 percentage points higher in democracies than non-democracies, although not
significantly so.24 Consistent with this tax difference reflecting increased redistribution, after-tax
inequality, measured by the net Gini, is almost three points lower in democracies, while pre-tax
inequality is one point higher (the Gini is measured on a 0 to 100 scale). Figure 1 shows the
evolution of average democracy in our sample between 1960 and 2010.25
including consumption, monetary income, disposable income, and others. We standardized these ratios by regressing
them on a full set of dummies for each income concept and using the residuals. The raw ratios are presented only in
the summary statistics.
  24
     This comparison is broadly consistent with the cross-national regressions of Gil, Mulligan, and Sala-i-Martin
(2004), though it is interesting that even in this cross-section we do see some differences between democracies and
non-democracies.
  25
     Note that democracies appear to be associated with a higher income share of the top 10% in the United States.
This is because of the trend shown in Figure 1, making democracies more common in the recent past when this
variable has also been higher.




                                                        30
5     Main Results
5.1   The Effect of Democracy on Taxes

Our first results are contained in Table 2, which reports estimates of equation (6) with tax revenue
to GDP ratio (tax to GDP ratio for short) as the dependent variable.
    Column 1 is estimated by OLS imposing ρ = 0 in equation (6). Though biased when ρ > 0,
this is a natural benchmark, particularly since it corresponds to a specification often used in the
literature. In all columns, we report standard errors corrected for arbitrary heteroskedasticity and
serial correlation at the country level. We multiply the coefficient on democracy by 100 to ease
interpretation. Throughout, we always report the number of observations, number of countries in
the sample, and the number of switches in democracy from 0 to 1 or vice versa in the
    estimation sample (which is 92 in this case). All models include a lag of GDP per capita as a
control, but the coefficients are not reported to save space. The coefficient on the estimated effect
of democracy in this column, 15.00 (to two decimal places), implies a 15% increase in the tax to
GDP ratio, with a standard error of 4.33 and is thus statistically significant at less than the 1%
confidence level. This estimate is also economically significant. It indicates that democratization—
i.e., a change in our democracy dummy—is associated with a 2.4 percentage points increase in the
tax to GDP ratio.
    Column 2 includes the lag of tax to GDP ratio on the right-hand side, thus relaxing the as-
sumption that ρ = 0. We see that ρ is estimated to be significantly different from zero, suggesting
that there are potentially important dynamics in the tax to GDP ratio.The effect of democracy,
γ, is now estimated to be 11.7 (approximately 11.7%, with standard error = 3.38) and is again
statistically significant at less than the 1% level. In the presence of the lagged dependent variable
on the right-hand side in this specification, γ is now merely the short-run impact of democracy
on the tax to GDP ratio, not the long-run effect. The estimate of ρ is 0.27, and is significant,
suggesting that there is indeed some persistence in the dependent variable. To obtain the long-run
effect, we set zit = zit−1 so that the dynamics in the outcome variable converge to the new “steady
state”. This gives the long-run effects of a switch to democracy as
                                                γ
                                                   ,
                                               1−ρ
and is reported at the bottom, together with the p-value for the hypothesis that it is equal to 0.
In column 2, this long-run effect implies a 16% percent increase in the tax to GDP ratio from a
permanent switch to democracy.
    Figure 2 shows the effect of democracy on the tax to GDP ratio visually. Here, similar to an
event study analysis, we place all transitions to democracy at t = 0, and those observations before
then (with t < 0) show the trends in tax to GDP ratio before democratization, and those with

                                                 31
t > 0 correspond to changes in the tax to GDP ratio after democratization. The figure shows
that there is no discernible change in the tax to GDP ratio before democratization, increasing our
confidence in the results concerning the effect of democracy on taxes. It also confirms that the
effect of democracy on the tax to GDP ratio evolves only slowly, reaching a maximum 15 years
after the democratization takes place. This underscores the role of the lagged dependent variable
in our econometric specifications.
   As a second diagnostic for our estimates, Figure 3 shows a scatter plot of the residuals of the
tax to GDP ratio (in logs) on the vertical axis against the residuals of the lag of our democracy
measure on the horizontal axis. All covariates, including year and country fixed effects, and the
lagged dependent variable are partialled out. Each point corresponds to a particular country/year
observation. The slope of the regression line coincides with our estimated coefficient of 11.7. The
figure shows that the estimated relationship does not seem to be driven by any particular outlier.
To explore this more formally we removed 49 observations whose Cook distance was above the rule
of thumb 4/N , with N the sample size and re-estimated our model. The coefficient of democracy
falls to 8.28 with standard error 2.46, and is still significant at the 1% level. The bottom panel
of Figure 3 shows the scatter plot excluding these outliers. We have experimented with a number
of other methods for dealing with outliers, such as Huber M-regressions and excluding outliers
with estimated standardized errors > 1.96, and our results on tax to GDP ratios remain generally
unchanged.
   As noted in the previous subsection, the OLS estimator of column 2 is inconsistent because
of the (downward) bias in the estimation of ρ. Column 3 reports the GMM estimator described
earlier with the full set of moments (in this case, this corresponds to 82 moments as noted in
the table). Notably, the estimate for ρ is identical to two decimal places, indicating in fact that
if there was a downward bias in the estimation of column 2, it was small, suggesting that the
large-T assumption (given the low persistence ρ) is a good approximation. The estimate for γ also
decreases marginally, but the standard error increases substantially, making the resulting estimate
insignificant at conventional levels. The GMM estimate of ρ becomes 0.27 (standard error = 0.10),
which is still significant at less than the 1% confidence level. The increase in the estimate of ρ also
makes the long-run impact very similar to the OLS estimate of approximately 15 (15%), with a
p-value of 0.11. It should also be noted that the tests for second-order autocorrelation in the error
term and the Hansen’s J test for over identification pass comfortably, thus further increasing our
confidence in this specification.
   Columns 4 and 5 present alternative GMM estimators with fewer moments and with forward-
differencing, respectively. Both columns only use up to the fifth valid lags of democracy and the
dependent variable to form moment conditions. The point estimates on both γ and ρ are larger


                                                  32
than columns 2 and 3, and significant at the 1% level, and hence imply the significantly larger
long-run effects, 26% and 21%, respectively, reported at the bottom.
    Columns 6-10 estimate equation (6) imposing different values for ρ spanning the entire interval
from 0 to 1. We use the same sample as in Column 2, which is also the same one as in Column 1
and thus implies that in this case Column 6, which sets ρ = 0, is identical to Column 1 (this will
not be the case in some of our later tables). As noted above, the problem with the OLS estimation
(with fixed effects) stems from the bias in the estimate of ρ, so conditional on the correct value
for this variable, the OLS estimate of the impact of democracy is consistent. In almost all cases,
with the exception of the last column, there is a statistically and economically significant impact
of democracy on the tax to GDP ratio. The long-run impact is smaller when ρ is assumed to take
a small value, and comparable to that in column 2 when we impose ρ = 0.25. The coefficient gets
small and less significant the farther the imposed value of ρ is from the estimated values in columns
2-5.26 In sum, the median estimated long-run effect of democracy on the tax to GDP ratio from
this table is almost 16%, with estimates that range from 15% to 26%.
    Table 3 has the same structure as Table 2 but uses total government revenue to GDP ratio
as the dependent variable. Though the impact of democracy is a little smaller, the pattern is
qualitatively very similar, with slightly larger long-run effects in the GMM estimators relative to
the OLS estimators. The estimates in Column 2 show that the coefficient of lagged democracy is
7.55 (standard error=2.35), which is significant at the 1% level. The long-run effect of democracy
is to increase total revenue as a percentage of GDP by 11.64 and is significant at the 1% level. The
baseline GMM estimator leads to larger values of ρ and γ, resulting in a larger long-run effect of
17.8%. Figure 4 is the analogue of Figure 2, but using the total revenue to GDP ratio measure
instead, and shows a similar pattern, although there is a slight downward trend prior to democracy
in this variable. In sum, the evidence again suggests that democracy results in a larger government,
measured as government revenue as a share of GDP.
    Table 4 estimates equation (6) for the annual panel. Column 1 includes just four (annual) lags
of the dependent variable and democracy on the right-hand side, and is estimated by OLS. Even
though individual lags of democracy are not significant, they are jointly significant as witnessed
by the long-run effect reported at the bottom, which is similar to the OLS long-run effect in Table
2. Columns 2 adds four more lags and Column 3 adds four further lags, for a total of 12 lags
of democracy and the dependent variable on the right-hand side (to economize on space, we only
report the p-values for F- tests for the joint significance of these additional lags). The overall
pattern and the long-run effect are very similar to Column 1. Columns 4 to 6 estimate the same
  26
     In column 10 where we impose ρ = 1, we do not compute the long-run impact, since this is undefined in this
unit-root specification. The coefficient in this specification is small and insignificant, suggesting that there is not
much variation in growth rates of tax to GDP to be explained by democratization.


                                                          33
models using the Arellano and Bond GMM estimator. The long-run effects are substantially higher
and comparable to the one estimated in Columns 3 to 5 in Table 2 using the 5 year panel.
       Table 5 probes the robustness of the tax to GDP ratio results, focusing on the five-year panel.
Odd-numbered columns report the OLS estimate of (6), while even-numbered columns are for the
GMM estimator (equivalent to column 3 of Table 2). The first two columns exclude GDP per capita
as a control. Reassuringly, however, our coefficients remain positive and significant, implying a 10-
15% increase in the tax to GDP ratio following a democratization. Columns 3 and 4 include the
lagged index of foreign wars. This is useful since several authors have claimed that either in history
or in the recent past, war has been a major determinant of taxation and redistribution policies.
For example, the famous Tilly (1975) hypothesis explains the growth of the state with war and
preparation for war (see also Besley and Persson, 2011). More recently, Atkinson, Piketty and
Saez (2011) have pointed to wars as one of the most significant events correlated with declines of
inequality in Western nations (see also Scheve and Stasavage, 2010, 2012). In contrast to these
hypotheses, we do not find any effect of war on the tax to GDP ratio in our post-war panel. The
effect of democracy on the tax to GDP ratio hardly budges when the external war index is included.
       Columns 5 and 6 include the lagged measure of social unrest from the SPEED data. This
variable is insignificant and has no effect on the coefficient on democracy. Columns 7 and 8 include
the stock of education, measured as the fraction of the population with at least secondary schooling
from the Barro-Lee dataset, which could be an important determinant of fiscal policy and inequality.
Once again, this variable has no major effect itself or on the estimate of the impact of democracy
on the tax to GDP ratio. Columns 9 and 10 include all three of these variables together, again
with a very limited impact on our estimates and no evidence of an effect of war, unrest or the stock
of education. The long-run effects at the bottom are very similar to those in Table 2 and highly
significant.27
       Overall, the evidence in Tables 2-5 show a strong and robust impact of democracy on taxes as
measured by the tax to GDP ratio or the government revenue to GDP ratio. This evidence suggests
that democracy does lead to more taxes. This evidence is consistent with several of the works we
discussed above though it is in stark contrast with Gil, Mulligan and Sala-i-Martin (2004). The
main difference is the cross-national focus of Gil, Mulligan and Sala-i-Martin, which contrasts with
our econometric approach exploiting the within-country variation (with country fixed effects and
also controlling for the dynamics of the tax to GDP ratio). For reasons explained above, we believe
that the cross-sectional relationship is heavily confounded by other factors and is unlikely to reveal
  27
    Another relevant robustness check is to include ex-Soviet countries in the sample. However, fiscal data are only
available for Hungary, Poland, and Romania, and then only for the 1990-1995 period, which results in the observations
being absorbed by the fixed effects. We thus do not report this robustness check for these specifications (but will
report it for our inequality results).



                                                         34
much about the impact of democracy on redistribution and taxes.
   We next investigate whether there is an impact of democracy on inequality.

5.2   The Effect of Democracy on Inequality

Tables 6 and 7 turn to the effect of democracy on inequality. Each panel of Table 6 mirrors Table
2, with the top panel using the net Gini coefficient (after-tax and transfers) and the bottom panel
using the gross Gini coefficient (before-tax and redistribution) as dependent variables.
   Though the sample is smaller and data quality may be lower, the most important message
from these tables is that there is no consistent evidence for a significant effect of democracy on
inequality. Some of our specifications show negative effects of democracy on inequality, particularly
on the gross Gini coefficient, but these tend to have large standard errors and are not stable across
specifications.
   For example, in Table 6, most of our estimates suggest there is a negative effect of democracy
on the net Gini coefficient, but none of these estimates is statistically significant at the standard
levels. For instance, the estimates in Column 3 imply that democracy reduces the Gini coefficient
(measured on a 0 to 100 scale) by 2.01 points (standard error=1.59) in the short run, and by
3.1 points in the long run. Given the standard deviation of the net Gini of 10.76 (see Table 1),
these effects are quantitatively sizable (though they are also smaller in other columns) but also
statistically insignificant. The magnitudes for the gross Gini are similar, but a few specifications
contain significant results (those with imposed values of ρ > 0.5). This may be because there is
less measurement error in this measure relative to the net Gini which does depend on potentially
misreported taxes and transfers.
   The AR2 test for the GMM estimator for the net Gini suggests there is higher order autocorre-
lation in the transformed errors which invalidates the use of second lags as instruments. However,
when we only use deeper lags to form valid moment conditions we get very similar results, with
smaller effects of democracy on inequality, consistent with the fact that the Hansen overidentifica-
tion test passes comfortably. The specification tests (AR2 and Hansen J test) for our models using
the gross Gini as dependent variable also pass comfortably.
   Figure 5, which is similar to Figures 2 and 4, visually shows that there is no substantial fall in
inequality following a democratization. There is no pre-trend in inequality. But there is a temporary
increase in inequality prior to democratization, which could have persistent effects biasing our
estimates unless we control for the dynamics of inequality, further motivating our specifications
controlling for such dynamics.
   As a second diagnostic of our estimates, Figure 6 again shows a scatter plot of the residuals of
the net Gini on the vertical axis against the residuals of the lag of our democracy measure on the


                                                 35
horizontal axis. All covariates, including year and country fixed effects and the lagged dependent
variable are partialled out. Each point corresponds to a particular country/year observation. The
slope of the regression line coincides with our estimated coefficient of -0.744 in column 2 of the
top panel in Table 6. The figure shows that the estimated relationship does not seem to be driven
by any particular outlier. Figure 7 shows the same scatter plot, except with gross Gini on the
y-axis, and again suggests a negative, if imprecise, relationship. We explored the impact of outliers
further, using a procedure similar to the one we used before. We therefore removed observations
whose Cook distance was above the rule of thumb 4/N , with N the sample size and re-estimated
our model. Democracy has no significant effect in this sample without the outliers for the net Gini,
but there is a moderately significant effect on the gross Gini in some specifications. In addition,
we found a marginally significant effect on both the net and the gross Gini when we used Huber’s
M estimator. When excluding observations with standardized residuals > 1.96, we again found a
significant negative effect on the gross Gini but not on the net Gini.
   Table 7 adds covariates, as in Table 5 for the tax variables, and comprises two panels, one for
each Gini measure. The only difference is that it adds two columns including ex-Soviet countries
in the estimation sample. The addition of controls does not change the patterns shown in Table 6,
although omitting income as a control does lead to moderately significant negative effects in the
GMM estimate on net Gini, and in both the OLS and GMM estimates for gross Gini. This suggests
that there may be other forces correlated with GDP and democracy that influence inequality, such
as some of the structural transformation variables we examine below. Social unrest is the only
variable that has an effect on inequality that is significant in the gross Gini specifications, and our
point estimates on democracy are roughly unchanged. The addition of ex-Soviet countries to our
estimation sample results in smaller magnitudes of the effect of democracy on inequality, consistent
with the idea that inequality went up in these countries following democratization.
   We also found (but are not reporting to save space) that democracy does not have any significant
effect on other measures of inequality. In particular, in Appendix A we show that, with updated
data and our sample, democracy appears to have no effect on the log of industrial wages and explain
why this result is different from those of Rodrik (1999).
   We have also experimented with other estimates of the Gini using a panel with data every five
years constructed from the World Income and Inequality Dataset. Controlling for indicators of type
of concept used to calculate the Gini (i.e., disposable income, consumption and so on) as well as
indicators for data quality, we found broadly similar results, though generally for smaller samples.
   Overall, although some specifications do show a negative impact of democracy on inequality,
particularly the gross Gini, there is no consistent and robust impact. This contrasts with our results
on tax to GDP ratio (or the total government revenue to GDP ratio). Though this could be because


                                                  36
of the lower quality of inequality data, it might also reflect some of the theoretical forces we have
suggested in the previous section. We will turn to an investigation of some of these channels after
looking at the relationship between democracy and structural transformation next.

5.3      Democracy and Structural Transformation

Tables 8-10 look at the impact of democracy on various measures of structural transformation and
public goods provision. We focus on the nonagricultural share of employment, nonagricultural
share of value added, and secondary enrollment (which is a flow measure, thus better reflecting the
effect of democracy on educational investments). Each table has two panels: the top one has the
same structure as Table 2, while the bottom one is similar to Table 5 and shows the robustness
of the results. Overall, we find significant effects of democracy on these measures of structural
transformation.
       For example, Tables 8 and 9 show some significant effects of democratization on the size of the
nonagricultural sector.28 Table 8 shows that democratization increases the (log of) nonagricultural
share of employment, but this effect is generally only significant at the 10% level in the top panel,
and is not completely robust to all exogenously imposed values of ρ in columns 6-10. The bot-
tom panel shows more consistent and significant estimates, but the coefficients differ substantially
between the OLS and GMM estimators. Table 9, on the other hand shows that democratization
increases the nonagricultural share of GDP. We find significant effects across OLS and most GMM
specifications, imposing lower values for ρ, and with various sets of controls. The estimated magni-
tudes are plausible, with democracy increasing the nonagricultural employment by 4 to 11 percent
and nonagricultural share of GDP by between 6 and 10 percent in the long run.
       Table 10 shows a generally robust long-run effect of democratization on log secondary school
enrollment. While the coefficient magnitudes differ substantially between the GMM and OLS
estimators, the long-run effect is uniformly positive and generally significant. Together with the
taxation results, this suggests that one important economic change that democracies implement
is to tax and provide public goods such as schooling. Our GMM specification in column 3 of the
top panel shows that democracy increases secondary enrollment by 67.6% in the long run, with an
associated p-value of 0.07.29
  28
     Bates and Block (2013) find that democratization significantly increased agricultural productivity in Africa, which
may also be part of the process of structural change.
  29
     The contrast of these results with Aghion, Persson and Rouzet (2012), who find that democracy, as measured by
the polity score, reduces primary school enrollment, is partly due to their different sample, dependent variable and
econometric specification. Indeed, Aghion, Persson and Rouzet (2012) estimate models without the lagged dependent
variable and also include several additional variables on the right-hand side, most notably, military expenditure per
capita (which is problematic since it is correlated with democracy, making it a potential “bad control”). They also
focus on primary schooling, and according to our discussion above, democracy may have different effects on primary
and secondary enrollment depending on the current level of education of the median voter.



                                                          37
    In sum, there is strong evidence that democratization does not just redistribute income, but
also results in a degree of structural change of the economy and investment in public goods.30 As
our theoretical discussion implied, this could explain why democratization has a statistically weak
effect on inequality. Democracy may be bringing new opportunities and economic change, which
may increase inequality, while simultaneously lowering barriers to entry and investing in public
goods, which may reduce inequality, and the net result could be either an increase or decrease in
inequality, despite the increased taxation documented in Tables 2 and 3. This reasoning, as well
as the theoretical ideas discussed in Section 2, underscores the importance of investigating the
heterogeneous effects of democracy on inequality, a topic we turn to next.

5.4    Investigating the Mechanisms: Heterogeneity

We now turn to heterogeneity in the effect of democracy on inequality. We first consider the effect
of democracy interacted with the land Gini, which we take to be a measure of landed elite power,
to test the “capture” channel discussed above. We show only effects on net and gross Gini for most
of the interactions to save space, and then discuss the heterogeneous effects on tax to GDP and
government revenue to GDP ratios in the text.
    Table 11 shows a positive and generally significant interaction of democracy with land inequal-
ity, suggesting that the power of landed elites to capture the state or thwart any redistributive
tendencies of democratization results in higher inequality. The magnitudes are sizable, suggesting
that a democratization in, say, Myanmar, with the highest land Gini (=77 in a 0 to 100 scale)
among nondemocracies in our sample, would increase the after-tax Gini by between approximately
.72 to 2.42 points and the pre-tax Gini by .2 to 1.6 points. Our results suggest that democracy
may increase inequality in societies with strong landed elites. This could be the case if democracy
creates inequality increasing market opportunities and at the same time can increase redistribution.
If the elite manages to reduce taxation through de facto channels, inequality may increase under
democracy. An alternative explanation is given in Acemoglu and Robinson (2008), where a transi-
tion to democracy can lead to more pro-elite policies. The intuition for this somewhat paradoxical
result is that the elite invests more in de facto power under democracy because, besides the benefits
in terms of being able to impose their favorite economic institutions, investments in de facto power
increase the likelihood of a transition to autocracy.
    The difference between the net and gross measures may reflect the importance of non-fiscal
channels. Consistent with this, we see only moderate attenuation of the effect of democracy on
the tax to GDP ratio, and no significant heterogeneity on the government revenue to GDP ratio
(omitted to save space). For example, the equalizing effects of lowering barriers to mobility out of
  30
     Event study figures analogous to Figures 2, 4 and 5 reveal no pre-trends for these variables and an increase after
the democratization, but are not included to save space.


                                                          38
the agricultural sector may only be seen in societies with politically weak agricultural elites. While
land inequality is potentially correlated with many other economic and social factors that may
also mediate the effect of democracy on inequality, we view this as some evidence of the “capture”
channel modeled above.
   We next consider the effect of democracy depending on the extent of structural transformation,
motivated by our hypothesis that democracy induces structural change and may increase inequal-
ity by expanding opportunities, such as skilled occupations and entrepreneurship, for previously
excluded groups.
   Table 12 shows the effect of democratization interacted with the share of nonagricultural em-
ployment in 1968 as a measure of the extent of structural transformation (results are similar with
the 1978 share). We find that democratization increases inequality more (or fails to reduce in-
equality ) in places that have smaller agricultural employment shares relative to others. This is
consistent with democracy expanding access to inequality-increasing market opportunities specially
in more urban societies where skilled occupations and entrepreneurship are potentially more impor-
tant. The magnitudes suggest that democratization in a country that was 10 percentage points less
agricultural than the mean in 1968 (measured by the percentage of nonagricultural employment),
will bring an increase between 1 and 1.6 net Gini points (1.3 and 2.3 gross Gini points) relative to
the average effect in the short run, and between 1.6 and 2.2 net Gini points (2.5 and 5.6 gross Gini
points) in the long run. We have also estimated these specifications using our other proxies for
structural transformation and obtained uniformly positive, although often imprecise, coefficients
on the interaction variables. The results using the gross Gini coefficient show a similar pattern and
similar, though slightly larger, estimates.
   While we do not show these results for space reasons, there is no significant heterogeneity by
nonagricultural employment in the effect of democracy on taxation, and this result is robust to
all proxies for the extent of structural transformation we have tried, including the 1970 values of
urbanization, education, and nonagricultural share of GDP. This suggests that the mechanisms via
which democracy increases inequality in relatively more economically modernized countries has less
to do with lowering government redistribution or public good provision, but probably work through
other mechanisms emphasized in our discussion of dis-equalizing market opportunities opened up
by democracy for entrepreneurs, educated workers, and capitalists.
   Table 13 looks further at heterogeneity by the level of potential inequality created by market
opportunities. We interact democratization in year t with the top 10% share of income in the United
States in the same year. This is a proxy (albeit a highly imprecise and imperfect one) for the extent
of inequality increasing market opportunities available at the time and their potential to create
inequality, shaped by world-level forces such as globalization, technological and organizational


                                                 39
change that either originate or find widespread adoption in the United States (Panitch and Gindin,
2013). We did not find significant interaction effects of this sort on the tax to GDP ratio or
the government revenue to GDP ratio. However, we do see generally significant impact of this
interaction on the gross Gini, which appears to be further increased by democracy when there
is greater inequality in the United States. There is also a similar effect on the net Gini but
is much weaker and not present when using the GMM estimators. Though on the whole this
evidence is on the weak side, it is broadly consistent with a story in which democratization increases
inequality at times when the expanded market opportunities available following democracy are more
disequalizing.
   Finally, Tables 14-17 provide some preliminary evidence on Director’s Law. Recall from our
discussion in Section 2, in particular Proposition 5, that our (modified) Director’s Law implies that
the negative effect of democracy on inequality should be visible or greater in places where the rich
have a large share of income (Meltzer-Richards also predicts this) and, more uniquely, should be
positive where the poor have a higher share of income (which is the opposite of the Meltzer-Richards
prediction). Thus, we investigate the heterogeneous effect of democracy depending on the shares of
the top and bottom of the income distribution (in each case relative to the share of the middle, i.e.,
using the top and bottom income shares described above). Recall also that the effect of the income
share of the rich on inequality in democracy is related to whether there is capture of democracy by
the elite, which provides a reason why this prediction of Proposition 5 may not hold even when a
greater share of income of the poor may increase inequality as posited in Proposition 5.
   Indeed, Table 14 shows that when the top decile is richer relative to the middle, there is no
significantly heterogeneous effect on inequality, although coefficients are generally negative. This
might be because this estimate is picking up both an elite capture effect (as in the land Gini
interaction specifications) as well as additional demand for redistribution by the median voter as in
our (modified) Director’s Law, with higher incidence on the rich. Table 15 provides support for the
possibility that top tail inequality, as measured by the top share, could be picking up elite capture
effects. It shows that the effect of democracy on the tax to GDP ratio is significantly attenuated
by income inequality as measured by the top share (but there is no effect on government revenue
as a fraction of GDP), contrary to what Meltzer and Richards model or our (modified) Director’s
Law would predict. Our conclusion from this exercise is that our research design does not allow
us to separate the effects of democracy through the demand for redistribution and the incidence
of taxation emphasized in our modified Director’s Law from the possibility that democracies with
large upper tail inequality are more likely to be captured by the wealthier elite.
   Tables 16 and 17, on the other hand, provide support for the more unique prediction of the
(modified) Director’s Law, that democracy should increase inequality more when the poor are closer


                                                 40
to the middle class in nondemocracy. Table 16 looks at the interaction of the bottom income share
with democracy, and finds that the net Gini does in fact increase with democratization, while there
is no effect on the gross Gini. This relative difference between the pre-fiscal and post-fiscal effects
suggests that government redistribution may be (part of) the mechanism. Table 17 confirms this
by showing that the tax to GDP ratio does go up following a democratization in a society where
the poor are initially relatively well-off compared to the middle class.
    Subject to the major caveats about omitted variables and measurement error, this evidence thus
provides some support to our (modified) Director’s Law: middle classes empowered by democracy
appear to be able to use the government to transfer resources from the poor to themselves, increasing
post-fiscal inequality. As far as we know, this is the first evidence of this kind on how democracy
might redistribute in a way that increases inequality.
    We have investigated a number of other sources of heterogeneity, including various measures
of ethnolinguistic fragmentation, wheat-sugar land suitability ratio (as a measure of the type of
agriculture), constitutional provisions against redistribution, and average level of social unrest, and
found little in the way of robust results.
    Overall, the important concerns about endogeneity and measurement error notwithstanding,
the results presented in this section paint a picture in which democracy does indeed create greater
pressures for redistribution, but the pathways via which these affect inequality are more nuanced
than the standard Meltzer-Richard mechanism presumes. In particular, the correlation between
democracy and inequality appears to be more limited than one might have at first expected (and
more limited than the effect on taxes). On the other hand, the evidence on heterogeneity of
effects, even if not as robustly estimated as the impact on taxes, indicates that interactions with
elite capture, structural transformation, middle-class bias in redistribution, and the disequalizing
market opportunities opened up by democracy might be playing some role in modulating these
influences.


6    Conclusion

The effect of democracy on redistribution and inequality is important for understanding what
democracies do and with what policy instruments. Nevertheless, our survey of the relevant literature
shows that the social science literature on this topic is far from a consensus or a near-consensus on
this topic.
    We explained why the baseline expectation in the literature has been that democracy should
increase redistribution and reduce inequality (for example, based on Meltzer and Richard’s seminal
1981 paper), and why this expectation may not be borne out in the data because democracy may
be captured or constrained; because democracy may cater to the wishes of the middle class; or

                                                  41
because democracy may simultaneously open up new economic opportunities to the previously
excluded, contributing to economic inequality. This ambiguity may be one of the reasons why
the large empirical literature on this topic comes to such inconclusive findings, though the use of
datasets with different qualities and different methodologies and econometric practices, many of
which are far from satisfactory, are also contributing factors. It may also be that because different
researchers have looked at different sets of countries in different periods, the differing results are
to some extent picking up situations where one or other of the mechanisms we have identified are
more dominant.
   The bulk of the chapter empirically investigated the (dynamic) relationship between democracy
and various economic outcomes related to redistribution and inequality. Our results, which come
from panel data models controlling for the dynamics and persistence in our outcome variables,
indicate that democratization does indeed increase government taxation and revenue as fractions
of GDP. This confirms the baseline expectations, as predicted by the standard Meltzer-Richard
logic. In contrast, we have found no robust evidence that democracy reduces inequality, although
our estimated coefficients are quite imprecise in this case. Our results also suggest that democracy
increases the share of GDP and population not in agriculture, as well as secondary school enrollment.
This is consistent with democracy triggering a more rapid structural transformation, for example,
because this structural transformation may have been arrested or slowed down by the nondemocratic
political system.
   These patterns suggest that the effect of democracy on redistribution and inequality may be
more nuanced than often presumed and highly heterogeneous across societies. We tried to make
some tentative progress on this issue by providing additional correlations on these heterogeneous
effects and mechanisms on which they might be based. We found some results suggesting that de-
mocratization in the presence of powerful landed elites may increase inequality, and that structural
transformation may induce an expansion of opportunities that counteract any additional redistri-
bution, and either of these could explain the absence of an effect on inequality. This interpretation
is confirmed by our finding that democracy increases inequality in places that have lower share of
population in agriculture, and in times when the global technological and organizational frontier is
more inequality inducing.
   In addition, we also found some evidence consistent with the (modified) Director’s Law, which
suggests that democracy redistributes from the rich and the poor to the middle class, and therefore
its effect on inequality may depend on the relative position of the middle class vis-a-vis the poor
and the rich.
   Overall, the evidence suggests that to the extent democracy does reduce inequality, which
is fairly limited, it does so by altering pre-redistribution market outcomes, and that the fiscal


                                                 42
mechanisms stressed by the literature do not play a large net role in explaining any effect of
democracy on inequality, and may in fact be inequality-increasing.
   We hope that future research will investigate these theoretical and empirical issues more sys-
tematically, also tackling the first-order endogeneity and reverse causality issues, which we have
not confronted this paper, as well as exploiting within-country as well as cross-national variations.




                                                 43
Appendix A: Comparison to Rodrik (1999)

This Appendix replicates and extends the analysis in Rodrik (1999). At a first glance, the fact that
we find no robust effect on net or gross income inequality seems at odds with Rodrik’s findings that
democracies pay higher real wages in manufacturing. These opposite findings could be explained by
a logic similar to the one outlined in Proposition 4. In particular, democracies may increase wages
by allowing workers to reallocate to new sectors, but this may also increase inequality if there is
sufficient heterogeneity in labor productivity and wages were previously compressed and reduced by
labor market institutions. Besides this conceptual difference we also explore the differences between
our empirical setting and Rodrik’s. We show that while the results are robust to our democracy
measure, they are fragile in a number of other directions.
   Rodrik’s data generating model is given by

                                  log wit = βDit + Xit γ + δi + δt + ǫit ,

with wit manufacturing wages from the UNIDO data set compiled by Martin Rama. However, this
model cannot be estimated because wage data comes grouped on averages for the years t, t + 1, t +
2, t + 3, t + 4 for every 5 years from 1960 onwards. Thus, only the average wages between 1960-1964,
1965-1969 and so on are observed. Thus, Rodrik estimates

                           log wit,t+4 = βDit,t+4 + Xit,t+4 γ + δi + δt + ǫit,t+4 .              (A1)

with all variables averaged over five year periods (from t to t + 4), and the model is estimated in a
panel covering 1960, 1965, . . . , 1990. Though Rodrik presents cross-sectional and panel estimates we
focus on the later which are the more convincing ones and are also closer to the empirical strategy
adopted in this chapter.
   In the top panel of Table A1 we present different estimates of equation A1 using a normalized
polity score between 0 and 1, a normalized freedom house index between 0 and 1 and our democracy
measure separately as proxies for democracy. We always control for the log of GDP per capita, the
log of worker value added in manufacturing and the log of the price index (from the Penn World
Tables) following Rodrik’s original setup. The estimates of β are multiplied by a 100 to ease their
interpretation. The left panel uses Rodrik’s original wage data and the right panel uses an updated
version. In all models we present robust standard errors adjusting for clustering at the country
level which are reflected in slightly higher standard errors than the ones found by Rodrik.
   Our estimates show that democracy, measured by any of the indices is associated with higher
wages using the original wage data, which replicates Rodrik’s findings. There are still some small
differences caused by updates to Polity and Freedom House, but qualitatively his conclusions hold.
In particular, an increase in the polity score from 0 to 1 increases wages by 19.72% (s.e=5.98);

                                                     44
an increase in the freedom house index from 0 to 1 increases wages by 20.57% (s.e=8.13), and a
switch from nondemocracy to democracy in our measure increases wages by 8.54% (s.e=3.88). The
results using the new wage data are less clear, smaller and not significant for Freedom House and
our democracy measure. Rodrik’s results hold with the new wage data only if the controls are not
averaged over five year periods but their value at t is used instead. The results suggest that the
association between democracy and wages is not robust if one uses the updated wage data and the
same empirical strategy as Rodrik.
   There are two more issues that are important to consider in weighing the importance of Rodrik’s
evidence. The wage data are in the form of five-year averages. First, this will tend to induce
non-trivial serial correlation in the dependent variable, inducing error in the presence of lagged
dependent variables on the right-hand side (which our estimates suggest are present). Second, by
averaging the democracy index, Rodrik’s specification induces the correlation between wages at t
and democracy at t + 1, t + 2, t + 3 and t + 4, which of course does not reflect the effect of democracy
on wages, to influence the estimate for β.
   To address the second issue and get closer to the empirical strategy we used in this chapter, we
can estimate the model
                               log wit,t+4 = βDit + Xit γ + δi + δt + ǫit .

This model still averages the dependent variable which cannot be undone given the wage data, but
uses the baseline value of the democracy index and the controls for the years 1960, 1965, . . . , 1990.
The bottom panel in Table A1 presents our results using the original wage data (left panel) and
updated wage data (right panel). The estimates for β are significantly smaller and never significant.
The comparison between the top panel—which uses Rodrik’s original specification—and our favorite
specification in the bottom suggests that Rodrik’s results are, at least in part, driven by a correlation
between wages at t and democracy at t + 1, t + 2, t + 3 and t + 4.
   Finally, we present estimates of the model

                      log wit,t+4 = ρ log wit−5,t−1 + βDit + Xit γ + δi + δt + ǫit ,                (A2)

which comes closest to the empirical specification we used throughout the paper. Table A2 has
the same structure as Table 2 in the paper and presents several estimates of the dynamic panel
model in equation A2. In this case, the lagged dependent variable also controls for the non-trivial
autocorrelation patterns induced by averaging the dependent variable. The results confirm that
there is no effect of democracy at time t on average wages between t and t + 4. Only the GMM
estimates show large effects that are almost significant at conventional levels. But these estimates
are unreliable because they are significantly above the fixed effect models with different imposed
values of ρ (and these estimates should bracket them). Moreover, the estimated ρ is too small

                                                   45
compared to the fixed effects estimates (it should typically be larger). We believe that this pattern
may be caused by the averaging of the dependent variable, which invalidates the moment conditions
of GMM estimation.
   Rodrik also estimates models using wage data compiled by the Bureau of Labor Statistics for
a smaller set of countries. The very small number of democratization is in this sample (only
Portugal, South Korea and Spain) makes these results less reliable. In any case, using Rodrik’s
original specification, we find that our democracy measure is associated with a 37% increase in
wages (standard error =14.23), but when we estimate the specification in equation (6) including
the lagged dependent variable, the effect becomes smaller and no longer significant.


Appendix B: Results Using Other Measures of Democracy

In this section we study whether our results are driven by our new measure of democracy. In
particular we use Cheibub, Gandhi, and Vreeland (2010) Democracy-Dictatorship data (CGV) and
Boix-Miller-Rosato’s Complete Dataset of Political Regimes, 1800-2007 (BMR). Both datasets are
different updates and revisions of the Przeworski et al. (2000) measure. We estimate our basic
dynamic panel model using the log of tax revenue as a percentage of GDP, and the Gini coefficient
for net and gross income as dependent variable. We only report fixed effects estimates and the
Arellano and Bond GMM estimates for each of these variables.
   The top panel in Table A3 presents the results using Cheibub et al. (2010) democracy measure;
while the bottom panel presents the results using Boix et al. (2012) democracy measure. We find
a similar pattern and similar magnitudes, though our GMM estimates on the tax to GDP ratio are
less precise and not significant. Again, there is an effect on tax revenue as a percentage of GDP,
which holds in a more robust way when we focus on specifications in levels that are not reported
here to save space. We also continue to find no robust effect on inequality.
   Overall, therefore, the results are broadly similar using other measures of democracy, though
they are somewhat more precise and consistent with our preferred measure—as would be expected
if our measure removes some of the measurement error present in other indices which was one of
the main goals for its construction.




                                                 46
References

   Acemoglu, Daron (2006) “Modeling Inefficient Institutions,” in Richard Blundell, Whit-
ney Newey and Torsten Persson eds. Advances in Economic Theory, Proceedings of 2005 World
Congress, New York: Cambridge University Press.
   Acemoglu, Daron, Georgy Egorov and Konstantin Sonin (2012) “Dynamics and sta-
bility of Constitutions, Coalitions and Clubs,” American Economic Review, 102(4), 1446–1476.
   Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James A. Robinson (2001) “The Colonial
Origins of Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation,” American Economic Review,
December, 91(5), 1369-1401.
   Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James A. Robinson (2002) “Reversal of For-
tune: Geography and Institutions in the Making of the Modern World Income Distribution,” Quar-
terly Journal of Economics, 118, 1231-1294.
   Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, James A. Robinson and Pierre Yared (2005)
“From Education to Democracy?” American Economic Review, 95, 44-49.
   Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, James A. Robinson and Pierre Yared (2008)
“Income and Democracy,” American Economic Review, 98, 808-842.
   Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, James A. Robinson and Pierre Yared (2009)
“Reevaluating the Modernization Hypothesis,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 56, 1043-1058.
   Acemoglu, Daron, Suresh Naidu, Pascual Restrepo and James A. Robinson (2013)
“Democracy Does Cuse Growth,” Unpublished.
   Acemoglu, Daron, Tristan Reed and James A. Robinson (2014) “Chiefs: Elite Control
of Civil Society and Economic Development in Sierra Leone” forthcoming in the Journal of Political
Economy, 122, April.
   Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2000) “Why Did the West Extend the Fran-
chise?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115, 1167-1199.
   Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2001) “A Theory of Political Transitions”
American Economic Review, 91, 938-963.
   Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2006) Economic Origins of Dictatorship and
Democracy, New York: Cambridge University Press.
   Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2008) “Persistence of Power, Elites and
Institutions,” American Economic Review, 98, 267-291.
   Acemoglu, Daron, James A Robinson, and Rafael J. Santos (2013) “The Monopoly of
Violence: Evidence from Colombia,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 11(S1), 5-44.
   Acemoglu, Daron, James A. Robinson and Ragnar Torvik (2013) “Why Do Voters



                                               47
Dismantle Checks and Balances?,” Review of Economic Studies, 80(3), 845-875
   Acemoglu, Daron, Davide Ticchi and Andrea Vindigni (2011) “Emergence and Per-
sistence of Inefficient States,” Journal of European Economic Association, 9(2), 177-208.
   Aghion, Philippe, Torsten Persson and Dorothee Rouzet (2012) “Education and Mil-
itary Rivalry,” Unpublished.
http://scholar.harvard.edu/files/aghion/files/education and military rivalry.pdf
   Aidt, Toke S. and Bianca Dallal (2008) “Female voting power: the contribution of women’s
suffrage to the growth of social spending in Western Europe (1869-1960),” Public Choice, 134 (3-4),
391-417.
   Aidt, Toke S., Martin J. Daunton and Jaysri Dutta (2009) “The Retrenchment hypoth-
esis and the extension of the franchise in England and Wales,” Economic Journal, 120, 990-1020.
   Aidt, Toke S., Jaysri Dutta, and Elena Loukoianova (2006) “Democracy comes to
Europe: franchise expansion and fiscal outcomes 1830-1938,” European Economic Review, 50:2,
249-283.
   Aidt, Toke S. and Peter S. Jensen (2009a) “The Taxman Tools Up: An Event History
Study of the Introduction of the Personal Income Tax in Western Europe, 1815-1941,” Journal of
Public Economics, 93, 160-175.
   Aidt, Toke S. and Peter S. Jensen (2009b) “Tax structure, size of government, and the
extension of the voting franchise in Western Europe, 1860–1938,” International Tax and Public
Finance, 16(3), 362-394.
   Aidt, Toke S. and Peter S. Jensen (2011) “Workers of the World Unite! Franchise Exten-
sions and the Threat of Revolution in Europe, 1820-1938,” Cambridge Working Papers in Economics
1102, Faculty of Economics, University of Cambridge.
   Aidt, Toke S. and Peter S. Jensen (2013) “Democratization and the Size of Government:
Evidence from the Long 19th Century,” http://ideas.repec.org/p/ces/ceswps/ 4132.html
   Albertus, Michael and Victor Menaldo (2012) “If You’re against them you are with us:
The Effect of Expropriation of Autocratic Survival,” Comparative Political Studies, 45(8), 973-1003.
   Albertus, Michael and Victor Menaldo (2013) “Gaming Democracy: Elite Dominance
During Transition and the prospects for Redistribution,” forthcoming in the British Journal of
Political Science.
   Alesina, Alberto, and George-Marios Angeletos (2005) “Fairness and Redistribution,”
American Economic Review, 95, 960-980.
   Alesina, Alberto, Reza Baqir and William Easterly (1999) “Pubic Goods and Ethnic
Divisions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114, 1243-1284.
   Alesina, Alberto and Edward L. Glaeser (2004) Fighting Poverty in the US and Europe:


                                                48
A World of Difference, New York: Oxford University Press.
   Alesina, Alberto and Eliana La Ferrara (2005) “Preferences for Redistribution in the
Land of Opportunities,” Journal of Public Economics, 89, 897-931.
   Alesina, Alberto and Dani Rodrik (1994) “Distributive Politics and Economics Growth,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109, 465-490.
   Alesina, Alberto and Guido Tabellini (1989) “External debt, Capital Flight and Political
Risk,” Journal of International Economics, 27(3), 199-220.
   Algan, Yann, Pierre Cahuc and Marc Sangnier (2013) “Efficient and Inefficient Welfare
States,” https://sites.google.com/site/pierrecahuc/unpublished papers
   Alvaredo, Facundo, Anthony B. Atkinson, Thomas Piketty, and Emmanuel Saez
(2010) “The World Top Incomes Database,” online at
http://topincomes.g-mond.parisschoolofeconomics.eu/.
   Alvarez, Javier and Manuel Arellano (2003) “The Time Series and Cross-Section Asymp-
totics of Dynamic Panel Data Estimators,” Econometrica, 71(4), 2003, 1121-1159.
   Anderson, Siwan, Patrick François and Ashok Kotwal (2011) “Clientelism in Indian
Villages,” http://faculty.arts.ubc.ca/fpatrick/documents/clientAERmay1313.pdf
   Angrist, Joshua D. and Jörn-Steffen Pischke (2008) Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An
Empiricist’s Companion, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
   Ansell, Ben (2010) From the Ballot to the Blackboard: The Redistributive Political Economy
of Education, New York: Cambridge University Press.
   Arbetman-Rabinowitz, Marina, Jacek Kugler, Mark Abdollahian, Kristin Johnson
and Kyungkook Kang (2011) “Replication data for: Relative Political Capacity Dataset,”
http://hdl.handle.net/1902.1/16845 Transresearch Consortium.
   Arellano, Manuel and Stephen R. Bond (1991) “Some Specification tests for Panel Data:
Monte Carlo Evidence and an Application to Employment Equations,” Review of Economic Studies,
58(2), 277-298.
   Atkinson, Anthony B. and John Micklewright (1992) Economic Transformation in East-
ern Europe and the Distribution of Income, Cambridge Books, Cambridge University Press,
   Atkinson, Anthony B., Thomas Piketty and Emmanuel Saez (2011) “Top Incomes in
the Long Run of History,” Journal of Economic Literature, 49(1), 3-71.
   Austen-Smith, David and Jeffrey S. Banks (1999) Positive Political Theory I, Ann Arbor:
University of Michigan Press.
   Avelino, George, David S. Brown and Wendy Hunter (2005) “The Effects of Capi-
tal Mobility, Trade Openness, and Democracy on Social Spending in Latin America 1980-1999,”
American Journal of Political Science, 49(3), 625-641.


                                                49
   Baland, Jean-Marie and James A. Robinson (2008) “Land and Power: Theory and
Evidence from Chile,” American Economic Review, 98, 1737–65.
   Baland, Jean-Marie and James A. Robinson (2012) “The Political Value of Land: Po-
litical Reform and Land Prices in Chile,” American Journal of Political Science, 56(3), 601-619.
   Bardhan, Pranab, Samuel Bowles and Michael Wallerstein eds. (2006) Globalization
and Egalitarian Redistribution, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
   Bates, Robert H. and Steven A. Block (2013) “Revisiting African Agriculture: Institu-
tional Change and Productivity Growth,” Journal of Politics, 75(2), 372–384.
   Battaglini, Macro and Steve T. Coate (2008) “A Dynamic Theory of Public Spending,
Taxation and Debt,” American Economic Review, 98(1), 201-236.
   Baum, Matthew A. and David A. Lake (2001) “The invisible hand of democracy: Political
control and the provision of public services,” Comparative Political Studies, 34, 587-621.
   Baum, Matthew A. and David A. Lake (2003) “The Political Economy of Growth:
Democracy and Human Capital,” American Journal of Political Science, 47, 333-347.
   Beard, Charles A. (1913) An Economic Interpretation of the U.S. Constitution, New York:
The Free Press.
   Bénabou, Roland (2001) “Unequal Societies: Income Distribution and the Social Contract,”
American Economic Review, 90, 96-129.
   Bénabou, Roland (2008) “Ideology,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 6,
321–352.
   Bénabou, Roland and Efe Ok (2001) “Social Mobility and the Demand for Redistribution:
The POUM Hypothesis,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116, 447-487.
   Bénabou, Roland and Jean Tirole (2006) “Belief in a Just World and Redistributive
Politics,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121, 699-746.
   Berlinski, Samuel and Torun Dewan (2011) “The Political Consequences of Franchise
Extension: Evidence from the Second Reform Act,” Quarterly Journal of Political Science, 6(4),
329-376.
   Besley, Timothy F. (2007) Principled Agents:The Political Economy of Good Government,
Oxford: Oxford Universoty Press.
   Besley, Timothy F. and Masa Kudamatsu (2006) “Health and Democracy,” American
Economic Review, 96, 313-18.
   Besley, Timothy F. and Torsten Persson (2011) Pillars of Prosperity, Princeton: Prince-
ton University Press.
   Besley, Timothy F., Torsten Persson and Daniel Sturm (2010) “Political Competition,
Policy and Growth: Theory and Evidence from the United States,” Review of Economic Studies,


                                                50
77, 1329–1352.
   Blaydes, Lisa M. and Mark Kayser (2011) “Counting Calories: Democracy and Distribu-
tion in the Developing World,” International Studies Quarterly, 55, 887-908.
   Richard Blundell and Stephen Bond (2000) “GMM Estimation with persistent panel
data: an application to production functions,” Econometric Reviews, 19(3), 321-340.
   Bollen, Kenneth W. and Robert W. Jackman (1985) “Political Democracy and the Size
Distribution of Income,” American Sociological Review, 50, 438 –457.
   Boix, Carles and Michael Miller and Sebastian Rosato (2012) “A Complete Data Set
of Political Regimes, 1800–2007,”Comparative Political Studies, 46(12), 1523 - 1554.
   Brown, David S. (1999) “Reading, writing and regime type: Democracy’s impact on primary
school enrollment,” Political Research Quarterly, 52(4), 681-707.
   Brown, David S. and Wendy A. Hunter (1999) “Democracy and Social Spending in Latin
America, 1980-92,” American Political Science Review, 93 (4),
   Brown, David S. and Wendy A. Hunter (2004) “Democracy and Human Capital Forma-
tion: Educational Expenditures in Latin America,” Comparative Political Studies, 37, 842-864.
   Burkhart, Ross E. (1997) “Comparative Democracy and Income Distribution: Shape and
Direction of the Causal Arrow,” Journal of Politics, 59(1), 148-164.
   Campello, Daniela (2011) “The Great Gap: Inequality and the Politics of Redistribution in
Latin America “in Merike Blofield ed., The Politics of Redistribution in Less Developed Democra-
cies: Evidence from Brazil, Ecuador, and Venezuela, University Park: Penn State Press.
   Carter, Michael R. and John Morrow (2012) “Left, Right, Left: Income Dynamics and
the Evolving Political Preferences of Forward Looking Bayesian Voters,”
http://agecon.ucdavis.edu/people/faculty/michael-carter/docs/nopoumECMA.pdf
   Cascio, Elizabeth and Ebonya Washington (2012) “Valuing the Vote: The Redistribution
of Voting Rights and State Funds Following the Voting Rights Act of 1965,” National Bureau of
Economic Research, working paper No. 17776.
   Cheibub, José Antonio (1998) “Political Regimes and the Extractive Capacity of Govern-
ments: Taxation in Democracies and Dictatorships,” World Politics, 50, 349-376.
   Cheibub, José Antonio, Jennifer Gandhi and James R. Vreeland (2010) “Democracy
and Dictatorship Revisited,” Public Choice, 143(1): 67-101.
   Daalgard, Carl-Johan, Henrik Hansen and Theo Larsen (2005) “Income Skewness,
Redistribution and Growth: A Reconciliation,” Unpublished, Department of Economics, University
of Copenhagen.
   Dasgupta, Sandipto (2013) Legalizing the Revolution, Unpublished Ph.D. Thesis, Columbia
University.


                                                51
   De la O, Ana L. and Jonathan Rodden (2008) “Does Religion Distract the Poor? Income
and Issue Voting Around the World,” Comparative Political Studies, 41(4), 437-476.
   Drazen, Allan M. (2000) Political Economy in Macroeconomics, Princeton: Princeton Uni-
versity Press.
   Dunning, Thad (2008) Crude Democracy, New York: Cambridge University Press.
   Elis, Roy (2011) “Redistribution under Oligarchy: Trade, Regional Inequality and the Origins
of Public Schooling in Argentina, 1862-1912,” Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, Department of
Political Science, Stanford University.
   Ellman, Matthew and Leonard Wantchekon (2000) “Electoral Competition Under the
Threat of Political Unrest,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115(2), 499–531
   Einhorn, Robin L. (2006) American Taxation, American Slavery, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
   Engerman, Stanley L. and Kenneth L. Sokoloff (2005) ‘The Evolution of Suffrage Insti-
tutions in the New World,” Journal of Economic History, 65, 891-921.
   Engerman, Stanley L. and Kenneth L. Sokoloff (2011) Economic Development in the
Americas since 1500: Endowments and Institutions, New York: Cambridge University Press.
   Fernandez, Raquel and Richard Rogerson (1995) “On the Political Economy of Educa-
tion Subsidies,” Review of Economic Studies, 62, 249-262.
   Flemming, John S. and John Micklewright (2000). “Income distribution, economic
systems and transition,” in Anthony B. Atkinson and François Bourguignon eds, Handbook of
Income Distribution, edition 1, volume 1, chapter 14, 843-918 Elsevier.
   Frank, Thomas (2005) What’s the Matter with Kansas? How Conservatives Won the Heart
of America, New York: Holt.
   Freeman, Richard B. (2007) “Labor Market Institutions around the World,” NBER Working
Paper #13242.
   Fujiwara, Thomas (2011) “Voting Technology, Political Responsiveness, and Infant Health:
Evidence from Brazil,” http://www.princeton.edu/˜fujiwara/papers/elecvote site.pdf
   Gallego, Francisco A. (2010) “Historical Origins of Schooling: The Role of Democracy and
Political Decentralization,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 92(2), 228-243.
   Gerring, John, Strom Thacker and Rodrigo Alfaro (2012) “Democracy and Human
Development,” Journal of Politics, 74(1),
   Gil, Ricard, Casey B. Mulligan, and Xavier Sala-i-Martin (2004) “Do Democracies
have different Public Policies than Nondemocracies?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 18, 51-74.
   Gradstein, Mark, Moshe Justman and Volker Meier (2004) The Political Economy of
Education: Implications for Growth and Inequality, Cambridge: MIT Press.


                                                52
   Gradstein, Mark and Branko Milanovic (2004) “Does Liberté=égalité? A Survey of the
Empirical Evidence on the Links between Political Democracy and Income Inequality”, Journal of
Economic Surveys, 18(4), 515-537.
   Guttsman, W.L. ed. (1967) A Plea for Democracy: Ad Edited Selection from the 1867
Essays on Reform and Questions for a Reformed Parliament, London: Macgibbon & Kee.
   Harding, Robin and David Stasavage (2013) “What Democracy Does (and Doesn’t do)
for Basic Services: School Fees, School Inputs, and African Elections,” Unpublished, Department
of Politics, New York University.
   Hassler, John, Kjetil Storesletten, José V. Rodrı́guez Mora and Fabrizio Zilibotti
(2003) “The Survival of the Welfare state”, American Economic Review, 93(1), 87-112.
   Hendrix, Cullen S. (2010) “Measuring state capacity: Theoretical and empirical implications
for the study of civil conflict,” Journal of Peace Research, 47(3), 273-285.
   Holtz-Eakin, Douglas, Whitney K. Newey and Harvey S. Rosen (1988) “Estimating
Vector Autoregressions With Panel Data,” Econometrica, 56(6), 1371-1396.
   Holton, Woody (2008) Unruly Americans and the Origins of the Constitution, New York:
Palgrave Macmillan.
   Huber, Evelyne, François Nielsen, Jenny Pribble and John D. Stephens (2006)
“Politics and Inequality in Latin America and the Caribbean,” American Sociological Review, 71(6),
943-963.
   Huber, Evelyn and John D. Stephens (2012) Democracy and the Left: Social Policy and
Inequality in Latin America, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
   Husted, Thomas A. and Larry Kenny (1997) “The Effect of the Expansion of the Voting
Franchise on the size of Government,” Journal of Political Economy, 105, 54-82.
   Justman, Moshe and Mark Gradstein (1999a) “The Industrial Revolution, political tran-
sition and the subsequent decline in Inequality in nineteenth century Britain,’ Explorations in
Economic History, 36, 109-127.
   Justman, Moshe and Mark Gradstein (1999b) “The Democratization of Political Elites
and the decline in Inequality in Modern Economic Growth,” in Elise S. Breizes and Peter Temin
eds. Elites, Minorities and Economic Growth, Amsterdam: Elsevier.
   Kaufman, Robert R. and Alex Segura-Ubiergo (2001) “Globalization, Domestic Politics,
and Social Spending in Latin America: A Time-Series Cross-Section Analysis, 1973-97,” World
Politics, 53(4), 553-587.
   Krusell, Per, José-Vı́ctor Rı́os-Rull, and Vincenzo Quadrini (1997) “Politico-Economic
Equilibrium and Growth,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 21(1), 243-272.
   Krusell, Per and José-Vı́ctor Rı́os-Rull (1999) “On the Size of the U.S. Government,”


                                                 53
American Economic Review, 89(5), 1156-81.
   Kudamatsu, Masa (2012) “Has Democratization Reduced Infant Mortality in sub-Saharan
Africa? Evidence from Micro Data,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 10(6), 1294-
1317.
   Larcinese, Valentino (2011) “Enfranchisement and Representation: Italy 1909-1913,” Un-
published Department of Government, London School of Economics,
http://personal.lse.ac.uk/LARCINES/enfranchisement nov11.pdf
   Lapp, Nancy D. (2004) Landing votes: representation and land reform in Latin America,
New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
   Lee, Cheol-Sung (2005) “Income Inequality, Democracy, and Public Sector Size,” American
Sociological Review, 70(1), 158-181.
   Lee, Woojin (2003) “Is Democracy more Expropriative than Dictatorship? Tocquevillian
wisdom revisited,” Journal of Development Economics, 71, 155-198.
   Li, Hongyi, Lyn Squire and Heng-fu Zou (1998) “Explaining International and Intertem-
poral Variations in Income Inequality,” Economic Journal, 108(1), 26-43.
   Lindert, Peter H. (1994) “The Rise of Social Spending, 1880 - 1930,” Explorations in
Economic History, 31(1), 1-37.
   Lindert, Peter H. (2004) Growing Public: Social Spending and Economic Growth since the
Eighteenth Century, New York; Cambridge University Press.
   Lizzeri, Alessandro and Nicola Persico (2004) “Why Did the Elites Extend the Suffrage?
Democracy and the Scope of Government, with an Application to Britain’s ‘Age of Reform”’ Quar-
terly Journal of Economics, 119, 707-765.
   Llavador, Humberto and Robert J. Oxoby (2005) “Partisan Competition, Growth, and
the Franchise,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120, 1155-1192.
   Londregan, John B. (2000) Legislative Institutions and Ideology in Chile, New York: Cam-
bridge University Press.
   Lott, John R. Jr. and Lary Kenny (1999) “How Dramatically Did Women’s Suffrage
Change the Size and Scope of Government?” Journal of Political Economy, 107(6), 1163-1198.
   Lundahl, Mats (1982) “The Rationale for Apartheid,” American Economic Review, 72, 1169-
1179.
   Martinez-Bravo, Monica, Gerard Padró-i-Miquel, Nancy Qian, and Yang Yao (2012)
“The Effects of Democratization on Public Goods and Redistribution: Evidence from China.”Working
Paper
   McDaniel, Timothy (1991) Autocracy, Modernization and Revolution in Russia and Iran,
Princeton: Princeton University Press.


                                               54
   McGuire, James W. (2010) Wealth, Health and Democracy in East Asia and Latin America,
New York: Cambridge University Press.
   McGuire, Robert A. (2003) To Form a More Perfect Union: A New Economic Interpreta-
tions of the United States Constitutions, New York: Oxford University Press.
   McMillan, John and Pablo Zoido (2004) “How to Subvert Democracy: Montesinos in
Peru,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 4, 69-92
   Meltzer, Allan M. and Scott F. Richard (1981) “A Rational Theory of the Size of
Government,” Journal of Political Economy, 89, 914-927.
   Milanovic, Branko (1998) Income, inequality, and poverty during the transition from planned
to market economy, Washington: World Bank.
   Miller, Grant (2008) “Women’s Suffrage, Political Responsiveness, and Child Survival in
American History,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123 (3), 1287-1327.
   Moene, Karl Ove and Michael Wallerstein (2001) “Inequality, Social Insurance and
Redistribution,” American Political Science Review, 95, 859-874.
   Mohamed, Seeraj and Kade Finnoff “Capital flight and capital controls in developing
countries “in Epstein, Gerald ed Capital flight and capital controls in developing countries. 85-115.
Edward Elgar.
   Moore, Barrington (1966) The Social Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy: Lord and
Peasant in the Making of the Modern World, Boston: Beacon Press.
   Moses, Jonathan W. (1994) “Abdication from National Policy Autonomy: What’s Left to
Leave?”Politics & Society. 22(2) 125-148.
   Moses, Shayo (2009) “A Model of Social Identity with an Application to Political Economy:
Nation, Class, and Redistribution”American Political Science Review. 103(2) 147-174.
   Muller, Edwin N. (1988) “Democracy, Economic Development, and Income Inequality,”
American Sociological Review, 53(1), 50-68.
   Muller, Edwin N. (1989) “Democracy and Inequality,” American Sociological Review, 54(5),
868-871.
   Naidu, Suresh (2011) “Suffrage, Schooling, and Sorting in the Post-Bellum U.S. South,”
http://tuvalu.santafe.edu/˜snaidu/papers/suffrage may 25 2012 combined.pdf
   Naidu, Suresh and Noam Yuchtman (2013) “Coercive Contract Enforcement: Law and
the Labor Market in 19th Century Industrial Britain,” American Economic Review, 103(1), 107-
144.
   Newey, Whitney K. and with Frank Windmeijer (2009) “GMM Estimation with Many
Weak Moment Conditions,” Econometrica, 77(3), 687-719.
   Nickell, Stephen (1981) “Biases in dynamic models with fixed effects,” Econometrica, 49(6),


                                                 55
1417– 1426.
   Papaioannou, Elias and Gregorios Siourounis (2008) “Democratisation and Growth,”
Economic Journal, 118(532), 1520-1551.
   Panitch, Leo and Sam Gindin (2012) The Making of Global Capitalism, New York, Verso.
   Perotti, Roberto (1996) “Growth, Income Distribution and Democracy: what the data say,”
Journal of Economic Growth, 1, 149-187.
   Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini (1994) “Is Inequality Harmful to Growth?” Amer-
ican Economic Review, 84, 600-621.
   Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini (2000) Political Economics, Cambridge: MIT Press.
   Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini (2003) The Economic Effects of Constitutions,
Cambridge: MIT Press.
   Pettersson-Lidbom, Per and BJörn Tyrefors (2011) “Democracy, Redistribution, and
Political Participation: Evidence from Sweden 1919-1938,”
   http://people.su.se/˜pepet/democracyFeb2012.pdf
   Piketty, Thomas (1995) “Social mobility and redistributive politics,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 110, 551-584.
   Przeworski, Adam, Michael Alvarez, José A. Cheibub and Fernando Limongi.
Democracy and Development: Political Institutions and Material Well-being in the World, 1950-
1990. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2000.
   Putterman, Louis (1996) “Why Have the Rabble not Redistributed the Wealth? On the Sta-
bility of Democracy and Unequal Wealth,” in John E. Roemer, ed., Property Relations, Incentives
and Welfare, London: McMillan.
   Roberts, Kevin W.S. (1977) “Voting over Income Tax Schedules,” Journal of Public Eco-
nomics, 8, 329-340.
   Rodrik, Dani (1999) “Democracies Pay Higher Wages,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
114, 707-738.
   Roemer, John E. (1998) “Why the Poor do not Expropriate the Rich: An old agrument in
new garb,” Journal of Public Economics, 70, 399-424.
   Roemer, John E., Woojin Lee and Karine Van der Straeten (2007) Racism, Xeno-
phobia and Distribution: Multi-Issue Politics in Advanced Democracies, Cambridge: Harvard Uni-
versity Press.
   Romer, Thomas (1975) “Individual Welfare, Majority Voting and the properties of a linear
income tax,” Journal of Public Economics, 7, 163-168.
   Ross, Michael L. (2006) “Is Democracy Good for the Poor?.” American Journal of Political
Science, 50:860-74.


                                              56
   Seligmann, Linda J. (1995) Between Reform & Revolution: political struggles in the Peru-
vian Andes, 1969-1991, Stanford: Stanford University Press.
   Scheve, Kenneth and David Stasavage (2009) “Institutions, Partisanship, and Inequality
in the Long Run,” World Politics, 61, 215-253.
   Scheve, Kenneth and David Stasavage (2010) “The Conscription of Wealth: Mass Warfare
and the Demand for Progressive Taxation,” International Organization, 64, 529-561,
   Scheve, Kenneth and David Stasavage (2012) “Democracy, War, and Wealth: Lessons
from Two Centuries of Inheritance Taxation,” American Political Science Review, 106(1), 82-102.
   Schonhardt-Bailey, Cheryl (2006) From the Corn Laws to Free Trade: Interests, Ideas, and
Institutions in Historical Perspective, Cambridge: MIT Press.
   Shayo, Moses (2009) “A Model of Social Identity with an Application to Political Economy:
Nation, Class, and Redistribution,” American Political Science Review, 103(02), 147-174.
   Simpson, Miles (1990) “Political Rights and Income Inequality: A Cross-National Test,”
American Sociological Review, 55(5), 682-693.
   Siavelis, Peter M. (2000) The President and Congress in Post-Authoritarian Chile: Insti-
tutional Constraints to Democratic Consolidation, University Park: Pennsylvania State University
Press.
   Sirowy, Larry and Alex Inkeles (1990) “The Effects of Democracy on Economic Growth
and Inequality: A Review,” Studies in Comparative International Development, 25, 126-157.
   Soifer, Hillel (2013) “State Power and Redistributive Threat,” forthcoming in Studies in
Comparative International Development.
   Solt, Frederick (2009) “Standardizing the world income inequality database,” Social Science
Quarterly, 90(2), 231-242.
   Stasavage, David. (2005a). “Democracy and Education Spending in Africa,” American
Journal of Political Science, 49, 343-358.
   Stasavage, David (2005b) “The Role of Democracy in Uganda’s move to Universal Primary
Education,” Journal of Modern African Studies, 43(1), 53-73.
   Stigler, George J. (1970) “Director’s Law of public income redistribution,” Journal of Law
and Economics, 13, 1-10.
   Tilly, Charles (1975) “Reflections on the History of European State Making,” in Charles
Tilly ed. The Formation of National States in Western Europe, Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
   Vanhanen, Tatu (2013) “Democratization and Power Resources 1850-2000,”
http://www.fsd.uta.fi/en/data/catalogue/FSD1216/meF1216e.html#viittaaminen
   Waldstreicher, David (2009) Slavery’s constitution: from Revolution to Ratification, New


                                                 57
York: MacMillan.
   Wallerstein, Michael (1999) “Wage Setting Institutions and Pay Inequality in Advanced
Industrial Countries,” American Journal of Political Science, 43, 649-680.
   Weede Erich (1989) “Democracy and Income Inequality Reconsidered,” American Sociolog-
ical Review, 54(5), 865-868.
   Weyland, Kurt (2004) “Neoliberalism and Democracy in Latin America: A Mixed Record,”
Latin American Politics & Society, 46(1), 135-157.
   Whiteford, Andrew and Dirk Van Seventer (2000) “Understanding Contemporary House-
hold Inequality in South Africa,” Studies in Economics and Econometrics, 24(3), 7-30.
   Wigley, Simon and Arzu Akkoyunlu-Wigley (2011) “The Impact of Regime Type on
Health: Does Redistribution Explain Everything?” World Politics, 63(4), 647-677.
   Wilse-Samson, Laurence (2013) “Structural Change and Democratization: Evidence from
Apartheid South Africa,” Unpublished working paper, Columbia University,
http://www.columbia.edu/˜lhw2110/research.html
   Wooldridge, Jeffery M. (2002) Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data,
Cambridge: MIT Press.
   Wright, Randall D. (1996) “Taxes, Redistribution and Growth,” Journal of Public Eco-
nomics, 62, 327-338.




                                               58
                                                                                    Table 1: Summary statistics

                                                                                                            Non-Democracies                                            Democracies
       Variable:                                                                                     Mean             Std. Dev.                 N            Mean             Std. Dev.               N
       Tax revenue as a percentage of GDP                                                           15.82                 9.50                660           20.94                 9.73               569
       Total revenue as a percentage of GDP                                                         20.74                12.85                660           25.42                11.01               569
       Gini coefficient, net income                                                                 38.91                10.76                338           36.81                10.19               497
       Gini coefficient, gross income                                                               43.92                11.72                338           45.11                 7.71               497
       Foreign wars (polity)                                                                        0.15                  0.70               740            0.07                  0.39               623
       Social unrest (SPEED)                                                                        5.35                 24.99               927            9.16                 35.40               705
       Share with secondary enrollmenty (Barro Lee)                                                 17.59                16.00                745           32.07                19.23               652
59




       Non-agricultural share of population                                                         64.54                28.51                138           81.39                19.55               301
       Non agricultural share of GDP                                                                74.05                16.65                627           86.32                13.47               649
       Secondary enrollment                                                                         45.95                31.50                492           76.01                29.90               545
       Land Gini                                                                                    59.96                15.21                214           62.96                16.23               399
       Non-agricultural share of population in 1968                                                 35.60                20.94                803           56.55                25.30               598
       United States top 10% income share                                                           36.03                 5.07               1050           39.43                 5.47               822
       Top share                                                                                    1.77                  1.32                81            1.34                 1.06                237
       Bottom share                                                                                 0.10                  0.03                81            0.10                  0.03               237
       GDP per capita in 2000 dollars                                                              2061.78              3838.08               718          8160.03              9415.89              770
     Note.- Summary statistics broken by observations during non-democracy (left panel) and democracy (right panel). See the text for a full description of the data and the variables. For each variable, its
     mean, standard deviation and number of observations are reported.
                                           Table 2: Effects of democratization on the log of tax revenue as a percentage of GDP.

                                                                                                                                                           Assuming AR(1) coefficient
                                                                                                              GMM                            ρ=0           ρ = 0.25 ρ = 0.5 ρ = 0.75                        ρ=1
                                                                   (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)             (6)             (7)             (8)             (9)           (10)
      Democracy lagged                                         15.00∗∗∗        11.71∗∗∗         11.27        18.68∗∗        14.63∗∗        15.00∗∗∗        11.92∗∗∗         8.84∗∗∗          5.77∗∗          2.69
                                                                (4.33)          (3.38)         (7.23)         (8.78)         (5.98)         (4.33)          (3.27)          (2.55)           (2.48)         (3.11)
      Dep. Var lagged                                                           0.27∗∗∗        0.27∗∗∗       0.29∗∗∗        0.33∗∗∗
                                                                                (0.06)         (0.10)         (0.07)         (0.08)
      Observations                                                944             944            816           816            816              944             944             944             944           944
60




      Countries                                                   128             128            125           125            125              128             128             128             128           128
      Numer of moments                                                                            81            61             61
      Hansen p-value                                                                             0.12          0.05           0.06
      AR2 p-value                                                                                0.92          0.83           0.78
      Democracy changes in the sample                             92              92              82            82             82             92               92             92              92              92
      Long run effect of democracy                               15.00           15.97          15.49         26.35          21.97           15.00            15.89          17.68           23.06             .
      P-value for the long run effect                            0.00            0.00           0.11           0.03           0.01           0.00             0.00           0.00            0.02              .
     Note.- Dependent variable: log of tax revenue as a percentage of GDP. OLS estimates (Columns 1-2) include a full set of country and year fixed effects. Arellano and Bond’s GMM estimators of the
     dynamic panel model (Columns 3-4) remove country fixed effects by taking first differences of the data, or by taking forward orthogonal differences (Column 5) and then construct moment conditions
     using predetermined lags of the dependent variable and democracy as instruments. Columns 4 and 5 use only up to the fifth lag of predetermined variables to create moments. Columns 6-10 impose
     different values for the autocorrelation coefficient in the dependent variable series, and estimates the effect of democracy including a full set of country and year fixed effects. All models control for lagged
     GDP per capita but this coefficient is not reported to save space. Robust standard errors, adjusted for clustering at the country level, are in parentheses. For the GMM models, significance levels for the
     Hansen J-test and test for lack of second-order serial correlation in residuals are reported at the bottom.
                                Table 3: Effects of democratization on the log of total government revenue as a percentage of GDP.

                                                                                                                                                          Assuming AR(1) coefficient
                                                                                                              GMM                           ρ=0           ρ = 0.25 ρ = 0.5 ρ = 0.75                         ρ=1
                                                                   (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)             (7)             (8)             (9)            (10)
      Democracy lagged                                          9.31∗∗∗        7.55∗∗∗         9.37∗        11.13∗∗         10.04∗∗        9.31∗∗∗         8.06∗∗∗         6.81∗∗∗          5.56∗∗          4.31
                                                                 (3.44)        (2.35)         (5.01)         (5.58)         (4.37)          (3.44)          (2.60)          (2.08)          (2.15)         (2.76)
      Dep. Var lagged                                                          0.35∗∗∗        0.47∗∗∗        0.52∗∗∗        0.53∗∗∗
                                                                               (0.03)         (0.06)         (0.06)         (0.06)
      Observations                                                 944           944            816            816            816             944             944             944             944            944
61




      Countries                                                    128           128            125            125            125             128             128             128             128            128
      Numer of moments                                                                          81             61             61
      Hansen p-value                                                                           0.05           0.04           0.05
      AR2 p-value                                                                              0.36           0.39           0.40
      Democracy changes in the sample                              92            92              82             82             82             92             92               92              92              92
      Long run effect of democracy                                9.31          11.64          17.77          22.96          21.47           9.31           10.74           13.61            22.23             .
      P-value for the long run effect                             0.01          0.00           0.07           0.05           0.03            0.01           0.00             0.00            0.01              .
     Note.- Dependent variable: log of total government revenue as a percentage of GDP. OLS estimates (Columns 1-2) include a full set of country and year fixed effects. Arellano and Bond’s GMM estimators
     of the dynamic panel model (Columns 3-4) remove country fixed effects by taking first differences of the data, or by taking forward orthogonal differences (Column 5) and then construct moment conditions
     using predetermined lags of the dependent variable and democracy as instruments. Columns 4 and 5 use only up to the fifth lag of predetermined variables to create moments. Columns 6-10 impose
     different values for the autocorrelation coefficient in the dependent variable series, and estimates the effect of democracy including a full set of country and year fixed effects. All models control for lagged
     GDP per capita but this coefficient is not reported to save space. Robust standard errors, adjusted for clustering at the country level, are in parentheses. For the GMM models, significance levels for the
     Hansen J-test and test for lack of second-order serial correlation in residuals are reported at the bottom.
Table 4: Effects of democratization on the log of tax revenue as a percentage of GDP, Yearly panel.

                                                                               OLS                                         GMM
                                                                  (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)
  Dt−1                                                            3.43          3.45          4.06            5.49           9.49         8.11∗
                                                                (2.82)         (2.91)        (3.13)         (3.83)         (5.82)         (4.86)
  Dt−2                                                           -2.31          -2.01         -2.08          -1.66          -0.67          -1.04
                                                                (2.83)         (2.86)        (3.00)         (2.67)         (2.56)         (2.86)
  Dt−3                                                            0.66          -0.03         -1.66           1.25           0.53          -0.88
                                                                (2.21)         (2.36)        (2.58)         (2.24)         (2.21)         (2.46)
  Dt−4                                                            1.65          2.83         3.88∗         6.14∗∗∗         3.45∗         4.29∗∗
                                                                (1.63)         (2.03)        (2.14)         (2.32)         (1.81)         (1.93)
  p-value, first four democracy lags                              0.02           0.10          0.20           0.06           0.07           0.06
  p-value, second four democracy lags                               .            0.61          0.21             .            0.13           0.09
  p-value, third four democracy lags                                .              .          0.80              .              .           0.82
  yt−1                                                         0.65∗∗∗        0.64∗∗∗       0.62∗∗∗        0.58∗∗∗        0.53∗∗∗        0.52∗∗∗
                                                                (0.04)         (0.04)        (0.05)         (0.05)         (0.04)         (0.06)
  yt−2                                                            0.06          0.08         0.09∗            0.03           0.04          0.06
                                                                (0.05)         (0.05)        (0.05)         (0.05)         (0.04)         (0.05)
  yt−3                                                            0.09          0.10          0.12            0.07           0.07          0.11
                                                                (0.09)         (0.09)        (0.10)         (0.08)         (0.09)         (0.09)
  yt−4                                                           -0.00          -0.03         -0.06          -0.03          -0.03          -0.06
                                                                (0.06)         (0.06)        (0.06)         (0.07)         (0.05)         (0.05)
  p-value, first four tax to GDP lags                             0.00          0.00          0.00            0.00           0.00          0.00
  p-value, second four tax to GDP lags                              .           0.61          0.55              .            0.05          0.19
  p-value, third four tax to GDP lags                               .              .          0.51              .              .           0.11
  Observations                                                   4434           3925          3425           4306           3799           3301
  Countries                                                       128            126           124            128            125            123
  Numer of moments                                                                                            373            637            837
  Hansen p-value                                                                                              1.00           1.00          1.00
  AR2 p-value                                                                                                 0.30           0.39          0.96
  Democracy changes in sample                                     75            73             69              75             73             68
  Long run effect of democracy                                  16.49          19.11          12.49         32.38          38.85          25.40
  p-value for long run effect                                    0.00          0.00           0.06            0.03           0.01          0.02
Note.- Dependent variable: log of tax revenue as a percentage of GDP. OLS estimates (Columns 1-3) include a full set of country and year fixed
effects. Arellano and Bond’s GMM estimators of the dynamic panel model (Columns 4-6) remove country fixed effects by taking first differences
of the data and then construct moment conditions using as many predetermined lags of the dependent variable and democracy as included in the
model. To save space we only report the p-value of a joint test of significance for lags 5 to 8 (second four lags) and lags 9 to 12 (third four lags).
All models control for as many lags of GDP per capita as lags of democracy in the equation, but these coefficients are not reported to save space.
For the GMM models, significance levels for the Hansen J-test and test for lack of second-order serial correlation in residuals are reported at the
bottom.




                                                                         62
                    Table 5: Effects of democratization on the log of tax revenue as a percentage of GDP with different set of controls.

                                                          Ex. GDP per capita                                                       Adding other controls
                                                             OLS            GMM               OLS          GMM            OLS          GMM            OLS           GMM            OLS          GMM
                                                             (1)             (2)              (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)           (7)            (8)           (9)           (10)
      Democracy lagged                                    10.91∗∗∗          12.59∗         12.22∗∗∗       12.42∗       11.70∗∗∗        10.73        11.59∗∗∗       15.01∗∗       11.68∗∗∗       15.34∗∗
                                                           (3.69)           (6.67)          (3.52)        (6.73)        (3.38)        (7.00)         (3.46)         (7.59)        (3.48)         (6.90)
      Dep. Var lagged                                      0.28∗∗∗          0.31∗∗∗         0.27∗∗∗       0.28∗∗∗       0.27∗∗∗       0.28∗∗∗        0.31∗∗∗       0.32∗∗∗       0.31∗∗∗        0.34∗∗∗
                                                           (0.07)           (0.11)          (0.06)        (0.10)        (0.06)        (0.10)         (0.07)         (0.12)        (0.07)         (0.12)
      War lagged                                                                             -1.60         -2.38                                                                   -2.30          -4.26
                                                                                            (2.56)        (3.91)                                                                  (3.03)         (4.06)
      Unrest lagged                                                                                                       0.01          -0.06                                       0.01          -0.09
63




                                                                                                                         (0.02)        (0.07)                                     (0.02)         (0.08)
      Education lagged                                                                                                                                -0.16          0.02          -0.15          -0.30
                                                                                                                                                     (0.19)         (0.63)        (0.20)         (0.69)
      Observations                                           1090             957             889           771            927           802           844           734            803            700
      Countries                                               133             133             118           115            125           122           110           107            103            100
      Numer of moments                                                        80                            82                           82                           82                            84
      Hansen p-value                                                         0.22                          0.07                         0.17                         0.15                          0.21
      AR2 p-value                                                            0.24                          0.88                         0.91                         0.76                          0.77
      Democracy changes in the sample                        101               90             89             80           92              82            77            68            77              68
      Long run effect of democracy                          15.22            18.26           16.64         17.27         15.97          14.84         16.76         22.15          16.97         23.17
      P-value for the long run effect                       0.00             0.07            0.00          0.06          0.00           0.12           0.00          0.04          0.00            0.02
     Note.- Dependent variable: log of tax revenue as a percentage of GDP. OLS estimates (Odd columns) include a full set of country and year fixed effects. Columns 3 to 10 include lagged GDP per capita
     as a control. Arellano and Bond’s GMM estimators of the dynamic panel model (Even columns) remove country fixed effects by taking first differences of the data and then construct moment conditions
     using predetermined lags of the dependent variable and democracy. Robust standard errors, adjusted for clustering at the country level, are in parentheses. For the GMM models, significance levels for
     the Hansen J-test and test for lack of second-order serial correlation in residuals are reported at the bottom.
                                     Table 6: Effects of democratization on inequality.

                                                                                                   Assuming AR(1) coefficient
                                                                GMM                     ρ=0       ρ = 0.25 ρ = 0.5 ρ = 0.75                ρ=1
                               (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)          (5)        (6)         (7)          (8)          (9)         (10)
                                                        Dependent variable: Gini coefficient, net income.
 Democracy lagged             0.62       -0.74       -2.01    -2.60    -1.60    -0.42      -0.67      -0.92                    -1.17       -1.42
                             (0.78)     (0.88)      (1.59)   (1.63)   (1.51) (0.93)       (0.89)     (0.89)                   (0.93)      (1.00)
 Dep. Var lagged                        0.32∗∗∗     0.35∗∗∗ 0.39∗∗∗ 0.32∗∗∗
                                        (0.07)      (0.10)   (0.12)   (0.12)
 Observations                  657        537         420      420      424      537        537        537                      537         537
 Countries                     127        113         100      100      100      113        113        113                      113         113
 Numer of moments                                      81       61       61
 Hansen p-value                                       0.60     0.69     0.30
 AR2 p-value                                          0.02     0.03     0.01
 Democracy changes              65         47          31       31       31       47         47         47                       47          47
 Long run effect               0.62      -1.10       -3.12    -4.28    -2.36    -0.42      -0.90      -1.84                    -4.67          .
 P-value                       0.43       0.40        0.21     0.12     0.30     0.65       0.45       0.31                     0.21          .
                                                       Dependent variable: Gini coefficient, gross income.
 Democracy lagged             -1.22      -1.50       -1.45       -1.88        -1.22      -1.51       -1.50       -1.50∗       -1.49∗       -1.49
                             (0.99)     (0.90)      (1.44)      (1.59)       (1.27)     (1.15)      (1.00)       (0.90)       (0.87)      (0.92)
 Dep. Var lagged                        0.50∗∗∗     0.64∗∗∗     0.64∗∗∗      0.76∗∗∗
                                        (0.06)      (0.11)      (0.11)       (0.11)
 Observations                  657        537         420         420          424       537          537          537          537         537
 Countries                     127        113         100         100          100       113          113          113          113         113
 Numer of moments                                      81          61           61
 Hansen p-value                                       0.54        0.29         0.37
 AR2 p-value                                          0.59        0.57         0.48
 Democracy changes              65         47          31          31           31        47           47           47           47          47
 Long run effect              -1.22      -2.98       -3.99       -5.26        -5.15     -1.51        -2.00        -3.00        -5.97          .
 P-value                       0.22       0.11        0.36        0.30         0.42      0.19         0.14         0.10         0.09          .
Note.- Dependent variables: Gini coefficient, net income (top panel) and gross income (bottom panel). OLS estimates (Columns 1-2) include a
full set of country and year fixed effects. Arellano and Bond’s GMM estimators of the dynamic panel model (Columns 3-4) remove country fixed
effects by taking first differences of the data, or by taking forward orthogonal differences (Column 5) and then construct moment conditions using
predetermined lags of the dependent variable and democracy as instruments. Columns 4 and 5 use only up to the fifth lag of predetermined variables
to create moments. Columns 6-10 impose different values for the autocorrelation coefficient in the dependent variable series, and estimates the
effect of democracy including a full set of country and year fixed effects. All models control for lagged GDP per capita but this coefficient is not
reported to save space. Robust standard errors, adjusted for clustering at the country level, are in parentheses. For the GMM models, significance
levels for the Hansen J-test and test for lack of second-order serial correlation in residuals are reported at the bottom.




                                                                        64
                      Table 7: Effects of democratization on inequality adding controls.

                        Ex GDP per capita                                    Baseline Sample                                     Inc. Ex-Soviets
                         OLS        GMM         OLS      GMM        OLS      GMM          OLS      GMM        OLS      GMM
                         (1)         (2)        (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)         (7)       (8)       (9)       (10)      (11)      (12)
                                                         Dependent variable: Gini coefficient, net income.
 Democracy lagged        -0.87     -2.81∗∗      -0.71     -1.87     -0.75     -2.16       -0.72     -1.46     -0.72     -1.69     -0.26     -1.51
                        (0.82)      (1.31)     (0.93)    (1.68)    (0.88)    (1.58)      (1.03)    (1.87)    (1.06)    (1.86)    (0.77)    (1.32)
 Dep. Var lagged        0.33∗∗∗    0.49∗∗∗     0.32∗∗∗   0.34∗∗∗   0.32∗∗∗   0.36∗∗∗     0.32∗∗∗   0.34∗∗∗   0.32∗∗∗   0.33∗∗∗   0.31∗∗∗   0.53∗∗∗
                        (0.07)      (0.10)     (0.07)    (0.11)    (0.07)    (0.10)      (0.08)    (0.12)    (0.08)    (0.12)    (0.06)    (0.10)
 War lagged                                      0.12                                                          0.33     0.27
                                               (0.28)                                                        (0.28)    (0.49)
 Unrest lagged                                                      -0.01     0.00                            -0.00     0.00
                                                                   (0.00)    (0.01)                          (0.00)    (0.01)
 Education lagged                                                                         -0.02       0.06    -0.02     0.01
                                                                                         (0.04)      (0.13)  (0.05)    (0.16)
 Observations             556         435        512       402     523       409           502         399     480       382      611        473
 Countries                115         103        106       95      110       97            100         91       95        87      134        121
 Numer of moments                     80                   82                82                        82                 84                 81
 Hansen p-value                      0.82                 0.76              0.59                      0.67              0.77                0.42
 AR2 p-value                         0.03                 0.04              0.02                      0.04              0.04                0.03
 Democracy changes        49           34        44        30       47       31             38         28       37        27       61         39
 Long run effect         -1.30       -5.55      -1.06     -2.85   -1.10     -3.39         -1.05       -2.19   -1.06     -2.51     -0.37     -3.23
 p-value                 0.29        0.03       0.44      0.26    0.39      0.18           0.48       0.44     0.49      0.37     0.74      0.27
                                                         Dependent variable: Gini      coefficient, gross income.
 Democracy lagged       -1.51∗     -2.18∗      -1.57∗     -1.90     -1.39     -1.39      -1.80∗     -1.29     -1.70∗    -1.28     -0.97     -0.79
                        (0.89)     (1.24)      (0.95)    (1.52)    (0.89)    (1.40)      (1.00)    (1.65)     (1.02)   (1.65)    (0.84)    (1.41)
 Dep. Var lagged        0.53∗∗∗    0.75∗∗∗     0.50∗∗∗   0.60∗∗∗   0.49∗∗∗   0.65∗∗∗     0.49∗∗∗   0.62∗∗∗   0.49∗∗∗   0.62∗∗∗   0.49∗∗∗   0.72∗∗∗
                        (0.06)     (0.09)      (0.06)    (0.12)    (0.06)    (0.11)      (0.06)    (0.12)     (0.07)   (0.12)    (0.06)    (0.08)
 War lagged                                     0.06      -0.03                                                0.21     -0.03
                                               (0.26)    (0.44)                                               (0.27)   (0.46)
 Unrest lagged                                                     -0.01∗∗    -0.00                          -0.01∗∗    -0.00
                                                                    (0.00)   (0.01)                           (0.00)   (0.01)
 Education lagged                                                                         0.02      -0.02      0.02     -0.02
                                                                                         (0.06)    (0.12)     (0.06)   (0.16)
 Observations             556         435        512       402      523        409        502        399       480       382      611        473
 Countries                115         103        106       95       110        97         100         91        95        87      134        121
 Numer of moments                     80                   82                  82                     82                  84                 81
 Hansen p-value                      0.51                 0.70                0.45                   0.79                0.84               0.28
 AR2 p-value                         0.50                 0.52                0.45                   0.66                0.50               0.50
 Democracy changes        49           34        44        30        47        31          38         28       37         27       61         39
 Long run effect         -3.19       -8.69      -3.15     -4.72     -2.75     -3.95       -3.56     -3.38     -3.34     -3.43     -1.91     -2.84
 p-value                 0.11        0.13       0.11      0.25      0.13      0.37        0.08       0.46     0.10       0.45     0.26      0.59
Note.- Dependent variables: Gini coefficient, net income (top panel) and gross income (bottom panel). OLS estimates (Odd columns) include a full
set of country and year fixed effects. Columns 3 to 10 include lagged GDP per capita as a control. Arellano and Bond’s GMM estimators of the
dynamic panel model (Even columns) remove country fixed effects by taking first differences of the data and then construct moment conditions
using predetermined lags of the dependent variable and democracy. Robust standard errors, adjusted for clustering at the country level, are in
parentheses. For the GMM models, significance levels for the Hansen J-test and test for lack of second-order serial correlation in residuals are
reported at the bottom.




                                                                     65
    Table 8: Effects of democratization on the log of the nonagricultural share of employment.

                                                                                                     Assuming AR(1) coefficient
                                                                   GMM                    ρ=0       ρ = 0.25 ρ = 0.5 ρ = 0.75             ρ=1
                               (1)          (2)           (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)         (10)
 Democracy lagged             0.81         0.61∗        1.86∗       1.71∗      1.66∗      1.48        1.22        0.96        0.69∗       0.43
                             (1.74)       (0.33)       (0.95)     (0.92)      (0.86)     (1.63)      (1.18)      (0.75)       (0.39)     (0.38)
 Dep. Var lagged                          0.83∗∗∗      0.83∗∗∗    0.83∗∗∗     0.84∗∗∗
                                          (0.05)       (0.06)     (0.06)      (0.06)
 Observations                 350           313          252        252         252        313         313         313         313         313
 Countries                     62           61            60        60           60        61          61          61          61          61
 Number of moments                                        56        40           40
 Hansen p-value                                          0.33      0.12         0.07
 AR2 p-value                                             0.10      0.08         0.10
 Democracy changes             23           21            18        18           18        21          21          21           21          21
 Long run effect              0.81         3.59         10.79      9.91        10.09      1.48        1.62        1.91         2.77          .
 p-value                      0.64         0.06          0.01      0.02         0.02      0.37        0.31        0.21         0.08          .
                            Ex. GDP per capita                                          Adding other controls
                              OLS         GMM            OLS       GMM         OLS       GMM          OLS        GMM
                              (1)          (2)           (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)         (7)         (8)          (9)         (10)
 Democracy lagged            0.96∗         1.34         0.70∗       2.24∗      0.68∗     2.00∗∗       0.90∗      1.60∗∗∗      0.85∗      1.38∗∗∗
                            (0.51)        (1.19)       (0.40)     (1.19)      (0.35)     (0.96)      (0.48)      (0.62)      (0.50)      (0.52)
 Dep. Var lagged            0.83∗∗∗       0.84∗∗∗      0.82∗∗∗    0.81∗∗∗     0.82∗∗∗    0.81∗∗∗     0.79∗∗∗     0.79∗∗∗     0.77∗∗∗     0.77∗∗∗
                            (0.04)        (0.05)       (0.05)     (0.06)      (0.05)     (0.06)      (0.03)      (0.04)      (0.04)      (0.04)
 War lagged                                             0.09       0.13                                                        0.12       0.50∗
                                                       (0.08)     (0.17)                                                     (0.12)      (0.28)
 Unrest lagged                                                                 -0.00      0.01                                -0.00      0.03∗∗
                                                                              (0.01)     (0.02)                              (0.01)      (0.01)
 Education lagged                                                                                     -0.04      -0.06∗       -0.03       -0.04
                                                                                                     (0.03)      (0.03)      (0.03)      (0.03)
 Observations                 341          279           229        184         294        237         227        183          189         153
 Countries                     62           61           45          44         57          56         44          43           36          35
 Number of moments                          55                       57                     57                     52                       54
 Hansen p-value                            0.29                     0.81                   0.31                   0.92                     1.00
 AR2 p-value                               0.82                     0.57                   0.21                   0.23                     0.29
 Democracy changes             22           19            18         16         21          18          8           6            8          6
 Long run effect              5.72         8.42          3.79      11.87       3.84       10.63       4.20        7.52         3.77       5.90
 p-value                      0.04         0.16          0.08       0.03       0.04        0.01       0.07        0.01         0.10        0.01
Notes for top panel.- Dependent variable: log of the nonagricultural share of employment. OLS estimates (Columns 1-2) include a full set of country
and year fixed effects. Arellano and Bond’s GMM estimators of the dynamic panel model (Columns 3-4) remove country fixed effects by taking
first differences of the data, or by taking forward orthogonal differences (Column 5) and then construct moment conditions using predetermined
lags of the dependent variable and democracy as instruments. Columns 4 and 5 use only up to the fifth lag of predetermined variables to create
moments. Columns 6-10 impose different values for the autocorrelation coefficient in the dependent variable series, and estimates the effect of
democracy including a full set of country and year fixed effects. All models control for lagged GDP per capita but this coefficient is not reported
to save space. Robust standard errors, adjusted for clustering at the country level, are in parentheses. For the GMM models, significance levels
for the Hansen J-test and test for lack of second-order serial correlation in residuals are reported at the bottom.
Notes for bottom panel.- Dependent variable: log of the nonagricultural share of employment. OLS estimates (Odd columns) include a full set
of country and year fixed effects. Columns 3 to 10 include lagged GDP per capita as a control. Arellano and Bond’s GMM estimators of the
dynamic panel model (Even columns) remove country fixed effects by taking first differences of the data and then construct moment conditions
using predetermined lags of the dependent variable and democracy. Robust standard errors, adjusted for clustering at the country level, are in
parentheses. For the GMM models, significance levels for the Hansen J-test and test for lack of second-order serial correlation in residuals are
reported at the bottom.




                                                                       66
            Table 9: Effects of democratization on the log of nonagricultural share of GDP.

                                                                                                    Assuming AR(1) coefficient
                                                                   GMM                   ρ=0       ρ = 0.25 ρ = 0.5 ρ = 0.75             ρ=1
                              (1)           (2)          (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)         (10)
 Democracy lagged           3.96∗∗∗       2.49∗∗∗       2.66∗      1.58       2.62∗∗    4.00∗∗∗     3.34∗∗∗     2.68∗∗∗      2.02∗∗       1.36
                             (1.38)       (0.95)       (1.56)     (2.15)     (1.31)      (1.34)      (1.11)      (0.95)      (0.92)      (1.01)
 Dep. Var lagged                          0.57∗∗∗      0.73∗∗∗    0.74∗∗∗    0.73∗∗∗
                                          (0.05)       (0.08)     (0.09)     (0.07)
 Observations                1033           978          833        833        834        978         978         978         978         978
 Countries                    147           144          140        140        140        144         144         144         144         144
 Number of moments                                       100        70         70
 Hansen p-value                                         0.21       0.18       0.08
 AR2 p-value                                            0.72       0.71       0.40
 Democracy changes             90           88            78        78         78          88          88          88          88          88
 Long run effect              3.96         5.81         9.86       6.14       9.76        4.00        4.46        5.36        8.09          .
 p-value                      0.00         0.01         0.10       0.49       0.08        0.00        0.00        0.01        0.03          .
                            Ex. GDP per capita                                         Adding other controls
                             OLS          GMM           OLS        GMM        OLS        GMM         OLS        GMM
                             (1)           (2)          (3)         (4)       (5)         (6)        (7)         (8)          (9)         (10)
 Democracy lagged           2.63∗∗∗       3.61∗∗        2.63∗∗     3.05∗      2.43∗∗     2.67∗      2.78∗∗∗      3.70∗∗     2.82∗∗∗     3.89∗∗
                            (0.91)        (1.57)       (1.01)      (1.68)    (0.94)     (1.54)      (1.05)      (1.66)      (1.05)      (1.67)
 Dep. Var lagged            0.61∗∗∗       0.78∗∗∗      0.58∗∗∗    0.73∗∗∗    0.58∗∗∗    0.75∗∗∗     0.60∗∗∗     0.76∗∗∗     0.60∗∗∗     0.74∗∗∗
                            (0.04)        (0.07)       (0.05)      (0.08)    (0.05)     (0.08)      (0.04)      (0.07)      (0.04)      (0.07)
 War lagged                                             -0.45     -1.82∗∗                                                    -0.29      -1.79∗
                                                       (0.44)      (0.74)                                                   (0.43)      (0.96)
 Unrest lagged                                                                 0.00       -0.01                               0.00       -0.01
                                                                              (0.01)     (0.01)                             (0.01)      (0.01)
 Education lagged                                                                                     -0.01       -0.15      0.01        -0.10
                                                                                                     (0.04)      (0.13)     (0.05)      (0.13)
 Observations                1010          861           852        730        924        789          823         709        762         658
 Countries                    148          143           121        117        134        130          113         109        103          99
 Number of moments                          99                      101                   101                      101                    103
 Hansen p-value                            0.28                     0.27                  0.30                     0.21                   0.31
 AR2 p-value                               0.28                     0.52                  0.61                     0.74                   0.64
 Democracy changes             91           81            81         74         88         78          70           63         69          62
 Long run effect              6.69        16.61          6.24      11.23       5.78      10.47        7.00       15.39        7.05       14.87
 p-value                      0.01         0.08          0.01       0.09       0.01       0.10        0.01         0.02       0.01        0.02
Notes for top panel.- Dependent variable: log of nonagricultural share of of GDP. OLS estimates (Columns 1-2) include a full set of country and
year fixed effects. Arellano and Bond’s GMM estimators of the dynamic panel model (Columns 3-4) remove country fixed effects by taking first
differences of the data, or by taking forward orthogonal differences (Column 5) and then construct moment conditions using predetermined lags of
the dependent variable and democracy as instruments. Columns 4 and 5 use only up to the fifth lag of predetermined variables to create moments.
Columns 6-10 impose different values for the autocorrelation coefficient in the dependent variable series, and estimates the effect of democracy
including a full set of country and year fixed effects. All models control for lagged GDP per capita but this coefficient is not reported to save
space. Robust standard errors, adjusted for clustering at the country level, are in parentheses. For the GMM models, significance levels for the
Hansen J-test and test for lack of second-order serial correlation in residuals are reported at the bottom.
Notes for bottom panel.- Dependent variable: log of nonagricultural share of of GDP. OLS estimates (Odd columns) include a full set of country and
year fixed effects. Columns 3 to 10 include lagged GDP per capita as a control. Arellano and Bond’s GMM estimators of the dynamic panel model
(Even columns) remove country fixed effects by taking first differences of the data and then construct moment conditions using predetermined lags
of the dependent variable and democracy. Robust standard errors, adjusted for clustering at the country level, are in parentheses. For the GMM
models, significance levels for the Hansen J-test and test for lack of second-order serial correlation in residuals are reported at the bottom.




                                                                      67
                  Table 10: Effects of democratization on the log of secondary enrollment.

                                                                                                      Assuming AR(1) coefficient
                                                                  GMM                       ρ=0      ρ = 0.25 ρ = 0.5 ρ = 0.75             ρ=1
                              (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)        (7)         (8)         (9)         (10)
 Democracy lagged           12.31∗∗     12.30∗∗∗      17.41∗∗    20.35∗∗        13.39     19.28∗∗∗   16.25∗∗∗     13.22∗∗∗    10.19∗∗       7.17
                            (5.17)       (4.67)       (8.21)     (9.28)        (8.41)      (5.64)     (5.00)       (4.56)      (4.40)      (4.54)
 Dep. Var lagged                         0.58∗∗∗      0.74∗∗∗    0.75∗∗∗       0.82∗∗∗
                                         (0.06)       (0.12)     (0.12)        (0.12)
 Observations                 825          630          453        453           489         630       630          630         630         630
 Countries                    150          141          127        127           129         141       141          141         141         141
 Number of moments                                      77         56             57
 Hansen p-value                                        0.04       0.04           0.12
 AR2 p-value                                           0.83       0.91           0.79
 Democracy changes            71           51            29         29            29         51        51           51          51           51
 Long run effect             12.31        29.03        67.56      82.43         76.17       19.28     21.67        26.44       40.77          .
 p-value                     0.02         0.01         0.07       0.09           0.16       0.00      0.00         0.00        0.02           .
                            Ex. GDP per capita                                            Adding other controls
                             OLS         GMM            OLS       GMM           OLS        GMM         OLS         GMM
                             (1)          (2)           (3)        (4)          (5)         (6)        (7)          (8)         (9)         (10)
 Democracy lagged           11.19∗∗      16.77∗∗      12.85∗∗    21.47∗∗       12.81∗∗∗    19.55∗∗   10.92∗∗      18.39∗∗     11.08∗∗     17.36∗∗
                            (4.45)       (8.50)       (4.98)     (8.49)        (4.70)      (7.79)    (5.11)       (8.67)      (5.25)       (8.13)
 Dep. Var lagged            0.58∗∗∗      0.80∗∗∗      0.57∗∗∗    0.72∗∗∗       0.57∗∗∗     0.73∗∗∗   0.61∗∗∗      0.82∗∗∗     0.61∗∗∗     0.81∗∗∗
                            (0.06)       (0.11)       (0.06)     (0.12)        (0.06)      (0.12)    (0.06)       (0.09)      (0.07)       (0.09)
 War lagged                                            0.73       -0.07                                                        0.31         -1.21
                                                      (0.98)     (1.87)                                                       (1.01)       (1.92)
 Unrest lagged                                                                   0.04       0.04                               0.06          0.12
                                                                                (0.04)     (0.06)                             (0.05)       (0.07)
 Education lagged                                                                                     -0.29∗      -0.78∗      -0.32∗       -0.74∗
                                                                                                      (0.17)      (0.42)      (0.18)       (0.39)
 Observations                 686          495          563        411           610         442       553         407          519          385
 Countries                    151          134          121        111           133         121       116         106          106           99
 Number of moments                         76                      78                        78                     78                        80
 Hansen p-value                           0.08                    0.13                      0.04                   0.19                      0.18
 AR2 p-value                              0.66                    0.67                      0.61                   0.51                      0.59
 Democracy changes            54            33          48          29           51           29       43           26          42            26
 Long run effect             26.50        84.72        30.11      76.17         30.04       71.71     28.20       103.65       28.32       93.58
 p-value                     0.01         0.11         0.01       0.04          0.00        0.04      0.02         0.04        0.02          0.03
Notes for top panel.- Dependent variable: log of secondary enrollment. OLS estimates (Columns 1-2) include a full set of country and year fixed
effects. Arellano and Bond’s GMM estimators of the dynamic panel model (Columns 3-4) remove country fixed effects by taking first differences of
the data, or by taking forward orthogonal differences (Column 5) and then construct moment conditions using predetermined lags of the dependent
variable and democracy as instruments. Columns 4 and 5 use only up to the fifth lag of predetermined variables to create moments. Columns
6-10 impose different values for the autocorrelation coefficient in the dependent variable series, and estimates the effect of democracy including a
full set of country and year fixed effects. All models control for lagged GDP per capita but this coefficient is not reported to save space. Robust
standard errors, adjusted for clustering at the country level, are in parentheses. For the GMM models, significance levels for the Hansen J-test
and test for lack of second-order serial correlation in residuals are reported at the bottom.
Notes for bottom panel.- Dependent variable: log of secondary enrollment. OLS estimates (Odd columns) include a full set of country and year fixed
effects. Columns 3 to 10 include lagged GDP per capita as a control. Arellano and Bond’s GMM estimators of the dynamic panel model (Even
columns) remove country fixed effects by taking first differences of the data and then construct moment conditions using predetermined lags of the
dependent variable and democracy. Robust standard errors, adjusted for clustering at the country level, are in parentheses. For the GMM models,
significance levels for the Hansen J-test and test for lack of second-order serial correlation in residuals are reported at the bottom.




                                                                          68
     Table 11: Effects of democratization on inequality. Includes interaction of democracy with Land Gini (averaged over all years with
     available data).

                                                                                                                                                      Assuming AR(1) coefficient
                                                                                                          GMM                           ρ=0          ρ = 0.25 ρ = 0.5 ρ = 0.75                        ρ=1
                                                                 (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)             (8)             (9)           (10)
                                                                                                  Dependent variable: Gini coefficient, net income.
       Democracy lagged                                         0.29          -0.91          -1.01    -2.44     -1.56     -0.56       -0.81      -1.06                                 -1.31           -1.57
                                                              (0.90)         (1.02)         (1.31)   (1.86)    (1.46)    (1.04)      (1.02)     (1.05)                                (1.12)          (1.22)
       Lagged democracy × Land Gini                           0.18∗∗∗       0.11∗∗         0.23∗∗ 0.33∗∗∗ 0.27∗∗∗ 0.15∗∗∗           0.12∗∗       0.09                                  0.06             0.03
                                                              (0.04)         (0.05)         (0.10)   (0.10)    (0.10)    (0.05)      (0.05)     (0.06)                                (0.07)          (0.08)
       Dep. Var lagged                                                      0.35∗∗∗        0.36∗∗∗ 0.33∗∗∗ 0.34∗∗∗
                                                                             (0.07)         (0.08)   (0.08)    (0.10)
       Observations                                             485            407            326      326       329       407         407        407                                   407             407
69




       Countries                                                 86            78             72       72        72        78          78         78                                    78              78
       Democracy changes in the sample                           32             23             16      16        16        23          23         23                                    23              23
                                                                                                Dependent variable: Gini coefficient, gross income.
       Democracy lagged                                       -2.89∗∗       -2.51∗∗        -2.47∗        -4.38∗∗        -2.57∗∗        -2.88∗         -2.69∗∗         -2.50∗∗         -2.30∗∗        -2.11∗∗
                                                               (1.32)        (1.04)         (1.28)        (2.07)         (1.29)         (1.48)         (1.21)          (1.03)          (0.96)         (1.05)
       Lagged democracy × Land Gini                           0.22∗∗∗       0.18∗∗∗        0.27∗∗∗       0.46∗∗∗        0.29∗∗∗        0.24∗∗∗        0.21∗∗∗         0.18∗∗           0.15∗∗          0.12
                                                               (0.08)        (0.07)         (0.08)        (0.12)         (0.07)         (0.09)         (0.08)          (0.07)          (0.07)         (0.07)
       Dep. Var lagged                                                      0.48∗∗∗        0.56∗∗∗       0.49∗∗∗        0.66∗∗∗
                                                                             (0.07)         (0.09)        (0.11)         (0.09)
       Observations                                             485           407            326           326            329            407             407             407            407             407
       Countries                                                 86            78             72            72             72            78              78              78             78              78
       Democracy changes in the sample                           32            23             16            16             16            23              23              23             23              23
     Note.- Dependent variables: Gini coefficient, net income (top panel) and gross income (bottom panel). OLS estimates (Columns 1-2) include a full set of country and year fixed effects. Arellano and Bond’s
     GMM estimators of the dynamic panel model (Columns 3-4) remove country fixed effects by taking first differences of the data, or by taking forward orthogonal differences (Column 5) and then construct
     moment conditions using predetermined lags of the dependent variable, democracy and the interaction term as instruments. Columns 4 and 5 use only up to the fifth lag of predetermined variables to
     create moments. Columns 6-10 impose different values for the autocorrelation coefficient in the dependent variable series, and estimates the effect of democracy including a full set of country and year
     fixed effects. All models control for lagged GDP per capita but this coefficient is not reported to save space. Robust standard errors, adjusted for clustering at the country level, are in parentheses. For
     the GMM models, significance levels for the Hansen J-test and test for lack of second-order serial correlation in residuals are reported at the bottom.
     Table 12: Effects of democratization on inequality. Includes interaction of democracy with the percentage of non-agricultural population
     in 1968.

                                                                                                                                                             Assuming AR(1) coefficient
                                                                                                                       GMM                       ρ=0         ρ = 0.25 ρ = 0.5 ρ = 0.75                  ρ=1
                                                                                 (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)           (7)           (8)           (9)         (10)
                                                                                                              Dependent variable: Gini coefficient, net income.
      Democracy lagged                                                          0.91          -0.32        -0.45     -1.81    -0.80      -0.05      -0.27      -0.49                        -0.71        -0.92
                                                                               (0.74)        (0.78)       (1.35)    (1.54)   (1.28)     (0.82)     (0.79)     (0.81)                       (0.88)       (0.98)
      Lagged democracy × non-agricultural pop. in 1968                         0.12∗∗∗      0.11∗∗        0.16∗    0.16∗∗     0.13∗    0.13∗∗∗     0.12∗∗     0.10∗∗                        0.09         0.08
                                                                               (0.03)        (0.05)       (0.08)    (0.07)   (0.07)     (0.05)     (0.05)     (0.05)                       (0.06)       (0.06)
      Dep. Var lagged                                                                       0.31∗∗∗      0.29∗∗∗ 0.29∗∗∗ 0.36∗∗∗
                                                                                             (0.07)       (0.09)    (0.10)   (0.10)
      Observations                                                               614           506          402       402      406        506        506        506                         506          506
70




      Countries                                                                  112           100           91       91       91         100        100        100                         100          100
      Democracy changes in the sample                                             55           41           29        29       29         41         41         41                          41           41
                                                                                                              Dependent variable: Gini coefficient, gross income.
      Democracy lagged                                                          -0.81         -0.85        -0.40        -1.15        -0.71        -0.72         -0.79         -0.86         -0.92        -0.99
                                                                               (0.98)        (0.76)       (1.22)       (1.43)       (1.18)       (0.97)        (0.83)        (0.76)        (0.79)       (0.90)
      Lagged democracy × non-agricultural pop. in 1968                         0.15∗∗∗      0.13∗∗       0.21∗∗∗      0.23∗∗∗      0.19∗∗∗      0.17∗∗∗       0.15∗∗∗        0.13∗∗        0.11∗∗       0.08∗
                                                                               (0.05)        (0.05)       (0.08)       (0.08)       (0.07)       (0.07)        (0.06)        (0.05)        (0.05)       (0.04)
      Dep. Var lagged                                                                       0.48∗∗∗      0.54∗∗∗      0.55∗∗∗      0.66∗∗∗
                                                                                             (0.06)       (0.10)       (0.10)       (0.10)
      Observations                                                               614           506          402          402          406         506           506           506           506          506
      Countries                                                                  112           100           91          91           91          100           100           100           100          100
      Democracy changes in the sample                                             55           41           29           29           29          41            41            41            41           41
     Note.- Dependent variables: Gini coefficient, net income (top panel) and gross income (bottom panel). OLS estimates (Columns 1-2) include a full set of country and year fixed effects. Arellano and Bond’s
     GMM estimators of the dynamic panel model (Columns 3-4) remove country fixed effects by taking first differences of the data, or by taking forward orthogonal differences (Column 5) and then construct
     moment conditions using predetermined lags of the dependent variable, democracy and the interaction term as instruments. Columns 4 and 5 use only up to the fifth lag of predetermined variables to
     create moments. Columns 6-10 impose different values for the autocorrelation coefficient in the dependent variable series, and estimates the effect of democracy including a full set of country and year
     fixed effects. All models control for lagged GDP per capita but this coefficient is not reported to save space. Robust standard errors, adjusted for clustering at the country level, are in parentheses. For
     the GMM models, significance levels for the Hansen J-test and test for lack of second-order serial correlation in residuals are reported at the bottom.
     Table 13: Effects of democratization on inequality. Includes interaction of democracy with share of income held by the top ten decile in
     the U.S. at the time of democratization.

                                                                                                                                                           Assuming AR(1) coefficient
                                                                                                                    GMM                        ρ=0         ρ = 0.25 ρ = 0.5 ρ = 0.75                    ρ=1
                                                                             (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)           (6)           (7)           (8)            (9)          (10)
                                                                                                           Dependent variable: Gini coefficient, net income.
      Democracy lagged                                                      0.68          -0.76        -2.35   -3.06∗    -0.88                  -0.46         -0.70         -0.94          -1.18         -1.42
                                                                           (0.79)        (0.89)       (1.57)   (1.64)   (1.52)                 (0.94)        (0.90)        (0.90)         (0.93)        (1.00)
      Lagged democracy × Top 10 share in the U.S.                          0.22∗         0.19∗         -0.10    -0.12     0.22                 0.27∗         0.21∗           0.14           0.08          0.01
                                                                           (0.13)        (0.11)       (0.19)   (0.19)   (0.17)                 (0.15)        (0.12)        (0.10)         (0.09)        (0.10)
      Dep. Var lagged                                                                   0.31∗∗∗      0.35∗∗∗ 0.36∗∗∗ 0.47∗∗∗
                                                                                         (0.07)       (0.10)   (0.11)   (0.08)
      Observations                                                           657           537          420      420      424                   537            537       537                537          537
71




      Countries                                                              127           113          100      100      100                   113            113       113                113          113
      Democracy changes in the sample                                        65            47           31       31        31                   47             47        47                 47           47
                                                                                                         Dependent variable: Gini             coefficient,    gross income.
      Democracy lagged                                                     -1.04          -1.55        -0.68         -0.71        0.44          -1.61         -1.58          -1.54        -1.51∗         -1.48
                                                                          (0.98)         (0.95)       (1.46)        (1.76)       (1.69)        (1.18)        (1.04)         (0.94)        (0.89)        (0.91)
      Lagged democracy × Top 10 share in the U.S.                         0.72∗∗∗       0.36∗∗∗        0.25          0.28       0.37∗∗        0.72∗∗∗       0.52∗∗∗        0.33∗∗∗         0.13          -0.06
                                                                          (0.17)         (0.11)       (0.18)        (0.21)       (0.16)        (0.19)        (0.15)         (0.11)        (0.09)        (0.10)
      Dep. Var lagged                                                                   0.46∗∗∗      0.61∗∗∗       0.60∗∗∗      0.71∗∗∗
                                                                                         (0.06)       (0.11)        (0.11)       (0.11)
      Observations                                                           657           537          420           420         424           537            537           537            537          537
      Countries                                                              127           113          100           100         100           113            113           113            113          113
      Democracy changes in the sample                                        65            47           31            31           31           47             47            47             47           47
     Note.- Dependent variables: Gini coefficient, net income (top panel) and gross income (bottom panel). OLS estimates (Columns 1-2) include a full set of country and year fixed effects. Arellano and Bond’s
     GMM estimators of the dynamic panel model (Columns 3-4) remove country fixed effects by taking first differences of the data, or by taking forward orthogonal differences (Column 5) and then construct
     moment conditions using predetermined lags of the dependent variable, democracy and the interaction term as instruments. Columns 4 and 5 use only up to the fifth lag of predetermined variables to
     create moments. Columns 6-10 impose different values for the autocorrelation coefficient in the dependent variable series, and estimates the effect of democracy including a full set of country and year
     fixed effects. All models control for lagged GDP per capita but this coefficient is not reported to save space. Robust standard errors, adjusted for clustering at the country level, are in parentheses. For
     the GMM models, significance levels for the Hansen J-test and test for lack of second-order serial correlation in residuals are reported at the bottom.
     Table 14: Effects of democratization on inequality. Includes interaction of democracy with the average share of income held by the top
     decile relative to share of mid 50th earners before 2000.

                                                                                                                                                      Assuming AR(1) coefficient
                                                                                                           GMM                          ρ=0          ρ = 0.25 ρ = 0.5 ρ = 0.75                         ρ=1
                                                                 (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)            (7)             (8)              (9)           (10)
                                                                                                 Dependent variable: Gini coefficient, net income.
       Democracy lagged                                         0.79          -0.54          -1.39    -1.73    -1.24    -0.20       -0.48      -0.76                                    -1.04          -1.32
                                                               (0.80)        (0.88)         (1.47)   (1.49)   (1.33) (0.95)        (0.91)     (0.91)                                   (0.95)         (1.03)
       Lagged democracy × Top share                             -0.01         -0.01          -0.02    -0.02    -0.01    -0.01       -0.01      -0.01                                    -0.01          -0.01
                                                               (0.01)        (0.01)         (0.01)   (0.01)   (0.01) (0.01)        (0.01)     (0.01)                                   (0.01)         (0.01)
       Dep. Var lagged                                                      0.30∗∗∗        0.29∗∗∗ 0.30∗∗∗ 0.32∗∗∗
                                                                             (0.07)         (0.08)   (0.08)   (0.08)
       Observations                                              606           503            397      397      401      503         503        503                                      503            503
72




       Countries                                                 110           102            93       93       93       102         102        102                                      102            102
       Democracy changes in the sample                            55           41             29       29       29        41         41         41                                       41             41
                                                                                               Dependent variable: Gini coefficient, gross income.
       Democracy lagged                                         -0.76         -1.29          -1.73          -2.30          -1.55         -1.02          -1.16           -1.30           -1.45          -1.59
                                                               (0.93)        (0.85)         (1.31)         (1.41)         (1.30)        (0.98)         (0.89)          (0.85)          (0.88)         (0.97)
       Lagged democracy × Top share                             -0.00         -0.00           0.00          -0.00           0.00         -0.00          -0.00           -0.00           -0.01          -0.01
                                                               (0.01)        (0.01)         (0.01)         (0.01)         (0.01)        (0.01)         (0.01)          (0.01)          (0.01)         (0.01)
       Dep. Var lagged                                                      0.48∗∗∗        0.52∗∗∗        0.54∗∗∗        0.60∗∗∗
                                                                             (0.06)         (0.08)         (0.08)         (0.08)
       Observations                                              606           503            397            397            401           503            503             503             503            503
       Countries                                                 110           102             93            93              93           102            102             102             102            102
       Democracy changes in the sample                            55           41              29            29              29           41             41              41              41             41
     Note.- Dependent variables: Gini coefficient, net income (top panel) and gross income (bottom panel). OLS estimates (Columns 1-2) include a full set of country and year fixed effects. Arellano and Bond’s
     GMM estimators of the dynamic panel model (Columns 3-4) remove country fixed effects by taking first differences of the data, or by taking forward orthogonal differences (Column 5) and then construct
     moment conditions using predetermined lags of the dependent variable, democracy and the interaction term as instruments. Columns 4 and 5 use only up to the fifth lag of predetermined variables to
     create moments. Columns 6-10 impose different values for the autocorrelation coefficient in the dependent variable series, and estimates the effect of democracy including a full set of country and year
     fixed effects. All models control for lagged GDP per capita but this coefficient is not reported to save space. Robust standard errors, adjusted for clustering at the country level, are in parentheses. For
     the GMM models, significance levels for the Hansen J-test and test for lack of second-order serial correlation in residuals are reported at the bottom.
     Table 15: Effects of democratization on the log of tax and total government revenue as a percentage of GDP. Includes interaction of
     democracy with the average share of income held by the top decile relative to share of mid 50th earners before 2000.

                                                                                                                                                       Assuming AR(1) coefficient
                                                                                                           GMM                            ρ=0          ρ = 0.25 ρ = 0.5 ρ = 0.75                       ρ=1
                                                               (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)             (7)             (8)             (9)          (10)
                                                                                           Dependent variable: Tax revenues as a percentage of GDP
      Democracy lagged                                     18.75   ∗∗∗
                                                                           14.54     20.93∗∗∗ 21.97∗∗
                                                                                   ∗∗∗
                                                                                                                         19.86∗∗ 18.75∗∗∗              14.50∗∗∗        10.24∗∗∗          5.99∗∗         1.74
                                                            (4.88)           (3.72)    (8.02)    (9.86)                   (8.55)   (4.88)               (3.46)          (2.48)           (2.52)        (3.54)
      Lagged democracy × Top share                         -0.10∗∗∗        -0.08 ∗∗∗
                                                                                      -0.22 ∗∗
                                                                                                -0.19∗∗                  -0.20 ∗∗
                                                                                                                                  -0.10∗∗∗             -0.08∗∗∗        -0.06∗∗∗          -0.03∗         -0.01
                                                            (0.04)           (0.03)    (0.09)    (0.08)                   (0.10)   (0.04)               (0.03)          (0.02)           (0.02)        (0.02)
      Dep. Var lagged                                                       0.25∗∗∗   0.23∗∗∗   0.25∗∗∗                  0.30∗∗∗
                                                                             (0.06)    (0.09)    (0.08)                   (0.08)
      Observations                                             843            843       730       730                      730      843                  843        843       843                        843
      Countries                                                113            113       110       110                      110      113                  113        113       113                        113
73




      Democracy changes in the sample                           72             72        67        67                       67       72                   72         72       72                         72
                                                                                Dependent variable: Total               government revenues            as a percentage of GDP
      Democracy lagged                                      10.56∗∗         8.46∗∗∗         14.27∗∗        15.50∗∗       13.97∗∗        10.56∗∗         9.09∗∗∗         7.61∗∗∗         6.13∗∗∗         4.66
                                                             (4.03)          (2.43)          (6.11)         (7.07)        (6.86)         (4.03)          (2.81)          (2.02)          (2.19)        (3.17)
      Lagged democracy × Top share                            -0.03           -0.02           -0.10          -0.11         -0.12          -0.03           -0.02           -0.02           -0.01         -0.00
                                                             (0.03)          (0.02)          (0.06)         (0.07)        (0.08)         (0.03)          (0.02)          (0.02)          (0.02)        (0.02)
      Dep. Var lagged                                                       0.36∗∗∗         0.43∗∗∗        0.48∗∗∗       0.50∗∗∗
                                                                             (0.04)          (0.06)         (0.06)        (0.06)
      Observations                                             843             843             730            730           730            843             843             843             843           843
      Countries                                                113             113             110            110           110            113             113             113             113           113
      Democracy changes in the sample                           72              72             67             67            67             72              72              72              72            72
     Note.- Dependent variables: log of tax revenue as a percentage of GDP (top panel) and log of total government revenue as a percentage of GDP (bottom panel). OLS estimates (Columns 1-2) include a
     full set of country and year fixed effects. Arellano and Bond’s GMM estimators of the dynamic panel model (Columns 3-4) remove country fixed effects by taking first differences of the data, or by taking
     forward orthogonal differences (Column 5) and then construct moment conditions using predetermined lags of the dependent variable, democracy and the interaction term as instruments. Columns 4 and
     5 use only up to the fifth lag of predetermined variables to create moments. Columns 6-10 impose different values for the autocorrelation coefficient in the dependent variable series, and estimates the
     effect of democracy including a full set of country and year fixed effects. All models control for lagged GDP per capita but this coefficient is not reported to save space. Robust standard errors, adjusted
     for clustering at the country level, are in parentheses. For the GMM models, significance levels for the Hansen J-test and test for lack of second-order serial correlation in residuals are reported at the
     bottom.
     Table 16: Effects of democratization on inequality. Includes interaction of democracy with the average share of income held by the
     bottom decile relative to share of mid 50th earners before 2000.

                                                                                                                                                       Assuming AR(1) coefficient
                                                                                                            GMM                          ρ=0          ρ = 0.25 ρ = 0.5 ρ = 0.75                        ρ=1
                                                                   (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)            (7)             (8)             (9)           (10)
                                                                                                   Dependent variable: Gini coefficient, net income.
       Democracy lagged                                          0.92          -0.41        -2.11∗   -2.64∗    -1.93∗     -0.07      -0.35      -0.64                                   -0.92          -1.21
                                                                (0.78)        (0.85)         (1.28)  (1.35)    (1.14) (0.91)        (0.88)     (0.88)                                  (0.93)         (1.01)
       Lagged democracy × Bottom share                          0.52∗        0.67∗∗          0.94∗    0.71      0.58     0.71∗∗     0.68∗∗     0.65∗∗                                  0.62∗∗         0.59∗∗
                                                                (0.29)        (0.28)         (0.56)  (0.51)    (0.44) (0.30)        (0.28)     (0.27)                                  (0.28)         (0.30)
       Dep. Var lagged                                                       0.30∗∗∗        0.33∗∗∗ 0.35∗∗∗ 0.43∗∗∗
                                                                              (0.07)         (0.07)  (0.08)    (0.07)
       Observations                                               606           503           397     397       401        503        503        503                                     503            503
74




       Countries                                                  110           102            93      93        93        102        102        102                                     102            102
       Democracy changes in the sample                             55            41            29      29        29         41        41         41                                       41            41
                                                                                                Dependent variable: Gini coefficient, gross income.
       Democracy lagged                                          -0.68         -1.24          -1.57        -2.35∗           -1.58         -0.95          -1.10           -1.25          -1.40          -1.55
                                                                (0.95)        (0.86)         (1.26)         (1.42)         (1.24)        (1.00)         (0.91)          (0.87)         (0.89)         (0.97)
       Lagged democracy × Bottom share                            0.29          0.28          -0.08          -0.24           0.09          0.31           0.29            0.28           0.26           0.25
                                                                (0.37)        (0.31)         (0.52)         (0.56)         (0.49)        (0.37)         (0.33)          (0.31)         (0.32)         (0.35)
       Dep. Var lagged                                                       0.48∗∗∗        0.58∗∗∗        0.60∗∗∗        0.66∗∗∗
                                                                              (0.06)         (0.08)         (0.08)         (0.07)
       Observations                                               606           503            397            397            401          503            503             503             503            503
       Countries                                                  110           102             93            93              93          102            102             102             102            102
       Democracy changes in the sample                             55            41             29            29              29           41            41              41               41            41
     Note.- Dependent variables: Gini coefficient, net income (top panel) and gross income (bottom panel). OLS estimates (Columns 1-2) include a full set of country and year fixed effects. Arellano and Bond’s
     GMM estimators of the dynamic panel model (Columns 3-4) remove country fixed effects by taking first differences of the data, or by taking forward orthogonal differences (Column 5) and then construct
     moment conditions using predetermined lags of the dependent variable, democracy and the interaction term as instruments. Columns 4 and 5 use only up to the fifth lag of predetermined variables to
     create moments. Columns 6-10 impose different values for the autocorrelation coefficient in the dependent variable series, and estimates the effect of democracy including a full set of country and year
     fixed effects. All models control for lagged GDP per capita but this coefficient is not reported to save space. Robust standard errors, adjusted for clustering at the country level, are in parentheses. For
     the GMM models, significance levels for the Hansen J-test and test for lack of second-order serial correlation in residuals are reported at the bottom.
     Table 17: Effects of democratization on the log of tax and total government revenue as a percentage of GDP. Includes interaction of
     democracy with the average share of income held by the bottom decile relative to share of mid 50th earners before 2000.

                                                                                                                                                               Assuming AR(1) coefficient
                                                                                                                         GMM                       ρ=0         ρ = 0.25 ρ = 0.5 ρ = 0.75                 ρ=1
                                                                                   (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)           (7)           (8)           (9)        (10)
                                                                                                           Dependent variable: Tax revenues as a percentage of GDP
      Democracy lagged                                                          18.72  ∗∗∗
                                                                                              14.44 ∗∗∗
                                                                                                       18.47∗ 22.49∗∗               17.16∗∗ 18.72∗∗∗ 14.42∗∗∗ 10.11∗∗∗       5.81∗∗                      1.50
                                                                                 (5.18)        (3.98)   (9.43) (10.35)               (8.34)   (5.18)     (3.70)    (2.61)    (2.49)                     (3.45)
      Lagged democracy × Bottom 10th to middle 50th ratio                        5.04∗∗∗      3.88∗∗∗    7.34     9.31∗               6.36   5.04∗∗∗    3.87∗∗∗    2.70∗∗     1.54                       0.37
                                                                                  (1.88)       (1.46)   (4.84)   (5.58)              (5.54)   (1.88)     (1.44)    (1.14)    (1.12)                     (1.38)
      Dep. Var lagged                                                                         0.25∗∗∗  0.24∗∗∗ 0.24∗∗∗              0.30∗∗∗
                                                                                               (0.06)   (0.09)   (0.08)              (0.07)
      Observations                                                                 843          843      730       730                730      843        843        843      843                         843
      Countries                                                                    113          113      110       110                110      113        113        113      113                         113
75




      Democracy changes in the sample                                               72           72       67       67                  67       72         72        72        72                         72
                                                                                                 Dependent variable: Total          government revenues as a percentage of GDP
      Democracy lagged                                                          10.78∗∗∗       8.30∗∗∗      13.23∗      14.20∗∗      11.74∗      10.78∗∗∗       9.03∗∗∗      7.29∗∗∗        5.54∗∗       3.80
                                                                                 (4.07)         (2.46)       (6.91)      (7.05)       (7.10)      (4.07)         (2.84)       (2.01)        (2.12)      (3.08)
      Lagged democracy × Bottom 10th to middle 50th ratio                         1.55           0.74         2.92        4.14         3.37        1.55           0.98         0.40          -0.17       -0.74
                                                                                 (1.63)         (1.21)       (3.09)      (3.86)       (3.77)      (1.63)         (1.29)       (1.10)        (1.14)      (1.39)
      Dep. Var lagged                                                                          0.35∗∗∗      0.43∗∗∗     0.47∗∗∗      0.50∗∗∗
                                                                                                (0.04)       (0.06)      (0.06)       (0.05)
      Observations                                                                 843           843          730         730          730          843           843           843           843         843
      Countries                                                                    113           113          110         110          110          113           113           113           113         113
      Democracy changes in the sample                                               72            72           67          67           67          72            72            72            72          72
     Note.- Dependent variables: log of tax revenue as a percentage of GDP (top panel) and log of total government revenue as a percentage of GDP (bottom panel). OLS estimates (Columns 1-2) include a
     full set of country and year fixed effects. Arellano and Bond’s GMM estimators of the dynamic panel model (Columns 3-4) remove country fixed effects by taking first differences of the data, or by taking
     forward orthogonal differences (Column 5) and then construct moment conditions using predetermined lags of the dependent variable, democracy and the interaction term as instruments. Columns 4 and
     5 use only up to the fifth lag of predetermined variables to create moments. Columns 6-10 impose different values for the autocorrelation coefficient in the dependent variable series, and estimates the
     effect of democracy including a full set of country and year fixed effects. All models control for lagged GDP per capita but this coefficient is not reported to save space. Robust standard errors, adjusted
     for clustering at the country level, are in parentheses. For the GMM models, significance levels for the Hansen J-test and test for lack of second-order serial correlation in residuals are reported at the
     bottom.
Table A1: Replication of Rodrik’s results on the log of manufacturing wages. Dependent variable
is log of average wages between t and t + 4.

                                                               Original wage data                           Updated wage data
                                                              (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)          (6)
                                                                 Averaging democracy measure over t, t + 4:
  Polity index at t, t + 4                                19.25∗∗∗                                      14.48∗∗
                                                           (5.72)                                        (6.00)
  Freedom house index at t, t + 4                                           15.78∗∗                                      7.60
                                                                             (7.55)                                     (8.68)
  Our democracy index at t, t + 4                                                   8.48∗∗                                             6.51
                                                                                    (3.66)                                            (4.20)
  Observations                                               442             365     468     451      364                              467
  Countries                                                  93               98      99      90       92                               92
                                                                            Using democracy measure at t:
  Polity index at t                                         8.40                                          9.01
                                                           (6.15)                                        (5.89)
  Freedom house index at t                                                   11.03                                      11.52
                                                                            (10.55)                                     (9.77)
  Our democracy index at t                                                                  1.98                                       2.89
                                                                                           (3.54)                                     (3.39)
  Observations                                               429              285           455            437            294          456
  Countries                                                  91               96             97            85             87            90
Note.- Dependent variable: log of manufacturing wages. OLS estimates include a full set of country and year fixed effects. All models control
for the log of GDP per capita, log of worker value added and log of the price level, but these coefficients are not reported to save space. Robust
standard errors, adjusted for clustering at the country level, are in parentheses.




                                                                       76
     Table A2: Effects of democratization on the log of manufacturing wages controlling for worker value added, prices and GDP per capita.
     Dependent variable is log of average wages between t and t + 4

                                                                                                                                                      Assuming AR(1) coefficient
                                                                                                           GMM                          ρ=0          ρ = 0.25 ρ = 0.5 ρ = 0.75                         ρ=1
                                                                  (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)            (7)             (8)             (9)            (10)
      Democracy at t                                             2.89         2.65          15.42         15.91          13.22          3.84            2.65            1.45            0.25           -0.95
                                                                (3.39)       (4.01)         (9.64)       (10.35)        (10.22)        (3.85)          (3.89)          (4.38)          (5.19)         (6.20)
      Dep. Var lagged                                                        0.25∗∗∗        0.20∗         0.21∗           0.17
                                                                             (0.09)         (0.12)        (0.12)         (0.11)
77




      Observations                                                456          384           297           297            298            384             384             384             384            384
      Countries                                                    90           86            79            79             79            86              86              86              86             86
      Numer of moments                                                                        40            38             38
      Hansen p-value                                                                         0.52          0.44           0.49
      AR2 p-value                                                                            0.21          0.21           0.29
      Democracy changes in the sample                              47            45           35            35             35             45             45              45              45              45
      Long run effect of democracy                                2.89          3.53        19.31         20.01          15.93           3.84           3.53            2.90            1.00              .
      P-value for the long run effect                             0.40          0.50         0.10          0.11           0.19           0.32           0.50            0.74            0.96              .
     Note.- Dependent variable: log of manufacturing wages. OLS estimates (Columns 1-2) include a full set of country and year fixed effects. Arellano and Bond’s GMM estimators of the dynamic panel model
     (Columns 3-4) remove country fixed effects by taking first differences of the data, or by taking forward orthogonal differences (Column 5) and then construct moment conditions using predetermined
     lags of the dependent variable and democracy as instruments. Columns 4 and 5 use only up to the fifth lag of predetermined variables to create moments. Columns 6-10 impose different values for the
     autocorrelation coefficient in the dependent variable series, and estimates the effect of democracy including a full set of country and year fixed effects. All models control for lagged GDP per capita, but
     this coefficient is not reported to save space. Robust standard errors, adjusted for clustering at the country level, are in parentheses. For the GMM models, significance levels for the Hansen J-test and
     test for lack of second-order serial correlation in residuals are reported at the bottom.
Table A3: Effects of democratization on the log of tax revenue as a percentage of GDP per capita,
and Gini coefficient of net and gross income.

                                                                Tax ratio                     Net Gini                     Gross gini
                                                             OLS            GMM           OLS           GMM             OLS          GMM
                                                             (1)             (2)          (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)
                                                              Using Cheibub et al. (2010) democracy measure:
 Democracy lagged                                          9.48∗∗    11.44               -0.55     -1.45   -1.02   -1.56
                                                           (3.80)   (7.58)              (0.89)    (1.77)  (0.81)  (1.26)
 Dep. Var lagged                                           0.27∗∗∗  0.28∗∗∗             0.32∗∗∗   0.35∗∗∗ 0.49∗∗∗ 0.77∗∗∗
                                                           (0.06)   (0.10)              (0.07)    (0.10)  (0.06)  (0.09)
 Observations                                                942      814                 537       420     537     420
 Countries                                                   128      125                 113       100     113     100
 Numer of moments                                                      81                            81              81
 Hansen p-value                                                       0.17                          0.59            0.34
 AR2 p-value                                                          0.89                          0.02            0.45
 Democracy changes in the sample                             92        82                  47        31     47       31
 Long run effect of democracy                               12.98    15.82               -0.80     -2.22   -2.01   -6.87
 P-value for the long run effect                            0.01     0.12                 0.53     0.41    0.21    0.24
                                                               Using Boix et            al. (2012) democracy measure:
 Democracy lagged                                          9.94∗∗∗         10.57         -0.43          -1.99          -1.23          -2.16
                                                           (3.10)         (9.06)        (0.88)         (1.65)         (0.86)         (1.46)
 Dep. Var lagged                                           0.27∗∗∗        0.28∗∗∗       0.32∗∗∗        0.35∗∗∗        0.49∗∗∗        0.63∗∗∗
                                                           (0.06)         (0.10)        (0.07)         (0.10)         (0.06)         (0.11)
 Observations                                                944            816           537            420            537            420
 Countries                                                   128            125           113            100            113            100
 Numer of moments                                                            81                           81                            81
 Hansen p-value                                                             0.16                         0.61                          0.42
 AR2 p-value                                                                0.91                         0.02                          0.64
 Democracy changes in the sample                             92              82            47             31             47             31
 Long run effect of democracy                               13.61          14.66          -0.63         -3.08           -2.42         -5.81
 P-value for the long run effect                            0.00           0.24           0.62          0.22            0.17          0.17
Note.- Odd columns present OLS estimates with a full set of country and year fixed effects. Even columns present Arellano and Bond’s GMM
estimators of the dynamic panel model which remove country fixed effects by taking first differences of the data and then construct moment
conditions using predetermined lags of the dependent variable and democracy. All models control for the lag of GDP per capita but these
coefficients are not reported to save space. Robust standard errors, adjusted for clustering at the country level, are in parentheses. For the GMM
models, significance levels for the Hansen J-test and test for lack of second-order serial correlation in residuals are reported at the bottom.




                                                                       78
            .7      .6
  Average democracy
           .5
            .4
            .3




                         1960   1970     1980            1990            2000             2010
                                                 Year


Figure 1: Worldwide average democracy. Simple average using our panel of independent countries
from 1960 to 2010. Our democracy index is a dichotomous measure that takes the value of 1
during democratic periods in a country and zero otherwise. See the text for an explanation of its
construction.




                                                79
  Percent change of tax revenue as a percentage of GDP
  −20               0               20              40




                                                         −10      0                       10        20
                                                               Years around democratic transition


Figure 2: Tax revenue as a percentage of GDP around a democratization. The solid line is the
estimated effect of the most recent transition to democracy in each country on tax revenue as a
percentage of GDP. Each point corresponds to the coefficient of the relevant lag of our democracy
variable in a regression of the log of the dependent variable on a full set of lags and leads of
democracy. The contemporary democracy index is the excluded category (the baseline). The
dotted lines show the 95% confidence intervals.




                                                                           80
                                                                                                                                KWT




                Log of tax revenue as percentage of GDP (residual)
                                                             200
                                                                                                                               ZAR
                                                                                                                                URY
                                                                                                    NGA                       KWT
                                                    100                                                             KWT
                                                                                                                                  OMN                                           MMR
                                                                                            SOM          NER                      LBY
                                                                                                SOM        BFA
                                                                                                            UAE YEM    MDG
                                                                                                                       URYCHE      BWA                          NGA            SDN
                                                                                               NGA   NIC
                                                                                                     SLE   RWAHTI
                                                                                                              NER  BHR
                                                                                                                  UGA
                                                                                                                 COG         ZAR               ECU          MOZ
                                                                                                        NPL           SEN
                                                                                                                        SWZ
                                                                                                                       SDN       TURTGO SAU
                                                                                                                                        VEN         NGA             NIC
                                                                                              BOLLBNMOZ
                                                                                                     LSO
                                                                                                       UAE
                                                                                                        CIV MDG
                                                                                                          MDG
                                                                                                            BHRGINRWA
                                                                                                                   HTI BWA COLTCD
                                                                                                                              TGO
                                                                                                                            DEUSYR
                                                                                                                                LBY LBY   YEM
                                                                                                                                        MRT
                                                                                                                                      EGY
                                                                                                                                     TTO                 MOZ STP SUR
                                                                                     URY LBN   BOL       NIC
                                                                                                       IDN    PRY
                                                                                                            MLI
                                                                                                            CAF
                                                                                                            MDG  TCD
                                                                                                                 QATUGA
                                                                                                                  SOM    BDI
                                                                                                                        IDN
                                                                                                                        JOR
                                                                                                                       NER  ZMB
                                                                                                                            CHE
                                                                                                                          DEU
                                                                                                                          TUR
                                                                                                                        MMR
                                                                                                                         SIN   TZA
                                                                                                                             QAT  EGY
                                                                                                                                 CMR
                                                                                                                                 LBY
                                                                                                                                YEM
                                                                                                                                GAB
                                                                                                                                IRQSIN  ECUAGO
                                                                                                                                          JOR PER CYPCHL
                                                                                                                                                      CHL ESPBOL
                                                                                                                                                        SLV
                                                                                                                                                         ARG
                                                                                        LBNCOM
                                                                                           SURGTM
                                                                                             BRA
                                                                                            DOMZWE
                                                                                              ESP
                                                                                               PHLGTM COM
                                                                                                      DJI   CAF
                                                                                                            MRT
                                                                                                           AFG
                                                                                                            GNQ
                                                                                                            BWA
                                                                                                          GIN
                                                                                                            COL
                                                                                                           MWI
                                                                                                          COM
                                                                                                            OMNDZA
                                                                                                               BEN
                                                                                                             ETHCAF
                                                                                                                BFA AGO
                                                                                                                   ETH
                                                                                                                  JPN
                                                                                                                GNQ     ITA
                                                                                                                        NZL
                                                                                                                      SDNLKA
                                                                                                                         MAR
                                                                                                                          SYR
                                                                                                                         CRI
                                                                                                                         AUT
                                                                                                                       CIV
                                                                                                                         DNK FRA
                                                                                                                            IRQ
                                                                                                                              NZL
                                                                                                                              TCD
                                                                                                                             AUS
                                                                                                                              ITA
                                                                                                                            SYR
                                                                                                                              ZAR
                                                                                                                             IDN
                                                                                                                              SWE
                                                                                                                            CIV
                                                                                                                             SYC
                                                                                                                              DNK SAU
                                                                                                                                   ZAR
                                                                                                                                 IRN
                                                                                                                                 GAB
                                                                                                                                 VEN
                                                                                                                                PER
                                                                                                                                  JOR
                                                                                                                                  TCD
                                                                                                                                 IND
                                                                                                                               AFG
                                                                                                                               JPNMYS
                                                                                                                                 COL  NZL
                                                                                                                                      GAB
                                                                                                                                     BFA ISL
                                                                                                                                       SYC
                                                                                                                                         DZA
                                                                                                                                         INDBWA
                                                                                                                                            GRC  GMB
                                                                                                                                               URYDOM
                                                                                                                                                URY   THA
                                                                                                                                                     KOR
                                                                                                                                                       ESP
                                                                                                                                                        PRT  PHL
                                                                                                                                                           ESP
                                                                                                                                                             ARGNGA  LBNGHA
                                                                                                                                                                     IDN
                                                                                                                                                                   PAK
                                                                                                                                                                  BEN     SOM SLE
                                                                                      CHL ARG
                                                                                           BRA
                                                                                             ARG
                                                                                            ESP
                                                                                             ZWE
                                                                                           DOM  HND
                                                                                              SLV
                                                                                              NGA   GHA
                                                                                                  HND
                                                                                                  PAN
                                                                                                 PAN
                                                                                                  BOL
                                                                                                 SLV
                                                                                                 PHL
                                                                                                GTM  GHAETH
                                                                                                       ZWE TCD
                                                                                                         YEM
                                                                                                       UGA  CMR
                                                                                                            IRN
                                                                                                          SOM
                                                                                                           LSO
                                                                                                           BDI
                                                                                                         MWI
                                                                                                          CPV
                                                                                                         PRYKEN
                                                                                                            NER
                                                                                                           NPL
                                                                                                         SDNJAM
                                                                                                            PRY
                                                                                                           PRY LBR
                                                                                                             BDI
                                                                                                            CAN   PNG
                                                                                                                 PRY
                                                                                                               COG
                                                                                                               AFG
                                                                                                               NPL  IDN
                                                                                                                  CHN
                                                                                                                  COG  SLE
                                                                                                                       SDN
                                                                                                                       UGA
                                                                                                                     MMR  SEN
                                                                                                                         FRA
                                                                                                                        FIN
                                                                                                                         NLD
                                                                                                                        ISL
                                                                                                                       MEX
                                                                                                                         LUX
                                                                                                                         USA
                                                                                                                         TUN
                                                                                                                       CHE   PER
                                                                                                                            IND
                                                                                                                            LUX
                                                                                                                          BRB
                                                                                                                          MEX
                                                                                                                        SWETTO
                                                                                                                         KEN
                                                                                                                         BEL
                                                                                                                       IND     CHN
                                                                                                                             NZL
                                                                                                                             AUT DNK
                                                                                                                                FJI
                                                                                                                              FIN
                                                                                                                              ISL
                                                                                                                               BLZ
                                                                                                                             BHS
                                                                                                                              AUS
                                                                                                                               TTO
                                                                                                                              AUT
                                                                                                                            OMN
                                                                                                                             JOR
                                                                                                                              NLD
                                                                                                                              FRA
                                                                                                                              CAN
                                                                                                                             SAU
                                                                                                                               MAR
                                                                                                                               IRL  GAB
                                                                                                                                  DNK
                                                                                                                                  EGY
                                                                                                                                  IRL
                                                                                                                                    IRN
                                                                                                                                  FIN
                                                                                                                                  SWE
                                                                                                                                 SYR
                                                                                                                                TUN
                                                                                                                                SWZ
                                                                                                                                  FRA
                                                                                                                                  ITA
                                                                                                                                  AUT
                                                                                                                                  ERI
                                                                                                                                 ISR
                                                                                                                                MUS
                                                                                                                                SAU
                                                                                                                                 MYS
                                                                                                                                  EGY
                                                                                                                                  TUN
                                                                                                                                 NLD
                                                                                                                               NLD
                                                                                                                                FRA
                                                                                                                                 NZL
                                                                                                                                  NOR
                                                                                                                                BRB
                                                                                                                                  LUX  LBR
                                                                                                                                     MYS
                                                                                                                                     BHS
                                                                                                                                   AUS
                                                                                                                                    CHN
                                                                                                                                     NLDAFG
                                                                                                                                       ISR
                                                                                                                                      NLD
                                                                                                                                    BGD
                                                                                                                                    GIN   FJI
                                                                                                                                        TGO
                                                                                                                                        QAT
                                                                                                                                        TZA
                                                                                                                                        CAN
                                                                                                                                        FIN
                                                                                                                                      KEN
                                                                                                                                     DNK
                                                                                                                                     AUT
                                                                                                                                     CHN
                                                                                                                                       RWA
                                                                                                                                      FRA  THA
                                                                                                                                           GRC
                                                                                                                                          TTO
                                                                                                                                           PNG
                                                                                                                                          BHR     THA
                                                                                                                                                URY
                                                                                                                                              GRC
                                                                                                                                                DOM  CYP
                                                                                                                                                     ECU
                                                                                                                                                    GMB
                                                                                                                                                    GMB  DOM
                                                                                                                                                        BRA
                                                                                                                                                        CYP
                                                                                                                                                        GTM
                                                                                                                                                       KOR
                                                                                                                                                       PHL  PRT
                                                                                                                                                           BRA NPL
                                                                                                                                                                MLI
                                                                                                                                                              GNB
                                                                                                                                                             KOR
                                                                                                                                                              MWI
                                                                                                                                                            GNB  NER
                                                                                                                                                               BEN
                                                                                                                                                              CPV
                                                                                                                                                               NPL
                                                                                                                                                                MWIMDG
                                                                                                                                                                 PAN
                                                                                                                                                                ZAF  CIV
                                                                                                                                                                      LBNGHA
                                                                                                                                                                           COG UGA
                                                                                            PRT
                                                                                           ARGSUR
                                                                                            PAN PAN
                                                                                               KOR
                                                                                              PAN
                                                                                             ESP   SLV
                                                                                                 KORCPV
                                                                                                     PAK
                                                                                                    GNB
                                                                                                  KOR   ZAF
                                                                                                        MEXSWZ
                                                                                                         STP
                                                                                                           COG
                                                                                                         GNB
                                                                                                        PAK
                                                                                                        SEN
                                                                                                          SWZ IND
                                                                                                            JPN
                                                                                                            TTO
                                                                                                            SYR
                                                                                                            ISL
                                                                                                           LBR
                                                                                                          ETH
                                                                                                           DZA
                                                                                                            GBR
                                                                                                            ZAF
                                                                                                           COG
                                                                                                           MLI   MUS
                                                                                                                 PRY
                                                                                                               ZAF
                                                                                                             MAR
                                                                                                            CHN
                                                                                                            ZAF
                                                                                                           IND
                                                                                                         BEN    IRN
                                                                                                              STP
                                                                                                               ISR
                                                                                                               KEN
                                                                                                               CANNER
                                                                                                                IDN
                                                                                                               JAMCMR
                                                                                                                 MEX
                                                                                                                BRB
                                                                                                               HTI
                                                                                                              PNG
                                                                                                               MYS   IDN
                                                                                                                     MLT
                                                                                                                   MWI
                                                                                                                    MMR
                                                                                                                      NAM
                                                                                                                     SEN
                                                                                                                    MEX   VEN
                                                                                                                        MMR
                                                                                                                         NAM
                                                                                                                         AFG
                                                                                                                          BGD
                                                                                                                         AUS
                                                                                                                         NOR
                                                                                                                         MYS
                                                                                                                       SLE
                                                                                                                        SDN
                                                                                                                          LBR
                                                                                                                         MRT
                                                                                                                        CIV
                                                                                                                         GBR
                                                                                                                          LKA
                                                                                                                          DZA CRI
                                                                                                                              DNK
                                                                                                                             IRL
                                                                                                                           GNQ
                                                                                                                         JAM  USA
                                                                                                                              FIN
                                                                                                                              AFG
                                                                                                                               NOR
                                                                                                                               IRQ
                                                                                                                              TUN
                                                                                                                              JAM
                                                                                                                              BEL
                                                                                                                              GBR
                                                                                                                              NOR BEL
                                                                                                                                BDI
                                                                                                                                ZMB
                                                                                                                                CHN
                                                                                                                               GBR
                                                                                                                              COL
                                                                                                                               LUX
                                                                                                                                 GIN
                                                                                                                                 AFG
                                                                                                                               MLT  ISR
                                                                                                                                  JAM
                                                                                                                                   JPN
                                                                                                                                  VEN
                                                                                                                                  MLT
                                                                                                                                  NOR
                                                                                                                                 CRI
                                                                                                                                 LKA
                                                                                                                                  GBR
                                                                                                                                 GAB
                                                                                                                                 AUT
                                                                                                                                  CAN
                                                                                                                                 USA
                                                                                                                               EGYMRT NOR
                                                                                                                                      GIN
                                                                                                                                     USA
                                                                                                                                     TUN
                                                                                                                                    IND
                                                                                                                                   CRIIRL
                                                                                                                                    BRB
                                                                                                                                  SAU  AUT
                                                                                                                                     CMR
                                                                                                                                    MUS
                                                                                                                                     BEL
                                                                                                                                    SWE
                                                                                                                                   IRQ
                                                                                                                                   DEU USA
                                                                                                                                     NORMAR
                                                                                                                                       DEU
                                                                                                                                     FIN
                                                                                                                                      SWE
                                                                                                                                       ITA
                                                                                                                                        CHE
                                                                                                                                       MUS
                                                                                                                                      FJI
                                                                                                                                        SIN
                                                                                                                                      AUS
                                                                                                                                     IRQ
                                                                                                                                    GIN     GRC
                                                                                                                                             TUR
                                                                                                                                           CYP
                                                                                                                                          BHS
                                                                                                                                        BDI
                                                                                                                                       JPN
                                                                                                                                      CHE      SWZ
                                                                                                                                             CHL  PER
                                                                                                                                                 PRT
                                                                                                                                                   GMB
                                                                                                                                                 ARG
                                                                                                                                                PER
                                                                                                                                                BRA    ECU
                                                                                                                                                      GTM
                                                                                                                                                     PHL
                                                                                                                                                      HND
                                                                                                                                                       THA STP
                                                                                                                                                           NIC
                                                                                                                                                          PRT
                                                                                                                                                        CHL  HND
                                                                                                                                                           GHA
                                                                                                                                                            PAK  ZAF
                                                                                                                                                                ETH
                                                                                                                                                                  MLI
                                                                                                                                                                  CAF
                                                                                                                                                                 BOL
                                                                                                                                                                PAN   SENPAK
                                            0



                                                                           GMB GRCTUR  ECU
                                                                                     CHL
                                                                                   PERTHA  GHA
                                                                                         PAK   GTM
                                                                                             PRT
                                                                                             SUR
                                                                                           PRT     HND
                                                                                                   PHL
                                                                                                 BOL
                                                                                                SLV
                                                                                                  SLV
                                                                                                KOR   PAK
                                                                                                        LSO
                                                                                                       CPV
                                                                                                         MMR
                                                                                                         LBNCAF
                                                                                                            USA
                                                                                                            ISR
                                                                                                           GNB SWE
                                                                                                               MRT
                                                                                                               HTI
                                                                                                               TTO
                                                                                                             BRB
                                                                                                               SYR
                                                                                                               MWI
                                                                                                               GBR
                                                                                                              AGO
                                                                                                               LSO
                                                                                                             TZA
                                                                                                               MLI
                                                                                                               ZAF
                                                                                                               BEL
                                                                                                               BHS
                                                                                                             CRI
                                                                                                             IRL
                                                                                                             COL
                                                                                                            BEN
                                                                                                            BEL
                                                                                                           MAR PRY
                                                                                                               CAF
                                                                                                               CAF
                                                                                                               DJI
                                                                                                               VEN
                                                                                                             BEN
                                                                                                               USABHSLUX
                                                                                                                   MLI
                                                                                                                   NPL
                                                                                                                   DJI
                                                                                                                 BEN
                                                                                                                   DJI
                                                                                                                  TGO
                                                                                                                 FJI
                                                                                                                  SYC
                                                                                                                 TZA
                                                                                                                MLI  MEX
                                                                                                                    SDN CAN
                                                                                                                      LKAMLT
                                                                                                                          JPN
                                                                                                                          FJI
                                                                                                                          MUS
                                                                                                                         GRC BGD
                                                                                                                             LKA
                                                                                                                            MLT
                                                                                                                          ISR  MYS
                                                                                                                               BEL
                                                                                                                              KEN
                                                                                                                             SIN
                                                                                                                           IRN
                                                                                                                           LKA LBR
                                                                                                                             MYS
                                                                                                                              MRT
                                                                                                                            PNG
                                                                                                                            MEX
                                                                                                                            ZMB
                                                                                                                          GAB
                                                                                                                         IRL
                                                                                                                          IRQ BHR
                                                                                                                             VEN
                                                                                                                           TGOIDN
                                                                                                                            SEN
                                                                                                                           ZMB    BFA
                                                                                                                                 USA
                                                                                                                                  TZA
                                                                                                                                  FIN
                                                                                                                                 KEN
                                                                                                                                  MAR
                                                                                                                                AUS
                                                                                                                                  BEL
                                                                                                                                 UAE
                                                                                                                                 NZL
                                                                                                                               OMN
                                                                                                                                 BFA TZA
                                                                                                                                   ISL
                                                                                                                                 GBR
                                                                                                                                 ISL
                                                                                                                                JOR TZA
                                                                                                                                    DZA
                                                                                                                                    IRQ
                                                                                                                                    JOR
                                                                                                                                   ISR
                                                                                                                                 JPN
                                                                                                                               RWA
                                                                                                                                 IRL
                                                                                                                               DEU
                                                                                                                                LBR
                                                                                                                                  PNGGBR
                                                                                                                                     MAR
                                                                                                                                      CMR
                                                                                                                                    OMN
                                                                                                                                  LBR
                                                                                                                                    GNQ  GRC
                                                                                                                                       BEL
                                                                                                                                       AUS
                                                                                                                                       GBR
                                                                                                                                      JAM
                                                                                                                                     MYS
                                                                                                                                       MUS
                                                                                                                                     DNK
                                                                                                                                   FJITUN
                                                                                                                                      FRA
                                                                                                                                    AGO NZL
                                                                                                                                       IRL
                                                                                                                                      SIN
                                                                                                                                      CRI
                                                                                                                                    CAN
                                                                                                                                  ISL
                                                                                                                                    LBR
                                                                                                                                  USA
                                                                                                                                 MAR   SWE
                                                                                                                                     VEN   CYP
                                                                                                                                         KEN
                                                                                                                                         ITA
                                                                                                                                        JAM THA  TUR ECU
                                                                                                                                                    CHL
                                                                                                                                                     GMB
                                                                                                                                                   TUR
                                                                                                                                                  TUR
                                                                                                                                                ESP
                                                                                                                                                 BRA     THA
                                                                                                                                                       HND
                                                                                                                                                         CYP
                                                                                                                                                       PAN    SLV
                                                                                                                                                            CPV
                                                                                                                                                             LSO
                                                                                                                                                             LSO ETH
                                                                                                                                                               HND   DJI
                                                                                                                                                                   COMMEX
                                                                                                                                                                    NER   ZWE
                                                                                                                                                                           ZWE
                                                                            GMB           BRAHND
                                                                                        ECU
                                                                                        CYP
                                                                                        DOM
                                                                                       THA        PHL
                                                                                                 HND
                                                                                                   KOR
                                                                                                  BOL
                                                                                                 GHA  STP
                                                                                                      GHA
                                                                                                      LBN
                                                                                                      PAK  NIC
                                                                                                         MOZ
                                                                                                         PAK
                                                                                                        MLI
                                                                                                        SLE
                                                                                                         COG  ITA
                                                                                                            ZWE
                                                                                                            HTI
                                                                                                              ISL
                                                                                                             VEN ZWE
                                                                                                               IRL
                                                                                                               OMN
                                                                                                                 CIV
                                                                                                               TUN
                                                                                                              SIN
                                                                                                             ITA
                                                                                                               ETH
                                                                                                               GAB
                                                                                                               IRQ
                                                                                                               ZWE
                                                                                                               NOR
                                                                                                              CRI
                                                                                                              MUS
                                                                                                            SWE
                                                                                                              FJI ZAF
                                                                                                                 EGY
                                                                                                                   SYC
                                                                                                                 BEN
                                                                                                               DEU
                                                                                                               AUSNPL
                                                                                                                  SLE
                                                                                                                   LBYZMB
                                                                                                                    MMR  GIN
                                                                                                                       ERI
                                                                                                                       UAE
                                                                                                                        BLZ
                                                                                                                       MEX
                                                                                                                     UGA
                                                                                                                       SEN
                                                                                                                      BGD YEM EGY
                                                                                                                             ITAGNQ
                                                                                                                               YEM
                                                                                                                               ISR
                                                                                                                              LUX
                                                                                                                                TGO
                                                                                                                               DZA
                                                                                                                              ZMB
                                                                                                                             ISR
                                                                                                                            MLT
                                                                                                                              IRN
                                                                                                                                CAN
                                                                                                                                COLCAN
                                                                                                                                  QAT
                                                                                                                                 AGOTGO
                                                                                                                                  DZA
                                                                                                                                  MRT
                                                                                                                                CMR
                                                                                                                               BFA MAR
                                                                                                                                  RWA
                                                                                                                                    BDI
                                                                                                                                    SIN BRB PRT
                                                                                                                                       DEU
                                                                                                                                     PNG
                                                                                                                                      NAM
                                                                                                                                      CRI
                                                                                                                                    TCD
                                                                                                                                    COL
                                                                                                                                   JAM
                                                                                                                                 LKA
                                                                                                                                  BDI   JPN
                                                                                                                                      BFA
                                                                                                                                       GNQ
                                                                                                                                       IND
                                                                                                                                       IRN
                                                                                                                                     SYR
                                                                                                                                     GRC          PER
                                                                                                                                                 ESP SLV BRADOM
                                                                                                                                                             GTMMDG GTM
                                                                                                                                                                   HTI   HTI
                                                                                    CYP
                                                                                      CYP
                                                                                    CHL  ARG
                                                                                          PRT
                                                                                            COM  PHLMWI
                                                                                                HTI        BWA
                                                                                                          CPV
                                                                                                          MDG  SAU
                                                                                                             NOR
                                                                                                              TGO
                                                                                                              SIN
                                                                                                             JOR
                                                                                                               CHE
                                                                                                               FIN
                                                                                                               BEN ZAF
                                                                                                                  MLI
                                                                                                                    CIV
                                                                                                                   SOM
                                                                                                                   NPL  CIV
                                                                                                                       SEN
                                                                                                                      SLE   GAB
                                                                                                                          EGY
                                                                                                                            YEM
                                                                                                                           LUX
                                                                                                                          BFA
                                                                                                                        TZA
                                                                                                                         JPN SWE SAU
                                                                                                                                 MRT
                                                                                                                                 BHS
                                                                                                                               ZAR
                                                                                                                               CHE
                                                                                                                             TTO     IRN
                                                                                                                                    GIN
                                                                                                                                   KWTCOL
                                                                                                                                    KEN
                                                                                                                                   CHE
                                                                                                                                  ITACOL
                                                                                                                                   BHR
                                                                                                                                 RWA DZA
                                                                                                                                     SWZ
                                                                                                                                       RWA
                                                                                                                                     OMN
                                                                                                                                    MRT  QAT
                                                                                                                                          AFGGMBPERUAESUR ARGDOMPHL
                                                                                                                                                                  PRY
                                                                                     ECU DOM
                                                                                    THA
                                                                                   PER
                                                                                 TUR        BRA NGASTP
                                                                                                 COG
                                                                                                       NIC
                                                                                                      GNBHTI
                                                                                                          LBN
                                                                                                        GHA
                                                                                                        NIC
                                                                                                          MDG
                                                                                                         CAF
                                                                                                               NLD
                                                                                                             TUN
                                                                                                              DEU
                                                                                                             QAT SAU
                                                                                                                NZL
                                                                                                                FRA
                                                                                                               AUS
                                                                                                               AUT
                                                                                                               FIN
                                                                                                               ETHSOM
                                                                                                                  MWI
                                                                                                                 IRQ
                                                                                                                 LSO
                                                                                                               CHE
                                                                                                               SEN
                                                                                                               DNK
                                                                                                               LBY
                                                                                                               MYS
                                                                                                               AUT
                                                                                                                      GRC
                                                                                                                    ETH  TCD
                                                                                                                        SAU LBY
                                                                                                                           CMR
                                                                                                                         CHN
                                                                                                                         ZAR
                                                                                                                         TGO
                                                                                                                       CIV  AGO
                                                                                                                            CMR
                                                                                                                                OMN
                                                                                                                              LBYCHN
                                                                                                                               OMN
                                                                                                                                   ISL
                                                                                                                                  JOR
                                                                                                                                          SYC
                                                                                                                                        SYR
                                                                                                                                        BDI
                                                                                                                                     TCD CHL
                                                                                                                                    TTO         ARGTURSUR
                                                                                                                                                       BOL
                                                                                                                                                          NIC
                                                                                                                                                        PAN     KOR
                                                                                                                                                                SLVCAF COM
                                                                                                                                                                   COG     SOM
                                                                                                GTM
                                                                                                  NIC          DNK
                                                                                                               NLD
                                                                                                                 MMR
                                                                                                                NPL
                                                                                                               FRA  SDN   RWA VEN
                                                                                                                                BFA KWT
                                                                                                                                    SYR
                                                                                                                                   BWA
                                                                                                     UGA EGY    GAB
                                                                                                              NZL     SLE       GIN
                                                                                                                                  YEM
                                                                                                                                AFG
                                                                                                                                     TCD  YEM URY BOL
                                                                                                                                        SWZ                     NGA
                                                                                                                                                                  PRY LBN
                                                                                                           MOZ     ZAR UGA       IND
                                                                                                                               LBY
                                                                                                                             ZAR        UAE        ECU
                                                                                                    NER     MOZ    ZAR
                                 −100




                                                                                                         MMR                         BHR
                                                                                          ESP                                              BWA
                                                                                                                                             URY
                                                                                                      SDN             KWT
                                                                                                              NER
                                                                                                            SOM MDG  IDN KWT
                                                                                   URY
                                                                                                               KWT
                        −200




                                                                                                   NGA
              −300




                                                                      −1                     −.5                  0                               .5                        1
                                                                                                          Democracy (residual)
                                                               100
               Log of tax revenue as a percentage of GDP (residual)




                                                                                                                       MDG LBY     BWA
                                                                                                                YEMURY
                                                                                                              HTIBHR CHE ECU
                                                                                                          RWA NER UGA
                                                                                                                 COG         ZAR
                                                                                                                      SEN
                                                                                                                       SWZTUR                       NGA
                                                                                                                                        SAU
                                                    50




                                                                                                       NPL             SDN          TGO VEN
                                                                                                    MOZ               BWATCD  TGO         YEM            MOZ
                                                                                                     LSO
                                                                                                       UAE
                                                                                                       CIV  MDG
                                                                                                          MDG     RWA
                                                                                                                   HTI COL     SYR      MRT                      SUR
                                                                                                   LBN BHR     GIN
                                                                                                              PRY   UGA  BDIDEU
                                                                                                                            ZMB LBY LBY
                                                                                                                                  EGY
                                                                                                                                 CMR  EGY
                                                                                                                                     TTO                       STP
                                                                                                                                                          ESPBOL
                                                                                          LBN BOL IDN    NICMLI
                                                                                                            CAF  TCD
                                                                                                                 QAT    IDN
                                                                                                                        JOR
                                                                                                                       NER  CHE
                                                                                                                          DEU
                                                                                                                          TUR    LBY
                                                                                                                                YEM
                                                                                                                               TZA SIN  ECUAGOPER CYPCHL
                                                                                              GTM
                                                                                             BRA            MDG
                                                                                                            CAFDZA
                                                                                                               BEN
                                                                                                             ETH  SOM
                                                                                                                    AGO MMR
                                                                                                                         SIN QAT
                                                                                                                             FRA
                                                                                                                            IRQ GAB
                                                                                                                                IRQ
                                                                                                                                  SAU
                                                                                                                                   ZAR SYCJOR
                                                                                                                                         ISLBWA
                                                                                                                                            GRC       CHL
                                                                                                                                                        SLV
                                                                                                                                                         ARG         LBN
                                                                                           COM        COM   MRT
                                                                                                           AFG     ETH  ITA
                                                                                                                        NZL
                                                                                                                         LKA
                                                                                                                         MAR  NZL
                                                                                                                              TCD
                                                                                                                             AUS
                                                                                                                              ITA
                                                                                                                            SYR
                                                                                                                              ZAR
                                                                                                                             IDN IRN  NZL
                                                                                                                                      GABDZA GMB  DOM        PHL              SLE
                                                                                           SUR
                                                                                            DOMZWE
                                                                                              ESP GTM       GNQ
                                                                                                            BWA
                                                                                                          GIN
                                                                                                            COL CAF
                                                                                                                BFA
                                                                                                                  JPN
                                                                                                                GNQ  SDN  SYR
                                                                                                                         CRI
                                                                                                                         AUT  SWE
                                                                                                                            CIV
                                                                                                                             SYC GAB
                                                                                                                                 VEN
                                                                                                                                PER
                                                                                                                                  JOR
                                                                                                                                  TCD
                                                                                                                                 IND
                                                                                                                               AFGMYS    IND URYURY   THA
                                                                                                                                                     KOR
                                                                                                                                                       ESP ESP
                                                                                                                                                             ARGNGAPAK
                                                                                                                                                                  BEN     SOM
                                                                                                                                                                     IDN GHA
                                                                                        LBN
                                                                                          ARG  PHL
                                                                                                HND   DJI
                                                                                                    GHAETH MWI
                                                                                                          COM
                                                                                                            OMN
                                                                                                           TCD
                                                                                                            CMR
                                                                                                            IRN
                                                                                                          SOM          CIV
                                                                                                                         DNK
                                                                                                                       SLE
                                                                                                                       SDNSEN DNK
                                                                                                                               JPN
                                                                                                                             PER COL
                                                                                                                               CHN
                                                                                                                                 DNK
                                                                                                                                  EGY
                                                                                                                                FJI
                                                                                                                              FIN IRLBFA
                                                                                                                                    GAB
                                                                                                                                  DNK  LBRFJI
                                                                                                                                        AFG
                                                                                                                                       ISR THA    THACYPPRT
                                                                                                                                                         DOM
                                                                                                                                                        BRA
                                                                                                                                                        CYP PRT
                                                                                      CHL BRAARG
                                                                                            ESP
                                                                                             ZWE  HNDGHA
                                                                                                       ZWELSO
                                                                                                        PRYBDI
                                                                                                         MWI
                                                                                                         CPVKEN
                                                                                                           NER LBRPNG
                                                                                                                 PRYIDNUGA
                                                                                                                         FRA
                                                                                                                        FIN
                                                                                                                         NLD
                                                                                                                        ISL
                                                                                                                       MEX   NZL
                                                                                                                              ISL
                                                                                                                            IND
                                                                                                                             AUT
                                                                                                                            LUX  SYR
                                                                                                                                TUN
                                                                                                                                SWZ
                                                                                                                               BLZ
                                                                                                                             BHS
                                                                                                                              AUS
                                                                                                                               TTO  IRN
                                                                                                                                  FIN
                                                                                                                                  SWE
                                                                                                                                  FRAMYS
                                                                                                                                     BHS
                                                                                                                                   AUS
                                                                                                                                    CHN
                                                                                                                                  ITA
                                                                                                                                  AUTNLDTGO
                                                                                                                                        QAT
                                                                                                                                        TZA
                                                                                                                                        CAN
                                                                                                                                      NLD  GRC  URY
                                                                                                                                              GRC GMBECU   BRA  MLI
                                                                                                                                                               NPL
                                                                                                                                                              GNB
                                                                                                                                                             KOR
                                                                                                                                                              MWI
                                                                                                                                                            GNB  NER
                                                                                                                                                                BEN
                                                                                                                                                              CPV   MDG  GHA
                                                                                                                                                                     CIV COG UGA
                                                                                           DOMSLV
                                                                                              NGA
                                                                                            PRT
                                                                                                  PAN
                                                                                                 PAN
                                                                                                  BOL
                                                                                                 SLV
                                                                                                 PHL
                                                                                                GTMSLV
                                                                                                    CPVUGA
                                                                                                     PAK
                                                                                                          NPL
                                                                                                         SDN
                                                                                                         YEM
                                                                                                        STP
                                                                                                            JAM
                                                                                                            PRY
                                                                                                          PRY
                                                                                                            CAN
                                                                                                          SWZ
                                                                                                        ZAF    COG
                                                                                                               AFG
                                                                                                             BDI
                                                                                                               NPL
                                                                                                              IND CHN
                                                                                                                  COG
                                                                                                                 MUS MMR
                                                                                                                     IDN
                                                                                                                     MLT
                                                                                                                         LUX
                                                                                                                         USA
                                                                                                                         TUN
                                                                                                                        SWE
                                                                                                                         BEL
                                                                                                                       IND  OMN
                                                                                                                          BRB
                                                                                                                          MEX
                                                                                                                          VEN
                                                                                                                        MMR
                                                                                                                         NAM
                                                                                                                         AFG
                                                                                                                          BGD
                                                                                                                         AUS
                                                                                                                         NOR
                                                                                                                             JOR
                                                                                                                           TTO
                                                                                                                         KEN
                                                                                                                       CHE    NLD
                                                                                                                              FRA
                                                                                                                              CAN
                                                                                                                               NLD
                                                                                                                             SAU
                                                                                                                               MAR
                                                                                                                               IRLERI
                                                                                                                                 ISR
                                                                                                                                MUS
                                                                                                                                SAU
                                                                                                                              AUTMYS
                                                                                                                                BRB
                                                                                                                              DNK
                                                                                                                               GBR
                                                                                                                              COL
                                                                                                                                    BGD
                                                                                                                                    GIN
                                                                                                                                  EGY
                                                                                                                                  TUN
                                                                                                                                 NLD
                                                                                                                                FRA
                                                                                                                                 NZL
                                                                                                                                  NOR
                                                                                                                                  LUX
                                                                                                                                 CHN
                                                                                                                                  BEL
                                                                                                                                BDI
                                                                                                                                ZMB
                                                                                                                              CRI NLD
                                                                                                                                    ISR
                                                                                                                                  JAM
                                                                                                                                   JPN
                                                                                                                                  VEN
                                                                                                                                CHN
                                                                                                                                  TUN
                                                                                                                                  MLT
                                                                                                                                        FIN
                                                                                                                                      KEN
                                                                                                                                     DNK
                                                                                                                                     AUT
                                                                                                                                     CHN
                                                                                                                                       RWA
                                                                                                                                      FRA
                                                                                                                                      NOR
                                                                                                                                      GIN
                                                                                                                                     USA  TTO
                                                                                                                                           PNG
                                                                                                                                          BHR
                                                                                                                                            GRC
                                                                                                                                             TURDOMGMB  GTM
                                                                                                                                                       KOR
                                                                                                                                                       PHL STP
                                                                                                                                                           NIC
                                                                                                                                                             HND
                                                                                                                                                                NPL
                                                                                                                                                                 MWI
                                                                                                                                                                  PAN
                                                                                                                                                                ZAF
                                                                                                                                                                  ZAF
                                                                                                                                                                ETH   LBNPAK
                                                                                           ARGSUR
                                                                                                PAN
                                                                                               KOR
                                                                                                 KORGNB SEN
                                                                                                       MEX COG
                                                                                                         GNB
                                                                                                       PAKSWZ STP
                                                                                                             MAR
                                                                                                            CHN
                                                                                                           ZAF
                                                                                                           IND
                                                                                                         BENJPN  PRY
                                                                                                               ZAF
                                                                                                                IRN
                                                                                                                IDN
                                                                                                               JAM
                                                                                                               ISR
                                                                                                               KEN MWI
                                                                                                                  NER
                                                                                                                    MMR
                                                                                                                      NAM
                                                                                                                     SEN
                                                                                                                    MEX  MYS
                                                                                                                       SLE GNQ
                                                                                                                         JAM
                                                                                                                        SDN
                                                                                                                          LBR  LUX
                                                                                                                             IRL
                                                                                                                              FIN
                                                                                                                              AFGAFG
                                                                                                                                 GIN
                                                                                                                               MLT
                                                                                                                              USA
                                                                                                                               NOR
                                                                                                                               IRQ
                                                                                                                              TUN NOR
                                                                                                                                 CRI
                                                                                                                                 LKA
                                                                                                                                  GBRTUN
                                                                                                                                    IND
                                                                                                                                   CRIIRL
                                                                                                                                    BRB
                                                                                                                                  SAU  AUT
                                                                                                                                     CMR
                                                                                                                                    MUS
                                                                                                                                     BEL
                                                                                                                                    SWEUSA
                                                                                                                                     NORMAR
                                                                                                                                       DEU
                                                                                                                                     FIN
                                                                                                                                      SWE      SWZPER
                                                                                                                                                 PRT   ECU
                                                                                                                                                      GTM
                                                                                                                                                     PHL  PRT
                                                                                                                                                        CHLGHA    MLISEN
                                                                                                                                                                  CAF
                                                                                            PAN
                                                                                              PAN
                                                                                             ESP  KOR       TTO
                                                                                                            SYR
                                                                                                            ISL
                                                                                                           LBR
                                                                                                          ETH
                                                                                                          DZA
                                                                                                            GBR
                                                                                                            ZAF
                                                                                                           COG CANCMR
                                                                                                                 MEX
                                                                                                                BRB
                                                                                                               HTI
                                                                                                              PNG        MRT
                                                                                                                        CIV
                                                                                                                         GBR
                                                                                                                          LKA
                                                                                                                          DZA JAM
                                                                                                                              BEL
                                                                                                                              GBR
                                                                                                                              NORGAB
                                                                                                                                   IRQ
                                                                                                                                   DEU
                                                                                                                                 AUT
                                                                                                                                  CAN
                                                                                                                                 USA
                                                                                                                               EGY  GIN
                                                                                                                                  MRT  ITA
                                                                                                                                        CHE
                                                                                                                                       MUS
                                                                                                                                      FJI
                                                                                                                                        SIN
                                                                                                                                      AUS
                                                                                                                                     IRQBDI
                                                                                                                                       JPN
                                                                                                                                      CHE  CYP
                                                                                                                                          BHSCHLPER
                                                                                                                                                BRAGMB
                                                                                                                                                 ARG  HND
                                                                                                                                                       THA  PAK  BOL
                                                                                                                                                                PAN
                                         0




                                                                                  TUR
                                                                           GMB GRC PER ECU GHA GTM HNDPAK  MLI
                                                                                                            CAFMYS
                                                                                                               SWE
                                                                                                               MRT
                                                                                                               HTI
                                                                                                               TTO
                                                                                                             BRB
                                                                                                               SYR
                                                                                                               MWI
                                                                                                               GBR
                                                                                                              AGO
                                                                                                               LSOBHSLUX
                                                                                                                   MLI
                                                                                                                   NPL
                                                                                                                   DJI  CAN
                                                                                                                         MLT
                                                                                                                          ISR
                                                                                                                           IRN DEU
                                                                                                                             BGD
                                                                                                                             LKA
                                                                                                                            MLTMYS
                                                                                                                               BEL
                                                                                                                              KEN BFA
                                                                                                                                 USA
                                                                                                                                  TZA
                                                                                                                                 GBR
                                                                                                                                 ISL
                                                                                                                                JOR  TZA
                                                                                                                                   ISL
                                                                                                                                    TZA
                                                                                                                                    DZA
                                                                                                                                    IRQ
                                                                                                                                    JOR
                                                                                                                                   ISR
                                                                                                                                   FJI   GRC
                                                                                                                                       BEL
                                                                                                                                       AUS
                                                                                                                                       GBR
                                                                                                                                      JAM
                                                                                                                                     MYS
                                                                                                                                       MUS
                                                                                                                                     DNK   CYP   TUR ECU
                                                                                                                                                    CHL  THA
                                                                                                                                                       HND    SLVETH
                                                                                                                                                               HND   DJI
                                                                                     CHL
                                                                                      THAPAKPRT
                                                                                             SURSLVPHL
                                                                                                 BOL    LSO
                                                                                                       CPV   TZA BEN
                                                                                                               MLI
                                                                                                               ZAF
                                                                                                               BEL    LKA JPN
                                                                                                                          FJI
                                                                                                                          MUSSIN
                                                                                                                           IRN
                                                                                                                           LKA
                                                                                                                             MYS JPN
                                                                                                                               RWA
                                                                                                                               LBR
                                                                                                                                 IRL
                                                                                                                               DEU
                                                                                                                                LBR   TUN
                                                                                                                                      FRA
                                                                                                                                    AGO
                                                                                                                                  PNG
                                                                                                                                  FINGBR
                                                                                                                                     MAR
                                                                                                                                      CMRKENTHA      GMB
                                                                                                                                                   TUR   CYP
                                                                                                                                                       PAN  CPV
                                                                                                                                                             LSO      MEX
                                                                                                                                                                    COM   ZWE
                                                                                           PRTKOR
                                                                                          BRA
                                                                                        ECU
                                                                                                  SLV LBNMMRBEN
                                                                                                            BEL
                                                                                                           MAR
                                                                                                            USA
                                                                                                            ISR
                                                                                                           GNB BHS
                                                                                                             CRI
                                                                                                             IRL
                                                                                                             COL
                                                                                                               PRY
                                                                                                               CAF
                                                                                                               CAF
                                                                                                               DJI
                                                                                                             BEN
                                                                                                              SIN
                                                                                                             ITA
                                                                                                                   DJI
                                                                                                                  TGO
                                                                                                                 FJI
                                                                                                               VENSYC
                                                                                                                 TZA
                                                                                                               USA
                                                                                                                MLI
                                                                                                                 ZWE
                                                                                                               IRL
                                                                                                               OMN
                                                                                                                 CIV
                                                                                                               TUN
                                                                                                                     MEX
                                                                                                                    SDN
                                                                                                                  ZAF    IRL
                                                                                                                         GRC
                                                                                                                          IRQ
                                                                                                                           TGO
                                                                                                                         GIN
                                                                                                                              MRT
                                                                                                                            PNG
                                                                                                                            MEX
                                                                                                                            ZMB
                                                                                                                          GAB BHR
                                                                                                                            SEN
                                                                                                                           ZMBEGY
                                                                                                                             ITA
                                                                                                                                 KEN
                                                                                                                                  MAR
                                                                                                                                 NZL
                                                                                                                                 BFA
                                                                                                                               OMN
                                                                                                                             VEN
                                                                                                                              IDN
                                                                                                                                GNQ
                                                                                                                               YEM
                                                                                                                               ISR
                                                                                                                                    OMN
                                                                                                                                  LBR
                                                                                                                                AUS GNQ
                                                                                                                                  BEL
                                                                                                                                 UAELBR
                                                                                                                                  USA
                                                                                                                                 MAR
                                                                                                                                  LBRVEN
                                                                                                                                   CAN
                                                                                                                                  QAT
                                                                                                                                 AGO
                                                                                                                                        NZL
                                                                                                                                         ITA ESP
                                                                                                                                       IRL
                                                                                                                                      SIN
                                                                                                                                      CRI
                                                                                                                                    CAN
                                                                                                                                  ISL  SWE
                                                                                                                                        JAM
                                                                                                                                        BRB
                                                                                                                                                  TUR
                                                                                                                                                 BRA SLV DOM LSO MDGNER ZWE
                                                                            GMB         CYP       PHL
                                                                                                 HND
                                                                                                   KOR    NIC
                                                                                                         MOZ
                                                                                                         PAK
                                                                                                       MLI
                                                                                                       SLE  ZWE
                                                                                                            HTIETH
                                                                                                              ITAEGY
                                                                                                               GAB
                                                                                                              ISL
                                                                                                             VEN
                                                                                                               IRQ
                                                                                                               ZWE
                                                                                                               NOR SYCZMB
                                                                                                                    MMRERI
                                                                                                                       UAE
                                                                                                                        BLZ
                                                                                                                       MEX
                                                                                                                     UGA       BFA
                                                                                                                              LUX
                                                                                                                                TGO TGO
                                                                                                                                  DZA
                                                                                                                                  MRT
                                                                                                                                CMRMAR
                                                                                                                                  RWA
                                                                                                                                    SINDEU
                                                                                                                                     PNG
                                                                                                                                      NAM
                                                                                                                                    BDI GNQ PRT
                                                                                                                                      CRI         PER        GTM    GTM
                                                                                        DOM           STP
                                                                                                      GHA     CRI
                                                                                                              MUS
                                                                                                            SWE
                                                                                                              FJIBEN
                                                                                                                  NPL
                                                                                                                  SLE  SEN
                                                                                                                     BGD  YEM  DZA
                                                                                                                              ZMB
                                                                                                                             ISR
                                                                                                                            MLT
                                                                                                                              IRN
                                                                                                                                CAN
                                                                                                                                COL TCD
                                                                                                                                    COL JPN
                                                                                                                                      BFA
                                                                                                                                       GNQ
                                                                                                                                       IND       ESP       BRA           HTI
                                                                                    CYPTHA
                                                                                         ARG HND  BOL
                                                                                                 GHA  LBN
                                                                                                 PHLMWI COG
                                                                                                      PAK BWA  DEU
                                                                                                               AUS
                                                                                                               SAU
                                                                                                             NOR   LBY
                                                                                                                   ZAF
                                                                                                                  MLI
                                                                                                                    CIVCIV
                                                                                                                      SEN   GAB
                                                                                                                          EGY
                                                                                                                            YEM
                                                                                                                           LUX
                                                                                                                                   JAM
                                                                                                                                 LKA
                                                                                                                                  BDI
                                                                                                                                 SAU
                                                                                                                                 MRT
                                                                                                                                 BHS   IRN
                                                                                                                                     SYR
                                                                                                                                     GRC
                                                                                                                                     IRN
                                                                                                                                    GIN
                                                                                                                                   KWT
                                                                                                                                   CHE
                                                                                                                                  ITA COL
                                                                                                                                    KEN
                                                                                                                                     COL        PERUAE ARG   DOM
                                                                                                                                                                   HTI
                                                                                      CYPPRTCOM HTI       CPVJOR
                                                                                                              TGO
                                                                                                              SIN
                                                                                                             JOR
                                                                                                               CHE    SLE
                                                                                                                       TZABFA  ZAR
                                                                                                                             SWE
                                                                                                                               CHE
                                                                                                                             TTO   BHR
                                                                                                                                 RWA DZA
                                                                                                                                     SWZ
                                                                                                                                       RWA
                                                                                                                                         QAT
                                                                                                                                          AFG                   PHLPRY
                                                                                    CHL
                                                                                    THA    DOM           MDG
                                                                                                       NIC
                                                                                                      GNB      FIN
                                                                                                               BEN
                                                                                                               NLD SOM
                                                                                                                   NPL
                                                                                                                 SAU
                                                                                                                NZL   GRC
                                                                                                                    ETH  JPN
                                                                                                                         TCD    OMN  OMN
                                                                                                                                    MRT   SYC GMB SURNIC
                                                                                                         HTI    FRA
                                                                                                               AUS
                                                                                                               AUT
                                                                                                               FIN
                                                                                                               ETH          LBY
                                                                                                                              LBYCHN
                                                                                                                                   ISL  SYR
                                                                                   PER
                                                                                     ECU BRA              LBN
                                                                                                        GHA
                                                                                                        NIC  TUN
                                                                                                              DEU
                                                                                                             QAT  SOM
                                                                                                                  MWISAU
                                                                                                                 IRQ
                                                                                                                 LSO       CMR
                                                                                                                            AGO         BDI        TUR  PAN
                                                                                                                                                      SUR
                                                                                                NGA       MDG  CHE
                                                                                                               SEN
                                                                                                               DNK
                                                                                                               LBY       CHN
                                                                                                                         ZAR
                                                                                                                         TGO      JOR
                                                                                                   STPCAFAUT
                                                                                                 COG
                                                                                                GTM            MYS     CIVCMR  OMN   TCD CHL
                                                                                                                                    TTO         ARG BOL
                            −50




                                                                                                  NIC          DNK
                                                                                                               NLD
                                                                                                                 MMR      RWA VEN
                                                                                                                                BFA KWT
                                                                                                                                    SYR
                                                                                                                NPL
                                                                                                               FRA
                                                                                                                GAB SDN GIN        BWA
                                                                                                                                     TCD
                                                                                                     UGA NZL         SLE YEM              YEM
                                                                                                              EGY               AFG     SWZ
                                                                                                                       UGA       IND
                                                                                                           MOZZAR LBYUAE
                                                                                                            MOZ              ZAR
                                                                                                                   ZAR
                                                                                                                                     BHR
              −100




                                                                      −1                     −.5                  0                               .5                        1
                                                                                                          Democracy (residual)


Figure 3: Scatter plot of the residual of the log of tax revenue as a percentage of GDP (vertical
axis) against the residual of our democracy indicator. The covariates that are partialled out include
Country and year effects, the lagged dependent variable and GDP per capita. Each dot is a coun-
try/year observation, and there are a total of 975 observations. The bottom figure is constructed
in a similar way but excludes outliers, defined as countries with a Cook distance above 4/N , with
N the number of observations.



                                                                                                                   81
   Percent change of total government revenue as a percentage of GDP
             −10          0        10         20        30




                                                                       −10      0                       10        20
                                                                             Years around democratic transition


Figure 4: Total government revenue as a percentage of GDP around a democratization. The
solid line is the estimated effect of the most recent transition to democracy in each country on
total government revenue as a percentage of GDP. Each point corresponds to the coefficient of the
relevant lag of our democracy variable in a regression of the log of the dependent variable on a full
set of lags and leads of democracy. The contemporary democracy index is the excluded category
(the baseline). The dotted lines show the 95% confidence intervals.




                                                                                         82
                         4
              Net gini coefficient
               0         −2     2




                                       −10      0                       10          20
                                             Years around democratic transition
                         2
              Gross gini coefficient
                    −2   −4
                         −6       0




                                       −10      0                       10          20
                                             Years around democratic transition


Figure 5: Gini coefficient around a democratization. The top figure plots the net income Gini
coefficient and the bottom figure the gross income Gini coefficient. The solid line is the estimated
effect of the most recent transition to democracy in each country on the Gini coefficient. Each
point corresponds to the coefficient of the relevant lag of our democracy variable in a regression of
the dependent variable on a full set of lags and leads of democracy. The contemporary democracy
index is the excluded category (the baseline). The dotted lines show the 95% confidence intervals.



                                                         83
                              20
                                                                                          JAM

                                                               MLI


                                                                                                MAR
              Net Gini coefficient (residual)

                                                                                             MYS
                                      10

                                                                                 BHS
                                                                           MWI
                                                                                                MAR
                                                                                MWI            SLE
                                                                                LKA MARCOLSLE                             NPL
                                                           LSO             PHL ZMB          MEXKEN
                                                             PRY         JPN  CIV
                                                                             NZL                JOR                 BGD
                                                                     MWI    CHN
                                                                            KOR                     MUS                      PHL
                                                                   ETH                       CMR           THA ESP ZAF PAN
                                                               GTM
                                                                       PAK
                                                                     ETH BGD
                                                                         GBR
                                                                       KOR   ISRZAF
                                                                               JPN
                                                                              HRV
                                                                                    UGA
                                                                                     PERCHN
                                                                                        YEM   CIV
                                                                                            NZL
                                                                                             TZA
                                                                                             GBR
                                                                                           COL   IRN
                                                                                                CMR THA
                                                                                                   TZA
                                                                                                       THA
                                                                                                      EGY
                                                                                                      IND
                                                                                                    PER
                                                                                                  TUN
                                                                                                   ARG
                                                                                                         ARG
                                                                                                       DEU   BRA         GHANGAPAK
                                                                 PAN
                                                               CHL        USA
                                                                            FIN
                                                                           NPL
                                                                             PRT
                                                                            SIN
                                                                           IND
                                                                         MDGJOR SWE
                                                                               CHE
                                                                              GBR
                                                                              LUXSIN
                                                                                 BEL
                                                                               AUT
                                                                               USA
                                                                                ZMB
                                                                               CAN  SWE
                                                                                      IDNNZL
                                                                                          GBR   UGA
                                                                                               AUT
                                                                                              DNK
                                                                                             BDI
                                                                                            KEN
                                                                                           USA
                                                                                            MUS  INDAUS
                                                                                                    KEN
                                                                                                    BWA
                                                                                                     TTO     CPV     TAW
                                                      TURGRCGTM    NGA
                                                                    KOR   AUS
                                                                         CAN
                                                                        NZLZMB
                                                                          ETH
                                                                          NOR  AUS
                                                                             NLD
                                                                             CRIURYCYP
                                                                                  FIN
                                                                                 HND
                                                                                   JAM  NAM
                                                                                        BOL DNKIRN
                                                                                             CIV
                                                                                             FRA
                                                                                            AUSIRN
                                                                                             BEL
                                                                                           VEN
                                                                                         GIN
                                                                                           EGYPRT
                                                                                                CHE  FRA
                                                                                                    IRL
                                                                                                  FRA     MKD
                                                                                                      ITA GRC    ARG    BGD
                                                                                                                      PAN  ZAF
                                                            ESP
                                                            MKD
                                                            CHL
                                                            SVN SLV
                                                              SEN     PAN
                                                                     MDG
                                                                   PAK    COL
                                                                           ITA
                                                                            MUS
                                                                           DEU NOR
                                                                                MUSZAF
                                                                                    DZA
                                                                                    DOM
                                                                                   CRI
                                                                                    MAR VNM
                                                                                        ECU MYS
                                                                                           CHN
                                                                                           TUN
                                                                                             MNG
                                                                                           IDN
                                                                                             TUR
                                                                                           ITA  DNK
                                                                                              VEN
                                                                                              IRL  AUT
                                                                                                 VEN
                                                                                                  NOR
                                                                                                BRB
                                                                                                 BRA
                                                                                               DNK DEU
                                                                                                 CAN NLD
                                                                                                    USA
                                                                                                     SIN
                                                                                                       BOL    SLV   PHL
                                                                                                                  MDG
                                                                                                                    ARG      IDN
                                                              DJI
                                                               PAN
                                                          ESP SLV
                                                         PAK       GHA
                                                                 SLV  MEX
                                                                    SLV    TUN
                                                                          SWE
                                                                          VEN
                                                                        BGD   DZA
                                                                              TAW
                                                                               EGY
                                                                               PER ISR
                                                                                    MEX
                                                                                     HTI
                                                                                   LUX
                                                                                 JOR    IDN
                                                                                        CYP
                                                                                      URYBRB
                                                                                       PNG
                                                                                     USA DOM
                                                                                       MRT  GNB
                                                                                          AUS
                                                                                            SWZ
                                                                                            LKA
                                                                                            NIC
                                                                                            NER
                                                                                           IRN
                                                                                           IND
                                                                                           GRC SWE
                                                                                               TUN
                                                                                                CAN
                                                                                               NLD
                                                                                             USA
                                                                                            IRL
                                                                                             EGY  JAM
                                                                                                 EGY
                                                                                                   JPN
                                                                                                   SWEDNK
                                                                                                    GBR ESP
                                                                                                       VEN     ARG
                                                                                                             LSO         TAW
                                                                                                                       SLVPAK
                                                                                                                     KOR
                                                                              TTO
                                                                               IRNPRT   FJI
                                                                                      SER   NOR
                                                                                          KHM
                                                                                          RWA
                                                                                          LBN
                                                                                          SUR
                                                                                          AGO
                                                                                          MLT
                                                                                          ZWE
                                                                                          GMB
                                                                                          MOZ
                                                                                          BFA
                                                                                          ALB
                                                                                          LAO  SER HND
                     0




                                                                   PHL
                                                                  HRV PHL   BEL
                                                                           DNK
                                                                          TAW  ZAF
                                                                             UGA
                                                                             IRL
                                                                             ZMB
                                                                            ZAFCOLIDN
                                                                                 MEX
                                                                                DEU
                                                                               TUN
                                                                              NPL
                                                                               ITA AUT
                                                                                   ECUBWA
                                                                                     AUSBRB
                                                                                        NER
                                                                                      BRB
                                                                                    TTO   NOR
                                                                                        NIC
                                                                                         SWZ FJI
                                                                                              KEN
                                                                                             DEU
                                                                                             BHS MUS
                                                                                               MRT
                                                                                                TTO
                                                                                               SIN
                                                                                               JPN
                                                                                              LUX
                                                                                              PNG
                                                                                                HTIIRL
                                                                                                   ITA
                                                                                                 CRI
                                                                                                  IND
                                                                                                 NLD  TUN
                                                                                                     ECU
                                                                                                     BEL
                                                                                                   CHE
                                                                                                     FIN
                                                                                                    URY
                                                                                                      CANCPV
                                                                                                          DZACHL
                                                                                                           BRA
                                                                                                          SVN
                                                                                                            TUR
                                                                                                             SVN
                                                                                                           TURPANPAN
                                                                                                                  ESP
                                                                                                                    DJI
                                                                                                                      SLV
                                                                                                                    CHL
                                                     THA   ARG  NGA
                                                              ESP       TAW
                                                                      PAN  FRA VEN  IDN
                                                                                  TAW
                                                                                FRA  IDNGNB
                                                                                      HND
                                                                                        MNGFRA
                                                                                           SWE
                                                                                          IRN
                                                                                           DEUISR
                                                                                              FRA
                                                                                              EGY
                                                                                            BRB
                                                                                            JPN
                                                                                           CAN
                                                                                          JPN   BWA
                                                                                                 HND
                                                                                                AUS
                                                                                               BEL
                                                                                             VNM
                                                                                             IND
                                                                                             MYS
                                                                                            VEN
                                                                                           JOR   AUS
                                                                                               GRC
                                                                                                LUX
                                                                                              MYS
                                                                                              NOR
                                                                                              CRIFIN  JOR
                                                                                                      NOR
                                                                                                     LUX
                                                                                                      CRI
                                                                                                      ISR
                                                                                                    ESP
                                                                                                  NZLUGA         KOR
                                                                                                                PHL  SEN
                                                                                                                      MDG
                                                                                                                    GTM
                                                       BRA CPV KOR          TAW
                                                                             KEN
                                                                            PAK   NLD
                                                                                 BWA
                                                                                DNK MWI    BHS
                                                                                          TZA
                                                                                           SLE
                                                                                            FRA
                                                                                            NAMFIN
                                                                                             DZA
                                                                                              CAN
                                                                                             FIN
                                                                                            NLD  URY
                                                                                               NOR
                                                                                              TTO
                                                                                             SWE
                                                                                            GIN
                                                                                              CHE
                                                                                               COL
                                                                                              ITA
                                                                                               SWE
                                                                                             ITA
                                                                                             IND
                                                                                            CANVEN  DOMUSA
                                                                                                      PRT
                                                                                                      JPN GTMGTM
                                                                                                           SLV
                                                                                                            GRC         ZMB
                                                                               IND
                                                                                 IRLCHE
                                                                                    MEX BDI SINNZL
                                                                                             COL
                                                                                            BRA   TUR SWE
                                                          NGA        KOR
                                                                      PAK IRN
                                                                         ZMB
                                                                           ZAF
                                                                          EGYMYS BOL
                                                                                  ZMB   MEX
                                                                                      INDJAM
                                                                                       GBR
                                                                                         CIV  LKA
                                                                                            TUN
                                                                                            TUN
                                                                                             EGYCHN
                                                                                                 PRT
                                                                                                GBR
                                                                                                 GBR
                                                                                                    CHN
                                                                                                  BEL
                                                                                                ISR  CYP  CHL
                                                                                                         PRYPRY
                                                                                                             MKD PAK ETHHRV
                                                                                                                    ESP     MEXNGA
                                                               ARGMDG
                                                                    PHLIDNGHA
                                                                              MAR KENTHA CIV
                                                                                            COL
                                                                                            YEMUSASIN
                                                                                                BHS
                                                                                              DEU
                                                                                                USACIV GBR
                                                                                                      MYS
                                                                                                        NZL               ZMB
                                                           ARG           BGDMYS TZA       DNK JPN
                                                                                            CHN
                                                                                             UGA     IRN                    KOR
                                                                                               MAR
                                                                             MWIMAR KEN           AUT
                                                                                                NZL
                                                                                                 JOR  COLTHA       ETH
                                                                           BGD     SLE BHS     LKA   PER
                                                                                                       AUSLSO          MWI
                                                                         ZAF     CMR
                                                                  PAN PHL       SLE JAMMAR         MUS MLI
                                                                                                                       MWI
                              −10




                                                                              NPL             MAR         MLI
                                                                                         JAM

                                                −1          −.5                  0                             .5                    1
                                                                         Democracy (residual)
                              10




                                                                                              SLE
                                                                               LKA             COL
                                                                                         MAR
                                                                          PHL ZMB
                                                                                           MEXKEN
              Net Gini coefficient (residual)




                                                                        JPN
                                          5




                                                                             CIV
                                                                            NZL                JOR
                                                                           CHN                     MUS
                                                                    MWI KOR                               THA
                                                                   ETHPAK ZAF      UGA      CMR IRN   THA
                                                                        BGD ISR        CHN
                                                                                       YEM   CIV
                                                                                           NZL
                                                                                            TZACMR   EGY
                                                                                                   THA  ARG ESP
                                                               GTM ETH
                                                                        GBR
                                                                      KOR
                                                                        USA
                                                                              JPN
                                                                             HRV    PER
                                                                                        NZL
                                                                                         GBR
                                                                                            GBR
                                                                                          COL
                                                                                               UGATZA
                                                                                                   PER
                                                                                                 TUN
                                                                                                  ARG DEU BRA
                                                                                                     IND
                                                                 PAN       FIN
                                                                         NPLPRT
                                                                           SIN
                                                                          IND  SWE
                                                                              CHE
                                                                             GBRSIN
                                                                                BELSWE
                                                                                     IDNUSA   AUT
                                                                                             DNK
                                                                                            BDI    AUS
                                                                                                   KEN
                                                                                                    TTOMKDCPVARG
                                                                                                   BWA              TAW
                                                      TUR GTM  CHLNGA MDG
                                                                        CAN
                                                                           JOR
                                                                         AUS LUX
                                                                              AUT
                                                                              USA
                                                                            NLD
                                                                          ZMB
                                                                         ETH
                                                                               ZMB
                                                                              CAN
                                                                              AUS CYP
                                                                                 FIN
                                                                                HND
                                                                               URYJAM  NAM KEN
                                                                                           MUS
                                                                                            FRA
                                                                                           AUS
                                                                                           DNK
                                                                                                IND
                                                                                              IRN
                                                                                            CIV
                                                                                              IRN
                                                                                            BEL     FRA
                                                                                                   IRL
                                                                                                 FRA ITA GRC          BGD
                                                                                                                    PAN  ZAF
                                                         GRC        KORNZL
                                                                        NOR
                                                                         COLCRI
                                                                          ITA     ZAF  BOLVEN
                                                                                        GIN
                                                                                          EGY
                                                                                          CHN
                                                                                          TUNPRT
                                                                                           MYS
                                                                                            MNG
                                                                                          IDN  CHE
                                                                                               BRBAUT
                                                                                                VEN
                                                                                                 NOR
                                                                                                BRA
                                                                                                  DEU
                                                                                                    NLD           PHL
                                                            ESP
                                                            MKD
                                                            CHL
                                                            SVN SLV
                                                              SEN    PAN   MUS
                                                                          DEU NOR  DZA
                                                                                   DOM
                                                                                  CRI
                                                                                   MAR VNM
                                                                                       ECUITA DNK
                                                                                            TURDNK USA
                                                                                                    SIN
                                                                                                      BOL    SLV MDG       IDN
                                                              DJI
                                                               PAN  MDG
                                                                  PAK
                                                                   GHAMEX TUN  MUS
                                                                             DZA
                                                                             TAW  ISR
                                                                                   MEX
                                                                                    HTIIDN
                                                                                         AUS
                                                                                       CYP
                                                                                        BRB  VEN
                                                                                             IRL
                                                                                           GNB
                                                                                           SWZ
                                                                                           LKA
                                                                                           NIC
                                                                                           IRL  CAN
                                                                                              SWE
                                                                                              TUN
                                                                                               CAN
                                                                                              NLD
                                                                                            USA
                                                                                            EGY  JAM DNK
                                                                                                   GBR            ARG  TAW
                                                          ESP SLV
                                                         PAK       SLV
                                                                 SLV     SWE
                                                                         VEN
                                                                       BGD    EGY
                                                                              PER
                                                                             TTOJOR
                                                                              IRNPRT URY
                                                                                      PNG
                                                                                    USA
                                                                                  LUX   DOM
                                                                                      MRT
                                                                                       FJI
                                                                                     SER   NER
                                                                                          IRN
                                                                                          IND
                                                                                          GRC
                                                                                           NOR
                                                                                         AGO
                                                                                         LAO
                                                                                         SUR
                                                                                         MOZ
                                                                                         KHM
                                                                                         ZWE
                                                                                         ALB
                                                                                         GMB
                                                                                         BFA
                                                                                         RWA
                                                                                         MLT
                                                                                         LBN    EGY
                                                                                              SER JPN
                                                                                                  SWE
                                                                                                  HND  ESP
                                                                                                      VEN     ARG
                                                                                                            LSO      SLV
                                                                                                                    KOR
                            0




                                                                   PHL
                                                                  HRV      BEL
                                                                          DNK
                                                                        TAW   ZAF
                                                                              TUN
                                                                             NPL
                                                                              ITA
                                                                            UGA  IDN
                                                                                MEX
                                                                               DEU   BWA
                                                                                    AUSBRB
                                                                                       NER  FJI
                                                                                             LUX
                                                                                             PNG
                                                                                            DEU MUS
                                                                                              MRT
                                                                                               TTO
                                                                                              SIN
                                                                                              JPN
                                                                                               HTI
                                                                                             KEN  IRL
                                                                                                  ITA
                                                                                                CRI  TUN
                                                                                                    ECU
                                                                                                    BEL
                                                                                                  CHE
                                                                                                    FIN CPV
                                                                                                         DZACHL
                                                                                                          BRA
                                                                                                         SVN    PAN      PAK
                                                           ARG       PHL
                                                                NGA PAN     IRL
                                                                            ZMB
                                                                           ZAF
                                                                          FRA COL
                                                                              VEN AUT
                                                                                  ECUBRB
                                                                                   TTO
                                                                                   IDN   NOR
                                                                                       NIC
                                                                                        SWZ
                                                                                       GNB
                                                                                     HND    BHS
                                                                                          FRA
                                                                                          SWEISR
                                                                                             FRA
                                                                                             EGY IND
                                                                                                NLDURY
                                                                                                     CAN
                                                                                                     JOR
                                                                                                     NOR
                                                                                                    LUX    TUR
                                                                                                            SVN
                                                                                                          TURPAN ESP
                                                                                                               PHLDJI
                                                                                                                    SLV
                                                                                                                  CHL
                                                                                                                KORSEN
                                                                                                                     MDG
                                                     THA      ESP      TAW       TAWIDN  IRN
                                                                                       MNGDEU
                                                                                           JPN
                                                                                          CAN
                                                                                         JPN   BWA
                                                                                                HND
                                                                                               AUS
                                                                                              BEL
                                                                                            VNM
                                                                                           BRB
                                                                                            IND AUS
                                                                                              GRC
                                                                                            MYS  NZL
                                                                                               LUX
                                                                                             MYS
                                                                                             NOR
                                                                                           VEN       CRI
                                                                                                     ISR
                                                                                                   ESP
                                                                                                    UGA           GTM
                                                                           TAW FRA
                                                                                 NLD
                                                                                BWA       JOR
                                                                                          BHSCRI
                                                                                             CAN
                                                                                            FIN
                                                                                           NLD
                                                                                             TTO
                                                                                            SWE
                                                                                           GIN
                                                                                             CHEFIN
                                                                                              FIN
                                                                                            DZA URY
                                                                                              NOR  DOMUSA
                                                                                                     PRT GTM          ZMB
                                                       BRA CPV KORZMB       KEN
                                                                           PAK DNK
                                                                              IND
                                                                                IRLMWI
                                                                                   CHE
                                                                                   MEX
                                                                                         TZA
                                                                                       BDI
                                                                                          SLE
                                                                                           CAN
                                                                                           SIN
                                                                                              COL
                                                                                             ITA
                                                                                              SWE
                                                                                            ITA
                                                                                           FRA
                                                                                           NAM
                                                                                            IND
                                                                                              VEN
                                                                                              NZL
                                                                                            COL
                                                                                           BRA   TUR JPN
                                                                                                     SWE    GTM
                                                                                                          SLV
                                                                                                           GRC
                                                          NGA
                                                                     KOR IRN
                                                                          ZAF BOL
                                                                         EGY
                                                                     PAK MYSGBR
                                                                   MDG
                                                                                 ZMB   MEX
                                                                                     INDJAM
                                                                                        CIV
                                                                                             LKA
                                                                                           TUN
                                                                                           TUN
                                                                                            EGYISR
                                                                                               CHN
                                                                                                PRT
                                                                                               GBR
                                                                                                GBR
                                                                                                   CHN
                                                                                                 BELCYP  CHL
                                                                                                        PRYPRY
                                                                                                            MKD
                                                                                                                   ESP
                                                                                                                   ETH
                                                                                                                  PAK  HRVMEXNGA
                                                                      IDN                  COL
                                                               ARGPHL      GHA   KEN       YEMUSASIN
                                                                                               BHS
                                                                                             DEU
                                                                                               USACIV GBR               ZMB
                                                                             MAR THA    CIV          MYS
                                                                                                       NZL
                                                                        BGDMYS TZA DNK       JPNIRN
                                                                                           CHN
                                                                                            UGA
                                                                                  MAR KEN     MARAUT COL
              −5




                                                                            MWI                NZL
                                                                                                JOR     THA
                                                                          BGD SLE BHS         LKA   PER
                                                                                                      AUSLSO
                                                                                CMR
                                                                                               MAR
                                                                                         JAM MUS
                              −10




                                                −1          −.5                  0                             .5                    1
                                                                         Democracy (residual)


Figure 6: Scatter plot of the residual of the net Gini coefficient (vertical axis) against the residual
of our democracy indicator. The covariates that are partialled out include Country and year effects,
the lagged dependent variable and GDP per capita. Each dot is a country/year observation, and
there are a total of 538 observations. The bottom figure is constructed in a similar way but excludes
outliers, defined as countries with a Cook distance above 4/N , with N the number of observations.




                                                                                 84
                               20
                                                                                          JAM



                                                                                                 MAR
              Gross Gini coefficient (residual)
                                                                               MWI
                                          10
                                                                                   MWI          MYS
                                                                               CHE                                          NGA
                                                             MLI                              BEL              ESP
                                                                                      MAR    CIV    UGA
                                                                                                     SLE
                                                                                                   KEN
                                                             PRY                AUT                                      NPL
                                                                           BGD PRTLUXECU   FRA  JOR
                                                                                               COL
                                                                                             IDNCOL
                                                                                                  SLEMAR
                                                             LSO
                                                           GRC                 CIV FIN   JAM   PRT
                                                                                                CIVSWE KEN          TAW      PAK
                                                                  SLVETH DEU
                                                                 GTM          FIN
                                                                               ZMB
                                                                                 DEU
                                                                                NZL UGA
                                                                                  HNDZMB    LKA
                                                                                             FRA
                                                                                             NZLMAR
                                                                                               BHS TZA
                                                                                                   AUS   ARGBRA
                                                                                                            GRC
                                                                       ETH
                                                                     PHL   NOR CHN
                                                                             MWI   BEL     NOR
                                                                                         YEM    TUN
                                                                                                 GRC
                                                                                                   DEU INDTHA
                                                                                                        THA          ZAF
                                                                     PAK
                                                                ESP HRV     IND
                                                                           NPL
                                                                           MWI
                                                                         PAK
                                                                           JPN
                                                                            PHL EGY
                                                                                CAN
                                                                               LUX
                                                                                BHS
                                                                                JPNSINPER
                                                                                     MEX CHN
                                                                                           BRB
                                                                                            ITAAUS
                                                                                                AUT
                                                                                               GBR
                                                                                              BDI   BWA
                                                                                                   MYS
                                                                                                  MUS
                                                                                                   GBREGY
                                                                                                    IRL
                                                                                                  IRN
                                                                                                KEN   IRN    CPV
                                                                                                              SLV MDG   GHA
                                                                                                                   KORTAW
                                                         TUR GTM      KOR
                                                                     PAN  ETH
                                                                        BGD   NLD
                                                                              SIN
                                                                              HRV
                                                                            USA
                                                                            AUS
                                                                             NPL
                                                                            KOR
                                                                            GBR
                                                                           CAN
                                                                         PHLPAK
                                                                           NZL
                                                                            ITA  USA
                                                                                   IDN
                                                                                  MEX
                                                                                 GBR
                                                                                NOR
                                                                                 AUSCYP
                                                                                   MUS
                                                                                 ZMBAUT  GIN
                                                                                           CHN
                                                                                         NAMUSA
                                                                                            SWETUN
                                                                                             NOR
                                                                                              ITA
                                                                                             DNK  LUX
                                                                                                NLD
                                                                                                  FRA
                                                                                                 CMR BOL
                                                                                                       ITA
                                                                                                     CRIMKD ARG  ESP
                                                                                                                  ARG    ZAF
                                                                                                                          PHL
                                                             SVN   PAN
                                                                 CHLGHAPHL TUN
                                                                           FRA CRI  CRI
                                                                                  URYDZA
                                                                                     ZAF
                                                                                    CHE
                                                                                    ISR    VEN
                                                                                           TUN
                                                                                           COL
                                                                                         CYP
                                                                                         BOL  MNG
                                                                                            MYS
                                                                                              LKA
                                                                                            GBR
                                                                                            TUR   TUN
                                                                                                   IRL
                                                                                                  BRA
                                                                                                    SIN
                                                                                                  CANESP         ARG       IDN
                                                       THA      SEN
                                                                DJI
                                                              CHL  NGAPHL
                                                                   SLV MDG
                                                                       KOR
                                                                       MEX
                                                                          MDGZMB
                                                                           DNK
                                                                         TAW    IRN
                                                                                VEN
                                                                               ISR
                                                                               TTO
                                                                                DZA
                                                                              IRL
                                                                              JOR
                                                                            SWE
                                                                           TAW   SWE
                                                                                 ZAF
                                                                                    DOM
                                                                                      URY
                                                                                      HTI
                                                                                    TTO
                                                                                      SER
                                                                                      MRT
                                                                                      SWE
                                                                                      BWA
                                                                                    ECU  DOM
                                                                                        IDN
                                                                                         VNM
                                                                                         SWZ
                                                                                         FJI
                                                                                         NER
                                                                                             BRB
                                                                                           RWA
                                                                                           MLT
                                                                                           MOZ
                                                                                           LAO
                                                                                           GMB
                                                                                           ALB
                                                                                           BFA
                                                                                           LBN
                                                                                           AGO
                                                                                           ZWE
                                                                                           SUR
                                                                                           KHM
                                                                                                SWE
                                                                                              MUS
                                                                                              PNG
                                                                                            IND
                                                                                              GNB
                                                                                               EGY
                                                                                              TZA
                                                                                              USA EGY
                                                                                                  NZL
                                                                                                AUS
                                                                                                  VEN
                                                                                                JPN
                                                                                               VEN
                                                                                              NLD
                                                                                            AUS
                                                                                           CAN  IRL
                                                                                                DNK
                                                                                               CMR USA
                                                                                                  PER
                                                                                                 IND
                                                                                                  JPN
                                                                                                  UGA
                                                                                                IRN
                                                                                                BEL
                                                                                              NIC HND
                                                                                                      TTO
                                                                                                      FRA
                                                                                                      DNK
                                                                                                     THA
                                                                                                      JPN
                                                                                                    MUSMYS
                                                                                                     ARG DZA MKD
                                                                                                            CHL
                                                                                                             SVN
                                                                                                           BRA
                                                                                                                   BGDSLV PAN
                                                                                                                 PANPAN
                            0




                                                             ARGPAN NGA    VEN
                                                                         KOR    TUN
                                                                               ZAF NLDHND
                                                                                      USANIC
                                                                                           EGY
                                                                                         MEX
                                                                                         BRB
                                                                                         GNB
                                                                                         PNG  NER
                                                                                             FJI
                                                                                               DNK
                                                                                               ISR
                                                                                              DEU
                                                                                              SWZ
                                                                                             IRN
                                                                                             CAN
                                                                                            DEU
                                                                                           NZLVNM DNK
                                                                                                GBR
                                                                                               TTOJOR
                                                                                                 MRT
                                                                                                 SER
                                                                                               CHE
                                                                                                 HTI
                                                                                               NZL
                                                                                             EGY      VEN
                                                                                                    NLD
                                                                                                  BRBISR
                                                                                                    URY
                                                                                                  AUT         PAN
                                                                                                            TUR
                                                                                                             LSO
                                                                                                           TUR       SLV MEX
                                                                                                                    MDG
                                                                                                                   DJI
                                                          PAKCPV     KORPAN
                                                                       PAK EGY
                                                                           COL TAW
                                                                             ZAF
                                                                              BELIND
                                                                                  PER
                                                                                 ITA
                                                                                DNK   AUS
                                                                                      MEX  JPN
                                                                                         IDN
                                                                                           IRN
                                                                                           BHS
                                                                                         MNG  FIN
                                                                                              JOR
                                                                                             VEN
                                                                                              IND
                                                                                               CRIISR
                                                                                                CHN
                                                                                               LUX IND
                                                                                                  BWA
                                                                                                SIN
                                                                                                  URY
                                                                                                  CHE
                                                                                                   ITA
                                                                                                  NOR
                                                                                                FRA  DOM  SVN
                                                                                                          CHL
                                                                                                          CPV      CHL
                                                                                                                   SEN
                                                             MKDSLV
                                                            ESP     PAN ZMBIRN
                                                                            MAR
                                                                            KEN
                                                                               ZAF
                                                                               ZMB
                                                                             TAW
                                                                                   CMR
                                                                                 KEN
                                                                                 LKA
                                                                                COL
                                                                                 TZA
                                                                                  IRL
                                                                                     IDN
                                                                                   JOR
                                                                                  BWA
                                                                                    PRT
                                                                                      IND
                                                                                           DNK
                                                                                         BDI
                                                                                       BRB
                                                                                      GBR
                                                                                               CAN
                                                                                             JPN
                                                                                               SWE
                                                                                              NAM
                                                                                             TUN
                                                                                              SIN
                                                                                              GIN
                                                                                               KEN
                                                                                                  TTO
                                                                                                IND
                                                                                                CAN
                                                                                                VEN
                                                                                              IRL
                                                                                            TZA   BHS
                                                                                                USA
                                                                                                DZA
                                                                                                MUS
                                                                                                 SWE
                                                                                               IRN
                                                                                             COL
                                                                                             BRA
                                                                                               SLE
                                                                                             MEX
                                                                                               NOR
                                                                                                      NOR
                                                                                                    PERUSA
                                                                                                       DEU
                                                                                                      CAN
                                                                                                    CIV
                                                                                                    CHN
                                                                                                  TUR
                                                                                                    BEL
                                                                                                    FIN
                                                                                                    JAM
                                                                                                      COLMLIGTMKOR
                                                                                                          GTM
                                                                                                           SLV     ESP
                                                                                                                   GTM
                                                                                                                       BGD
                                                                                                                     ZMB
                                                         BRANGA      MDGIDN
                                                                          ZAF BGD
                                                                              MUS
                                                                                UGA BOL
                                                                                   TAW
                                                                                 MAR         BHS
                                                                                            MAR  GBR
                                                                                                  FIN
                                                                                                FIN
                                                                                              YEM   JOR
                                                                                                  SIN
                                                                                                  NLD
                                                                                                  CRICYP
                                                                                                     PRT  PRYPRY
                                                            ARGARG SLV      MYS
                                                                              GHA         THA    USA
                                                                                               JPN
                                                                                                 AUSHND
                                                                                                   LKANZLESP
                                                                                                       GBR
                                                                                                       SWE          ETH   KOR
                                                                                                                         ZMB
                                                                          BGD
                                                                         MWISLE
                                                                                 MYSSLEIDN CHN  JAMCOL
                                                                                                  PRT THA LSO   PHLPAK HRVPAK
                                                            ESP                 FRA CIV     GRC NOR
                                                                                                EGY
                                                                                                NZL
                                                                                                ITA
                                                                                               MYS
                                                                                              MAR
                                                                                                     ECU MLI ETH
                                                                                                                             NGA
                                                                                               FRA AUSGRC          PHL
                                                                                            KEN UGA
                                                                                                  BEL TUN
                                                                                                      CHE
                                                                                            CIVDEULUX
                                                                                           JAM
               −10




                                                                               JAM
                                                                                                    AUT
                                                                                  NPL                               MWIMWI

                                                                                              MAR
                               −20




                                                  −1         −.5                  0                            .5                  1
                                                                          Democracy (residual)
                               10




                                                                                            BEL
                                                                                           CIV
                                                                                     MAR          UGA
                                                                                                   SLE
                                                                                                 KEN
                                                                               AUT            JOR
                                                                          BGD                COL
                                                                                           IDN
              Gross Gini coefficient (residual)




                                                                              PRT ECU    FRA  COL
                                                                                                SLEMAR
                                                                                   LUXJAM SWE
                                           5




                                                                                                     KEN
                                                                 SLV          CIVFIN
                                                                             FIN   UGA    LKAPRT
                                                                                              CIV
                                                                                              MAR ARG     BRA
                                                                GTM ETH    DEUZMB
                                                                                DEU
                                                                               NZL
                                                                                 HNDZMB    FRA
                                                                                           NZL
                                                                                             BHS TZA
                                                                                                 AUS      GRC
                                                                      ETHNOR
                                                                    PHL       CHN
                                                                            MWIBEL NOR        TUN    INDTHA
                                                                                       YEM     GRC
                                                                                                 DEU  THA
                                                                    PAK    IND
                                                                          NPL  EGYSIN  CHN
                                                                                     PERBRB  AUS
                                                                                              AUT
                                                                                             GBR  BWA
                                                                                                    EGY
                                                                                                  IRL
                                                                                                IRN
                                                                                              KEN                 KORGHA
                                                               ESP HRV    MWI
                                                                        PAK
                                                                          JPN
                                                                           PHL CAN
                                                                              LUX
                                                                               BHS
                                                                               JPN  MEX   ITA
                                                                                            BDI  MYS
                                                                                                MUS
                                                                                                 GBRIRN CPV
                                                                                                   BOL      SLVMDG
                                                         TUR GTM     KOR     NLD
                                                                             SIN
                                                                             HRV
                                                                           USA
                                                                           AUS
                                                                         ETHNPL
                                                                           KOR  USA
                                                                                  IDN
                                                                                 MEX
                                                                                GBRCYP GIN
                                                                                         CHN
                                                                                          USATUN
                                                                                           NOR
                                                                                            ITA LUX  ITA
                                                                                                   CRI                TAW
                                                                                                                       ZAF
                                                                    PANBGD GBR
                                                                          CAN
                                                                        PHLPAK
                                                                          NZL
                                                                           ITA NOR
                                                                                AUS
                                                                                  MUS
                                                                                ZMBAUT NAMSWE
                                                                                           DNKNLD
                                                                                                FRA
                                                                                               CMR              ESP
                                                                                                                 ARG     PHL
                                                                  PAN
                                                                CHLGHAPHL TUN
                                                                          FRA CRI  CRI
                                                                                 URYDZA
                                                                                    ZAF  COL
                                                                                       CYP  MNG
                                                                                          MYS
                                                                                         VEN
                                                                                         TUNLKA TUN
                                                                                                 IRL
                                                                                                BRA
                                                                                                  SIN
                                                                                                   ESP  MKD   ARGBGD IDN
                                                                                                                ARG
                                                       THA   SVN
                                                               SEN   PHL MDGZMBIRN CHE
                                                                                   ISR BOLGBR
                                                                                          TUR
                                                                                           BRB
                                                                                            MUS CAN
                                                                                              SWE
                                                                                                EGY
                                                                                                NZL TTO
                                                                                                    FRA
                                                                                                    DNK              SLV
                                                               DJISLV     DNK  VEN
                                                                              ISR
                                                                              TTO  DOM
                                                                                     URY
                                                                                       DOM
                                                                                     HTI
                                                                                      IDN IND AUS
                                                                                            PNG
                                                                                            GNB
                                                                                             EGYVEN
                                                                                               IND THA
                                                                                                 USA
                                                                                                PER JPN
                                                                                                     MYS   MKD
                                                                                                          CHL            PAN
                                                              CHL NGAMDGTAW
                                                                      KOR
                                                                      MEX      DZA
                                                                             IRL
                                                                             JOR
                                                                           SWE  SWE
                                                                                ZAF
                                                                                   TTO VNM
                                                                                     SER
                                                                                     MRT
                                                                                     SWE
                                                                                       SWZ
                                                                                     BWA
                                                                                       FJI
                                                                                       NER
                                                                                         MOZ
                                                                                         LBN
                                                                                         MLT
                                                                                         ALB
                                                                                         GMB
                                                                                         RWA
                                                                                         BFA
                                                                                         KHM
                                                                                         LAO
                                                                                         AGO
                                                                                         ZWE
                                                                                         SUR
                                                                                            TZA
                                                                                            USA
                                                                                          AUS
                                                                                         CAN VEN
                                                                                            NLD JPN
                                                                                              JPN
                                                                                              IRL
                                                                                              DNK
                                                                                              BEL
                                                                                            NIC
                                                                                             CMR
                                                                                                  MUS
                                                                                                UGA
                                                                                              IRN  ARG DZA SVN
                                                                                                         BRA   PAN
                            0




                                                                          TAW
                                                                          VEN  TUN ECU NIC
                                                                                     HND
                                                                                     USA EGY
                                                                                       MEX  NER
                                                                                           FJI
                                                                                             DNK
                                                                                             ISR
                                                                                            DEU
                                                                                            SWZ
                                                                                           IRN
                                                                                          DEU
                                                                                         NZL    HND
                                                                                                DNK
                                                                                              GBR
                                                                                             TTO
                                                                                           CAN  JOR
                                                                                               MRT
                                                                                               SER  VEN     PAN PAN
                                                                                                          TUR      SLV MEX
                                                                                                                   MDG
                                                             ARGPANNGAPAN
                                                                        KOR   ZAF NLD  BRB
                                                                                       GNB
                                                                                       PNG  VNM
                                                                                             CHE
                                                                                             NZL
                                                                                           EGY    NLD
                                                                                                BRB
                                                                                               HTI ISR TUR
                                                                                                  URY
                                                                                                AUT        LSO    DJI
                                                          PAKCPV    KOR
                                                                      PAK EGY TAW        JPN
                                                                                       IDN  FIN
                                                                                            JOR
                                                                                           VEN
                                                                                            IND ISR
                                                                                                 IND
                                                                                                BWA
                                                                                              SIN                 CHL
                                                                                                                  SEN
                                                                            ZAF
                                                                          COLBELIND
                                                                                 PER
                                                                                ITA
                                                                               DNK   AUS
                                                                                     MEX IRN
                                                                                         BHS
                                                                                       MNG   CRI
                                                                                              CHN
                                                                                             LUX
                                                                                             CANURY
                                                                                                CHE
                                                                                                 ITA
                                                                                                NOR
                                                                                              FRA  DOM
                                                                                                    NOR SVN
                                                                                                        CHL
                                                                                                        CPV KOR BGD
                                                                                                        GTM
                                                                              ZAF
                                                                              ZMB CMR
                                                                                    IDN    JPN
                                                                                         DNKNAM TTO
                                                                                              IND
                                                                                             SWE
                                                                                              CAN
                                                                                              VEN
                                                                                                BHS
                                                                                              USA
                                                                                              DZA    USA
                                                                                                     DEU          ESP
                                                             MKDSLV
                                                            ESP    PAN IRN
                                                                         ZMB
                                                                                KEN
                                                                               COL
                                                                                  JOR
                                                                                 BWA
                                                                                LKA
                                                                                TZA
                                                                                   PRT
                                                                                       BDI
                                                                                            IRL
                                                                                          TZA
                                                                                           TUNMUS
                                                                                            SIN
                                                                                            GIN
                                                                                             KEN
                                                                                           BRA SWE
                                                                                             IRN
                                                                                           COL      CAN SLV
                                                                                                  PER
                                                                                                  CIV
                                                                                                  CHN
                                                                                                TUR
                                                                                                  BEL
                                                                                                  FIN
                                                                                                  JAM
                                                                                                          GTM GTM   ZMB
                                                                           MAR
                                                                           KEN
                                                                            TAW
                                                                             BGD IRL IND
                                                                                      BRB YEM
                                                                                     GBR     SLE
                                                                                           MEX
                                                                                             NOR
                                                                                               GBR
                                                                                                FIN COL MLI
                                                                       IDN MUSBOL MAR      BHSFIN JOR
                                                                                                SIN
                                                                                                NLDCYP  PRY
                                                                    MDG                         CRI    ESPPRY
                                                                    SLV ZAFMYS UGATAW
                                                                                MAR
                                                                             GHA THAJPN        USA PRT
                                                                                                  HND
                                                                                                 LKA
                                                                                               AUS  NZL
                                                                                                     GBR
                                                                                                     SWE           ETHHRVKOR
                                                                                                                       ZMB
                                                                         BGD    MYSIDN           COL           PHL
                                                                                                PRT THA LSO
               −5




                                                                                   SLE
                                                                              SLE CIV      CHNJAM                 PAK
                                                                        MWI FRA          GRC  NOR
                                                                                              EGY
                                                                                              NZL
                                                                                              ITA  ECU     MLI  ETH
                                                                                             MYS
                                                                                            MAR
                                                                                             FRA AUSGRC
                                                                                          KEN TUN
                                                                                              UGA
                                                                                                BEL CHE
                                                                                         JAM
                                                                                         CIVDEU
                               −10




                                                  −1         −.5                  0                            .5                  1
                                                                          Democracy (residual)


Figure 7: Scatter plot of the residual of the gross Gini coefficient (vertical axis) against the residual
of our democracy indicator. The covariates that are partialled out include Country and year effects,
the lagged dependent variable and GDP per capita. Each dot is a country/year observation, and
there are a total of 538 observations. The bottom figure is constructed in a similar way but excludes
outliers, defined as countries with a Cook distance above 4/N , with N the number of observations.




                                                                                  85
