                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    THE EFFECTS OF PAID FAMILY LEAVE IN CALIFORNIA ON LABOR MARKET
                               OUTCOMES

                                         Charles L. Baum
                                        Christopher J. Ruhm

                                        Working Paper 19741
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19741


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2013




Ruhm thanks the University of Virginia Bankard Fund for providing financial support for this research.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Charles L. Baum and Christopher J. Ruhm. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Effects of Paid Family Leave in California on Labor Market Outcomes
Charles L. Baum and Christopher J. Ruhm
NBER Working Paper No. 19741
December 2013
JEL No. J1,J18,J2,J3

                                               ABSTRACT

Using data from the 1997 cohort of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY-97), we examine
the effects of California’s first in the nation government-mandated paid family leave program (CA-PFL)
on mothers’ and fathers’ use of leave during the period surrounding child birth, and on the timing of
mothers’ return to work, the probability of eventually returning to pre-childbirth jobs, and subsequent
labor market outcomes. Our results show that CA-PFL raised leave-taking by around 2.4 weeks for
the average mother and just under one week for the average father. The timing of the increased leave
use – immediately after birth for men and around the time that temporary disability insurance benefits
are exhausted for women – is consistent with causal effects of CA-PFL. Rights to paid leave are also
associated with higher work and employment probabilities for mothers nine to twelve months after
birth, possibly because they increase job continuity among those with relatively weak labor force attachments.
We also find positive effects of California’s program on hours and weeks of work during their child’s
second year of life and possibly also on wages.


Charles L. Baum
Economics and Finance Department
P. O. Box 27
Middle Tennessee State University
Murfreesboro, TN 37132
cbaum@mtsu.edu

Christopher J. Ruhm
Frank Batten School of
Leadership and Public Policy
University of Virginia
235 McCormick Rd.
P.O. Box 400893
Charlottesville, VA 22904-4893
and NBER
ruhm@virginia.edu
         I.      Introduction

         Most industrialized countries provide new mothers (and sometimes fathers) rights to a

substantial amount of paid leave following the birth of a child. For example, German mothers may

take up to a year off from work while receiving 67 percent of their usual pay, and Canada provides a

year or more of maternity leave with 55 percent of pay replaced. Conversely, the United States is

one of only four nations without entitlements to paid leave (Heymann, Earle, and Hayes, 2007).

         Prior to the 1993 Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA), the U.S. did not provide federal

rights to unpaid leave either.1 However, just as some states passed their own laws granting unpaid

maternity leave before the FMLA, states have begun to provide paid family leave (PFL) from work

to care for a newborn or a sick child, spouse, or parent. California was the first state to do so,

approving six weeks of PFL with 55 percent of usual pay replaced (up to $1,067 per week in 2013),

although this leave is not job-protected and is typically not provided to public-sector employees.2

         California’s paid family leave statute (CA-PFL), which was passed in 2002 and took effect

July 1, 2004, is financed through a payroll tax levied on employees and was added to the pre-



1
    The FMLA provides for 12 weeks of unpaid leave following the birth or adoption of a child, with

exemptions for small firms and employees not meeting a work history requirement. The law also

covers time off work due to their own or a family member’s serious health problem, and so is called

“family leave” rather than “parental leave.” Along this dimension, the FMLA and the state laws we

discuss below are broader than the provisions in many other countries. See Ruhm (2011) for a

detailed discussion of family and parental leave laws in both a U.S. and an international context.
2
    Information on California’s paid leave program in this and the next paragraph is obtained from

Fass (2009); Applebaum and Milkman (2011) and Employment Development Department (2013).
existing Temporary Disability Insurance program that typically provides mothers with six weeks of

paid leave during or just after pregnancy. In July 2009, New Jersey began a “family leave

insurance” program quite similar to CA-PFL, also added to the state’s TDI system, which offers six

weeks of paid leave at a 66 percent replacement rate, although with a considerably lower ($584 per

week in 2013) maximum benefit (Department of Labor and Workforce Development, 2013).

Beginning in 2014, Rhode Island’s “temporary caregiver’s insurance” program will provide four

weeks of paid leave at a 60 percent wage replacement rate, up to a ceiling ($752 per week in 2014).

As with California and New Jersey, the program is coordinated with the state’s temporary disability

insurance; however, job protection is also provided during the leave period.3 Washington state

approved $250 per week in paid benefits to be provided for five weeks, with the program scheduled

to begin in 2009 (Progressive States Network, 2010); however, due to budgetary pressures,

implementation has been repeatedly postponed and is now not scheduled until 2015 (Employment

Security Department, 2013).4 In addition, President Obama proposed (unsuccessfully) in his 2011




3
    Information on the Rhode Island program is available at www.dlt.ri.gov/tdi/tdifaqs.htm and

www.shrm.org/LegalIssues/StateandLocalResources/Pages/Rhode-Island-Temporary-Caregiver-

Leave.aspx.
4
    Unlike California and New Jersey, Washington does not have a temporary disability system upon

which paid family leave could be added. Only three other states – Hawaii, New York, and Rhode

Island – have temporary disability insurance programs (Fass, 2009) and the TDI benefits are often

quite low (e.g. the maximum benefit in New York is $170 per week in 2013).


                                                                                                      2
budget, to allocate $50 million in competitive grants to states that start PFL programs and there have

been increasing efforts to establish a national paid leave program.5

         Researchers have previously analyzed the labor market effects of (largely) unpaid family

leave in the United States (Klerman and Leibowitz, 1997, 1999; Waldfogel, 1999; Baum, 2003a,b;

Han and Waldfogel, 2003; Berger and Waldfogel, 2004; Han, Ruhm, and Waldfogel, 2009) and of

paid parental leave in other industrialized countries (Ruhm and Teague, 1997; Albrecht et al., 1998;

Ruhm, 1998; Ondrich et al., 1999; Schonberg and Ludsteck, 2007; Baker and Milligan, 2008; Gupta,

Smith, and Verner, 2008; Hanratty and Trzcinski, 2009; Lalive and Zweimuller, 2009; Pronzato,

2009). These studies typically examine the effects of the government mandates on aggregate

employment rates or wages of mothers or women of childbearing age.6 Most of this research

suggests that parental leave rights yield positive effects on labor market outcomes, but with some

variation in the findings. For example, Ruhm (1998) indicates that short- to medium-length leave

5
    Most recently, the Family and Medical Insurance Leave Act, proposed by Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand

and Rep. Rosa DeLauro in 2013, would provide workers with 12 weeks of paid leave at a 66 percent

wage replacement rate (up to a ceiling), with no employer size exemption, and administered by a

new Office of Paid Family and Medical Leave within the Social Security Administration

(www.nationalpartnership.org/research-library/work-family/paid-leave/family-act-fact-sheet.pdf).
6
    Parental leave rights could increase aggregate employment and wage levels because they preserve

employer-employee relationships. Conversely, they may have the opposite effect (for at least some

groups) if they raises labor costs (particularly for the workers most likely to take leave). There is also

a related literature examining how parental leave entitlements affect the mental or physical health of

children and parents (e.g. Ruhm, 2000; Chatterji and Markowitz, 2005; Tanaka, 2005; Berger et al.,

2005; Baker and Milligan, 2010; Rossin, 2011).


                                                                                                        3
mandates in Europe increase employment without decreasing wages, whereas Lalive and Zweimuller

(2009) find that an extension of Austrian paid leave rights from one to two years decreased maternal

employment and wages in the short-term but not the long-run.

         Paid family leave could have different consequences than the unpaid leave provided under

the 1993 FMLA because wage replacement may allow parents facing financial constraints to take

more time off work. Moreover, coverage under California PFL is nearly universal, whereas fewer

than 60 percent of workers are eligible under the FMLA, due to its firm size and work history

requirements.7 The effects of the California paid leave program may also depart from those of paid

leave in other industrialized nations because of its relatively short duration (e.g., six weeks in

California versus a year or more in Canada).8

         PFL is expected to raise leave-taking in the period immediately following the birth because

some parents will delay their return to the pre-childbirth job, during which time they are “employed

but not at work,” while others take leave rather than quitting their jobs. However, to the extent that

job continuity is increased, employment and work may rise in the longer-term. These effects will be




7
    Klerman et al. (2012) estimate that 59 percent of workers were FMLA-eligible in 2012. Eligibility

rates will be lower for expectant parents who work for smaller firms or have less recent employment

experience than the average worker.
8
    Benefits in some European countries are long enough to allow parents to have multiple births while

on paid leave.


                                                                                                         4
dampened to the extent that parents have paid leave even without the legislation or if the wage

replacement rate is too low for them to afford time off work.9

         Most closely related to the current research is Rossin-Slater, et al.’s (2013) analysis of March

Current Population Survey (CPS) data from 1999-2010, which shows that CA-PFL more than

doubled the use of maternity leave among mothers with infants – increasing it from three to six or

seven weeks for the average mother. They also provide suggestive evidence of particularly large

growth in use for less advantaged groups and of medium-term increases in the usual weekly work

hours and wages of employed mothers of one to three year old children. However, the March CPS

does not identify the precise timing of leave-taking nor permit testing of whether the increases in

leave use occurring during the period in which CA-PFL is anticipated to have the strongest effects.

         We build on the existing literature by using the data from the 1997 cohort of the National

Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY-97) to examine how CA-PFL affected leave-taking and (for

mothers) other labor market outcomes. The NLSY-97 provides information on the location and exact

timing of births, as well as detailed work history data before and after it. Our analysis focuses on

parents with substantial work experience during the pregnancy period, since this is the group

potentially eligible for paid parental leave, and uses a differences-in-differences (DD) approach

where the experiences of new California parents in the period after CA-PFL implementation are

compared to their counterparts whose children were born earlier, and these changes are contrasted

with corresponding parents in matched comparison states. Our analysis extends the literature by

examining parents’ leave and work decisions in each day and week after the child’s birth, by

9
    In 2012, 35 percent of female employees were at worksites offering paid maternity leave (although

of potentially short duration) to “all” or “most” employees and 20 percent of males were at sites

offering corresponding paternity leave (Klerman, et al., 2012).


                                                                                                        5
investigating the likelihood and timing of the return to the pre-birth job, and by analyzing fathers (to

the extent the data allow), as well as mothers.10

          Since the NLSY-97 precisely identifies the timing of births and leave-taking, we are able to

determine whether the patterns of leave use are those anticipated by the institutional details of CA-

PFL, making a more credible case for causal inference. Specifically, California mothers are expected

to begin using PFL following the exhaustion of temporary disability benefits, which typically occurs

six to eight weeks after birth, so that this is where we should see increases in leave-taking following

enactment of the program. Conversely, since fathers do not qualify for (pregnancy-related) TDI

benefits, any increase for them should occur immediately after the birth. Examining subsequent

employment rates – a year or more after the child’s birth—shows longer-term effects of the

government leave mandates (e.g. occurring through changes in employer-employee relationships).

          Our analysis yields six primary results. First, the availability of CA-PFL increases leave-

taking. On average, mothers use two to three additional weeks of leave and fathers just under one

extra week. Second, the timing of the rise in leave use – just after the birth for fathers and around the

time temporary disability benefits are exhausted for mothers – is consistent with those expected if

the program has a causal effect. Third, the increase in maternal leave use primarily reflects work

reductions during the first three months after birth, although some specifications also suggest

increased rates of employment. Fourth, the California paid leave program is associated with greater

probabilities that mothers have returned to work by mothers nine to twelve months after giving birth.

10
     Han et al. (2009) analyzed unpaid leave in the U.S. includes fathers, but they do not know the

exact timing of the birth or the reason why parents are employed but not working. Hanratty and

Trzcinski (2009) model the return to work after childbirth among Canadian mothers but cannot

distinguish between periods of paid and unpaid leave or nonparticipation in the labor force.


                                                                                                          6
Fifth, the results for job continuity are mixed, providing little evidence of an increased likelihood

that mothers return to their pre-birth employers in our main specifications, but with such a pattern

emerging when broadening the sample to include those working fewer weeks during pregnancy. This

raises the possibility that PFL provides incentives for some pregnant women to stay on the job until

birth in order to qualify for paid leave benefits (and then subsequently return to the same employer).

Last, we find evidence that California’s paid leave legislation has positive medium-term effects on

weeks and hours worked by mothers and, possibly, also on wages.

          II.    Data

          In 1997, the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth began annually collecting information

on the labor market experiences and background characteristics of 4,385 females and 4,599 males

aged 12 to 16, including oversamples of non-Hispanic blacks and Hispanics. To construct our

analysis sample, we selected respondents (mothers and fathers) who had a child between 2000 and

2010 (the last available survey wave) and, in our main specifications, who were employed at least 32

weeks during the nine months before the child’s birth. We excluded parents who worked fewer

weeks during the pregnancy, since they would be unlikely to qualify for family leave, although we

test and report on the robustness of the results to this exclusion.11 We also omitted the self-employed

who, by definition, do not need to negotiate for leave from work. When weighted, our sample is

nationally representative of children born to parents meeting these conditions.


          The NLSY-97 collects weekly data on labor market status (i.e. employed, unemployed, out-

of-the labor force), as well as the exact dates of childbirth. This allowed us to construct a work

11
     Parents quitting jobs prior to giving birth will not receive leave benefits. However, some who

worked less than 32 weeks during the pregnancy could receive paid leave – e.g. a mother who

worked continuously during the second and third but not the first trimester.


                                                                                                        7
history for each mother and father identifying whether she or he was employed in each week before

and after the birth. The starting and stopping day of paid and unpaid leave spells (during which the

individual was employed but not working) are also identified. The “paid leave” questions refer to

paid time off work because of a pregnancy or birth of a child. The “unpaid leave” questions indicate

unpaid vacation or leave that is related to a pregnancy (for spouses in the case of men). One

complication is that some respondents may classify time off work provided under CA-PFL as

“unpaid leave” because they are not directly paid by their employer, but instead by the State of

California.12 Therefore, we focus below on the total leave-taking, including both paid and unpaid

time off work.


          The NLSY-97 questions are designed to capture leaves lasting at least seven days. However,

many mothers and fathers report leaves of six or fewer days, and durations of exactly seven days

occur only slightly more often than those lasting six or eight days.13 For this reason, our analysis

proceeds as if all leaves are identified, but we recognize that some short leaves are probably missing.

This is likely to be particularly problematic for fathers, who frequently will be off work for only



12
     In regression models that separate them, CA-PFL is associated with higher use of both paid and

unpaid leave, which is consistent with the hypothesized classification problem, since there is no

reason why paid leave would raise unpaid time off work.
13
     For example, 2.0%, 3.1%, 2.2%, 4.1% and 2.6% of 2010 year unpaid leaves for female

respondents were reported to last four, five, six, seven and eight days respectively. For paid leaves,

the corresponding percentages were 1.3%, 0.0%, 0.9%, 1.7%, 1.3%. For fathers, these reported

percentages were 5.7%, 1.3%, 1.8%, 7.9%, and 3.1% for unpaid leaves and 11.4%, 5.3%, 8.3%,

19.7%, and 14.4% for paid leaves.


                                                                                                         8
brief periods of time. And the restriction should be noted when we consider leave survival

probabilities, which will be overstated by the exclusion of some short leaves.


          Mothers are followed for one year after giving birth, in most of the analysis, but the return to

work is treated as an absorbing state, so that the tracking is discontinued once this occurs. We are

also able to identify the last job held by the mother before her child’s birth and the first job after it,

and so can determine if she returned to the pre-birth employer. Our analysis of fathers is limited to

leave-taking – we do not examine future employment probabilities because it seems unlikely that

these will be much affected by the brief leaves that (some) fathers take and because any such effects

are likely to be overwhelmed, in the differences-in-differences (DD) framework, by small disparities

in levels or trends between the treatment and control groups.


          The key explanatory factor, CA-PFL, is a dummy variable equal to one if the child is born on

or after July 1, 2004, when California’s paid family leave is in force, and zero for births in other

states or in California before that date. The CA-PFL variable is a good indicator of eligibility

because coverage is almost universal for private-sector employees. However, some new parents may

be ineligible because they stopped working earlier in the pregnancy or do not meet the (weak) work

history requirements for coverage.14 We also control for the parent’s age with a comprehensive set of

dummy variables (one for each year of age in the sample), race/ethnicity (black and Hispanic),

education (years of school completed), marital status (married vs. unmarried), and years of prior




14
     To be eligible, new parents must have earned at least $300 during the 5 to 17 preceding months;

there are no other work history or tenure requirements (Applebaum and Milkman, 2011).


                                                                                                             9
work experience. Additional covariates include family size, number of biological children and parity

(child birth order).15


          In supplemental analyses, we explore longer-term effects of CA-PFL on wages and on annual

weeks and weekly hours of work. Specifically, we use the NLSY-97’s work history data described

above to identify the hourly wage at the mother’s job held one year after the birth, as well as the

number of hours and weeks worked during the child’s second year of life (e.g., the 53rd through

104th weeks after birth).16


          III.   Empirical Specification

          We use multivariate differences-in-differences (DD) analysis to explore the effects of CA-

PFL, distinguishing between the impacts on mothers and fathers through the use of separate models

for each. Our DD models contrast changes in the outcomes for new California parents before and

after enactment of PFL to those for corresponding parents in matched control states.

          The basic DD specification takes the form:

15
     We could not further stratify the unmarried group because only 7.2% of the sample were

widowed, separated or divorced. Work experience is calculated by summing weeks worked,

excluding weeks on unpaid or paid leave, through the week preceding the child’s birth and then

dividing by 52.
16
     More precisely, wages are measured at the first job held between the 47th to 57th weeks after birth,

adjusted for inflation to year-2012 dollars using the Consumer Price Index (CPI). We also windsorize

wages, replacing values below (above) $5 ($50) with $5 ($50). Windsorizing at other values (e.g., $1 and

$100) does not appreciably affect the results. The measures of work weeks and hours do not condition on

employment – i.e. they include zero values.


                                                                                                       10
                      Yict =  + 1CAict + 2POSTict + 3CA×POSTict + 1Xict + εict,               (1)

where Y is the outcome, CA is dummy variable taking the value of one for California parents and

zero for their control state counterparts, POST is a dichotomous indicator set to one (zero) for births

on or after (before) the July 1, 2004 enactment of PFL, X is a vector of supplementary covariates, 

is an error term, and the subscripts respectively denote parent i, child c, and t days or weeks after the

birth.17      provides the DD estimate of primary interest. We obtained (but do not show) similar

results using the somewhat more flexible model:

                          Yict =  + 3CA×POSTict + 1Xict + 2Tict + 3Sict + εict,        (1’)

where T and S are vectors of year and state dummy variables.18

           The outcomes are measures of labor market status including the use of leave before or after

birth and, for mothers, the probability of work, employment, and having returned to the pre-birth

employer. As mentioned, we restrict the main analysis to parents who worked at least 32 weeks

during the pregnancy, since those who have not done so are unlikely to qualify for leave.19 The

tables also report robust standard errors, clustered at the state level (Bertrand, Duflo, and

Mullainathan, 2004).

           We present additional results using several variants of (1). In some figures, we show

component elements of the DD models through visual comparisons of the outcome variables for

17
     Negative values for t indicate periods before the birth.
18
     (1’) controls for a more complete set of time-invariant location-specific effects and for factors that

vary uniformly across locations at a point in time. The POST and CA main effects are absorbed by T

and S, and so do not show up in (1’).
19
     This sample inclusion criterion also excludes older women and single men.


                                                                                                         11
California and comparison state parents before and following the implementation of PFL, after

controlling for demographic characteristics. This is done through estimates of:

              Yict =  + 1CONTROL×POSTict + 2CA×PREict + 3CA×POSTict + 1Xict + εict,                         (2)

where CONTROL is a dummy variable equal to one for births from the control states and zero for

births from California, and PRE is a dichotomous variable set to one for births before the July 1,

2004 implementation of PFL implementation. In (2),                      provides the regression-controlled estimated

average value of the dependent variable for the reference group of control state parents prior to PFL.

Corresponding estimates for control state parents after July 1, 2004 and California parents before

and subsequent to PFL implementation are                  ,                ,   and      respectively.

          We also sometimes estimate parental leave hazard and survival rates for specified periods

after birth. This is done using discrete time hazard models (Prentice and Gloeckler,1978; Meyer,

1990, 1995) measuring the probability that a spell of leave ends between week (or day) t and t+1,

conditional on being on leave at t.20 Hazard models are conceptually appropriate and are well

designed to deal with censored observations (e.g., when some leave spells are on-going as of the

most recently-released wave of data) and the discrete time specification imposes no parametric

restrictions on the underlying baseline hazard function.

          Defining ic(t) as the hazard rate t weeks (or days) after the birth of child c for parent i,

                                          ic (t )  prob[t  1  Tic | Tic  t ] ,                       (3)

and the hazard specification is

                                          ic (t )  0 (t )e  X ,
                                                              t   ict
                                                                                                          (4)

20
     In our application, once a mother (or father) moves off leave, either by returning to work or

exiting the labor force, she exits the sample.


                                                                                                                  12
with Xict defined as above, except with an additional control for an interaction of PFL with a quartic

function of leave duration. 0(t), the baseline hazard rate for week (or day) t, is estimated non-

parametrically.21 The corresponding survivor rate, ic(T), which is the probability of remaining on

leave for T weeks (or days), is the cumulative product of (one minus) the individual hazard rates, or

                                                      T
                                          ic (T )   (1  ic (t )) .                       (5)
                                                     t 1



          IV.    Selection of Control States

          A requirement for the DD procedures to generate consistent estimates of the causal effect of

CA-PFL is that the changes over time in the outcomes would have been similar between California

and the control states had CA-PFL not been enacted, although the levels could differ. Conversely, if,

for example, leave-taking was increasing faster for California mothers than for counterparts in other

states, even absent CA-PFL, then the program will be spuriously related to increases in leave use,

leading to an overestimate of its true causal effect.

          While we cannot know what the outcomes during the post-PFL period in California would

have been without its implementation, we can observe the pre-program trends. Therefore, our

empirical strategy is to choose control states with similar trends in maternal leave-taking before July

1, 2004 to those observed in California. Specifically, we use the following procedure to determine

whether parents in a given state should be included in the control group. First, we exclude the 29

states and the District of Columbia with fewer than 8 NLSY-97 women giving birth during the pre-

program period, since precision of the estimates will be extremely low in these cases. Second, for

21
     Specifically, we use the probit functional form (see Maddala, 1983) for ic(t), including duration

dummy variables which allow the baseline hazard to take a value in each period that best fits the

data, instead of being forced to follow a trend that is partially determined by other durations.


                                                                                                      13
each of the remaining 21 states, we estimate the following model, using only observations from

before July 1, 2004 for California and the specified state:

                 Yict =  + Xict + TRict + NONCAict + TR×NONCAict + εict.                (6)

In (6), TR is a linear time trend (for the 2000-2004 period) and NONCA is a dummy variable set to

one for the potential control state and zero for California. The interaction term, TR×NONCAict,

allows the leave-taking time trend to differ between California and the other state, and we treat that

state as a possible control if we are unable to reject the null hypothesis that   equals zero. Although

similar numbers of NLSY-97 fathers and mothers have children before July 2004, too few fathers

take leave to identify valid control states. Therefore, we use the control states identified for mothers

in our analysis of the effects of PFL on father’s leave-taking.22

         Table 1 presents    from equation (6) for each potential control state, the associated standard

error, the number of pre-July 2004 births to mothers, and whether each state is included in the

control group. Ultimately, 15 states are deemed to be valid controls for mothers. The other 35 states

and District of Columbia either had different pre-PFL trends in leave-taking or provided too few

observations to be compared with California. In addition to eliminating those states with statistically

different time trend coefficients, we exclude six states (AL, DE, MS, MO, TN, and WI) whose time

trend coefficients are not statistically different but exceed 1.0 in absolute value. Although admittedly

arbitrary, we consider the pre-trend patterns in these states to be too different from those in

California to provide valid controls.




22
     We obtain similar marginal effects of CA-PFL on leave-taking, with somewhat smaller standard

errors in some cases, for fathers when using all non-California states as controls.


                                                                                                        14
       Descriptive characteristics, weighted so as to be representative, are provided for mothers and

fathers in Appendix tables A.1 and A.2, with separate results presented for California and the control

states and for periods before after CA-PFL implementation. The combined (California plus control

state) samples contain 1,188 births for mothers and 1,126 births for fathers. California parents are

less likely to be black and more often Hispanic than parents from control states. As expected, since

the NLSY-97 follows a cohort, those giving birth before July 2004 are younger, have less education

and work experience, are less likely to be married, and have fewer children than counterparts whose

children are born later. However, these parents reside in households with more members.


       V.      Leave-Taking

       Figure 1 presents the daily regression-adjusted proportion of mothers in our sample on leave

during the 12 weeks before and 39 weeks after giving birth. These are obtained from estimates of

equation (2) which, as discussed, distinguish births before and after July of 2004 and in California

versus the control states, and adjusts for differences in race/ethnicity, age, education, marital status,

work experience, family size and number of children.


       The figure provides strong evidence that CA-PFL increased leave-taking. Prior to the

program’s enactment, new mothers in California took roughly the same amount of leave as their

control state counterparts in the weeks immediately before birth and slightly more two to eight

weeks after it (probably reflecting the availability of temporary disability insurance in California).

There was no change, or possibly even a slight decrease, in control state leave-taking after July of

2004, whereas its use increased fairly dramatically for California mothers over the same period.


       Additional details are provided in the first two columns of Table 2, which shows differences-

in-differences estimates (the estimated marginal effects on the CA×POST interaction in equation 1)


                                                                                                         15
along with the associated standard errors, for specified time periods after the births. For example, the

first table entry indicates that California’s paid leave program raised estimated leave-taking one day

after birth by a highly significant 17.0 percentage points (from a baseline of 57.7%). The DD

estimates indicate that PFL was associated with 14 to 17 percentage point in leave-taking during the

first five or six weeks after birth and 18 to 30 point growth during the next seven weeks. The effect

shrinks rapidly thereafter, although generally remaining statistically significant through the child’s

first four months. These patterns make sense since PFL is expected to have the strongest effect

during the six-week period after the expiration of Temporary Disability Insurance benefits, which

generally exhaust for mothers six to eight weeks after the birth.


          PFL also appears to have increased the leave-taking of fathers, but with three important

differences. First, the strongest effects occur immediately after the birth, rather than being delayed

by several weeks (see Figure 2 and the last two columns of Table 2). This is again consistent with a

causal effect of CA-PFL, since many women will be on TDI leave after delivery, which fathers are

not eligible for. Second, the absolute magnitude of the effect is much smaller – peaking at 6 to 10

percentage points for men versus 20 to 30 points for women. However, since the baseline rates of

leave-taking are also dramatically lower for fathers (17.0% percent just after birth versus 57.7% for

mothers) the estimated effects are of approximately equal size or even slightly larger in relative

terms.23 Third, fathers remain on leave relatively briefly, even after the enactment of paid family

leave, with less than 6 percent still off the job by the end of the child’s third week and fewer than 1




23
     Applebaum and Milkman (2011) indicate the proportion of fathers taking paid leave after a child’s

birth in California increased from 17 percent in 2004 to 26 percent in 2010.


                                                                                                         16
percent after the seventh week.24 By contrast, after the enactment of PFL, 53.3% of California

mothers and 24.7% of those in control states were still not at work seven weeks after delivery.

          Further detail on how CA-PFL affected the timing of leave-taking is provided in Table 3 and

Figures 3 through 6, which show estimated parental leave hazard and survival rates after controlling

for demographic characteristics. Specification 1, in Table 3, constrains the effects to be proportional

in each week after birth; in specification 2 and the figures, the effects of CA-PFL on the hazard rates

are allowed to vary nonlinearly with leave durations: this is done by interacting a quartic polynomial

of time on leave with the indicator for the post-PFL implementation period (with California and Post

main effects also controlled for).


          CA-PFL reduces the estimated average weekly hazard rate out of leave by a statistically

significant 4 to 5 percent for both men and women (see specification 1). However, as shown in

specification 2, the predicted effects vary substantially over time. For mothers, the hazard rates fall

immediately after the birth but with the largest decrease occurring 6 to 14 weeks after delivery and

with a negative effect persisting until around the 18th week, after which the pattern reverses and CA-

PFL is associated with higher hazard rates (Figure 3). This last effect occurs because fewer than five

percent of California mothers remained on leave through the 18th week prior to 2004, versus around

10 percent after the law’s passage (see Figure 4), so that hazard rates became necessarily low.

Almost no mothers remain on leave beyond six months, either before or after the enactment of

California paid leave. For fathers, the reduction in leave hazard rates is immediate, peaking one

week after the birth, and with a higher exit rate predicted during the post-PFL period after the second


24
     On a related point, we do not show regression-adjusted effects for fathers beyond two weeks, in

Table 2, because no California fathers remained on leave after 14 days during the pre-PFL period.


                                                                                                       17
post-birth week (Figure 5), reflecting the extremely low rates at which fathers took more than two

weeks of leave before 2004 (see Figure 6). These results suggest a causal impact of CA-PFL.

Specifically, the reduction in expected hazard rates is largest for women during the several weeks

after the exhaustion of temporary disability insurance benefits, six to eight weeks after birth, but

immediately after it for men, who do not have access to TDI.


          Using the predicted survivor rates, displayed in Figures 4 and 6, we estimate that CA-PFL

raised average leave-taking from 7.8 to 10.2 weeks for new mothers and from 11.0 to 15.7 days for

new fathers.25 This implies that the average mother is taking 40 percent of the statutory duration of

the program as additional leave (2.4 of 6 weeks) and that the average father is taking around one-

sixth of the newly available leave (4.7 days out of the 6 weeks). In addition to these net increases,

there may be some replacement of time off work that would have otherwise been taken as unpaid or

company paid leave. These average effects conceal substantial variation in leave use across parents.

For instance we estimate that leave increased by around two (four) weeks for mothers at the 25th

(75th) percentiles of leave use and by 3 (10) days for corresponding fathers.


          VI.     Other Labor Market Outcomes

          The increase in leave-taking due to CA-PFL reflects a small reduction in non-employment

combined with a larger decrease in work among those who remain employed (but on leave). This is

shown in Table 4, which provides separate estimates for nonemployment and work, as well as for

work at the job held prior to childbirth. For instance, at the end of the first post-birth week, the 16.6

percentage point rise in predicted leave-taking (shown in Table 2 and previously discussed),

consisted of a 3.9 percentage point decline in non-employment and a 12.6 point reduction in work.


25
     This is calculated as t(t)×t, for (t) the probability of being on leave t periods after the birth.


                                                                                                             18
As mentioned, large predicted effects on maternal leave-taking persist through the fourth month after

delivery and, at almost all of these intervals, are accompanied by strong reductions in work and

much weaker (and usually statistically insignificant) declines in non-employment. Additional detail

on the components of the DD estimates – the regression-adjusted labor market status of California

and control state mothers before and after CA-PFL enactment – are provided in Figures 7 and 8.26


          The intermediate-term labor market effects are equally interesting. CA-PFL is associated

with increased leave-taking and reduced rates of work during the first four months or so after birth,

as mentioned; however, by month six the leave-taking is complete and the negative predicted effects

on work have been eliminated. By nine months after birth, CA-PFL is predicted to increase work

probabilities and to reduce non-employment by a statistically significant five to six percentage

points, an effect which persists through at least the end of the first year.


          Researchers previously examining (mostly unpaid) state and federal leave entitlements

(Washbrook, et al., 2011), as well as California’s paid family leave program (Rossin-Slater, et al.,

2013) have also found that leave rights initially reduce but subsequently increase rates of work. The

reason generally hypothesized for the positive intermediate-term effect is that the availability of

leave reduces quits and raises the probability that mothers remain with their pre-birth employer. We

explore this possibility in the last two columns of Table 4 and in Figure 9, where the dichotomous

outcome indicates whether the mother is working at the last job held prior to giving birth.


26
     Figure 7 also shows the origin of the increase in non-employment estimated to occur in week 8.

Notice that the predicted non-employment rates of pre-PFL control group mothers spike downwards

and those of corresponding California mothers spike upwards, in this one week, before reverting to

more normal levels in the next. This produces the week 8 estimate shown on Table 4.


                                                                                                       19
       Our main specifications provide little evidence that CA-PFL increased job continuity.

Specifically, California mothers are predicted to be around one percentage point more likely to work

at their pre-birth job nine or twelve months after delivery, after enactment of the paid leave program,

but the effect does not approach statistical significance. The reason the impact is so small is that the

vast majority of the mothers analyzed (over 80 percent for all groups) eventually return to their old

jobs. However, this could partially reflect our sample inclusion requirement of having worked at

least 32 weeks during the pregnancy. Specifically, the availability of paid leave might induce some

mothers to work more during this period and take short paid leaves after it, rather than quitting the

job held during pregnancy, thereby increasing job continuity. This possibility is examined below.


       VII.    Robustness Checks

       We next test whether the preceding results are robust to changes in the choice of control

states or sample inclusion criteria. Table 5 summarizes the results. The top panel shows our base

model, where the comparison group consists of the matched control states and the sample includes

mothers employed at least 32 weeks of the pregnancy period. The second panel expands the

comparison to include all states (not just the matched controls). The third and fourth panels return to

the control state comparison but reduce the pre-birth work requirement for inclusion in the analysis

to 20 weeks and any employment during the nine months before the birth.

       Most results are insensitive to these changes. Expanding the control group to include all

states has little impact. Weakening the pregnancy period work requirement does not materially or

consistently affect the results for leave-taking but changes the estimated CA-PFL effect on

nonemployment and work in two ways. First, higher levels of employment explain a greater portion

of the increase in leave-taking, with a consequent decrease in the contribution of reductions in work.

For instance, CA-PFL is predicted to reduce the nonemployment of mothers by 7.8 percentage

                                                                                                        20
points, 4 weeks after the birth, when the sample includes those working at least 20 weeks during

pregnancy, versus a 1.3 point decrease when restricting the analysis to those who worked at least 32

weeks during this period. The accompanying reduction in work probabilities is 12.0 rather than 15.7

percentage points. Second, the medium-term increases in employment, work and return to the pre-

birth job are considerably larger when using less restrictive sampling criteria. Thus, PFL is predicted

to raise the probability of having returned to work within one year by 10.5 (8.7) percentage points

and to have done so with the pre-birth employer by 5.9 (8.8) points among mothers with any (at least

20) weeks of work during pregnancy, compared to 6.2 and 1.1 percentage point increases for the

main sample.

       This suggests that CA-PFL increases the job continuity of new mothers in ways that our main

estimates do not capture. Specifically, by restricting the sample to persons with substantial pre-birth

employment prior, we may be ignoring reductions in quit rates that paid leave facilitates. Without

paid time off the job, some mothers planning to stop working once their children are born may leave

their positions before delivery and therefore be excluded from our analysis. However, when paid

leave is available, some of them may choose not to quit their jobs but rather to take some time off

work and then return to their original employer. This could also help to explain the PFL-related

reduction in nonemployment observed immediately after childbirth. While an argument could be

made for using a less stringent pregnancy work requirement as our main specification, the tradeoff is

that doing so is likely to include more parents who who would not continue to be employed to the

point where leave rights become a relevant consideration.

       VIII. Wages, Earnings, and Work

       Last, we examine how California’s paid family-leave program has influenced longer-term

labor market outcomes of mothers including: the probability of having returned to work within one


                                                                                                      21
year of the birth, log hourly wages at this time, and the average number of weeks and hours worked

during the second year of the child’s life. The analysis samples are smaller than those above for two

reasons. First, labor market status will be unavailable for mothers giving birth near the end of the

analysis period. Second, wage data are missing for women who are not employed at the end of the

relevant time period and are not provided for some working mothers.27


          Our main results, summarized in the top panel of Table 6, confirm that CA-PFL increases

rates of maternal work one year after the child’s birth. Specifically, the DD estimate suggests that the

paid leave program raised the work probabilities of mothers by 5.5 percentage points one year after

birth, compared to a pre-PFL baseline of 91 percent.28 This is smaller than the 6.2 point increase

obtained in Table 5 (with a slightly larger sample and longer time period) but the difference does not

approach statistical significance. Rights to paid leave are also predicted to elevate weeks worked and

average weekly work hours during the second year of the child’s life – by 6.9 weeks and 4.2 hours –

which represent 19 and 16 percent growth compared over the pre-program baselines of 36.8 weeks

and 25.9 hours per week. At least some of this increase is expected, since rights to paid leave

significantly increased the probability of having returned to work by the end of the child’s first year.

Finally, the point estimates suggest that hourly wages increase by around five percent, one year after

the birth, but the confidence intervals are wide and include zero or negative effects.




27
     We found no evidence of differential patterns in missing data for California versus control state mothers.
28
     These are marginal effects estimated from probit models.


                                                                                                       22
          The bottom panel of Table 6 shows that we obtain fairly similar results when broadening the

sample to include mothers with any pre-birth employment.29 The one change is that there is a

considerably larger predicted increase in the probability of returning to work by 52 weeks after the

birth – 9.6 versus 5.5 percentage points – which is consistent with the results previously described in

Table 5 and again suggests a possible CA-PFL effect on job continuity.30


          IX.    Discussion


          Our analysis indicates that California’s paid family leave program raised the leave-taking of

new mothers and fathers. These increases are sizable and last for four months after the birth for

mothers and two weeks subsequent to it for fathers. For mothers, the effects are most pronounced

during the sixth through thirteenth weeks after delivery – an estimated 19 to 30 percentage point

increase – which corresponds to the period after the exhaustion of temporary disability benefits.

Fathers are not eligible for pregnancy-related TDI and the PFL effects for them begin immediately

after birth and are largest during the following week. Although the overall increase in leave-taking is

much smaller than for mothers – between 3 and 11 percentage points during the first two weeks – the

baseline levels are also dramatically lower, so that these effects are large in relative terms. We




29
     As expected, the baseline rates of post-birth work are lower for this group, since it includes mothers with

weaker attachments to the labor force.
30
     The effect on log wages at the end of year 1 and weeks or hours worked during year 2 are also similar for

the other two samples shown in Table 5 (mothers from all states, and those in California and control states

working 20 or more weeks during pregnancy), and the patterns of return to work by the end of the first year

also correspond with those found there.


                                                                                                       23
estimate CA-PFL increased the average leave-taking of mothers by around 2.4 weeks and that of

fathers by just under one week.

          We also examined other labor market consequences of the paid leave program for mothers.

The increased leave-taking immediately after birth results from a combination of reductions in work

among the employed and higher rates of employment, with the former being more important in most

specifications. There is consistent evidence that CA-PFL increased the likelihood that mothers have

returned to work by a year after birth and raised maternal hours and weeks of work by 15 to 20

percent during the second year of the child’s life. It is also predicted to raise hourly wages at then

end of the first year by 5 percent, but this estimate is imprecise and statistically insignificant. Finally,

there is some indication that the medium-term increases in the probability of working may reflect

increases in job continuity, resulting because paid leave reduces the probability that some expectant

mothers quit their jobs prior to giving birth.

          It is useful to compare these results to the recent study of California paid leave conducted by

Rossin-Slater et al. (2013). In their main specifications, the program is predicted to raise the average

leave-taking of eligible mothers by 3.1 to 3.3 weeks, with modestly smaller estimates obtained in

some alternative specifications. The similarity of these results to ours is noteworthy given that they

use a different data set – the 1999 to 2010 years of the March Current Population Survey – that

contains a larger sample but less precise information on leave-taking.31 They also find positive

medium-term effects of CA-PFL on maternal employment that appear to be of comparable size or

somewhat smaller than those that we observe.32 For example, rights to paid leave are anticipated to

raise the weekly work hours of mothers with one-year-old children by 2 to 3 hours per week, versus
31
     Information on leave-taking is only available for the week prior to the survey.
32
     They examine hours worked in the last week and last year for mothers of one to three year olds.


                                                                                                         24
a four hour per week reduction obtained here; however, these differences are statistically

indistinguishable. They also (imprecisely) estimate annual earnings increases of around 13 percent

for these mothers, largely reflecting growth in predicted work hours rather than hourly wages. Our

point estimate is larger – a 16 percent increase in work hours and a 4 to 5 percent rise in hourly

wages implies around a 22 percent rise in annual earnings – but again with standard errors that are

easily big enough enough to encompass the Rossin-Slater et al. estimate.33

          Our analysis extends beyond that of Rossin-Slater, et al. (2013) in at least two important

ways. First, the detailed NLSY-97 work history data permit us to identify increases in paternal leave-

taking that are modest in absolute size (less a week) but large in relative terms, more than a 40

percent increase from a low baseline. Interestingly, such results are consistent with Han, et al.’s

(2009) evidence that (largely unpaid) federal and state leave entitlements are associated with 50

percent or larger increases in leave-taking by fathers during the birth month, from extremely low

baseline rates.

          Second, we are able to more precisely measure the timing of leave-taking. As mentioned, the

patterns of leave use – immediately after births for fathers and reaching a maximum shortly after

temporary disability benefits are likely to be exhausted for most mothers – suggests that we are

observing a causal effect of CA-PFL. In addition, using predicted changes in survivor probabilities at

different durations, we can estimate the distribution of the rise in leave-taking. Doing so, we find

that the 25th percentile of the leave-taking distribution increases from just over 5 weeks to 7 weeks,

the 50th percentile from 8 to 11 weeks, and the 75th percentile from about 10 to 14 weeks. Similarly,



33
     The confidence intervals on Rossin-Slater et al. (2013) predictions are also wide and they estimate

a larger (21 percent) annual earnings increase for mothers with three year old children.


                                                                                                       25
for fathers the 25th, 50th, and 75th percentiles of the leave-taking distribution increase from 3 to 6, 7

to 12, and 12 to 22 days respectively.

          Some analysts advocate expanding California’s paid family leave program by further

publicizing its existence, raising the wage replacement rate, extending coverage to public sector

employees, and providing job protection during the leave.34 Our results indicate that the program, as

currently structured, has appreciable effects on leave-taking and work, so that these extensions are

likely to have noticeable effects as well. The cost of PFL mandates depends on the frequency and

duration with which parents take paid leave, the amount of wages replaced, and administrative costs

(including employer and employee accommodations for absent employees). The findings of this

analysis can be used to address the frequency and duration components of this cost. Also, the models

examining whether mothers return to the pre-birth employers raise the possibility of cost offsets, if

CA-PFL helps to preserve employer-employee matches and firm-specific human capital. This

information is also relevant, for California policymakers set the employee-paid payroll tax rate used

to finance the program. Finally, advocates of national paid family leave programs (e.g. O’Leary et

al., 2012; Zigler et al., 2012) draw heavily on the California experience and propose to incorporate

many of its key features in their proposals, making these findings particularly salient.


34
     In 2009-2010, a majority of California workers in did not know about the PFL program and a third

of those who knew of it did not apply for the benefits because the wage replacement was too low;

others did not take paid leave because they thought they were ineligible or feared that doing so

would limit their future potential advancement or result in employment termination (Applebaum and

Milkman, 2011).




                                                                                                        26
          References

       Albrecht, James W., Per-Anders Edin, Marianne Sundstrom, and Susan B. Vroman. (1998).
"Career Interruptions and Subsequent Earnings: A Reexamination Using Swedish Data." Journal of
Human Resources, 34(2), 294-311.

       Applebaum, Eileen, and Ruth Milkman. (2011). “Leaves that Pay: Employer and Worker
Experiences with Paid Family Leave in California.” Policy Report. Washington, D.C.: Center for
Economic and Policy Research.

       Baker, Michael and Kevin Milligan (2010). “Evidence from Maternity Leave Expansions of
the Impact of Maternal Care on Early Child Development.” Journal of Human Resources, 45(1): 1-
32.

       Baker, Michael, and Kevin Milligan. (2008). "How Does Job-Protected Maternity Leave
Affect Mothers’ Employment." Journal of Labor Economics, 26(4), 655-691.

       Baum, Charles L. (2003a). “The Effects of State Maternity Leave Legislation and the 1993
Family and Medical Leave Act on Employment and Wages.” Labour Economics, 10(5): 573-596.

       Baum, Charles L. (2003b). “The Effects of Maternity Leave Legislation on Mothers’ Labor
Supply Patterns after Childbirth.” Southern Economic Journal, 69(4): 772-799.

     Berger, Lawrence M., and Jane Waldfogel. (2004). "Maternity Leave and the Employment of
New Mothers in the United States." Journal of Population Economics, 17(2), 331-349.

      Berger, Berger, Jennifer Hill and Jane Waldfogel. (2005). “Maternity Leave, Early Maternal
Employment and Child Health and Development in the US.” Economic Journal 115(501): F29-F47

      Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan. (2004). “How Much Should
We Trust Difference-in-Differences Estimates?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(1): 249-275.

      Chatterji, Pinka and Sara Markowitz. (2005). “Does the Length of Maternity Leave Affect
Maternal Health,” Southern Economic Journal 72(1): 16-41.

        Department of Labor and Workforce Development, State of New Jersey. (2013). Maximum
Weekly Benefits and Taxable Wage Base Announced,
http://lwd.dol.state.nj.us/labor/lwdhome/press/2013/20130108_MaxWeeklyBenefits.html, accessed
February 26, 2013.

        Employment Development Department, State of California. (2013). Disability Insurance (DI)
and Paid Family Leave (PFL) Weekly Benefit Amounts,
http://www.edd.ca.gov/pdf_pub_ctr/de2588.pdf, accessed February 25, 2013.

        Employment Security Department, Washington State. (2013). Family Leave Insurance,
http://www.esd.wa.gov/newsandinformation/legresources/family-leave-insurance.php, accessed
February 25, 2013.


                                                                                                  27
       Fass, Sarah. (2009). “Paid Leave in the States: A Critical Support for Low-Wage Workers
and Their Families.” Research Report. New York, NY: Columbia University, National Center for
Children in Poverty.

       Gupta, Nabanita Datta, Nina Smith, and Mette Verner. (2008). “The Impact of Nordic
Countries’ Family Friendly Policies on Employment, Wages, and Children.” Review of Economics of
the Household, 6(1): 65-89.

       Han, Wen-Jui, Christopher J. Ruhm, and Jane Waldfogel. (2009). “Parental Leave Policies
and Parental Employment and Leave-Taking.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 28(1):
29-54.

       Han, Wen-Jui, and Jane Waldfogel. (2003). “Parental Leave: The Impact of Recent
Legislation on Parents’ Leave Taking.” Demography, 40(1): 191-200.

       Hanratty, Maria, and Eileen Trzcinski. (2009). “Who Benefits from Paid Leave? Impact of
Expansions in Canadian Paid Family Leave on Maternal Employment and Transfer Income.”
Journal of Population Economics, 22(3): 693-711.

       Haymann, Jody, Allison Earle, and Jeffrey Hayes. (2007). “The Work, Family, and Equity
Index.” Research Report. Montreal, Quebec: McGill University, Project on Global Working
Families and the Institute for Health and Social Policy.

     Klerman, Jacob, and Arleen Leibowitz. (1999). “Job Continuity Among New Mothers.”
Demography, 36(2): 145-155.

       Klerman, Jacob, and Arleen Leibowitz. (1997). “Labor Supply Effects of State Maternity
Leave Legislation” in Francine Blau and Ronald Ehrenberg (eds.) Gender and Family Issues in the
Workplace. New York: Russell Sage: 65-85.

        Klerman, Jacob A., Kelly Daley, and Alyssa Pozniak. (2012). Family and Medical Leave in
2012: Technical Report, prepared for the U.S. Department of Labor (Contract #GS10FOO86K).
Cambridge, MA: Abt Associates,
http://www.dol.gov/asp/evaluation/fmla/FMLATechnicalReport.pdf, accessed February 26, 2013.

       Lalive, Rafael, and Josef Zweimuller. (2009). “How Does Parental Leave Affect Fertility and
Return to Work? Evidence from Two Natural Experiments.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
124(3): 1363-1402.

      Maddala, G.S. (1983). Limited-Dependent and Qualitative Variables in Econometrics.
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.

      Meyer, Bruce. (1995). “Semiparametric Estimation of Hazard Models.” Unpublished
Manuscript. Chicago, IL: Northwestern University.

      Meyer, Bruce. (1990). “Unemployment Insurance and Unemployment Spells.”
Econometrica, 58(4), 757-782.


                                                                                                 28
       O’Leary, Ann, Matt Chayt and Eve Weissman. (2012) Social Security Cares: Why America
is Ready for Paid Family and Medical Leave. Washington D.C.: Center for American Progress.

       Ondrich, Jan, C. Katherine Spiess, Qing Yang, and Gert G. Wagner. (1999). “Full Time or
Part Time? German Parental Leave Policy and the Return to Work after Childbirth in Germany.”
Research in Labor Economics, 18(1): 41-74.

       Prentice, R. and L. Gloeckler (1978). “Regression Analysis of Grouped Survival Data with
Application to Breast Cancer Data.” Biometrics, 34(1), 57-67.

        Progressive States Network. (2010). “Maternity/Paternity Leave (Paid Family Leave).”
Research Report. New York, NY: http://www.progressivestates.org/content/369/maternity-and-
paternity-leave#paidleave.

       Pronzato, Chiara Daniela. (2009). “Return to Work after Childbirth: Does Parental Leave
Matter in Europe?” Review of the Economics of the Household, 7(4): 341-360.

      Rossin, Maya. (2011). “The Effects of Maternity Leave on Children’s Birth and Infant Health
Outcomes in the United States.” Journal of Health Economics, 30(2), 221-239.

       Rossin-Slater, Maya, Christopher J. Ruhm, and Jane Waldfogel. (2013). “The Effects of
California’s Paid Family Leave Program on Mothers’ Leave-Taking and Subsequent Labor Market
Outcomes.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 32(2), 224-245.

       Ruhm, Christopher J. (2011). “Policies to Assist Parents with Young Children.” The Future
of Children, 21(2): 37-68.

      Ruhm, Christopher J. (2000). “Parental Leave and Child Health.” Journal of Health
Economics, 19(6): 931-960.

      Ruhm, Christopher J. (1998). “The Consequences of Parental Leave Mandates: Lessons from
Europe.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(1): 285-318.

      Ruhm, Christopher J., and Jackqueline L. Teague. (1997). “Parental Leave Policies in Europe
and North America,” in Francine Blau and Ronald Ehrenberg (eds.) Gender and Family Issues in the
Workplace. New York: Russell Sage, 133-157.

       Schonberg, Uta, and Johannes Ludsteck. (2007). "Maternity Leave Legislation, Female
Labor Supply, and the Family Wage Gap." Discussion Paper. Bonn, Germany: IZA Institute for the
Study of Labor, Discussion Paper No. 2699.

      Tanaka, Sakiko. (2005). “Parental Leave and Child Health in OECD Across Countries.”
Economic Journal, 15(501): F7-F28.

       Waldfogel, Jane. (1999). “The Impact of the Family and Medical Leave Act.” Journal of
Policy Analysis and Management, 18(2): 281-301.



                                                                                                  29
       Washbrook, Elizabeth, Christopher J. Ruhm, Jane Waldfogel and Wen-Jui Han. (2011).
“Public Policies, Women’s Employment After Childbearing, and Child Well-Being.” The B.E.
Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy, 11(1 – Topics), Article 43.

      Zigler, Edward, Susan Muenchow and Christopher J. Ruhm. (2012). Time Out With Baby:
The Case for Paid Parental Leave. Washington, D.C.: Zero to Three.




                                                                                            30
Table 1: Results from Regressions to Select Control States

                 Number of
                                                   Standard           T-         Included as
                Pre-July 2004     Time-Trend
   STATE                                                                           Control
                  Births to       Coefficient        Error         Statistic        State
                   Mothers
      AL               8           -1.284          1.192           1.08            No
      AZ              14           -0.531          0.532           1.00            Yes
      CA              56            N/A             N/A            N/A             Yes
      DE               9           -1.221          0.937           1.30            No
      FL              13           -0.828          0.853           0.97            Yes
      GA              10           0.206           0.676           0.30            Yes
      IL              20           -0.550          0.445           1.24            Yes
      IN              12           -0.175          0.550           0.32            Yes
     MD               10           -0.657          0.670           0.98            Yes
      MI              15           0.401           0.671            060            Yes
     MN               16           -0.733          0.521           1.41            Yes
      MS              10           -1.276          1.083           1.18            No
     MO               11           -1.980          1.029           1.92            No
      NY              31           0.380           0.454           0.84            Yes
      NC              32           0.600           0.459           1.31            Yes
      OH              13           -0.046          0.775           0.06            Yes
      PA              14           -0.199          0.631           0.32            Yes
      TN              13           -1.069          1.110           0.96            No
      TX              64           -0.513          0.359           1.43            Yes
      VA              28           -0.243          0.468           0.52            Yes
      WI               8           1.369           1.132           1.21            No
The time-trend interaction measures the difference in the 2000 to pre-July 2004 time trend

between California and each state listed. States with fewer than 8 pre-July 2004 births to

mothers are not considered as control states These include (with the number of births shown

in parentheses): AK (1); AR (4); CO (4); CT (2); DC (1); HI (0); ID (0); IA (0); KS (4); KY

(6); LA (7); ME (0); MA (7); MT (3); NE (1); NV (3); NH (0); NJ (5); NM (2); ND (5); OK

(5); OR (4); RI (1); SC (6); SD (3); UT (0); VT (5); WA (3); WV (0); and WY (0). The text

provides further criteria for whether other states are included in the control group.


                                                                                               31
Table 2: Regression-Adjusted Estimated Effects of CA-PFL on Leave-Taking

 Time Period                          Mothers                           Fathers
 Day 1                       0.170***         (0.050)           0.063**           (0.029)
 Day 2                       0.172***         (0.049)          0.094***           (0.035)
 Day 4                       0.165***         (0.048)           0.085**           (0.036)
 Day 6                       0.158***         (0.048)          0.114***           (0.038)
 Day 7                       0.166***         (0.048)          0.100***           (0.036)
 Day 8                       0.166***         (0.048)           0.071**           (0.032)
 Day 10                      0.169***         (0.049)            0.069*           (0.037)
 Day 12                      0.174***         (0.046)             0.030           (0.023)
 Week 2                      0.163***         (0.048)            0.053*           (0.028)
 Week 3                      0.171***         (0.052)               -                -
 Week 4                       0.135**         (0.053)               -                -
 Week 5                      0.161***         (0.052)               -                -
 Week 6                      0.189***         (0.048)               -                -
 Week 7                      0.182***         (0.053)               -                -
 Week 8                      0.295***         (0.058)               -                -
 Week 10                     0.297***         (0.046)               -                -
 Week 13                     0.235***         (0.053)               -                -
 Week 16                      0.114**         (0.046)               -                -
 Week 18                       0.062*         (0.034)               -                -
 Week 20                        0.044         (0.027)               -                -
 Week 26                        0.004         (0.008)               -                -
 Week 34                       -0.005         (0.003)               -                -
 Week 39                       -0.004         (0.003)               -                -
Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Table shows difference-in-difference estimates

(coefficients on CA×POST interactions). The models also control for California and post-

July 2004 main effects, as well as race/ethnicity, age, education, marital status, work

experience, family size, and the number of biological children. Robust standard errors,

clustered at the state level, are in parentheses. There are 1,188 birth observations for mothers

and 1,126 birth observations for fathers who were employed in at least 32 pregnancy weeks

from California and the control states. No California fathers are on leave beyond 14 days in

the pre-PFL period, so estimates are not provided at those durations.
Table 3: Estimated Effects of CA-PFL on Hazard Rates Out of Leave

 Time Period                          Mothers                           Fathers
 Specification 1
 PFL                         -0.047***          (0.010)       -0.043***           (0.012)
 Specification 2
 PFL*Weeks/100               -0.014***          (0.003)       -0.020***           (0.004)
 PFL*Weeks2/1000               0.055            (0.046)        0.215***           (0.058)
 PFL*Weeks3/10000              0.023            (0.018)       -0.066***           (0.022)
 PFL*Weeks4/100000           -0.006***          (0.002)        0.006***           (0.002)
Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Table shows difference-in-difference estimates

(coefficients on CA×POST interactions), with the same controls as in Table 2. Robust

standard errors, clustered at the state level, are in parentheses. Discrete time hazard models

are estimated. There are 6,829 birth-week observations from 749 births for mothers and

2,295 birth-day observations from 186 births for fathers in the paid leave hazard model from

California and the control states.




                                                                                             33
Table 4: Regression-Adjusted Estimated Effects of CA-PFL on the Labor Market Status of Mothers

 Time Period                         Not Employed                    Returned to Work By                Returned to Old Job By
 Week 1                          -0.039           (0.031)         -0.126***           (0.028)         -0.126***          (0.028)
 Week 2                          -0.038           (0.033)         -0.124***           (0.027)         -0.125***          (0.027)
 Week 3                          -0.013           (0.032)         -0.159***           (0.027)         -0.157***          (0.027)
 Week 4                          -0.013           (0.037)         -0.157***           (0.027)         -0.156***          (0.027)
 Week 5                          -0.007           (0.035)         -0.160***           (0.028)         -0.157***          (0.027)
 Week 6                          -0.006           (0.033)         -0.190***           (0.036)         -0.190***          (0.036)
 Week 7                          -0.013           (0.032)         -0.202***           (0.038)         -0.204***          (0.038)
 Week 8                        -0.077***          (0.021)         -0.198***           (0.049)         -0.206***          (0.048)
 Week 10                          0.023           (0.038)         -0.308***           (0.047)         -0.325***          (0.044)
 Week 13                          0.005           (0.029)         -0.203***           (0.036)         -0.229***          (0.036)
 Week 16                         -0.019           (0.026)          -0.075**           (0.034)         -0.115***          (0.031)
 Week 18                         -0.015           (0.025)           -0.060*           (0.034)          -0.097**          (0.041)
 Week 20                         -0.022           (0.026)            -0.031           (0.033)           -0.074*          (0.040)
 Week 26                         -0.014           (0.021)             0.009           (0.022)            -0.010          (0.032)
 Week 34                         -0.017           (0.014)             0.023           (0.015)             0.003          (0.026)
 Week 39                       -0.050***          (0.011)          0.056***           (0.011)             0.012          (0.025)
 Week 52                       -0.058***          (0.011)          0.062***           (0.010)             0.011          (0.022)
Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Table shows difference-in-difference estimates (coefficients on CA×POST interactions), with

the same controls as in Table 2. Robust standard errors, clustered at the state level, are in parentheses. There are 1,188 birth

observations for mothers who were employed in at least 32 pregnancy weeks from California and the control states.
Table 5: Regression-Adjusted Estimated Effects of CA-PFL on the Labor Market Status of Mothers, Alternative Samples

Time Period           On Leave                   Not Employed            Returned to Work By        Returned to Old Job By
              Mothers Employed at least 32 Pregnancy Weeks from California and Control States (N=1,188)
Week 1         0.166***      (0.048)         -0.039       (0.031)        -0.126***      (0.028)      -0.126***       (0.028)
Week 4         0.135***      (0.053)         -0.013       (0.037)        -0.157***      (0.027)      -0.156***       (0.027)
Week 13        0.235***      (0.053)          0.005       (0.029)        -0.203***      (0.036)      -0.229***       (0.036)
Week 26          0.004       (0.008)         -0.014       (0.021)            0.009      (0.022)         -0.010       (0.032)
Week 52            -            -          -0.058***      (0.011)         0.062***      (0.010)          0.011       (0.022)
              Mothers Employed at least 32 Pregnancy Weeks from All States (N=1,763)
Week 1         0.178***      (0.033)         -0.032       (0.023)        -0.138***      (0.020)      -0.138***       (0.020)
Week 4         0.178***      (0.038)          0.008       (0.027)        -0.182***      (0.022)      -0.181***       (0.022)
Week 13        0.213***      (0.039)         -0.002       (0.022)        -0.187***      (0.031)      -0.226***       (0.030)
Week 26          0.001       (0.005)         -0.012       (0.015)           -0.009      (0.015)         -0.013       (0.023)
Week 52            -            -          -0.052***      (0.008)         0.054***      (0.007)         -0.008       (0.018)
              Mothers Employed at least 20 Pregnancy Weeks from California and Control States (N=1,446)
Week 1         0.201***      (0.041)       -0.124***      (0.029)         -0.059**      (0.027)       -0.061**       (0.025)
Week 4         0.205***      (0.044)        -0.078**      (0.036)        -0.117***      (0.025)      -0.102***       (0.024)
Week 13        0.218***      (0.052)         -0.047       (0.030)        -0.120***      (0.037)      -0.083***       (0.031)
Week 26          0.005       (0.008)       -0.060***      (0.022)          0.057**      (0.022)        0.073**       (0.029)
Week 52            -            -          -0.083***      (0.013)         0.087***      (0.012)       0.088***       (0.022)
              Mothers Employed at All during the Pregnancy from California and Control States (N=1,893)
Week 1         0.160***      (0.035)        -0.079**      (0.033)        -0.070***      (0.024)      -0.072***       (0.023)
Week 4          0.158**      (0.036)         -0.051       (0.036)        -0.107***      (0.024)      -0.100***       (0.022)
Week 13        0.173***      (0.043)         -0.043       (0.028)        -0.099***      (0.030)      -0.091***       (0.026)
Week 26          0.005       (0.007)       -0.088***      (0.019)         0.085***      (0.019)         0.046*       (0.028)
Week 52            -            -          -0.102***      (0.013)         0.105***      (0.014)        0.059**       (0.023)




                                                                                                                               35
Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Table shows difference-in-difference estimates (coefficients on CA×POST interactions), with

the same controls as in Table 2. Robust standard errors, clustered at the state level, are in parentheses.




                                                                                                                                36
   Table 6: Regression-Adjusted Estimated Effects of CA-PFL on the Probability of Working,
                      Weeks and Hours of Work and Wages for Mothers

                       Returned to
                                           Work in 2nd Year After Birth         Log Hourly Wages,
                       Work Within
                                                                                One Year After Birth
                       One Year Of       Annual Weeks        Weekly Hours
                          Birth            Worked              Worked
 Mothers Employed at least 32 Pregnancy Weeks from California and Control States
DD Estimate              0.055***           6.925***            4.209**                 0.045
Standard Error            (0.008)            (1.558)             (1.436)               (0.065)
Pre-PFL Baseline          [0.910]           [36.785]            [25.869]               [14.15]

Mothers Employed at all during Pregnancy from California and Control States
DD Estimate              0.096***           5.803***            3.082**                 0.045
Standard Error            (0.013)            (1.303)             (1.099)               (0.044)
Pre-PFL Baseline          [0.813]           [33.067]            [22.866]               [12.61]

Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Table shows difference-in-difference estimates

(coefficients on CA×POST interactions), with the same controls as in Table 2. Robust standard

errors, clustered at the state level, are in parentheses. Pre-PFL sample means in the dependent

variables for California mothers are shown in brackets (with levels rather the log of wages

displayed in the last column). The probability of working at any job one year after birth is

estimated using mothers providing employment information approximately one year (between 47

and 57 weeks) after the birth. Annual weeks and average weekly hours in the second year after

birth are measured during the 53rd through 104th weeks after the birth and are not conditional

upon employment (i.e. include weeks with zero work hours). Hourly wages, measured in natural

logs and 2012-year dollars, refer to those in the first job held during the 47th to 57th weeks

subsequent to the birth. Sample sizes are 1,114, 945, 945 and 830 in the top panel for work

probabilities, annual weeks worked, weekly hours worked and log hourly wages in the top panel

and 1,797, 1,574, 1,574 and 1,208 in the lower panel.
                                       Figure 1: Regression-Adjusted Proportion of Mothers on Leave

                  0.7
                 0.65
                  0.6
                 0.55
P                 0.5
r
                 0.45
o
p                 0.4
o
                 0.35
r
t                 0.3
i                0.25
o
                  0.2
n
                 0.15
                  0.1
                 0.05
                     0
    -6   -4     -2       0   2     4         6   8      10  12    14    16     18    20     22   24    26       28   30   32    34    36       38
                                                          Weeks Before or After Child's Birth

              Pre-July 2004 Control States           Post-July 2004 Control States      Pre-CA-PFL California         Post-CA-PFL California
                                Figure 2: Regression-Adjusted Proportion of Fathers on Leave

                                         0.2


                                      0.18


                                      0.16


P                                     0.14
r
o                                     0.12
p
o
                                         0.1
r
t
i                                     0.08
o
n                                     0.06


                                      0.04


                                      0.02


                                          0
    -7   -6   -5     -4    -3    -2      -1     0     1    2     3      4     5      6    7     8        9   10   11    12    13       14
                                                     Days Before or After Child's Birth


          Pre-July 2004 Control States         Post-July 2004 Control States     Pre-CA-PFL California        Post-CA-PFL California


                                                                                                                                            39
                                Figure 3: Estimated Leave Hazard Rates for Mothers
    35



    30



P   25
r
o
p   20
o
r
t   15
i
o
n   10



     5



     0
         0   2   4   6   8   10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52
                                              Weeks after Giving Birth

                                                   PFL=0       PFL=1




                                                                                                 40
                                   Figure 4: Estimated Leave Survior Rates for Mothers
    100

     90

     80

P    70
r
o    60
p
o
     50
r
t
     40
i
o
     30
n

     20

     10

      0
          0   2   4   6   8   10   12   14   16   18   20    22 24 26 28 30 32         34   36   38   40   42   44   46   48   50   52
                                                            Weeks after Giving Birth

                                                             PFL=0       PFL=1




                                                                                                                                         41
               Figure 5: Estimated Leave Hazard Rates for Fathers
  20

  18

  16

P 14
r
o 12
p
o
  10
r
t
   8
i
o
n 6

   4

   2

   0
       0   1          2                    3                  4     5        6
                                Weeks after Child's Birth

                                  PFL=0         PFL=1




                                                                        42
                  Figure 6: Estimated Leave Survior Rates for Fathers
    100

     90

     80
P
     70
r
o
     60
p
o
     50
r
t    40
i
o    30
n
     20

     10

      0
          0   1            2                   3                  4     5        6
                                    Weeks after Child's Birth

                                     PFL=0         PFL=1




                                                                            43
                                   Figure 7: Regression-Adjusted Proportion of Mothers Not Employed

              0.35


               0.3


P             0.25
r
o
p              0.2
o
r
t             0.15
i
o
n              0.1


              0.05


                   0
    -6   -4   -2       0   2   4   6   8      10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52
                                                       Weeks Before or After Child's Birth

               Pre-July 2004 Control States        Post-July 2004 Control States   Pre-CA-PFL California   Post-CA-PFL California
                                   Figure 8: Regression-Adjusted Proportion of Mothers Working at Any Job

                   1


              0.9


              0.8


P             0.7
r
o             0.6
p
o
              0.5
r
t
i             0.4
o
n             0.3


              0.2


              0.1


                   0
    -6   -4   -2       0   2   4    6   8    10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52
                                                      Weeks Before or After Child's Birth

              Pre-July 2004 Control States         Post-July 2004 Control States   Pre-CA-PFL California    Post-CA-PFL California




                                                                                                                                     45
                           Figure 9: Regression-Adjusted Proportion of Mothers Working at the Pre-Childbirth Job

                   1

              0.9

              0.8

P             0.7
r
o             0.6
p
o
              0.5
r
t
              0.4
i
o
              0.3
n

              0.2

              0.1

                   0
    -6   -4   -2       0   2   4   6   8     10   12   14   16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32            34   36   38   40   42   44   46   48   50   52
                                                            Weeks Before or After Child's Birth

              Pre-July 2004 Control States             Post-July 2004 Control States   Pre-CA-PFL California          Post-CA-PFL California




                                                                                                                                               46
Table A.1: Descriptive Statistics for Mothers
                                             Control State Mothers                           California Mothers
                                     Pre-July 2004            Post-July 2004        Pre-July 2004          Post-July 2004
Black (=1)                         0.272       (0.022)       0.195      (0.013)    0.059      (0.026)     0.055      (0.017)
Hispanic (=1)                      0.177       (0.019)       0.164      (0.013)    0.740      (0.048)     0.557      (0.038)
Age (years)                       19.621       (0.079)      23.871      (0.085)   19.660      (0.177)    23.855      (0.186)
Education (years)                 10.696       (0.084)      12.205      (0.083)   11.352      (0.131)    12.743      (0.145)
Married (=1)                       0.157       (0.018)       0.421      (0.017)    0.323      (0.052)     0.445      (0.038)
Experience (/52)                   3.177       (0.092)       6.658      (0.099)    2.722      (0.169)     6.468      (0.215)
Family Size                        3.662       (0.085)       3.173      (0.051)    4.738      (0.254)     4.090      (0.148)
Child Parity                       1.402       (0.033)       1.718      (0.033)    1.317      (0.063)     1.855      (0.079)
Year-2000 Birth                    0.101       (0.017)       0.000      (0.000)    0.146      (0.047)     0.000      (0.000)
Year-2001 Birth                    0.148       (0.018)       0.000      (0.000)    0.147      (0.039)     0.000      (0.000)
Year-2002 Birth                    0.224       (0.021)       0.000      (0.000)    0.292      (0.050)     0.000      (0.000)
Year-2003 Birth                    0.308       (0.023)       0.000      (0.000)    0.272      (0.049)     0.000      (0.000)
Year-2004 Birth                    0.182       (0.019)       0.078      (0.009)    0.167      (0.041)     0.102      (0.023)
Year-2005 Birth                    0.000       (0.000)       0.133      (0.012)    0.000      (0.000)     0.132      (0.026)
Year-2006 Birth                    0.000       (0.000)       0.176      (0.013)    0.000      (0.000)     0.125      (0.025)
Year-2007 Birth                    0.000       (0.000)       0.199      (0.014)    0.000      (0.000)     0.216      (0.031)
Year-2008 Birth                    0.000       (0.000)       0.196      (0.014)    0.000      (0.000)     0.124      (0.025)
Year-2009 Birth                    0.000       (0.000)       0.152      (0.012)    0.000      (0.000)     0.225      (0.032)
Year-2010 Birth                    0.000       (0.000)       0.067      (0.009)    0.000      (0.000)     0.076      (0.020)

Weighted sample means with standard errors in parentheses. There are 292 pre-July 2004 control mothers, 681 post-July 2004 control
mothers, 56 pre-July 2004 California mothers, and 159 post-July 2004 California mothers.




                                                                                                                               47
Table A.2: Descriptive Statistics for Fathers
                                              Control State Fathers                           California Fathers
                                      Pre-July 2004           Post-July 2004        Pre-July 2004           Post-July 2004
Black (=1)                          0.174       (0.022)      0.171      (0.014)    0.051      (0.030)      0.059      (0.019)
Hispanic (=1)                       0.114       (0.019)      0.108      (0.012)    0.609      (0.066)      0.463      (0.040)
Age (years)                        19.842       (0.096)     24.066      (0.093)   19.505      (0.217)     24.048      (0.180)
Education (years)                  11.561       (0.094)     13.348      (0.096)   11.764      (0.167)     13.177      (0.160)
Married (=1)                        0.276       (0.026)      0.501      (0.019)    0.279      (0.060)      0.503      (0.040)
Experience (/52)                    3.835       (0.103)      7.220      (0.099)    2.891      (0.195)      6.748      (0.203)
Family Size                         3.649       (0.106)      3.060      (0.053)    4.224      (0.254)      3.672      (0.147)
Child Parity                        1.487       (0.040)      1.758      (0.036)    1.325      (0.083)      1.769      (0.069)
Year-2000 Birth                     0.115       (0.020)      0.000      (0.000)    0.072      (0.036)      0.000      (0.000)
Year-2001 Birth                     0.184       (0.023)      0.000      (0.000)    0.153      (0.049)      0.000      (0.000)
Year-2002 Birth                     0.259       (0.026)      0.000      (0.000)    0.193      (0.053)      0.000      (0.000)
Year-2003 Birth                     0.310       (0.027)      0.000      (0.000)    0.379      (0.065)      0.000      (0.000)
Year-2004 Birth                     0.146       (0.021)      0.076      (0.010)    0.129      (0.045)      0.051      (0.017)
Year-2005 Birth                     0.000       (0.000)      0.157      (0.014)    0.000      (0.000)      0.181      (0.031)
Year-2006 Birth                     0.000       (0.000)      0.172      (0.014)    0.000      (0.000)      0.124      (0.026)
Year-2007 Birth                     0.000       (0.000)      0.170      (0.014)    0.000      (0.000)      0.202      (0.032)
Year-2008 Birth                     0.000       (0.000)      0.170      (0.014)    0.000      (0.000)      0.174      (0.030)
Year-2009 Birth                     0.000       (0.000)      0.181      (0.015)    0.000      (0.000)      0.146      (0.028)
Year-2010 Birth                     0.000       (0.000)      0.074      (0.010)    0.000      (0.000)      0.123      (0.026)

Weighted sample means with standard errors in parentheses. There are 246 pre-July 2004 control fathers, 685 post-July 2004 control
fathers, 52 pre-July 2004 California fathers, and 143 post-July 2004 California fathers.




                                                                                                                                 48
