NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MORTGAGES AND MONETARY POLICY
Carlos Garriga
Finn E. Kydland
Roman Sustek
Working Paper 19744
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19744

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2013

We thank John Campbell, Joao Cocco, Morris Davis, Wouter den Haan, Martin Schneider, Javier
Villar Burke, Eric Young, and Stan Zin for helpful suggestions and Dean Corbae, Andra Ghent,
Matteo Iacoviello, Amir Kermani, and Bryan Routledge for insightful conference discussions.
We have also benefited from comments by seminar participants at the Bank of England,
Birmingham, Carnegie Mellon, CERGEEI, Essex, Glasgow, IHS Vienna, Indiana, Norwegian
School of Economics, Ohio State, Royal Holloway, San Francisco Fed, Southampton, St. Louis
Fed, Surrey, and Tsinghua University and participants at the Bundesbank Workshop on Credit
Frictions and the Macroeconomy, LAEF Business CYCLES Conference, LSE Macro Workshop,
SAET Meetings (Paris), Sheffield Macro Workshop, NIESR/ESRC The Future of Housing
Finance Conference, UBC Summer Finance Conference, the Bank of Canada Monetary Policy
and Financial Stability Conference, Housing and the Economy Conference in Berlin, SED
(Warsaw), the 2015 MOVE Barcelona MacroWorkshop, Monetary Policy and the Distribution of
Income and Wealth Conference in St. Louis, and the 2015 Wharton Conference on Liquidity and
Financial Crisis. The views expressed are those of the authors and not necessarily of the Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2013 by Carlos Garriga, Finn E. Kydland, and Roman Sustek. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Mortgages and Monetary Policy
Carlos Garriga, Finn E. Kydland, and Roman Sustek
NBER Working Paper No. 19744
December 2013, Revised June 2016
JEL No. E32,E52,G21,R21
ABSTRACT
Mortgages are long-term loans with nominal payments. Consequently, under incomplete asset
markets, monetary policy can affect housing investment and the economy through the cost of new
mortgage borrowing and real payments on outstanding debt. These channels, distinct from
traditional real rate channels, are embedded in a general equilibrium model. The transmission
mechanism is found to be stronger under adjustable- than fixed-rate mortgages. Further, monetary
policy shocks affecting the level of the nominal yield curve have larger real effects than transitory
shocks, affecting its slope. Persistently higher inflation gradually benefits homeowners under
FRMs, but hurts them immediately under ARMs.

Carlos Garriga
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
P.O. Box 442
St. Louis, MO 63166
carlos.garriga@stls.frb.org
Finn E. Kydland
Department of Economics
University of California, Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara, CA 93106-9210
and NBER
kydland@econ.ucsb.edu

Roman Sustek
Social Sciences, Economics
University of Southampton
Murray Building (Bld. 58)
Southampton, SO17 1BJ
United Kingdom
rs1y10@soton.ac.uk

1

Introduction

Mortgages are long-term loans with regular nominal payments, consisting of interest and
amortization. The payments are set up so as to guarantee that, given the mortgage interest
rate, the principal is gradually repaid in full by the end of the mortgage term, typically 15
to 30 years. A ﬁxed-rate mortgage (FRM) has a ﬁxed nominal interest rate and constant
nominal payments, set at origination, for the entire term of the loan; an adjustable-rate
mortgage (ARM), in contrast, sets nominal payments on a period-by-period basis so as,
given the current short-term nominal interest rate, the loan is expected to be repaid in full
during its remaining term. Various mortgage loans build on these two basic contracts and
in most countries, typically, one or the other type dominates.1
While the long-term nominal aspect of mortgages—a form of nominal ‘rigidity’—has
been studied in the household ﬁnance literature (e.g., Campbell and Cocco, 2003), a formal
analysis of its consequences at the aggregate level has been missing (see Campbell, 2013).
This is despite the fact that mortgages, in the minds of policy makers, constitute an integral
part of a monetary transmission mechanism (e.g., Bernanke and Gertler, 1995; Bernanke,
2007; Mishkin, 2007).
In major economies, already the size of mortgage ﬁnance would suggest that its role in the
monetary transmission mechanism must be important. Mortgage payments are equivalent to
15-22% of homeowners’ pre-tax income in the U.S. (average for the past 30-40 years); 15-20%
in the U.K. (Hancock and Wood, 2004); 27% in Germany (European Mortgage Federation,
2012b); 36.5% in Denmark (ﬁrst-time homeowners; European Mortgage Federation, 2012c);
and 30% in France (ﬁrst-time homeowners; European Mortgage Federation, 2009). And the
1

Countries in which FRMs—with interest rates ﬁxed for at least 10 years—have traditionally dominated the mortgage market include Belgium, Denmark, Germany, France, and the United States; in
most other countries, either ARMs or FRMs with interest rates ﬁxed for less than 5 years prevail; see
Scanlon and Whitehead (2004) and European Mortgage Federation (2012a). Research is still inconclusive
on the causes of the cross-country heterogeneity, but likely reasons include government policies, historical
path dependence, sources of mortgage funding (capital markets vs. bank deposits), and inﬂation experience;
see Miles (2004), Green and Wachter (2005), and Campbell (2013). Countries also diﬀer in terms of prepayment penalties, costs of reﬁnancing, recourse, prevalence of teaser rates, the frequency of ARM resets, and
the ARM reference rate. Our analysis abstracts from these details.

mortgage debt to (annual) GDP ratio in developed economies has reached on average 70% in
2009, although there is a large cross-country variation (International Monetary Fund, 2011,
Chapter 3). In some countries outstanding mortgage debt is even larger than government
debt and its maturity is longer.2
In light of these facts, this paper provides a conceptual and quantitative analysis of the
role of the long-term nominal nature of mortgages in the monetary transmission mechanism
at the aggregate level. In order to accommodate the mortgage market structure of diﬀerent
countries, both FRM and ARM contracts are studied. First, in a simple partial equilibrium
setup, the paper describes the channels through which mortgage contracts transmit nominal
shocks to the real economy. These channels are then embedded in a calibrated general
equilibrium model. The purpose of this exercise is to impose general equilibrium discipline
on the problem, given its aggregate context, and assess the quantitative importance of the
mechanism. To keep the analysis transparent, we abstract from all other nominal rigidities
(sticky prices, wages), as well as other channels through which housing ﬁnance aﬀects the
macroeconomy (e.g., default or the role of home equity lines of credit in providing liquidity).
The transmission mechanism is studied in an environment in which homeowners do not
trade a full set of state-contingent securities with mortgage investors. Consequently, the
eﬀective discount factors of the two agent types are not equalized state by state and risk
sharing is limited. In this setup, we identify two channels through which mortgage contracts transmit nominal shocks into the real economy. Both channels are distinct from the
traditional real rate channel of monetary policy transmission.3
One channel works through the cost of new mortgage loans (‘price eﬀect’). In essence, it is
a dynamic version of the tilt eﬀect, previously studied in static settings (e.g., Schwab, 1982).
Expected future inﬂation, transmitted into nominal mortgage interest rates, redistributes
real mortgage payments over the life of the loan so as to leave mortgage investors indiﬀerent
2

Hilscher, Raviv, and Reis (2014) document that in the United States government debt has predominantly
short-term maturity.
3
The real rate channel, whereby the central bank directly aﬀects the ex-ante short-term real interest rate,
is described by, e.g., Bernanke and Gertler (1995). In our model, the real interest rate responds to monetary
policy shocks only indirectly through general equilibrium eﬀects.

2

between new mortgages and other assets. If this results in real payments increasing in
periods/states in which income has high value to homeowners, the eﬀective cost of the
mortgage to homeowners increases. This eﬀect is qualitatively the same under both FRM
and ARM.
The other channel works through the eﬀects of inﬂation on the real value of mortgage
payments of outstanding debt (‘income eﬀect’).4 Under incomplete asset markets, the nominal nature of mortgages translates inﬂation shocks into shocks to real disposable income.
This channel is qualitatively diﬀerent under the two contracts. Under FRM, higher inﬂation
reduces real mortgage payments; under ARM, higher inﬂation increases real mortgage payments, if it suﬃciently transmits into higher nominal interest rates. Under FRM, the eﬀects
grow gradually over time through accumulated inﬂation; under ARM they are immediate
and resemble the eﬀects of an increase in the real interest rate, even when the real rate itself
does not change.
The general equilibrium model, which embeds the two channels, consists of homeowners
and capital owners/mortgage investors. There is a representative agent of each type. Such
a coarse split of the population is motivated by Campbell and Cocco (2003): in the data,
the 3rd and 4th quintiles of the wealth distribution represent typical homeowners; the 5th
quintile represents capital owners.5 As an approximation to the characteristics in the data,
homeowners in the model derive income from labor and invest in housing capital, ﬁnancing
a given fraction of housing investment with mortgages. Capital owners do not work and
invest in capital used in production, one-period nominal bonds, and mortgages, pricing the
assets competitively by arbitrage. Homeowners can also access the one-period bond market,
but at a cost. The production side is standard and monetary policy is characterized by an
interest rate rule.
We study the transmission mechanism under (i) FRM and ARM in isolation, (ii) the
4

Bernanke and Gertler (1995) and Mishkin (2007) refer to this eﬀect also as a ‘cash ﬂow’ or ‘household
balance sheet’ eﬀect.
5
The 1st and 2nd quintiles are essentially renters with no assets and little liabilities and are not included
in the model.

3

co-existence of the two contracts and the endogenous choice between them, and (iii) reﬁnancing. In equilibrium, the stochastic properties of short- and long-term nominal interest
rates depend on the parameters of exogenous shock processes. Using the model, the persistence and standard deviations of two shocks—to the monetary policy rule (a nominal shock)
and the one-period bond market (a real shock)—are estimated by matching the volatility
and persistence of the long-term nominal interest rate and the long-short spread. Similarly
to Atkeson and Kehoe (2009), the nominal shock turns out to be highly persistent, shifting
the level of the nominal yield curve and inﬂation, the other shock fairly temporary, aﬀecting
the slope of the yield curve and the ex-ante real interest rate. Given these estimates, the
model is used as a laboratory to study the eﬀects of the nominal shock, which—like the level
factor in the data, e.g., Piazzesi (2006)—is the more important of the two shocks for nominal
interest rates (in contrast, existing money-macro literature mainly studies shocks aﬀecting
the real rate). The main focus is on housing investment, where the shock should matter the
most, but responses of other variables are also studied.6
The ﬁndings can be summarized as follows. First, the real eﬀects of the nominal shock
turn out to be stronger under ARM than FRM: a one percentage point (annualized) downward shift of the nominal yield curve and inﬂation generates, on impact, a 1.8% increase in
housing investment under ARM, whereas a 0.7% decline under FRM (0.15% decline with
reﬁnancing).7 The magnitude of the response under ARM is similar to those reported in the
literature as occurring due to real rate shocks, making the transmission mechanism under
ARM as potent as traditional real rate channels. The ﬁnding that the eﬀects are stronger
under ARM than FRM may seem surprising as, a-priori, one may expect that a contract
ﬁxing nominal payments for the entire term will generate larger real eﬀects. The failure to
do so is because under FRM the increase in real mortgage payments due to lower inﬂation
6

There are two additional shocks: to total factor productivity and the marginal rate of transformation
between housing and nonhousing use of output. Together, the four shocks produce standard deviations of
endogenous variables, and their correlations with output, consistent with the cyclical moments of U.S. data.
In addition, we cross-validate the model against existing empirical studies with respect to the responses of
housing investment, under FRM and ARM, to shocks to the real interest rate and the size of the marginal
propensity to consume out of homeowners’ income. The model lines up well with both.
7
The responses are symmetric for an upward shift of the yield curve, except in the case of reﬁnancing.

4

is only gradual and is partially oﬀset by the price eﬀect (less expensive new loans). Under
ARM, the decline in real mortgage payments is immediate and is further strengthened by
the price eﬀect. Reﬁnancing, while in principle making FRM look like ARM when interest
rates decline, does not overturn the result. This is because, once calibrated to the data,
reﬁnancing accounts for only a small fraction of the outstanding debt (2% per quarter on
average for total reﬁnancing and less than 1% when cash-out reﬁnancing, not necessarily
related to interest rates, is excluded).8 When FRMs and ARMs coexist, the real eﬀects lie
in-between the two separate cases. Under U.S. calibration, the results are still closer to the
FRM case than the ARM case.
Second, under both contracts, the size of the real eﬀects declines with the persistence
of the nominal shock (i.e., when the shock starts to aﬀect mainly the slope of the yield
curve). This is because what matters with long-term loans is the expected path of inﬂation,
and nominal interest rates, over the entire term of the loan.9 And third, persistently higher
inﬂation redistributes income from capital owners to homeowners under FRM, but (at least
initially) from homeowners to capital owners under ARM. The redistribution is gradual
under FRM, but immediate under ARM.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 connects the paper with the literature. Section
3 explains the main ideas. Section 4 describes the general equilibrium model. Section 5
maps it into data. Section 6 cross-validates the model. Section 7 reports ﬁndings from
the main computational experiments. Section 8 concludes and oﬀers suggestions for future
research. Supplemental material contains (i) equilibrium conditions, (ii) computation, (iii)
data counterparts to the variables, and (iv) estimates of mortgage debt servicing costs for
the United States.
8

Even though the reﬁnancing fraction can as much as double in response to realistic drops in interest
rates, it is still insuﬃcient to overturn the ﬁndings. Of course, given the large size of the stock, the small
variation in the fraction of the stock shows up as a large variation in the share of reﬁ loans in new loans,
reported periodically by Fredie Mac.
9
The model abstracts from the possibility that monetary policy may tilt the slope of the yield curve by
aﬀecting term premia. All the eﬀects on the slope work in the model through the expectations hypothesis.
We also abstract from potential eﬀects of monetary policy on mortgage markups and the primary-secondary
spread.

5

2

Related studies

The paper is related to diﬀerent strands of a growing literature on monetary policy, housing,
and debt.10 First, following Iacoviello (2005), a number of studies focus on the interaction
between sticky prices and the collateral value of housing, whereby housing facilitates borrowing for general consumption purposes, similar to home equity lines of credit (Iacoviello,
2010, contains a brief summary of this line of research). To this end, loans in these models are one-period loans.11 We abstract from this channel, focusing instead on the role of
mortgages as loans for house purchase (i.e., ﬁrst mortgages) and stressing their long-term
nominal aspect in transmitting nominal shocks to the real economy.12
Second, following Doepke and Schneider (2006), there is work on the redistributive effects of inﬂation under incomplete markets and nominal debt (Meh, Rios-Rull, and Terajima,
2010; Sheedy, 2013; Doepke, Schneider, and Selezneva, 2015). This research focuses exclusively on debt contracts with ﬁxed nominal payments, similar to FRM loans. However, we
show that the redistributive consequences of inﬂation are quite opposite under ARM contracts. Policy recommendations based on this literature, such as nominal GDP targeting
(Sheedy, 2013), are thus inappropriate for countries with a large fraction of ARMs.13
Third, a line of research investigates, in various contexts, the eﬀects of inﬂation on housing: the tax code (Piazzesi and Schneider, 2012), money illusion (Piazzesi and Schneider,
2007; Brunnermeier and Julliard, 2008), and substitution between market and home pro10

The role of housing ﬁnance, both ﬁrst mortgages and home equity lines of credit, has been also studied in
the context of home ownership, consumption smoothing, optimal mortgage choice, reﬁnancing, default, the
recent ﬁnancial crisis, and the cyclical dynamics of residential investment (see Davis and Van Nieuwerburgh,
2015, for an overiew of this broader literature). Many of these studies model housing market decisions in
great detail, but the models are either partial equilibrium or steady-state models. Our model is general
equilibrium model with aggregate shocks, but compromises on the details of the housing market.
11
Rubio (2011) extends the Iacoviello (2005) framework by considering one-period loans with interest rates
evolving in a sluggish manner, as a weighted average of past interest rates, interpreting such loans as FRMs.
Calza, Monacelli, and Stracca (2013) distinguish between ARMs, modeled as one-period loans, and FRMs,
modeled as two-period loans.
12
Ghent (2012) considers long-term FRM loans denominated in real, rather than nominal, terms. The
monetary transmission mechanism in her model works through the long-term real interest rate, which responds only little to monetary policy shocks.
13
Auclert (2014) studies redistributive eﬀects of monetary policy working through a real rate channel.
Redistributive eﬀects of monetary policy are also at the heart of the transmission mechanism proposed by
Sterk and Tenreyro (2013).

6

duction (Aruoba, Davis, and Wright, 2012).14 In our model, inﬂation transmits to housing
investment through mortgage contracts.
Finally, in recent years, a few studies investigated empirically connections between monetary policy and mortgage contracts. Villar Burke (2015) compares interest rates on outstanding mortgage debt and new mortgage loans in a sample of Eurozone countries in a
period around the cut in the European Central Bank’s policy rate in 2008/2009. In countries in which FRMs dominate (Germany and France) there was almost no change in the
interest rate on the pool of outstanding mortgages, despite relatively stable house prices. In
contrast, in countries in which ARMs dominate (Spain and, to a smaller extent, Italy), the
interest rate on the pool declined almost in parallel with the policy rate. The responses of
interest rates on new loans also diﬀered across countries, declining more moderately in FRM
countries than in ARM countries. Consistency with these empirical ﬁndings is at the core
of the mechanism in our model.
Calza et al. (2013), using a VAR model based on the usual identiﬁcation strategy, ﬁnd
stronger negative responses of housing investment to positive monetary policy shocks in ARM
then FRM countries.15 The shock they identify is closer to the real interest rate shock in our
model, than the nominal shock we focus on, in the sense that it increases the real interest
rate. Our model is consistent with their ﬁnding, producing stronger negative responses to
the real interest rate shock under ARM than FRM. Even quantitatively, the responses are
comparable.
Di Maggio, Kermani, and Ramcharan (2014) and Keys, Piskorski, Seru, and Yao (2014)
exploit the variation across U.S. counties in the use of FRM and ARM contracts to investigate
the responses of consumption to the 2008 cut in the Fed funds rate using household-level
data. Both studies ﬁnd that counties with a larger share of ARMs in the existing pool
of loans experienced a much larger boost in homeowners’ consumption than counties with
14

Earlier studies include Lessard and Modigliani (1975), Kearl (1979), Schwab (1982), Alm and Follain
(1984), and Poterba (1984).
15
Earlier VAR studies of housing investment include Bernanke and Gertler (1995) and
Iacoviello and Minetti (2008).

7

a larger share of FRMs. While the authors are careful to control for other channels that
could potentially lead to such an outcome, identiﬁcation can always be an issue in reducedform analysis. Our model provides a theoretical general-equilibrium underpinning for such
empirical ﬁndings, generating larger responses under ARM than FRM for both types of
interest rate shocks, nominal and real. Furthermore, the model replicates the empirical
marginal propensities of consumption, out of the extra income saved on mortgage payments,
for a slightly lower than the benchmark persistence of the interest rate shocks.16

3

A simple partial equilibrium model

The main ideas can be conveyed within a simple partial equilibrium model. We describe the
two channels of transmission (price and income eﬀects) under FRM and ARM, explain why
the combined eﬀect is stronger under ARM, and discuss under what conditions monetary
policy is neutral and to what extent the results also apply to other forms of nominal debt.
Reﬁnancing and the choice between FRM and ARM are delayed until the full model, although
we touch on these issues in Section 3.7, which provides numerical illustrations of the price
and income eﬀects.
Throughout this section, the real interest rate and real labor income are held constant,
the one-period nominal interest rate is varied exogenously, and the current inﬂation rate is
also exogenous. All these variables are endogenized in the general equilibrium model. The
details of FRM and ARM loans diﬀer across countries. We abstract from the details and
focus on the key common features.17
16
Cloyne, Ferreira, and Surico (2015) also use household-level data. They attempt to identify changes in
nominal interest rates in the United States and the United Kingdom due to monetary policy surprises. While
they ﬁnd substantial diﬀerences in the responses between outright homeowners and mortgagors, they do not
ﬁnd large diﬀerences between the responses of mortgagors in the two countries.
17
For instance, in the United States, the ARM rate may not change at the same frequency as the monetary
policy rate, as in our model. Typically, the ARM rate changes only once a year. In addition, many ARMs
have an initial period for which the rate is ﬁxed. In contrast, tracker mortgages, common for instance in
Ireland, change the mortgage rate whenever the policy rate of the European Central Bank changes.

8

3.1

A mortgage-ﬁnanced house purchase

There are three periods, with time denoted by t = 1, 2, 3. Each period a household is endowed
with constant real income w and in t = 1 has no outstanding mortgage debt (outstanding
debt is considered later). In t = 1, the household makes a once-and-for-all house purchase,
ﬁnancing a fraction θ of the purchase with a loan and a fraction 1 − θ with income. The loan
can be used only for house purchase and the house lasts for t = 2, 3, then it fully depreciates.


The life-time utility function of the household is V = 3t=1 β t−1 u(ct ) + 3t=2 β t−1 g(h), where
β is a discount factor, ct is period-t nonhousing consumption, h is housing, and u(.) and g(.)
have standard properties. The household maximizes utility with respect to c1 , c2 , c3 , and
h, subject to three per-period budget constraints: c1 + h = w + l/p1 , c2 = w − m2 /p2 , and
c3 = w − m3 /p3 , where l = θp1 h is the nominal value of the loan, m2 and m3 are nominal
mortgage payments, and pt is the aggregate price level (i.e., the price of goods in terms of
an abstract unit of account; this section abstracts from house prices).
Assume there is a ﬁnancial market that prices assets by the no-arbitrage principle but
in which the household does not participate due to, for instance, high entry costs. This
exclusion is reﬂected in the sequence of the budget constraints above, which do not allow for
ﬁnancial instruments other than the mortgage (in the full model this assumption is partially
relaxed, but maintaining it at this stage brings out the key aspects of the mechanism more
clearly). Assume that monetary policy controls the one-period nominal interest rate it . Noarbitrage pricing implies the Fisher eﬀect: 1 + πt+1 = (1 + it )/(1 + r), where 1 + r is a gross
real interest rate, given by some exogenous eﬀective discount factor (intertemporal rate of
substitution) of investors, μ∗ = (1 + r)−1, and πt+1 ≡ pt+1 /pt − 1 is the inﬂation rate between
periods t and t + 1.
M
Mortgage payments have a general form, m2 ≡ (iM
2 +γ)l and m3 ≡ (i3 +1)(1−γ)l. Here,

iM
t denotes the mortgage interest rate, henceforth referred to as the ‘mortgage rate’. Under
M
F
M
M
FRM, iM
2 = i3 = i ; under ARM, i2 and i3 may be diﬀerent. Further, γ is the amortization

rate in the ﬁrst period of the life of the mortgage, when the outstanding nominal debt is l.

9

In the second period, the outstanding nominal debt is (1 − γ)l and the amortization rate is
equal to one (i.e., the mortgage is repaid in full). For a standard mortgage, γ is calculated
18
so as to ensure m2 = m3 , conditional on iM
2 .

In the FRM case, no-arbitrage pricing by investors means that iF satisﬁes
(1)

(2)

1 = Q1 (iF + γ) + Q1 (iF + 1)(1 − γ),
(1)

(1)

(2)

where Q1 = (1+i1 )−1 = (1+π2 )−1 μ∗ and Q1 = [(1+i1 )(1+i2 )]−1 = [(1+π2 )(1+π3 )]−1 (μ∗ )2
are the period-1 prices of one- and two-period zero-coupon bonds, determined according to
the expectations hypothesis. The no-arbitrage condition (1) states that the present value
of payments from a mortgage of size one dollar is equal to one dollar. In the ARM case,
M
iM
2 = i1 and i3 = i2 satisﬁes no-arbitrage pricing, as

(1)

(2)

M
Q1 (iM
2 + γ) + Q1 (i3 + 1)(1 − γ) =

3.2

i1 + γ (i2 + 1) (1 − γ)
+
= 1.
1 + i1 (1 + i1 ) (1 + i2 )

(2)

Price eﬀect

The price eﬀect refers to the eﬀect of monetary policy on the cost of new mortgages.19
By ‘monetary policy’ we mean a sequence of short-term nominal interest rates i1 and i2 .
The sequence is known to the household (and the investors). Generally speaking, diﬀerent
sequences of nominal interest rates lead to diﬀerent sequences of real mortgage payments
over the life of the loan, so as to ensure that the present value of the one-dollar loan is equal
to one dollar, as dictated by the no-arbitrage pricing by investors. This, however, aﬀects the
value of the loan from the household’s perspective, as the household does not have the same
18

It is easy to verify that a higher iM
2 implies higher mortgage payments, despite the fact that γ changes
to equalize the payments between the two periods. Observe that to equalize the payments, γ = 1/(2 + iM
2 ).
M 2
Therefore, dγ/diM
=
−1/(2+i
)
∈
(−0.25,
0).
That
is,
when
the
mortgage
rate
increases,
the
amortization
2
2
rate needs to decline, but the decline is small. Overall, mortgage payments therefore increase. As a ﬁrst
pass, we can therefore abstract from changes in the amortization rate when studying the eﬀects of interest
rates on mortgage payments.
19
While the price eﬀect is discussed in a deterministic setup, which is the simplest setup in which it can
be demonstrated, it is straightforward to extend it to stochastic settings.

10

valuation of the real mortgage payments as the investors. This is due to the assumed market
incompleteness, which prevents an equalization of the eﬀective discount factors across the
two agent types.
Speciﬁcally, after substituting the budget constraints in the utility function, the ﬁrstorder condition for the utility maximization problem of the household with respect to h
gives
u (c1 )(1 + τH ) = β(1 + β)g (h),
where





iM + γ
(iM + 1)(1 − γ)
+ μ12 μ23 3
τH = −θ 1 − μ12 2
1 + π2
(1 + π2 )(1 + π3 )


(3)

is a wedge between the marginal utility of period-1 nonhousing consumption and the marginal
lifetime utility of housing. Further, μt,t+1 ≡ βu(ct+1 )/u (ct ) is the household’s eﬀective
discount factor. The wedge—working like a relative price of housing—captures the cost of
mortgage ﬁnance from the household’s perspective. To see this, observe that the expression
in the square brackets is the present value of real mortgage payments, discounted with the
household’s eﬀective discount factor, μt,t+1 , rather than the eﬀective discount factor of the
investor, μ∗ . In the case of FRM


τHF RM



iF + γ
(iF + 1)(1 − γ)
= −θ 1 − μ12
+ μ12 μ23
1 + π2
(1 + π2 )(1 + π3 )


,

in the case of ARM


τHARM



i1 + γ
1−γ
= −θ 1 − μ12
+ μ12 μ23 (μ∗ )−1
1 + π2
1 + π2


,

where, in the second term, we have used the Fisher eﬀect (1 + i2 )/(1 + π3 ) = (μ∗ )−1 .
To explain the eﬀect of monetary policy on the wedge, it is easier to start with the ARM
case. A decline in i1 , for instance, reduces the real payments in the ﬁrst period of the life of
the loan, (i1 + γ)/(1 + π2 ). To see this, observe that through the Fisher eﬀect, π2 declines

11

one-for-one with i1 but—as γ is less than one—the eﬀect of i1 on the numerator is larger than
the eﬀect of π2 on the denominator. The decline in π2 , however, increases the real payments
in the second period of the life of the loan, (μ∗ )−1 (1 − γ)/(1 + π2 ). If the household’s eﬀective
discount factor assigns a suﬃciently large weight on payments in the ﬁrst period of the life
of the loan, mortgage ﬁnance becomes cheaper for the household and the wedge declines,
inducing more housing investment. In the FRM case, the eﬀect is similar, as long as iF
suﬃciently declines in response to the decline in the short rate. This will be the case if the
decline in the short rate is persistent; i.e., both i1 and i2 decline. The lower inﬂation rates,
π2 and π3 , increase real payments in the second period of the life of the FRM loan, but again,
the wedge declines if the those payments are suﬃciently discounted.20

3.3

Income eﬀect

The income eﬀect refers to the eﬀect of monetary policy on the real value of payments on
outstanding mortgage debt. It concerns ex-post changes in inﬂation and, in the case of ARM,
also nominal interest rates. Eﬀectively, the nominal aspect of mortgages translates nominal
shocks to inﬂation and nominal interest rates into shocks to real mortgage payments and
disposable income.
To make the discussion concrete, consider a household in period t = 1, that took out a
mortgage in period t = 0. The mortgage matures in t = 3 (to show the income eﬀect under
ARM, the minimum length of the loan has to be three periods). By ‘monetary policy’ we
mean a sequence π1 , i1 , and i2 , which becomes known to the household in period t = 1;
i.e., one period after the household took out the loan (in this sense it is a monetary policy
20

Holding the nominal payments to income ratio constant across loans of diﬀerent maturities (i.e., adjusting
the size of the loan accordingly), the front- and back-end eﬀects become stronger the longer is the term of
iM +γ

t+1
M
the loan. At the front end, for a suﬃciently small inﬂation rate, t+1
≈ iM
t+1 + γt+1 ≈ it+1 , which
1+πt+1
holds since γt+1 → 0, as the term of the loan increases. Changes in real mortgage payments at the front
end are thus approximately equal to changes in the nominal interest rate. At the back end, for a small

iM +γt+ι

γt+ι
enough nominal interest rate, (1+πt+ιt+ι
)+...+(1+πt+1 ) ≈ (1+πt+ι )+...+(1+πt+1 ) , which holds since γt+ι → 1 as
the end of the term approaches. The denominator becomes larger with the term of the loan, increasing the
accumulated inﬂation eﬀect at the back end. In contrast, when the loan is a one-period loan (γt+1 = 1),
M
(iM
t+1 + 1)/(1 + πt+1 ) = 1 + r, as it+1 = it , and there is no price eﬀect.

12

‘surprise’). Speciﬁcally, suppose that monetary policy reduces π1 , i1 , and i2 .21 Through the
Fisher eﬀect, i1 and i2 again pin down π2 and π3 , respectively.
The real mortgage payments that the homeowner has to make on the outstanding loan
are
iM + γ1 
m1
l0 ,
= 1
p1
1 + π1

in t = 1,

m2
iM
2 + γ2
=
l0 ,
(1 − γ1 )
p2
(1 + π1 )(1 + π2 )

in t = 2,

iM
m3
3 +1
=
l0 ,
(1 − γ2 )(1 − γ1 )
p3
(1 + π1 )(1 + π2 )(1 + π3 )

in t = 3,

where γ1 and γ2 are the amortization rates in the ﬁrst and second periods of the life of the
loan and 
l0 ≡ l0 /p0 is the real size of the loan in period t = 0.
Unlike the case of the price eﬀect, the income eﬀect works in opposite directions under
FRM and ARM. Broadly speaking, in the FRM case, accumulated inﬂation aﬀects the real
value of mortgage payments over the life of the loan. In the ARM case, at least in the near
term, changes in the nominal interest rate have the dominating eﬀect on the real payments,
as in the case of the price eﬀect. The following paragraphs provide the details.
Starting with the payments in t = 1, the mortgage rate iM
1 is predetermined; it is equal
to some iF0 under FRM and to i0 , the period-0 short rate, under ARM, both determined in
period t = 0. Clearly, a decline in π1 generates a negative income eﬀect for the household in
t = 1.
Regarding payments in t = 2, there is still the lingering eﬀect of the decline in π1 . More
F
importantly, however, the payments are aﬀected by i1 . In the FRM case, iM
2 = i0 and a

decline in i1 increases the real payments further due to the resulting decline in π2 . In the
ARM case, the eﬀects are diﬀerent. Here, iM
2 = i1 and a decline in i1 reduces the real
mortgage payments, even though π2 declines one-for-one with i1 (again, as γ2 ∈ (0, 1), the
eﬀect of i1 on the numerator is larger than the eﬀect of π2 on the denominator). The decline
21

In the general equilibrium model, such a joint decline in nominal interest rates and current inﬂation is
an equilibrium outcome.

13

in the nominal interest rate thus works like a decline in the real interest rate, reducing real
interest payments on the loan.
Finally, the payments in t = 3 increase under both contracts, due to the accumulated
eﬀect of persistently lower inﬂation.

3.4

Both eﬀects

What happens when both eﬀects are taken into account? Under FRM, a decline in the
nominal interest rate reduces the cost of new housing investment, but increases real payments on outstanding debt. Under ARM, both the cost of new housing investment and real
payments on outstanding debt decline (the latter at least in the near term). Furthermore,
the increase in real mortgage payments on outstanding debt under FRM is gradual, whereas
the decline under ARM is immediate. Potential general equilibrium adjustments aside, one
would therefore expect monetary policy to be more potent under ARM than FRM loans.

3.5

Monetary policy neutrality

Generally speaking, if asset markets were complete, the Modigliani-Miller theorem would
apply in our setting and debt ﬁnance (including its form, FRM or ARM) would be irrelevant.
As a result, monetary policy would be neutral.
Speciﬁcally, start by observing that the mortgage pricing conditions (1) and (2) can be
re-written as
M
+γ
∗ ∗ (i3 + 1)(1 − γ)
.
+μ μ
1=μ
1 + π2
(1 + π2 )(1 + π3 )
M
∗ i2

Thus, if asset markets were complete—implying μt,t+1 equal to μ∗ —the expression in the
square brackets in equation (3) would be equal to one and the wedge τH would be equal
to zero. Intuitively, the household’s valuation of mortgage payments in every period (and
more generally in every state) would be the same as that of the investor. And because
the investor’s no-arbitrage pricing implies that the present value of mortgage payments is
equal to one, the household’s valuation would also be equal to one. This holds regardless
14

of what monetary policy does. Furthermore, under complete markets, the agents would
be mutually insured against redistributive income shocks, making their income immune to
monetary policy surprises. The income eﬀect would therefore be eliminated.
Monetary policy would also be neutral if asset markets were generally incomplete, but
complete with respect to inﬂation. That is, if the nominal rigidity in mortgages could be eﬀectively removed from the economy. Suppose μt,t+1 = μ∗ , but consider, for instance, mortgages
that are index-linked, adjusting the principal for changes in the price level. The nominal payM
ments of such mortgages are m2 = (iM
2 + γ)(1 + π2 )l and m3 = (i3 + 1)(1 −γ)(1 + π2 )(1 + π3 )l
M
and no-arbitrage pricing implies iM
2 = i3 = r. Converting the nominal payments to real,

l and m3 /p3 = (r +1)(1−γ)
l, shows that the real payments do not depend on
m2 /p2 = (r +γ)
nominal variables. The income eﬀect is thus absent. The wedge also does not depend on nominal variables, but is generally nonzero: τH = −θ {1 − [μ12 (γ + r) + μ12 μ23 (r + 1)(1 − γ)]}.

3.6

Discussion: other types of nominal debt

The focus of the paper is on mortgages, as opposed to corporate debt, as long-term corporate
assets are less debt-dependent than housing and presumably corporations operate closer to
complete asset markets than do households.22 Nevertheless, the two channels of transmission
in principle apply also to the corporate sector. Long-term corporate debt usually takes the
form of coupon bonds, which result in our setup when γ1 = γ2 = 0. With such amortization
structure, the nominal payments are concentrated in the ﬁnal period of the loan and the real
eﬀects of monetary policy work predominantly by aﬀecting the real value of those payments
through accumulated inﬂation.23
Within the household sector, our analysis applies also to auto loans, which have a similar
payment structure as FRMs. We abstract from auto loans as mortgage debt has a longer
term (the usual term of auto loans is only ﬁve years) and makes up a much larger fraction
22
Long-term corporate assets are typically more than 75% ﬁnanced through retained earnings and other
forms of equity (Rajan and Zingales, 1995).
23
Gomes, Jermann, and Schmid (2013) study nominal corporate debt in a model in which monetary policy
aﬀects its default value.

15

of household debt than auto loans.

3.7

Numerical illustrations

The three-period model has limitations to illustrate how the price and income eﬀects vary
with inﬂation persistence and what is the realistic size of the eﬀects for a typical household.
For this purpose, we rely on numerical examples, based on a standard 30-year mortgage.
Figure 1 plots debt-servicing costs—the ratio of real mortgage payments (mt /pt ) to real
income (w)—over the term of the loan (120 quarters) under two alternative paths of it ; a
constant ‘steady-state’ it = 4% and a mean-reverting decline of it to 1% in period 1, which
we refer to as ‘monetary policy easing’. The persistence of the decline is 0.95, which is the
average quarterly autocorrelation of the short rate in the data. All the assumptions of the
simple model—constant r and w and no-arbitrage pricing, with equation (1) extended to 120
quarters—are maintained here. The parameterization is r = 1% per annum and 
l = 16w,
i.e., four times annual income. In the full model of the next section, the household chooses 
l
optimally (by choosing h). The point here is simply to illustrate the size of these eﬀects for
one particular loan size.24
At the steady-state interest rate, debt-servicing costs are front-loaded and decline monotonically over the life of the mortgage from 29% to 6.5%. This is the standard ‘tilt eﬀect’
(e.g., Schwab, 1982), occurring due to a positive inﬂation rate (in this case 3%). This path
is a baseline against which to compare the debt-servicing costs under the monetary policy
easing.
Starting with the case of a new loan, under both FRM and ARM, monetary policy easing
reduces debt-servicing costs at the front end, where they are the highest, and somewhat
increases them at the back end, where they are the smallest. The decline under FRM is
24

The parameterization of the loan size is based on the average ratio, 1975-2010, of the median price of a
new home (assuming a loan-to-value ratio of 76%) to the median household net income (assuming an income
tax rate of 23.5%). The data on house prices and gross incomes are from the U.S. Census Bureau. The loanto-value ratio is the average ratio for single family newly-built home mortgages (Federal Housing Finance
Agency, Monthly Interest Rate Survey, Table 10); the tax rate is a NIPA-based estimate. A historical 2%
markup is added to the interest rate.

16

smaller than under ARM because the FRM interest rate, due to the mean-reverting nature
of the short rate in this example, declines by less than the short rate itself. The ﬂattening
of the path of debt-servicing costs results in smoother consumption and thus a decline in τH
under a concave utility function (and/or suﬃciently small β). Using a log utility function
and β = 0.9883, a parameterization of the model of the next section, τH declines by 1.66
percentage points in the case of FRM and by 3.83 percentage points in the case of ARM.
Recall that (1 + τH ) can be interpreted as the eﬀective price of new housing investment and,
thus, these numbers represent quarterly percentage declines in this price.25
For the case of an existing loan, we consider a loan with 119 periods remaining (the
magnitudes of the income eﬀect decline as the remaining term of the loan gets shorter for
reasons analogous to those in footnote 20). In the case of ARM, as the loan is only one
period into its life, the expected path of debt-servicing costs is essentially the same as that
for the new loan. Under FRM, however, the persistently low inﬂation leads to a gradual
increase in debt-servicing costs for the remainder of the term of the loan. The income eﬀect
under the two contracts thus goes in opposite directions.26
Figure 2 plots the results of the same experiment, but for two alternative degrees of
persistence: 0.99 and 0.5. In the 0.99 case, the magnitudes are much larger than in the 0.95
case. Furthermore, for new loans, the results under FRM and ARM are more similar to
each other than in the 0.95 case, as the long rate drops almost as much as the short rate.
For existing loans, however, the eﬀects under FRM and ARM diverge further apart. When
the persistence is 0.5, the eﬀects on both new and existing loans are small, in fact hardly
noticeable in the FRM case.
25

As the decline in the wedge is larger under ARM than FRM, given the choice, the household would
prefer the ARM loan over the FRM loan. (Through out the paper we assume constant risk and therefore
the household’s responses are driven only by conditional means of inﬂation and interest rates.)
26
With reﬁnancing, in the aggregate, a fraction of the outstanding FRM debt would get reﬁnanced (the
whole stock would get reﬁnanced if reﬁnancing was costless). This would not be the case in the opposite
experiment of monetary policy tightening.

17

4

General equilibrium model

The general equilibrium model extends the model of the previous section to inﬁnite horizon,
formally introduces shocks, and endogenizes the variables that were either held constant
(real labor income and the real interest rate) or were treated as exogenous (the short-term
nominal interest rate and current inﬂation).

4.1

Environment

The economy’s population is split into two groups, ‘homeowners’ and ‘capital owners’, with
measures Ψ and (1 − Ψ), respectively. Within each group, agents are identical. An aggregate
production function combines capital and labor to produce a single good, which can be used
for consumption, capital investment, or as new housing structures; new homes consist of
new structures and new land. Capital owners own the economy’s capital stock, homeowners
supply labor. Capital owners play the role of mortgage investors, kept outside of the simple
model.27 Where applicable, the notation is the same as in Section 3. Only new variables
and functions are therefore deﬁned. When a variable’s notation is the same for both agent
types, an asterisk (∗) denotes the variable pertaining to capital owners. Through out the
model, ﬁscal variables—taxes, transfers, and government spending—are included only to
ensure sensible calibration, explained in Section 5.
27
The split of the population is motivated by Campbell and Cocco (2003). In the data, homeowners
(corresponding to the 3rd and 4th quintiles of wealth distribution) have one major asset, a house, and one
major liability, a mortgage. Their main source of income is labor income. In contrast, capital owners (the 5th
quintile) hold almost the entire corporate equity in the economy and housing is a less important component
of their asset composition; labor income is also a less important source of their income. The 1st and 2nd
quintiles are essentially renters with no assets and little liabilities and are not included in the model.

18

4.1.1

Homeowners

The representative homeowner’s problem is an extended version of the problem in Section
3. The homeowner maximizes expected life-time utility

Et

∞


β t {v(ct , ht ) − χt } ,

β ∈ (0, 1),

t=0

where v(., .) has standard properties and χt is a utility cost related to reﬁnancing and mortgage choice, described below. The maximization is subject to a sequence of constraints

ct + pHt xHt +

bt+1
lt
mt
bt
= (1 − τN )(wt n − τ ) + −
+ (1 + it−1 + Υt−1 ) − ψt ,
pt
pt
pt
pt

(4)

lt
= θpHt xHt ,
pt

(5)

ht+1 = (1 − δH )ht + xHt .

(6)

Here, xHt is newly purchased homes, pHt is their relative price, bt+1 is the homeowner’s
holdings of a one-period nominal bond between periods t and t + 1, wt is a real wage rate,
n is labor, which the household supplies inelastically, τN is a labor income tax rate, τ is a
transfer to capital owners, and δH ∈ (0, 1) is a depreciation rate of the housing stock.28 Υt−1
is a bond market participation cost, governed by a function Υ(−bt ), where bt ≡ bt /pt−1 is
the homeowner’s real holdings of the bond. The function Υ(.) is assumed to be increasing
and convex and it controls the extent to which homeowners can smooth out consumption
in the presence of income ﬂuctuations.29 In order to avoid the participation cost aﬀecting
28

As in the three-period model, θ is a parameter. Chambers, Garriga, and Schlagenhauf (2009a) make a
similar assumption and empirical evidence supports this assumption at the aggregate level: over the period
1973-2006, there has been very little variation in the cross-sectional average of the loan-to-value ratio for single
family newly-built home ﬁrst mortgages, despite large changes in interest rates and other macroeconomic
conditions (Federal Housing Finance Agency, Monthly Interest Rate Survey, Table 10).
29
It is further assumed that Υ(.) = 0 when bt = 0, Υ(.) > 0 when bt < 0 (the homeowner is borrowing),
and Υ(.) < 0 when bt > 0 (the homeowner is saving). We think of Υ(.) > 0 as capturing a premium
for unsecured consumer credit, which is increasing in the amount borrowed. Υ(.) < 0 can be interpreted
as higher intermediation costs for homeowners than capital owners, which reduces the homeowers’ returns
on savings below those of capital owners. In steady state, b = 0. A technical role of the cost function is
that, as in two-country business cycle models with incomplete markets, it prevents the one-period debt from

19

the deﬁnition of aggregate output, it is rebated to the homeowner in a lump-sum way as ψt ,
which the homeowner takes as given. The description of mortgage payments follows after
describing the capital owner.
4.1.2

Capital owners

A representative capital owner maximizes expected life-time utility

Et

∞


β t u(c∗t ),

t=0

where u(.) has standard properties, subject to a sequence of constraints
c∗t + xKt +

b∗t+1 lt∗
b∗ m∗
pLt
, (7)
+ = [(1 − τK )rt + τK δK ] kt + (1 − τbt )(1 + it−1 ) t + t + τt∗ +
pt
pt
pt
pt
1−Ψ
kt+1 = (1 − δK )kt + xKt .

(8)

Here, xKt is investment in capital, rt is the real rate of return on capital, τK is a capital
income tax rate, δK ∈ (0, 1) is a capital depreciation rate (tax deductible), kt is capital, τt∗
is a lump-sum transfer, 1/(1 − Ψ) is new residential land, which the capital owner receives
each period as an endowment, and pLt is its relative price. In addition, τbt is a stochastic
tax rate on income from the one-period bond market. The tax rate follows a stationary
AR(1) process τb,t+1 = ρb τbt +

b,t+1 ,

where

bt

∼ iidN(0, σb ). As discussed below, τbt shows

up as a wedge in the capital owner’s Euler equation for bonds. In a reduced form way, this
wedge captures various shocks and frictions in ﬁnancial markets, including those generating
a real rate channel of monetary policy. Šustek (2011) provides examples of explicit mappings
from such ﬁnancial market frictions to τbt .30 Under no-arbitrage pricing, the capital owner
is indiﬀerent across investing in mortgages, bonds, and capital. His composition of period-t
becoming a random walk in a log-linear solution of the model. In other words, it keeps the log-linearized
model stationary.
30
By subjecting only the capital owner to this wedge, it is assumed that the wedge captures frictions
related only to the ‘wholesale’ ﬁnancial market, in which mortgage investors participate, as opposed to the
‘retail’ ﬁnancial market, in which homeowners participate.

20

investment is therefore pinned down by homeowners’ demand for new mortgages and the
one-period bond.
4.1.3

Mortgages

In the interest of clarity, we start by describing FRMs and ARMs in their simple forms;
i.e., no reﬁnancing or choice between the contracts. The modeling of mortgages is based
on Kydland, Rupert, and Šustek (forthcoming), who consider inﬁnitely-lived loans, which
nevertheless contain the key characteristics of standard (ﬁnitely-lived) mortgages. Denoting
by dt the period-t stock of outstanding nominal mortgage debt of the homeowner, the nominal
mortgage payments the homeowner has to make in period t are

mt = (Rt + γt )dt ,

(9)

where Rt and γt are, respectively, the interest and amortization rates of the outstanding
debt. The variables determining mt are state variables evolving as
dt+1 = (1 − γt )dt + lt ,

(10)

γt+1 = (1 − φt ) (γt )α + φt κ,
⎧
⎪
⎨ (1 − φt )Rt + φt iF ,
t
Rt+1 =
⎪
⎩ it ,

(11)
if FRM,

(12)

if ARM,

with φt ≡ lt /dt+1 denoting the fraction of new loans in the outstanding debt next period. The
amortization rate γt+1 and the interest rate Rt+1 in the FRM case thus evolve as weighted
averages of the amortization and interest rates, respectively, on the existing stock and new
loans. κ, α ∈ (0, 1) are parameters. Speciﬁcally, κ is the initial amortization rate of a new
loan and α controls the evolution of the amortization rate over time. Notice that setting
α = 0 and κ = 1 implies γt = 1 ∀t. That is, lt becomes a one-period loan. Setting α = 1
results in a constant amortization rate γt = κ and thus declining nominal mortgage payments
21

over the life of the loan. Recall from Section 3 that in order to keep mortgage payments
constant over the life of a loan, the amortization rate has to be increasing. When κ, α ∈ (0, 1),
the amortization rate increases, converging to one. Kydland et al. (forthcoming) show that
κ and α can be chosen so as to approximate the payments of a standard 30-year mortgage.31
Mortgage payments received by the capital owner are speciﬁed analogously
m∗t = (Rt∗ + γt∗ )d∗t ,

(13)

d∗t+1 = (1 − γt∗ )d∗t + lt∗ ,

(14)

∗
= (1 − φ∗t ) (γt∗ )α + φ∗t κ,
γt+1
⎧
⎪
⎨ (1 − φ∗ )R∗ + φ∗ iF ,
t
t
t t
∗
Rt+1 =
⎪
⎩ it ,

(15)
if FRM,

(16)

if ARM,

where φ∗t ≡ lt∗ /d∗t+1 . Under FRM, the ﬁrst-order condition for lt∗ pins down iFt such that
the capital owner is indiﬀerent between new mortgages and rolling over the one-period bond
from period t on. The ﬁrst-order condition is an inﬁnite-horizon counterpart to equation (1);
see Appendix A.
4.1.4

Reﬁ loans

Next, we turn to reﬁnancing. Chen, Michaux, and Roussanov (2013) document that, on
average, 60% of reﬁ loans in the United States between 1985 and 2013 were unrelated to
interest rate changes. Instead, they served the purpose of liquidity withdrawals, similar to
home equity lines of credit.32 Given our interest, we abstract from this type of reﬁnancing and
focus on the remaining 40%. At the aggregate level, as Chen et al. (2013) demonstrate, this
fraction is negatively related to a diﬀerence between the current 30-year mortgage interest
31

Under appropriate choice of κ and α, even though the loan has an inﬁnite life, it gets essentially repayed
within 30 years and the nominal payments are approximately constant for most of these 30 years, conditional
on a constant mortgage rate. Such modeling of mortgages is convenient, as both the agents and loans have
an inﬁnite life, thus allowing a simple recursive representation of the model with only a few state variables.
32
Hurst and Staﬀord (2004) also focus on the liquidity role of reﬁnancing

22

rate and an average of its past values. This is the relationship we intend to capture.
With reﬁnancing, new loans consist of mortgages used for new house purchase (ﬁrst
mortgages) and reﬁ loans
lt = θ(pt pHt xHt ) + t (1 − γt )dt .

(17)

Here, t is the fraction of the outstanding debt that is being reﬁnanced in period t (reﬁnancing
takes place after the regular period-t amortization payment is made). Mortgage payments
are still given by mt = (Rt + γt )dt , but now with laws of motion
dt+1 = (1 − t )(1 − γt )dt + lt ,

(18)

γt+1 = (1 − φt ) (γt )α + φt κ,

(19)

Rt+1 = (1 − Θt )Rt + Θt iFt ,

(20)

where φt ≡ θ(pt pHt xHt )/dt+1 is the fraction of ﬁrst mortgages (net borrowing) in the stock
of debt next period and Θt ≡ lt /dt+1 is the fraction of all new loans (gross borrowing) in the
stock of debt next period. Observe that combining equations (17) and (18) gives back the
original law of motion for debt (10). An implicit assumption in the law of motion (19) is that
a new reﬁ loan starts with an amortization rate of the loan that it replaces (this captures
that, e.g., a loan that is reﬁnanced 10 years before maturity gets replaced with a 10-year
loan). This leads to a sharp characterization of reﬁnancing. Namely, in the homeowner’s
problem, reﬁnancing shows up only in the law of motion (20), as a change in the weights on
the old eﬀective interest rate Rt and the current market interest rate iFt , without tieing this
change to new house purchases. When t = 1, i.e., the whole existing stock is reﬁnanced,
Θt = 1 and the evolution of Rt+1 becomes the same as under ARM. When t = 0, Θt = φt
and the evolution of Rt+1 becomes the same as in the case of the basic FRM loan, equation
(12).

23

The capital owner’s laws of motion are analogous,
d∗t+1 = (1 − t )(1 − γt∗ )d∗t + lt∗
∗
γt+1
= (1 − φ∗t ) (γt∗ )α + φ∗t κ,
∗
= (1 − Θ∗t )Rt∗ + Θ∗t iFt ,
Rt+1

where φ∗t = [lt∗ − t (1 − γt∗ )d∗t ]/d∗t+1 and Θ∗t ≡ lt∗ /d∗t+1 , with t taken as given. The capital
owner’s ﬁrst-order condition for lt∗ (gross lending) again determines iFt . Observe that, as the
evolution of d∗t+1 depends on t , the FRM rate iFt depends on the reﬁnancing behavior of the
homeowner (i.e., ρt shows up in a ﬁrst-order condition for lt∗ ).33
The homeowner’s decision to reﬁnance is modeled as follows
⎧
⎪
⎨ 
t =
⎪
⎩ t

and

χt = 0

if iFt ≥ Rt ,

and

χt = Γ (
t )

if iFt < Rt .

Here,  is a reﬁ fraction in steady state (occurring due to exogenous reasons, such as moving
house), t is chosen optimally, and Γ(.) is a function with Γ() = 0, Γ(.) > 0, and Γ(.) > 0.
The utility cost χt can be interpreted, for instance, as a time loss.34 When we abstract
from reﬁnancing, we set t ≡ 0 and χt ≡ 0. Characterization of t is provided in Section 7,
together with the quantitative ﬁndings.
4.1.5

Mortgage choice

Allowing for endogenous choice between new FRM and ARM loans requires keeping track
of the two types of debt separately. Therefore, mortgage payments of the homeowner are
mt = m1t + m2t , where m1t are payments on outstanding FRM debt and m2t are payments
33
With reﬁnancing, the left-hand side of the capital owner’s budget constraint (7) needs to be modiﬁed:
lt∗ gets replaced with lt∗ − t (1 − γt∗ )d∗t (in both cases it is net lending).
34
Even though, at an individual level, reﬁnancing costs often involve a ﬁxed component, at the aggregate
level of the representative homeowner, assuming a cost function like Γ(.) is a more appropriate modeling
choice.

24

on outstanding ARM debt. These two variables are determined by separate laws of motion
(10)-(12), as applicable, each with its own new loans, l1t for FRM and l2t for ARM. The
mortgage payments received by the capital owner are speciﬁed analogously. The ﬁnancing
constraint of the homeowner becomes lt = θpt pHt xHt , with lt = l1t + l2t . In order to avoid a
bang-bang solution, it is assumed that the homeowner faces a convex cost function Φ(l2t /lt ).
The cost function is assumed to satisfy Φ(l2 /l) = 0, where l2 /l is a steady-state share of
ARMs in new loans, a parameter. Further, Φ(.) > 0 and Φ(.) > 0. It is assumed that
the cost takes the form of the utility loss χt . A way to think about the steady-state share
l2 /l and the cost function is as reﬂecting various institutional and historical factors, noted
in footnote 1 and not modeled here. This is a reasonable modeling strategy, given our focus
on temporary ﬂuctuations, rather than the long run.
The capital owner takes the mortgage choice by the homeowner as given but the ﬁrst∗
again determines the mortgage rate iFt , so as to leave the capital owner
order condition for l1t

indiﬀerent between the two types of new loans (and other assets).
4.1.6

Technology

An aggregate production function, operated by perfectly competitive producers, is given by
Yt = At f (Kt , Nt ), where Kt is the aggregate capital stock, Nt is aggregate labor, and f (., .)
has the standard neoclassical properties. Total factor productivity (TFP) follows a stationary
AR(1) process log At+1 = (1 − ρA ) log A + ρA log At +
mean and

At

A,t+1 ,

where A is the unconditional

∼ iidN(0, σA ). The real rate of return on capital, rt , and the real wage rate,

wt , are determined by the marginal products of capital and labor, respectively. The resource
constraint of the economy is Ct + XKt + qt XSt + G = Yt , where Ct is aggregate consumption,
XKt is aggregate investment in capital, XSt is new housing structures, and G is (constant)
government expenditures. Here, qt is the marginal rate of transformation between new
housing structures and the other uses of output, and hence the relative price of new housing
structures. It is given as qt = ηt q(XSt ), where q(XSt ) is a convex function that makes the

25

economy’s production possibilities frontier (PPF) concave in the space of (Ct + XKt + G)
and (XSt )—a speciﬁcation akin to that of Huﬀman and Wynne (1999), a stand-in for the
costs of moving factors of production across diﬀerent sectors of the economy. The purpose
of the function q(.) is to ensure realistic volatility of new housing structures in response to
shocks; if the production possibilities frontier was linear, the volatility would be too high.
Further, ηt is a shock following a stationary AR(1) process ηt+1 = (1 − ρq ) + ρq ηt +
with unconditional mean equal to one and

qt

q,t+1 ,

∼ iidN(0, σq ). This shock can be thought of

as a housing construction shock. The shocks At and ηt are relevant only for cross-validating
the model against business cycle moments of the data.
As in Davis and Heathcote (2005), new homes consist of new housing structures and
land and are produced by perfectly competitive homebuilders according to an aggregate
production function XHt = g(XSt , XLt ). Here, XHt is the aggregate number of new homes
constructed in period t, XLt is the aggregate new residential land, and g has the standard
neoclassical properties.
4.1.7

Monetary policy

Monetary policy is characterized by a Taylor-type rule with a stochastic inﬂation target (e.g.,
Ireland, 2007)
it = (i + π t − π) + νπ (πt − π t ),

νπ > 1,

(21)

where i is the steady-state short-term nominal interest rate, and π t is the inﬂation target.
The inﬂation target follows a stationary AR(1) process π t+1 = (1−ρπ )π +ρπ π t +
π is a steady-state inﬂation rate, and

π,t+1

π,t+1 ,

where

∼ iidN(0, σπ ). Notice that the interest rate rule

can be rewritten in a more typical form as it = i+νπ (πt −π)+ξt , where ξt ≡ −(νπ −1)(π t −π).
As shown below, when ρπ is close to one, the inﬂation target shock works in equilibrium
like a ‘level factor’, moving short and long rates equally, and allows the model to reproduce
the observed volatility and persistence of the 30-year mortgage rate. A highly persistent
monetary policy shock is usually required in macro models to match the statistical prop-

26

erties of long-term nominal interest rates (Gallmeyer, Holliﬁeld, Palomino, and Zin, 2007;
Atkeson and Kehoe, 2009). Here, it has an interpretation as an inﬂation target shock.

4.2

Equilibrium

To economize on space and notation, the equilibrium is deﬁned only for the case of separate
FRM and ARM loans in their basic form.35 Let zt ≡ [log At , πt , τbt , ηt , pt−1 ] be the vector
of exogenous state variables and a lagged value of the price level, s∗t ≡ [kt , b∗t , d∗t , γt∗ , Rt∗ ] the
vector of the capital owner’s state variables, st ≡ [ht , bt , dt , γt , Rt ] the vector of the homeowner’s state variables, and St ≡ [Kt , Ht , Bt , Dt , Γt ,

t]

the vector of aggregate endogenous

state variables, where the elements are, respectively, aggregate capital, housing stock, bonds,
outstanding mortgage debt, and its amortization and interest rates. Next, write the capital
owner’s optimization problem as
U(z, S, s∗ ) =

max

[xK ,(b∗ ) ,l∗ ]




u(c∗ ) + βE[U(z  , S , (s∗ ) )|z] ,

(22)

where a prime denotes a value next period and the constraints (7), (8), and (13)-(16) are
thought to have been substituted in the utility and value functions. Similarly, write the
homeowner’s problem as



V (z, S, s) = max v(c, h) − χ + βE[V (z  , S , s )|z] ,
[xH ,b ]

(23)

where the constraints (4)-(6) and (9)-(12) are thought to have been substituted in the utility
and value functions. Let Wt ≡ [XKt , pt , iM
t , XHt , Bt+1 ] be the vector of aggregate decision
F
M
variables and prices, where iM
t = it under FRM and it = it under ARM. Deﬁne a function

Wt = W (zt , St ).36
35

Accommodating reﬁnancing and mortgage choice simply involves expanding the vector of decision variables of the homeowner by including the additional choice variable, either t or l2t . In the case of mortgage
choice, the state space is larger than in the case of the separate contracts, as there are two sets of the
mortgage state variables, one for each type of debt.
36
With reﬁnancing, the capital owner’s laws of motion (14)-(16) are replaced with their reﬁ counterparts.
Similarly, the homeowner’s laws of motion (10)-(12) are replaced with their reﬁ counterparts. In addition,

27

A recursive competitive equilibrium consists of the functions U, V , and W such that:
(i) U and V solve (22) and (23), respectively; (ii) rt and wt are given by the respective
marginal products of capital and labor, pHt and pLt are given by the respective marginal
products of structures and land, and qt = ηt q(XSt ); (iii) it is given by the monetary policy
rule (21); (iv) the bond, mortgage, housing, and land markets clear: (1 − Ψ)b∗t+1 + Ψbt+1 = 0,
(1 − Ψ)(lt∗ /pt ) = ΨθpHt xHt ,

ΨxHt = g(XSt, XLt ), and XLt = 1; (v) aggregate consistency

is ensured: Kt = (1 − Ψ)kt , XKt = (1 − Ψ)xKt , XHt = ΨxHt , Bt = Ψbt , Ht = Ψht ,
(1 − Ψ)m∗t = Ψmt , (1 − Ψ)d∗t = Ψdt = Dt , γt∗ = γt = Γt , Rt∗ = Rt =

t,

and (1 − Ψ)τt∗ =

τK (rt − δK )Kt + τN (wt N − Ψτ ) + Ψτ + τbt (1 − it−1 )Bt /pt − G; (vi) the exogenous state
variables follow their respective stochastic processes and the endogenous aggregate state
variables evolve according to aggregate counterparts to the laws of motion for the respective
individual state variables; and (vii) the individual optimal decision rules of the capital owner




(for xK , (b∗ ) , and l∗ ) and the homeowner (for xH and b ) are consistent with W (z, S).37
The computational procedure is described in Appendix B. Before computing the equilibrium, the model is made stationary by dividing all nominal variables by either pt or pt−1 .
Given a relatively large number of state variables, the model is solved by log-linear approximation (appropriately modiﬁed in the case of reﬁnancing). Thus, in the quantitative results
presented, the linear equilibrium decision rules and pricing functions are characterized by
certainty equivalence, whereby only current realizations and the conditional ﬁrst moments
of future shocks (not higher moments) aﬀect agents’ decisions and market clearing prices.
The FRM rate in the log-linear model is thus based on expectations hypothesis.38
the homeowner’s maximization is also with respect to t and an aggregate counterpart to t is an element
of Wt . Further, the mortgage market clearing condition noted below is replaced with (1 − Ψ)(lt∗ /pt ) =
Ψ[θ(pHt xHt ) + t (1 − γt )dt /pt ]. With mortgage choice, the homeowner’s maximization is also with respect
to l1t and l2t , subject to l1t = θ(pt pHt xHt ) − l2t , and the aggregate counterpart to l2t is a part of Wt . In
∗
the capital owner’s problem, maximization with respect to lt∗ is replaced with l1t
. Mortgage market clearing
∗
∗
∗
requires (1−Ψ)(l1t +l2t ) = Ψθ(pt pHt xHt ) and (1−Ψ)l2t = Ψl2t . The choice of xHt and l2t by the homeowner
∗
∗
thus pins down l1t
and l2t
.
37
In the case of ARM, iM
t = it makes the capital owner indiﬀerent between new mortgages and bonds and
the ﬁrst-order condition for lt∗ can be dropped from the description of the equilibrium. In the case of FRM,
the ﬁrst-order condition is needed to determine iF
t .
38
We have explored the eﬀects of (constant) second moments of the shocks on the equilibrium decision
rules and pricing functions, using a special case of Epstein-Zin preferences (i.e., with unitary intertemporal
elasticity of substitution) that is easy to handle by the computational method. But like Tallarini (2000) and

28

4.3

Equilibrium nominal interest rates and inﬂation

The capital owner’s ﬁrst-order conditions for b∗t+1 and xKt yield the Fisher equation. In a
linearized form: it − Et πt+1 ≈ Et rt+1 + Et τb,t+1 , where (abusing notation) the variables are
in percentage point deviations from steady state. Notice that, for a given expected rate
of return on capital Et rr+1 , determined by the expected marginal product of capital, an
increase in Et τb,t+1 increases the ex-ante real interest rate, it − Et πt+1 . In this sense, τbt is a
real rate shock.
Given stochastic processes for rt and τbt , the Fisher equation and the monetary policy
rule (21) determine, by forward substitutions, it and πt . For ρπ close to one, excluding
explosive paths for inﬂation (a common assumption), the resulting expression for it is
j
∞ 

1
νπ ρb
Et rt+1+j +
τbt + π t .
it ≈
νπ
νπ − ρb
j=0

(24)

Substituting it from equation (24) back into the policy rule (21) gives the equilibrium inﬂation
rate

j
∞ 
1  1
ρb
Et rt+1+j +
τbt + π t .
πt ≈
νπ j=0 νπ
νπ − ρb

(25)

Thus, under the assumption that ρπ is close to one, the equilibrium short-term nominal
interest rate and inﬂation move, subject to general equilibrium adjustments in the expected
path of rt , one for one with the highly persistent inﬂation target shock π t . In this sense, in
contrast to the τbt shock, the inﬂation target shock is a purely nominal shock.
Because movements in it occurring due to the π t shock are highly persistent, the long
rate iFt moves almost as much as the short rate in response to this shock. In this sense, the
π t shock works like a level factor shock. In contrast, the τbt shock, if less persistent, has only
a temporary eﬀect on the short rate. It thus has only a small eﬀect on the long rate and
moves predominantly the long-short spread. We exploit these properties in calibration.
Backus, Ferriere, and Zin (2015), we have found little eﬀect of the second moments on the model dynamics
for a wide range of the risk aversion parameter.

29

5

Calibration

As most of the required historical data are readily available for the United States, the
calibration is based on U.S. data, even though the mechanism applies more generally. One
period in the model corresponds to one quarter.

5.1

Functional forms

The following standard functional forms are used: u(c∗ ) = log c∗ , v(c, h) = ξ log c + (1 −
ξ) log h, f (K, N) = K ς N 1−ς , g(XS , XL ) = XS1−ϕ XLϕ . Further, as in Kydland et al. (forthcoming),
q(XSt ) = exp(ζ(XSt − XS )), where ζ > 0 and XS is the steady-state ratio of new housing
structures to output (Y is normalized to be equal to one in steady state). A similar functional form is used also for the bond market participation cost: Υ(−bt ) = exp(−ϑbt ) − 1,
where ϑ > 0 and bt = 0 in steady state. It is straightforward to check that this function
satisﬁes the properties set out in Section 4.

5.2

Debt-servicing costs

A particular challenge arises due to the need to match debt-servicing costs—mortgage payments to income ratio—of homeowners. This requires the model to be consistent with
the cross-sectional distribution of income, in addition to the standard aggregate targets:
XK /Y = 0.156, XS /Y = 0.054, K/Y = 7.06, H/Y = 5.28, and rK/Y = 0.283, all averages for 1958-2006. Oﬃcial data for mortgage debt servicing costs are not published for the
United States. Estimates, however, can be obtained from diﬀerent sources (see Appendix D),
resulting in long-run averages in the ballpark of 18.5% of homeowners’ pre-tax income. The

 = (R+γ)D/(1+π),

model’s steady-state counterpart to this ratio is M/(wN
−Ψτ ), where M
 being the debt-to-output ratio.
with D
Consistency with the observed cross-sectional distribution of income is achieved through
τ . Recall that homeowners in the model are an abstraction for the 3rd and 4th quintiles of
the wealth distribution, while capital owners are an abstraction for the 5th quintile. In the
30

data, while the 5th quintile get substantial income from capital, they also receive income
from transfers and labor. Thus, if the only source of income of capital owners in the model
was capital, and given that the model is required to match the observed average capital
share of output (rK/Y = 0.283), capital owners would account for too small fraction of
aggregate income (28.3% in the model v.s. 48% in the data; SCF 1998), while homeowners’
share would be too large. As a result, the steady-state debt-servicing costs would be too
low (or the required debt-to-output ratio would have to be too high, making it inconsistent
with the observed XS /Y ratio, the land share in new housing, the loan-to-value ratio, and
the amortization schedule). The parameter τ adjusts for this discrepancy, transferring some
of the homeowners’ labor income to capital owners.

5.3

Parameter values

The parameter values are listed in Table 1, where they are organized into eight categories:
Ψ (population); β, ξ (preferences); δK , δH , ς, A, ζ, ϕ (technology); τK , τN , G, τ (ﬁscal); θ,
α, κ (mortgage contracts); ϑ (bond market); π, νπ (monetary policy); and ρA , σA , ρπ , σπ , ρb ,
σb , ρq , σq (stochastic processes).39 Wherever possible, calibration targets are for the period
1958-2006. The calibration is mainly based on steady-state relations and unconditional ﬁrst
moments of the data. Most parameters can be assigned values without solving a system
of steady-state equations, three parameters (ξ, τK , τ ) have to be obtained jointly, and
two parameters (ζ, ϑ) are assigned values together with the parameters of the stochastic
processes by matching unconditional second moments of the data. Calibration of the three
sets of parameters is described in turn.
First, the share of homeowners Ψ is set equal to 2/3. The capital share ς is set equal
to 0.283, an estimate from National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA) for aggregate
output close to our measure of output (see Appendix C). The share of land in new housing
ϕ is set equal to 0.1, an estimate reported by Davis and Heathcote (2005). The depreciation
39

Parameters speciﬁc to reﬁnancing and mortgage choice are dealt with in Sections 7.2 and 7.3, respectively.

31

rates δK and δH are set equal to 0.02225 and 0.01021, respectively, to be consistent with
the average ﬂow-stock ratios for capital and housing, respectively. The level of TFP, A,
is set equal to 1.5321, so that steady-state output is equal to one. The labor income tax
rate is derived from NIPA using a procedure of Mendoza, Razin, and Tesar (1994), yielding
τN = 23.5%. The role of this parameter is to map the observed debt-servicing costs, which
are based on gross income, into net income. The parameter G is measured to be equal to
0.138 (see Appendix C).40 We focus on conventional mortgages and therefore set θ equal to
0.6. This is based on the observation that conventional loans make up, on average, 80% of
single family newly-built home mortgages (Construction Survey, 1973-2006) and the average
cross-sectional mean of their loan-to-value ratio is 0.76 (Freddie Mac’s Monthly Interest
Rate Survey, 1973-2006). As in Kydland et al. (forthcoming), the amortization parameters
are κ = 0.00162 and α = 0.9946, approximating the amortization schedule of a 30-year
mortgage. The weight on inﬂation in the monetary policy rule νπ is set equal to a fairly
standard value of 1.5. The steady-state inﬂation rate π is set equal to 0.0113, the average
(1972-2006) quarterly inﬂation rate. In steady state, the ﬁrst-order condition for lt∗ constrains
iF to equal to i. The ﬁrst-order condition for b∗t then relates i and π to β. The above value of π
and iF = 9.31% per annum (the 1972-2006 average for 30-year FRM rate) imply β = 0.9883.
Given the above parameter values, the second set of parameters (ξ, τK , τ ) is calibrated by
matching the observed average K/Y ratio, H/Y ratio, and debt-servicing costs. The relationship between the three parameters and the targets is given by the steady-state versions of
the ﬁrst-order conditions for xKt and xHt and the expression for steady-state debt-servicing
costs noted above (see Appendix A for the ﬁrst-order conditions). These restrictions yield
ξ = 0.5003, τK = 0.3362, and τ = 0.4693.
Finally, given the values of the ﬁrst and second set of parameters, ζ and ϑ are calibrated,
together with the parameters of the stochastic processes, by minimizing an equally-weighted
distance between the following second moments of the data and their simulated model coun40

Having government expenditures in the model ensures a realistic expense of the tax revenues, which
otherwise would have to go into transfers, thus aﬀecting the distribution of income.

32

terparts41 : (i) the standard deviations and autocorrelations of the 10-year government bond
yield (a longer series used as a proxy for the 30-year mortgage rate) and of the long-short
spread (10-year minus 3-month), (ii) the standard deviation and autocorrelation of output,
(iii) the standard deviation and autocorrelation of house prices, and (iv) the standard deviations of housing and capital investment. These are 10 targets for 10 parameters. The
resulting parameter values are reported in Table 1. Here, instead of going over the values,
we brieﬂy discuss how the targets map into the parameters. Targets (i) help pin down the
parameters of the inﬂation target and bond market shocks, as explained in Section 4; targets (ii) help pin down the parameters of the TFP shock; targets (iii) help pin down the
parameters of the shock to the marginal rate of transformation; and targets (iv) help pin
down the parameter controlling the curvature of PPF and the parameter of the cost function
for homeowners’ participation in the bond market.42 As reported and discussed in the next
section, the cyclical properties of the model are similar under FRM and ARM, in line with
cross-country data. The parameter values, therefore, are not particularly sensitive to which
contract is used to simulate the model to match the moments (the reported values are based
on FRM).

6

Model cross-validation

Before proceeding to quantitatively assess the transmission mechanism under investigation,
we use three diﬀerent sets of available empirical observations to cross-validate the model: (i)
business cycle moments, (ii) responses to a real interest rate shock, and (iii) the marginal
propensity to consume (MPC) of ARM homeowners.
First, the business cycle moments—standard deviations and correlations with output—
41

Both the U.S. and simulated data are expressed as percentage (percentage point, for interest rates)
deviations from HP-ﬁlter trend.
42
Speciﬁcally, the bond market cost function controls the extent to which homeowners can indirectly invest
in capital, thus aﬀecting the volatility of capital investment. The curvature of PPF controls the volatility of
housing investment.

33

are reported in Panel A of Table 2.43 Six standard deviations in the table are part of the set
of moments used to calibrate the model under FRM. Nonetheless, the remaining standard
deviations—of consumption, the short rate, and inﬂation—also line up well with the data.
The model also correctly predicts positive correlations with output of consumption and the
two types of investment, with the correlation of consumption being the highest and the
correlation of housing investment being the lowest of the three. However, it overpredicts
the strength of these relations. This also applies to house prices. Such ﬁnding should be
expected, as the number of shocks in the model is limited. The short and long interest rates,
the long-short spread, and the inﬂation rate have correlations with output similar to those
in the data.
The ﬁndings in Table 2 show that the cyclical properties of the model are not particularly
sensitive to whether FRM or ARM contract is used to simulate the model. This may seem
surprising as one would expect that, especially, the moments of housing investment should
be sensitive to the type of the loan. Housing investment is indeed less positively correlated
with output under ARM than FRM, and its volatility is lower under ARM than FRM, but
the diﬀerences are small. Is this true in the data? Panel B of the table shows that the
diﬀerences in the model are similar to those between a set of FRM countries and a set of
ARM countries.44 The reason for the similarity is that the TFP shock is the dominating
shock in the model and housing investment responds similarly to such a shock under both
contracts. However, as in the data, it responds a little less under ARM than FRM because
the responses get dampened by procyclical movements of interest rates, to which housing
investment is more sensitive under ARM than FRM, as shown below.
Second, we scrutinize the model responses to the τbt shock, which directly aﬀects the
ex-ante real interest rate. Recall that this shock can be thought of as capturing the real rate
channel of monetary policy transmission. The identiﬁcation of such shocks in the data is well
43

The data are quarterly. Both the actual and simulated data are expressed as percentage (or percentage
point, for interest rates and the inﬂation rate) deviations from HP-ﬁlter trend.
44
The countries used are the only countries for which quarterly housing investment data are available going
back to at least 1980. FRM counties: BEL, FRA, US; ARM countries: AUS, CAN, UK. The moments are
taken from Kydland et al. (forthcoming).

34

understood, unlike the identiﬁcation of the shock we focus on. Calza et al. (2013) employ a
typical identiﬁcation strategy to study the responses of housing investment in a sample of
FRM and ARM countries. They ﬁnd that, in response to a one-percentage point (annualized)
increase in the short-term nominal interest rate, increasing the real rate, housing investment
declines more in ARM than FRM countries. Figure 3 shows that the model is consistent with
this ﬁnding. Panel A shows responses under the calibrated persistence of the τbt shock, panel
B shows responses under calibration that reproduces the persistence of the nominal interest
rate in Calza et al. (2013).45 In the latter case, the quantitative response under FRM falls
within the error bands reported in their paper. Under ARM, the initial decline somewhat
exceeds their error bands (−1.95% in the model vs. −1.4% in their paper). This is likely
due to the fact that the interest rate of the ARM contract in the model adjusts immediately,
whereas in their study the classiﬁcation of countries as ARM countries is based on interest
rates ﬁxed for up to ﬁve years.
Finally, in Table 3, we compare the MPC of ARM homeowners in the model to the
empirical MPC from the study by Di Maggio et al. (2014) described brieﬂy in Section 2 (the
study does not contain MPC of FRM homeowners). In both the data and the model, the
MPC is calculated as an increase in consumption of ARM homeowners divided by the extra
income brought about by a decline in real mortgage payments occurring due to a drop in
the nominal interest rate. In the model, the nominal interest rate can decline due to both
the τbt and π t shocks (i.e., it can decline due to a decline in the real rate or in line with
inﬂation), whereas the empirical study is silent on the sources of the decline. We therefore
consider both scenarios. As the empirical study is based on reduced form analysis, it does
not address the question of the agents’ expectations of the persistence of the interest rate
decline. When we use the calibrated persistence of the shocks, the model implies MPC of
around 0.28. However, a modest reduction in the persistence of the π t shock, from 0.994
to 0.95, replicates the empirical MPC of 0.17 (the MPC value of 0.28, however, is in the
45

The calibrated persistence is based on the long-short spread, which may be aﬀected by other factors,
such as time-varying risk premia, than just the channels identiﬁed by Calza et al. (2013).

35

ballpark of estimates from the ﬁscal stimulus literature, e.g., Johnson, Parker, and Souleles,
2006; Parker, Souleles, Johnson, and McClelland, 2013). As demonstrated below, reducing
the persistence of the shock to 0.95 does not change the main message of the paper. In the
case of the τbt shock, the persistence needs to be brought down to 0.7 (interestingly, a value
in-between our calibrated value of 0.9 and the value implied by Calza et al., 2013, of 0.5).

7

Findings from computational experiments

The purpose of the computational experiments is to impose general equilibrium discipline on
the transmission mechanism laid out in Section 3 and to explore its quantitative importance.
In order to demonstrate the general equilibrium eﬀects of FRM and ARM contracts in
their starkest form, we start by studying the responses of the model economy under the
two contracts separately, abstracting from the choice between them and reﬁnancing. This
exercise, while not strictly applicable to the United States, is relevant for other countries, in
addition to its purpose of isolating the eﬀects of each contract. In many countries, ARMs (of
various types) are the only contract available; see footnote 1. And in some FRM countries,
reﬁnancing is less common than in the United States. For instance, as noted in Section 2,
Villar Burke (2015) shows that the interest rate on the pool of existing mortgages stayed
almost intact in Germany and France, following the European Central Bank’s interest rate
cut to near zero in 2008/2009, despite declines of interest rates on new loans and relatively
stable house prices. After this initial exercise, we scrutinize the mechanism under reﬁnancing
and mortgage choice.

7.1
7.1.1

Responses under FRM and ARM
Baseline responses

The quantitative assessment of the transmission mechanism under the two separate contracts
is contained in Figure 4. The ﬁgure plots the responses of selected variables to a positive

36

(1 percentage point, annualized) π t shock in period 1. The ﬁrst two charts demonstrate the
nominal and level factor nature of the shock: the short-term nominal interest rate and the
inﬂation rate, and in the case of the FRM economy also the FRM rate, all increase more or
less in parallel by approximately one percentage point (annualized).46 The next chart plots
the responses of real mortgage payments (mt /pt ). The chart conﬁrms the eﬀects discussed
in Section 3. Due to higher inﬂation, real mortgage payments decline on impact (period 1)
under both contracts by the same amount. But this decline is dwarfed by the magnitudes
in subsequent periods. Under FRM, real mortgage payments display a persistent gradual
decline, while under ARM the payments increase sharply (and persistently) one period after
the shock. Under FRM, both homeowners’ consumption (Ct ) and housing investment (XSt )
increase in response to growing real disposable income.47 In contrast, under ARM, both
variables decline in response to the drop in real disposable income. Further, the responses
under ARM are stronger than under FRM. For instance, the decline in housing investment
is 1.8% on impact under ARM, compared with a 0.7% increase under FRM.48 House prices
(pHt ), not plotted due to space constraints, increase on impact by 0.2% under FRM, and
decline by 0.5% under ARM. The last chart shows that capital owners’ consumption (Ct∗ )
responses are opposite to those of homeowners, but are smaller and smoother. This reﬂects
the fact that mortgage payments are a quantitatively smaller fraction of capital owners’ than
homeowners’ income (6.4% vs 24.2% of after-tax income) and that capital owners can better
smooth out ﬂuctuations in income.
7.1.2

Comparison with a real rate channel

It was argued in Section 3 that, under ARM, the eﬀect of a one-for-one increase in the
nominal interest rate and inﬂation works like an increase in the real interest rate. How does,
46

The model is stationary. Thus, even though convergence back to steady state may not be apparent from
the plots, eventually all variables converge back to steady state. This, however, takes longer than the 40
periods displayed in the charts.
47
The ﬁgure plots responses of XSt but the responses of XHt are similar.
48
The responses of consumption and housing investment do not exactly copy the responses of real mortgage
payments as homeowners have some access to the one-period bond market to smooth out the impact of the
changes in disposable income.

37

then, the transmission mechanism under ARM quantitatively compare with a real interest
rate channel? To answer this question, we rely again on the τbt shock that aﬀects the ex-ante
real interest rate. Using again the calibration based on the VAR study of Calza et al. (2013),
ρb is set equal to 0.5. Figure 5 contains the results of this comparison. It plots the responses
of selected variables (it − Et πt+1 , mt /pt , XS , and Ct ) to a one percentage point (annualized)
increase in the short term nominal interest rate, occurring due to either the τbt or the π t
shock. Observe that under the τbt shock the ex-ante real interest rate (it − Et πt+1 ) increases,
whereas under the π t shock it stays almost unchanged (it gradually declines due to small
general equilibrium eﬀects working through capital accumulation). The immediate eﬀect on
real mortgage payments, however, is the same under the two shocks and the subsequent eﬀect
is even more persistent under the π t shock than under the τbt shock. Housing investment
under both shocks declines by roughly 2% on impact, but the decline is more persistent
under the π t shock. The same applies to consumption. The transmission mechanism studied
in this paper is thus at least as potent, under ARM, as the traditional real rate channel.
7.1.3

The role of persistence

Recall that the calibration of ρπ is based on replicating the persistence of the 10-year nominal government bond yield, used as a proxy for the 30-year mortgage rate. How do the
quantitative ﬁndings change when the persistence of the shock is reduced? Figure 6 provides
the answer. Focusing on the ARM case, in which the real eﬀects are generally larger, the
initial response of housing investment is reduced from 1.8% to 1.1% as the persistence is
reduced from the calibrated value of 0.994 to 0.95 (recall that the latter value is required to
match the MPC of homeowners in Di Maggio et al., 2014). When the persistence is further
reduced to 0.5, the real eﬀects become negligible. At this degree of persistence, the real
eﬀects working through the traditional real rate channel are much stronger (refer back to
the bottom panel of Figure 3). Notice that as the persistence is reduced, the shock starts
to aﬀect the long-short spread, rather than the level of the yield curve. The transmission

38

mechanism proposed in this paper is thus quantitatively more relevant for monetary policy
shocks that primarily aﬀect the level of the yield curve, rather than its slope.

7.2

Reﬁnancing

The previous analysis has abstracted from reﬁnancing. This is a reasonable approximation
for countries like Germany and France, as argued at the start of this section, but not for
the United States. Does optimal reﬁnancing make the responses of the economy under FRM
look more like under ARM when interest rates decline? As described in Section 4, when
iFt < Rt , the homeowner optimally chooses the fraction of outstanding debt t to reﬁnance.
We assume that the reﬁ cost function is Γ(.) = υ(t − )2 , with υ > 0. For this cost function,
the ﬁrst-order condition for t takes a simple form


−βEt VR,t+1
(1 − γt ) dt
(Rt − iFt ),
t −  =
(1 + πt ) dt+1
2υ
where VRt < 0 is the derivative of the homeowner’s value function with respect to Rt ,
capturing the marginal life-time gain of reducing the eﬀective interest rate on outstanding
debt.
The parameter  is set so that, in steady state, the share of reﬁ loans in new loans,
(1−γ)d/l, is equal to 0.4, a long-run average from Freddie Mac’s Primary Mortgage Market
Survey (1987-2007). This implies  = 0.02, i.e., 2% of the outstanding debt is reﬁnanced
quarterly in steady state, a fraction reported also by Chen et al. (2013). The reﬁ cost
parameter υ is set equal to 12.0, so as to match, in equilibrium, the local elasticity of the
share of reﬁ loans in new loans with respect to the FRM rate. This elasticity is approximately
a 32 percentage point increase in the reﬁ share for a one percentage point decline in the 30year FRM rate.
Figure 7 shows the responses of selected variables to a 25 basis point quarterly (one
percentage point, annualized) decline in the FRM rate, occurring due to the π t shock, with
the calibrated persistence of ρπ = 0.994. For comparison, the ﬁgure also plots responses under
39

FRM without reﬁnancing and under ARM. As expected, the responses under reﬁnancing lie
in-between the other two cases. Quantitatively, they are closer to the FRM responses. This
is because the increase in the reﬁ share of outstanding debt, t , is fairly small: an increase
from 0.02 to 0.026 on impact. Notice, however, that (given the size of the stock) such a
modest increase in t shows up as a large increase in the reﬁ share of new loans: an increase
from 0.4 to 0.48 on impact (equivalent to an increase to 0.72 for a one percentage point
decline in the FRM rate). The increase in reﬁnancing is persistent, resulting in a sustained,
though modest, decline in real mortgage payments for several periods after the shock. As
reﬁnancing converges back to steady state, the eﬀect of persistently low inﬂation takes over
and real mortgage payments start to increase, converging to the basic FRM case. Due to the
attenuated response of real mortgage payments, the negative responses of consumption and
housing investment observed under the basic FRM contract are now weaker, close to zero,
in fact, for several periods.

7.3

Mortgage choice

In many countries, the only type of mortgage contract available are ARM loans (see footnote
1). However, in the United States, and a few other countries, homeowners have a choice between FRMs and ARMs. On average (1982-2007), ARMs in the United States accounted for
30 percent of new loan originations but this share has not been stable over time. Various studies document that the ARM share moves positively with the long-short spread, or its various
proxies (Koijen, Van Hemert, and Van Nieuwerburgh, 2007; Moench, Vickery, and Aragon,
2010; Badarinza, Campbell, and Ramadorai, 2014).49 Is our model consistent with this behavior once we allow for mortgage choice? And does mortgage choice aﬀect the responses of
the model economy to the π t shock? Campbell and Cocco (2003) provide a thorough theoretical analysis of mortgage choice at the household level. They show that mortgage choice
is sensitive to short-run movements in interest rates (and thus in the long-short spread)
49
Koijen et al. (2007) go further and argue that it is the term premium component of the long-short spread
that is the key driver of the movements in the ARM share.

40

when households have limited ability to smooth out ﬂuctuations in real mortgage payments
through other ﬁnancial instruments. Such a ﬁnancial market friction is present in our model.
As in the case of reﬁnancing, the cost function is assumed to be quadratic, Φ(.) =
ω(l2t /lt − l2 /l)2 , where (as noted in Section 4) l2t /lt is the fraction of ARM loans in newly
originated loans and l2 /l is its long-run average. The long-run average is parameterized and
captures various factors noted in footnote 1. Given our focus on temporary ﬂuctuations,
treating the long-run ratio as a parameter seems reasonable. With this functional form, the
optimality condition for mortgage choice is
1 F RM
l2t l2
ARM
− =
),
(τHt − τHt
lt
l
2ω
F RM
ARM
and τHt
are wedges for FRM and ARM contracts, respectively. According
where τHt

to the optimality condition, the larger is the FRM wedge relative to the ARM wedge, the
larger is the ARM share in new loans. For the general equilibrium model, the wedges are
derived in Appendix A, but they are straightforward generalizations of the wedges in the
simple model of Section 3. Recall than under complete markets the wedges are identically
equal to zero. In such a case, mortgage choice is irrelevant.
The steady-state share l2 /l is set to the long-run average of 0.3 and the cost parameter
ω is set so as to replicate the empirical elasticity of the ARM share to the long-short spread,
equal to 7.0 (i.e., a seven percentage point increase in the ARM share in response to a one
percentage point increase in the long-short spread). This elasticity implies ω = 0.0055.50
To assess if the model is consistent with the empirical observations on the movements in
the ARM share described in the literature, we study responses to the τbt shock, which is
the main driver of the long-short spread in the model. Panel A of Figure 8 shows that
the model is consistent with the basic feature of the data: the ARM share of new loans
50

This value is much smaller than that for the cost parameter in the case of reﬁnancing. This is because
the potential gain from reﬁnancing is much larger than the gain from mortgage choice as reﬁnancing applies
to the stock, whereas mortgage choice applies only to new loans. The fact that in the data only a small
fraction of the stock is reﬁnanced in response to a percentage fall in the mortgage rate implies a relatively
large reﬁ cost in the model.

41

declines when the long-short spread declines. Similarly to the case of reﬁnancing, while the
response of the share in new loans is substantial, it translates to only a small change in
the share of outstanding debt. The response of housing investment is mainly aﬀected by
the steady-state share of ARMs and lies in-between the responses under the separate FRM
and ARM contracts reported in panel A of Figure 3. Given that the model is consistent
with the basic observations on mortgage choice in the data, we ask if mortgage choice plays
an important role in the transmission mechanism with respect to the π t shock. Panel B
of Figure 8 provides a negative answer. As the π t shock is highly persistent, it has almost
no eﬀect on the long-short spread and thus no eﬀect on mortgage choice. The response of
housing investment is only aﬀected by the steady-state share of ARMs and lies in-between
the responses under FRM and ARM, reported in Figure 4.

8

Concluding remarks

Mortgage payments constitute a substantial part of homeowners’ mandatory expenses. In
combination with the fact that mortgages are long-term loans set in nominal terms, it is
natural to ask: what role do mortgage contracts play in the transmission of monetary policy?
This paper attempts to establish these connections. Like goods market imperfections provide
a breeding ground for nominal price rigidities to play a role in the transmission of monetary
policy in New-Keynesian models, ﬁnancial market imperfections (incomplete asset markets)
facilitate transmission of monetary policy through mortgage contracts in our framework.
Three key properties of the mortgage transmission mechanism emerge. First, the transmission mechanism is found to be stronger under adjustable- than ﬁxed-rate mortgages.
Second, monetary policy shocks aﬀecting the level of the nominal yield curve have larger
real eﬀects than transitory shocks, aﬀecting its slope. And third, persistently higher inﬂation gradually beneﬁts homeowners under FRMs, but hurts them immediately under ARMs.
In terms of quantities, on impact, housing investment increases by 1.8% under ARM and
declines by 0.7% (0.15% with reﬁnancing) under FRM, in response to a one percentage point
42

(annualized) downward shift of the nominal yield curve (and inﬂation). Under ARM, the
strength of the transmission mechanism is comparable to a traditional real rate channel.
This is despite the fact that, in equilibrium, the real interest rate in our model hardly moves
in response to monetary policy shocks.
In the interest of transparency, we have abstracted from the usual nominal frictions and
other channels through which housing ﬁnance aﬀects the macroeconomy. The number of
shocks was also limited. A natural extension is therefore to incorporate these additional
features and study their interaction with the mechanism proposed here.
Another interesting avenue is to study the price and income eﬀects in an overlapping
generations setup with realistic life-cycle dynamics. It is likely that the agents who face the
price eﬀect are diﬀerent from those who face the income eﬀect, and the importance of the
income eﬀect further varies with the homeownership life-cycle. This can lead to an additional
dimension of monetary policy redistribution, redistribution across diﬀerent homeowners.
Finally, an important normative question regards optimal monetary policy. Such a policy
is likely to depend on the prevalent mortgage type, FRM or ARM, in the economy. Diﬀerent
countries may thus follow diﬀerent policies depending on their mortgage markets. This
question may be quite complex for the Eurozone, which includes countries with very diﬀerent
mortgage markets. Extending the model to allow for default and banking may also generate
interesting interactions between monetary and macroprudential policies. The framework
developed in this paper provides a groundwork for addressing these additional questions.

43

References
Alm, J., Follain, J. R., 1984. Alternative mortgage instruments, the tilt problem, and consumer welfare. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 19, 113–26.
Aruoba, S. B., Davis, M. A., Wright, R., 2012. Homework in monetary economics: Inﬂation,
home production, and the production of homes. NBER Working Paper 18276.
Atkeson, A., Kehoe, P. J., 2009. On the need for a new approach to analyzing monetary
policy. In: NBER Macroeconomics Annual, Volume 23. National Bureau of Economic
Research, Inc.
Auclert, A., 2014. Monetary policy and the redistribution channel. Mimeo.
Backus, D. K., Ferriere, A., Zin, S., 2015. Risk and ambiguity in business cycle models.
Journal of Monetary Economics 69, 42–63.
Badarinza, C., Campbell, J. Y., Ramadorai, T., 2014. What calls to ARMs? International
evidence on interest rates and the choice of adjustable-rate mortgages. NBER Working
Paper 20408.
Benigno, P., Woodford, M., 2006. Optimal taxation in an RBC model: A linear-quadratic
approach. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 30, 1445–89.
Bernanke, B. S., 2007. Housing, housing ﬁnance, and monetary policy. Spech at the Federal
Reserve Bank of Kansas City’s Economic Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyoming.
Bernanke, B. S., Gertler, M., 1995. Inside the black box: The credit channel of monetary
transmission. Journal of Economic Perspectives 9, 27–48.
Brunnermeier, M. K., Julliard, C., 2008. Money illusion and housing frenzies. Review of
Financial Studies 21, 135–180.
Calza, A., Monacelli, T., Stracca, L., 2013. Housing ﬁnance and monetary policy. Journal of
the European Economic Association 11, 101–122.
Campbell, J. Y., 2013. Mortgage market design. Review of Finance 17, 1–33.
Campbell, J. Y., Cocco, J. F., 2003. Household risk management and optimal mortgage
choice. Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 1449–94.
Chambers, M., Garriga, C., Schlagenhauf, D., 2009a. Accounting for changes in the homeownership rate. International Economic Review 50, 677–726.
Chen, H., Michaux, M., Roussanov, N., 2013. Houses as ATMs? Mortgage reﬁnancing and
macroeconomic uncertainty. NBER Working Paper 19421.
Cloyne, J., Ferreira, C., Surico, P., 2015. Monetary policy when households have debt: New
evidence on the transmission mechanism. Discussion Paper Series No. 11023, Centre for
Economic Policy Research.
44

Davis, M. A., Heathcote, J., 2005. Housing and the business cycle. International Economic
Review 46, 751–84.
Davis, M. A., Van Nieuwerburgh, S., 2015. Housing, ﬁnance, and the macroeconomy. In:
Duranton, G., Henderson, J. V., Strange, W. C. (Eds.), Handbook of Regional and Urban
Economics. Science Direct.
Di Maggio, M., Kermani, A., Ramcharan, R., 2014. Monetary policy pass-through: Household consumption and voluntary deleveraging. Mimeo.
Doepke, M., Schneider, M., 2006. Inﬂation and the redistribution of nominal wealth. Journal
of Political Economy 114, 1069–97.
Doepke, M., Schneider, M., Selezneva, V., 2015. Distributional eﬀects of monetary policy.
Working Paper 14, Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy at Brookings.
European Mortgage Federation, 2009. EMF Factsheet 2009—France. Brussels.
European Mortgage Federation, 2012a. Study on mortgage interest rates in the EU. Brussels.
European Mortgage Federation, 2012b. EMF Factsheet 2012—Germany. Brussels.
European Mortgage Federation, 2012c. EMF Factsheet 2012—Denmark. Brussels.
Gallmeyer, M. F., Holliﬁeld, B., Palomino, F., Zin, S. E., 2007. Arbitrage-free bond pricing with dynamic macroeconomic models. Fereral Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review
July/August, 305–326.
Ghent, A., 2012. Infrequent housing adjustment, limited participation, and monetary policy.
Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 44, 931–55.
Gomes, J., Jermann, U., Schmid, L., 2013. Sticky leverage. Mimeo.
Gomme, P., Rupert, P., 2007. Theory, measurement and calibration of macroeconomic models. Journal of Monetary Economics 54, 460–97.
Green, R. K., Wachter, S. M., 2005. The American mortgage in historical and international
context. Journal of Economic Perspectives 19, 93–114.
Hancock, M., Wood, R., 2004. Household secured debt. Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin
Autumn, 291–301.
Hansen, G. D., Prescott, E. C., 1995. Recursive methods for computing equilibria of business
cycle models. In: Cooley, T. F. (Ed.), Frontiers of Business Cycle Research. Princeton
University Press.
Hilscher, J., Raviv, A., Reis, R., 2014. Inﬂating away the public debt? An empirical assessment. Mimeo.
Huﬀman, G. W., Wynne, M. A., 1999. The role of intratemporal adjustment costs in a
multisector economy. Journal of Monetary Economics 43, 317–50.
45

Hurst, E., Staﬀord, F., 2004. Home is where the equity is: Mortgage reﬁnancing and household consumption. Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 36, 985–1014.
Iacoviello, M., 2005. House prices, borrowing constraints, and monetary policy in the business
cycle. American Economic Review 95, 739–64.
Iacoviello, M., 2010. Housing in DSGE models: Findings and new directions. In: de Bandt,
O., Knetsch, T., Peňalosa, J., Zollino, F. (Eds.), Housing Markets in Europe: A Macroeconomic Perspective. Springer-Verlag Berlin.
Iacoviello, M., Minetti, R., 2008. The credit channel of monetary policy: Evidence from the
housing market. Journal of Macroeconomics 30, 69–96.
International Monetary Fund, 2011. Housing ﬁnance and ﬁnancial stability—back to basics?
In: Global Financial Stability Report, April 2011: Durable Financial Stability—Getting
There from Here. International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Ireland, P. N., 2007. Changes in the Federal Reserve’s inﬂation target: Causes and concequences. Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 39, 1851–82.
Johnson, D. S., Parker, J. A., Souleles, N. S., 2006. Household expenditure and the income
tax rebates of 2001. American Economic Review 96, 1589–1610.
Kearl, J. R., 1979. Inﬂation, mortgage, and housing. Journal of Political Economy 87, 1115–
38.
Keys, B. J., Piskorski, T., Seru, A., Yao, V., 2014. Mortgage rates, household balance sheets,
and the real economy. NBER Working Paper 20561.
Koijen, R. S. J., Van Hemert, O., Van Nieuwerburgh, S., 2007. Mortgage timing. NBER
Working Paper 13361.
Koijen, R. S. J., Van Hemert, O., Van Nieuwerburgh, S., 2009. Mortgage timing. Journal of
Financial Economics 93, 292–324.
Kydland, F. E., Rupert, P., Šustek, R., forthcoming. Housing dynamics over the business
cycle. International Economic Review.
Lessard, D. R., Modigliani, F., 1975. Inﬂation and the housing market: Problems and potential solutions. In: New Mortgage Designes for Stable Housing in an Inﬂationary Environment. Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston.
Meh, C. A., Rios-Rull, J. V., Terajima, Y., 2010. Aggregate and welfare eﬀects of redistribution of wealth under inﬂation and price-level targeting. Journal of Monetary Economics
57, 637–52.
Mendoza, E. G., Razin, A., Tesar, L. L., 1994. Eﬀective tax rates in macroeconomics: Crosscountry estimates of tax rates on factor incomes and consumption. Journal of Monetary
Economics 34, 297–323.

46

Miles, D., 2004. The UK mortgage market: Taking a longer-term view. Special report, HM
Treasury.
Mishkin, F., 2007. Housing and the monetary transmission mechanism. Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2007-40, Federal Reserve Board.
Moench, E., Vickery, J. I., Aragon, D., 2010. Why is the market share of adjustable-rate
mortgages so low? Current Issues in Economics and Finance 16, 1–11.
Parker, J. A., Souleles, N. S., Johnson, D. S., McClelland, R., 2013. Consumer spending and
the economic stimulus payments of 2008. American Economic Review 103, 2530–53.
Piazzesi, M., 2006. Aﬃne term structure models. In: Ait-Sahalia, Y., Hansen, L. P. (Eds.),
Handbook of Financial Econometrics. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Piazzesi, M., Schneider, M., 2007. Inﬂation illusion, credit, and asset pricing. NBER Working
Paper 12957.
Piazzesi, M., Schneider, M., 2012. Inﬂation and the price of real assets. Mimeo, Stanford
University.
Poterba, J. M., 1984. Tax subsidies to owner-occupied housing: An asset-market approach.
Quarterly Journal of Economics 99, 729–52.
Rajan, R. G., Zingales, L., 1995. What do we know about capital structure? Some evidence
from international data. Journal of Finance 50, 1421–60.
Rubio, M., 2011. Fixed- and variable-rate mortgages, business cycles, and monetary policy.
Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 43, 657–88.
Scanlon, K., Whitehead, C., 2004. International trends in housing tenure and mortgage
ﬁnance. Special report for the Council of Mortgage Lenders, London School of Economics.
Schwab, R. M., 1982. Inﬂation expectations and the demand for housing. American Economic
Review 72, 143–53.
Sheedy, K., 2013. Debt and incomplete ﬁnancial markets: A case for nominal GDP targeting.
CEP Discussion Paper 1209.
Sterk, V., Tenreyro, S., 2013. The transmission of monetary policy operations through redistributions and durable purchases. Discussion Paper 2013-05, Centre for Macroeconomics.
Tallarini, T. D., 2000. Risk-sensitive real business cycles. Journal of Monetary Economics
45, 507–532.
Villar Burke, J., 2015. Impact of loan contract characteristics on monetary transmission and
consumer rent. Working Paper v33, European Commission.
Šustek, R., 2011. Monetary business cycle accounting. Review of Economic Dynamics 14,
592–612.
47

Monetary policy easing
Persistence = 0.95
5

Percent

4

3

2

Short−term interest rate
1

0
0

20

40

60

Quarters

New loan
(120-period term)

80

100

120

Existing loan
(119 periods remaining)

0.3

0.3

Steady state

Steady state
0.25

0.25

"Easing" under FRM

0.2

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05
0

"Easing" under FRM

0.15

"Easing" under ARM
0.1

20

40

60

80

100

Quarters since mortgage advance

120

0.05
0

"Easing" under ARM

20

40

60

80

100

120

Quarters since mortgage advance

Figure 1: Illustration of price and income eﬀects. Debt-servicing costs over
a term of a new and an existing 30-year mortgage under alternative paths of
the short-term nominal interest rate. The label ‘steady-state’ refers to the
case when the short rate is at its steady-state level of 4%. The mortgage is
equal to four times the household’s annual income; the real interest rate is held
constant at 1% per annum.

48

A. High persistence (0.99) of the short rate decline
New loan
Existing loan
(120-period term)
(119 periods remaining)
0.3

0.3

Steady state

Steady state
0.25

"Easing" under FRM

0.2

0.2

0.15

0.15

0.1

0.05
0

0.1

"Easing" under ARM
20

40

60

80

100

"Easing" under FRM

0.25

120

0.05
0

Quarters since mortgage advance

"Easing" under ARM
20

40

60

80

100

120

Quarters since mortgage advance

B. Low persistence (0.5) of the short rate decline
New loan
Existing loan
(120-period term)
(119 periods remaining)
0.3

0.3

Steady state

0.25

0.25

"Easing" under FRM

0.2

0.05
0

"Easing" under FRM

0.2

0.15

0.1

Steady state

0.15

"Easing" under ARM

20

40

60

0.1

80

100

120

0.05
0

Quarters since mortgage advance

"Easing" under ARM

20

40

60

80

100

120

Quarters since mortgage advance

Figure 2: Illustration of price and income eﬀects for high and low persistence
of the mean-reverting short rate decline by 3 percentage points.

49

Table 1: Calibration
Symbol
Population
Ψ
Preferences
β
ξ
Technology
A
ς
δK
δH
ζ
ϕ
Fiscal
G
τN
τK
τ
Mortgage contract
θ
κ
α
Bond market
ϑ
Monetary policy rule
νπ
π
Exogenous processes
ρA
σA
ρπ
σπ
ρb
σb
ρq
σq
Reﬁnancing

υ
Mortgage choice
l2 /l
ω

Value

Description

2/3

Share of homeowners

0.9883
0.5003

Discount factor
Weight on nonhousing consumption

1.5321
0.283
0.02225
0.01021
3.0
0.1

Steady-state level of TFP
Capital share of output
Depreciation rate of capital
Depreciation rate of housing
Curvature of PPF
Land share of new housing

0.138
0.235
0.3362
0.4693

Government expenditures
Labor income tax rate
Capital income tax rate
Transfer

0.6
0.00162
0.9946

Loan-to-value ratio
Initial amortization rate
Amortization adjustment factor

0.0345

Participation cost function

1.5
0.0113

Weight on inﬂation
Steady-state inﬂation rate

0.9641
0.0148
0.994
0.0012
0.9
0.00075
0.8
0.012

Persistence of TFP shock
Std. of TFP innovations
Persistence of inﬂ. target shock
Std. of inﬂ. target innovations
Persistence of bond market shock
Std. of bond market innovations
Persistence of PPF shock
Std. of PPF innovations

0.02
12.0

Steady-state fraction of reﬁ in outst. debt
Cost function parameter

0.3
0.0055

Steady-state share of ARMs
Cost function parameter

50

Table 2: Model cross-validation I: business cycle moments

A.
Std
Y
C
XS
XK
i
iF
iF − i
π
pH
B.

U.S. data

1.92
0.85
13.32
4.70
0.28
0.17
0.20
0.34
3.01

Model
FRM ARM
1.90
0.78
12.98
5.09
0.29
0.18
0.20
0.23
2.90

1.91
0.78
12.77
5.58
0.29
N/A
N/A
0.22
2.87

Other countries
FRM

ARM

U.S. data
Corr with Y
Y
1.00
C
0.79
XS
0.60
XK
0.73
i
0.36
iF
0.01
iF − i
-0.49
π
0.36
pH
0.55

Model
FRM ARM
1.00
0.95
0.82
0.89
0.42
0.16
-0.43
0.36
0.96

1.00
0.96
0.77
0.86
0.38
N/A
N/A
0.33
0.91

FRM

ARM

Model

std(XS )/ std(Y )
5.80
5.50
std(XS )/ std(Y )
6.83
6.68
0.65
0.55
corr(XS , Y )
0.84
0.77
corr(XS , Y )
Notes A: All moments are for HP-ﬁltered series, quarterly data. U.S. data:
1958-2006. 10-year government bond yield is used as a proxy for iFt due to
longer time availability; CPI ex-energy inﬂation rate is used for πt ; 3-month
T-bill yield is used for it ; the ratio of the average price of new homes sold
(Census Bureau) and the GDP deﬂator is used for pHt (1975-2006). The
model moments are averages of moments for 150 runs; the artiﬁcial data of
each run are of the same length as the U.S. data and are also HP ﬁltered.
Details of U.S. data are in Appendix C.
Notes B: FRM countries are BEL, FRA, US; ARM countries are AUS, CAN,
UK. The moments, based on HP-ﬁltered data, are taken from Kydland et al.
(forthcoming). The classiﬁcation is based on Footnote 1.

51

A. Calibrated shock persistence (ρb = 0.9)
1
0.8

Short−term nominal rate

0.4

Ex−ante real interest rate

1

FRM

Housing investment (XS)

0

0.3

0.6

FRM

−1
0.2

0.4

−2
0.1

0.2
0
0

10

20

30

40

0
0

10

−3

FRM

ARM

ARM

20

30

40

−4
0

ARM
10

20

30

40

B. Shock persistence based on Calza et al. (2013) (ρb = 0.5)
1

Short−term nominal rate

0.8

FRM

0.6

Ex−ante real interest rate

0.5

Housing investment (XS)

0

FRM

FRM

0.5
−0.5
0.4
−1
0
0.2

ARM
−0.5
0

10

−1.5

ARM
20

30

40

0
0

10

20

30

40

−2
0

ARM
10

20

30

Figure 3: Model cross-validation II: a real rate shock. The eﬀect of an increase of the ex-ante
real interest rate (bond market shock). Panel A: calibrated shock persistence (ρb = 0.9) based
on the persistence of the long-short spread. Panel B: shock persistence (ρb = 0.5) chosen to
replicate the persistence of the response of the interest rate in Calza et al. (2013). Interest
rates are in percentage point deviations (annualized), housing investment is in percentage
deviations. One period = one quarter.

52

40

Table 3: Model cross-validation III: marginal propensity to consume (MPC) of ARM homeowners

Di Maggio et al. (2014)

Calibrated
Nom. shock Real shock

Matched
Nom. shock Real shock

Shock persistence
N/A
0.994
0.90
0.95
0.70
∗
0.17
0.29
0.27
0.17
0.17
MPC
Note: Real shock = direct eﬀect on the ex-ante real interest rate (the bond market shock); nominal
shock = no direct eﬀect on the ex-ante real interest rate (the inﬂation target shock). Calibrated
= persistence as in Table 1; matched = persistence so as to reproduce MPC in Di Maggio et al.
(2014).
∗ Based on their reported $150 increase in consumption in response to $900 increase in disposable
income.

53

Inflation rate

Short rates and FRM rate (dots)
1

8

1

FRM

0.8

ARM

FRM

0.8

6

ARM
0.6

0.6

4

0.4

0.4

2

0.2

0.2

0

0
0

10

20

30

40

Housing investment (XS)

1
0.5

ARM

0
0

10

20

30

40

Consumption of homeowners (C)
0.5

FRM

FRM

−2
0

10

20

30

40

Consumption of capital owners (C*)
0.5

FRM

0

Real mortgage payments (m/p)

ARM

0

0

−0.5

−0.5

−0.5

FRM
−1
−1.5

ARM

−2
0

10

ARM
20

30

40

−1
0

10

20

30

40

−1
0

10

20

30

40

Figure 4: Findings I: the transmission mechanism under separate contracts. Responses to the
nominal (inﬂation target) shock under FRM and ARM; no reﬁnancing, no mortgage choice.
Interest rates and the inﬂation rate are measured as percentage point (annualized) deviations
from steady state, quantities are in percentage deviations. One period = one quarter.

54

0.8

Ex−ante real interest rate

0.6

6

0.4

4

0.2

2

0

0

−0.2
0

1

10

20

30

Real mortgage payments (m/p)

8

40

−2
0

Housing investment (X )

10

20

30

40

Consumption of homeowners (C)

S

0.5

0.5
0

0

−0.5
−1

−0.5

−1.5
−2
0

10

20

30

40

−1
0

10

20

30

40

Figure 5: Findings II: comparison of two transmission mechanisms under ARM. Responses to
the real rate (bond market) shock and to the nominal (inﬂation target) shock under ARM. Real
rate shock = circles. Nominal shock = solid line. Interest rates are measured as percentage
point (annualized) deviations from steady state, quantities are in percentage deviations. The
persistence of the real rate shock is 0.5, based on the VAR estimate of Calza et al. (2013).
The persistence of the nominal shock is the calibrated value of 0.994, based on matching the
autocorrelation of the long rate. In both cases, the initial response of the short-term nominal
interest rate (not plotted) is one percentage point (annualized). One period = one quarter.

55

A. ρπ = 0.994

B. ρπ = 0.95

Short rates and FRM rate (dots)
1

C. ρπ = 0.5

Short rates and FRM rate (dots)
1

FRM

0.8

ARM

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0
0

10

20

30

40

0.8

ARM

FRM

10

20

30

40

0
0

0

−0.2

−0.2

−0.4

−0.4

−0.4

−0.6

−0.6

−0.8

−0.8

FRM

10

20

30

40

Long−short spread (i F−i)

0

−0.2

ARM

0.2

Long−short spread (i F−i)

0

FRM

0.6
0.4

0
0

Long−short spread (i F−i)

Short rates and FRM rate (dots)
1

−0.6

FRM

−0.8

FRM
−1
0

10

20

30

40

Housing investment (X )

1

1

S

0.5

−1
0

0.5

FRM

10

20

30

40

Housing investment (X )

−1
0

1

S

FRM

0

0

−0.5

−0.5

−0.5

−1

−1
−1.5

ARM

−2
0

10

20

30

40

−2
0

20

30

40

Housing investment (X )
S

0.5 FRM

0

−1.5

10

ARM

−1

ARM
10

−1.5
20

30

40

−2
0

10

20

30

40

Figure 6: Findings III: the eﬀect of the persistence of the nominal (inﬂation target) shock
under FRM and ARM; no reﬁnancing, no mortgage choice. Interest rates and the inﬂation
rate are measured as percentage point (annualized) deviations from steady state, quantities
are in percentage deviations. One period = one quarter.

56

Refi share

8

4

of new loans

Real mortgage payments (m/p)
FRM no refi

2

6
0

4

−2

FRM with refi

−4

2

of outstanding debt
0
0

2

10

20

−6

30

40

ARM
10

20

30

40

Consumption of homeowners (C)
ARM

Housing investment (XS)

1

ARM
1

0.5

0 FRM with refi

0

10

FRM with refi

−0.5 FRM no refi

−1 FRM no refi
−2
0

−8
0

20

30

40

−1
0

10

20

30

40

Figure 7: Findings IV: the transmission mechanism under reﬁnancing. Responses to a one
percentage point (annualized) decline in the FRM rate due to the nominal (inﬂation target)
shock, with the calibrated persistence ρπ = 0.994. Reﬁ shares are measured as percentage
point deviations from steady state, quantities are in percentage deviations. One period = one
quarter.

57

A. Real rate shock, ρb = 0.9
Short rate and long−short spread
1

ARM share

0

1

Housing investment (X )
S

short−term nominal rate

0.5

−2

0

−4

−0.5

−6

of outstanding
debt

0

−1

of new loans

spread
−1
0

10

20

30

40

−8
0

10

20

30

−2
0

40

10

20

30

40

B. Nominal shock, ρπ = 0.994
Short rate and long−short spread
short−term nominal rate

0.5

ARM share

0.1

1

1

0.05

0.5

0

0

−0.05

−0.5

0

Housing investment (X )
S

spread
−0.5
−1
0

10

20

30

40

−0.1
0

10

20

30

40

−1
0

10

20

30

40

Figure 8: Findings V: the transmission mechanism under mortgage choice. Both shocks are
scaled so that, on impact, the short rate increases by one percentage point (annualized). ARM
share is measured as percentage point deviations from steady state, housing investment is in
percentage deviations. The steady-state share of ARMs is 30 percent (1982-2007 average).
One period = one quarter.

58

Supplemental material
The supplemental material covers (A) equilibrium conditions, (B) computation, (C) data
used in calibration, and (D) estimates of mortgage debt servicing costs for the United States.

Appendix A: Equilibrium conditions
This appendix lists the conditions characterizing the equilibrium deﬁned in Section 4 for
the basic FRM and ARM cases. We use these conditions to solve for the steady state (a
situation in which all shocks are equal to their unconditional means and all real variables,
interest rates, and the inﬂation rate are constant). The steady state is used to calibrate
the model and serves as the point of a local approximation of the economy in our solution
method described in Appendix B. Interested readers may also ﬁnd these conditions useful if
they wish to compute the equilibrium by log-linearization of the equilibrium conditions. Our
computational method does not rely on approximating these conditions. Instead, it takes
a linear-quadratic approximation of the Bellman equations within the recursive competitive
equilibrium problem described in Section 4 and then solves the LQ problem. Details are
provided in Appendix B. As is well known, the two methods yield the same approximate
decision rules and pricing functions. To solve for the case of reﬁnancing, the standard method
needs to be modiﬁed, as explained in Appendix B. The steady state, however, is the same
for the basic FRM case, the ARM case, reﬁnancing, and the mortgage choice problem. This
is because, in the steady state, it = iFt = Rt . (As a result, steady-state reﬁnancing and ARM
share are parameterized, as noted in the text.) The conditions below can thus be used to
solve for the steady state under all contract types considered in this paper.
Throughout, the notation is that, for instance, uct denotes the ﬁrst derivative of the function
u with respect to c, evaluated in period t. Alternatively, v2t , for instance, denotes the ﬁrst
derivative of the function v with respect to the second argument, evaluated in period t.
Capital owner’s optimality
First-order conditions:


1 = Et



uc,t+1
[1 + (1 − τK )(rt+1 − δK )] ,
1 = Et β
uct



uc,t+1 (1 − τb,t+1 )(1 + it )
,
1 = Et β
uct
1 + πt+1


d,t+1
Uγ,t+1 ∗
U
U
R,t+1 ∗
β
+β
ζ [κ − (γt∗ )α ] + β
ζ (iF − Rt∗ ) .
uct
uct Dt
uct Dt t

(A1)

(A2)
(A3)

Note: the last equation (for lt∗ ) applies only in the FRM case, as explained in the text.
Benveniste-Scheinkman conditions:

∗
∗
∗
dt = uct Rt + γt + β 1 − γt Et U
d,t+1 + ζlt∗ [(γt∗ )α − κ] Uγ,t+1 + ζlt∗ (Rt∗ − iFt )UR,t+1 , (A4)
U
1 + πt
1 + πt
59


Uγt = uct

d∗t
1 + πt




−β

d∗t
1 + πt


d,t+1
Et U

(A5)



∗
∗ α−1
(1
−
γ
)α(γ
)
d∗t
t
t
ζlt∗ [κ − (γt∗ )α ] +
Et Uγ,t+1
+β
1−γt∗ ∗
∗

1 + πt
+
l
d
t
1+πt t


d∗t
ζlt∗ (iFt − Rt∗ )Et UR,t+1 ,
+β
1 + πt



URt = uct

d∗t
1 + πt




+β

1−γt∗ ∗
d
1+πt t
∗
1−γt ∗
lt∗
d +
1+πt t


Et UR,t+1 .

(A6)

Constraints:
lt∗ = [1 + (1 − τK )(rt − δK )] kt + (1 − τbt )(1 + it−1 )
c∗t + kt+1 + b∗t+1 + 

m
 ∗t = (Rt∗ + γt∗ )

b∗
pLt
t
,
+m
 ∗t + τt∗ +
1 + πt
1−Ψ
(A7)

d∗t
,
1 + πt

(A8)

1 − γt∗ ∗ ∗
d + lt ,
d∗t+1 =
1 + πt t

(A9)

∗
γt+1
= (1 − φ∗t ) (γt∗ )α + φ∗t κ,


∗
Rt+1

=

(1 − φ∗t )Rt∗ + φ∗t iFt ,
it ,

xKt = kt+1 − (1 − δk )kt .

(A10)
if FRM,
if ARM,

(A11)
(A12)

Homeowner’s optimality
First-order conditions:



,
−
R
)V
vct (1 − θ)pHt = βEt Vh,t+1 + pHt θ Vd,t+1 + ζDt (κ − γtα )Vγ,t+1 + ζDt (iM
t R,t+1
t+1
(A13)



vc,t+1 1 + it + Υt
1 = Et β
.
(A14)
vct
1 + πt+1

F
M
Note: iM
t+1 = it (FRM case), it+1 = it (ARM case).

Benveniste-Scheinkman conditions:

Rt + γt
1 − γt  
Vdt = −vct
+β
Et Vd,t+1 + ζlt (γtα − κ) Vγ,t+1 + ζlt (Rt − iM
)V
R,t+1 , (A15)
t+1
1 + πt
1 + πt
60


Vγt = −vct

dt
1 + πt




−β

dt
1 + πt


Et Vd,t+1

(A16)



α−1
(1
−
γ
)αγ
dt
t
t
ζlt (κ − γtα ) + 1−γ
Et Vγ,t+1
+β
t 

1 + πt
+
l
d
t
t
1+πt


dt
ζlt (iM
+β
t+1 − Rt )Et VR,t+1 ,
1 + πt



VRt = −vct

dt
1 + πt




+β

1−γt 
d
1+πt t
1−γt 
lt
d +
1+πt t


Et VR,t+1 ,

(A17)

Vht = vht + β(1 − δH )Et Vh,t+1 .

(A18)


lt = θpHt xHt ,

(A19)

xHt = ht+1 − (1 − δH )ht .

(A20)

rt = At f1 ((1 − Ψ)kt , Ψn) ,

(A21)

wt = At f2 ((1 − Ψ)kt , Ψn) ,

(A22)

Yt = At f ((1 − Ψ)kt , Ψn) .

(A23)

qt = ηt q(ΨxSt ).

(A24)

Constraints

Production
First-order conditions:

PPF curvature:

Homebuilding
First-order conditions (after imposing land market clearing XLt = 1):
xSt =

1
1
(ΨxHt ) 1−ϕ ,
Ψ

(A25)

(ΨxSt )ϕ
,
= qt
1−ϕ

(A26)

pLt = pHt ϕ(ΨxSt )1−ϕ .

(A27)

pHt

Monetary policy
it = (i − π + π t ) + νπ (πt − πt ).
61

(A28)

Government budget constraint
G + (1 − Ψ)τt∗ = τK (rt − δK )(1 − Ψ)kt + τN (wt Ψn − Ψτ ) + Ψτ + Ξt .

(A29)

Market clearing
(1 − Ψ)c∗t + Ψct + (1 − Ψ)xKt + qt ΨxSt + G = Yt ,

(A30)

(1 − Ψ)b∗t + Ψbt = 0,

(A31)

lt .
(1 − Ψ)
lt∗ = Ψ

(A32)

(1 − Ψ)d∗t = Ψdt ,

(A33)

γt∗ = γt ,

(A34)

Rt∗ = Rt .

(A35)

Aggregate consistency

Equation count: 35 equations (FRM), 34 equations (ARM). Note: the homeowner’s budget
constraint holds by Walras’ law.
Endogenous variables
35 variables (FRM), 34 variables (ARM):
Allocations: c∗t , xKt , kt+1 , ct , xHt , ht+1 , xSt , Yt .

8 variables

Prices: πt , it , iFt (FRM only), rt , wt , qt , pLt , pHt .

8 vars (FRM), 7 vars (ARM)

∗
∗
, Rt+1
,
lt , dt+1 , γt+1 , Rt+1 .
Mortgages: 
lt∗ , m∗t , d∗t+1 , γt+1

9 variables

Bonds: b∗t+1 , bt+1 .

2 variables

Transfer: τt∗ .

1 variable

dt , Uγt , URt , Vdt , Vγt , VRt , Vht .
Value function: U

7 variables

Shocks
log At+1 = (1 − ρA ) log A + ρA log At +
π t+1 = (1 − ρπ )π + ρπ πt +
τb,t+1 = ρb τbt +

π,t+1 ,

b,t+1 ,

ηt+1 = (1 − ρq ) + ρq ηt +

q,t+1 ,

62

A,t+1 ,

A,t+1
π,t+1

∼ iidN(0, σA ).
∼ iidN(0, σπ ).

b,t+1

∼ iidN(0, σb ).

q,t+1

∼ iidN(0, σq ).

Transformation of variables used in (A1)-(A35)
To ensure stationarity:

dt ≡ pt−1 Udt ,
U
m
 ∗t ≡ m∗t /pt ,
d∗t ≡ d∗t /pt−1 ,

lt∗ ≡ lt∗ /pt ,
b∗ ≡ b∗ /pt−1 ,
t
t
Vdt ≡ pt−1 Vdt ,
dt ≡ dt /pt−1 ,

lt ≡ lt /pt ,
bt ≡ bt /pt−1 .

Auxiliary notation:
ζlt∗ ≡ 

∗
ζDt


lt∗
1−γt∗ ∗
d
1+πt t

2 ∈ (0, 1),

1−γt∗ ∗
d
1+πt t

≡

1−γt∗ ∗
d
1+πt t

ζDt ≡ 

ζlt ≡ 

+
lt∗

+
lt∗

1−γt 
d
1+πt t
1−γt 
d
1+πt t

+
lt


lt
+
lt

1−γt 
d
1+πt t

2 ∈ (0, 1),

2 ∈ (0, 1),

2 ∈ (0, 1),

lt∗ /d∗t+1 ∈ (0, 1),
φ∗t ≡ 
Ξt ≡ (1 − Ψ)τBt (1 − it−1 )b∗t /(1 + πt ),


Υt = Υ −bt+1 .

Residual variable
m
 t = (Rt + γt )

dt
1 + πt

63

or m
t =

1−Ψ ∗
m
t.
Ψ

Connecting the GE model with the simple PE model
Mortgage pricing
Notice that for a once-and-for-all mortgage loan (lt∗ = l∗ in period t and lt∗ = 0 thereafter)
∗
∗
and no outstanding mortgage debt (d∗t = 0 in period t), we have ζDt
= 0 and ζl,t+j
= 0, for
∗

j = 1, 2, .... In this case, the ﬁrst-order condition for lt (A3) and the BS condition for Udt (A4)
simplify, as the terms related to Uγt and URt drop out. Once combined, the two optimality
conditions result in an equation that is a straightforward inﬁnite-horizon extension of the
mortgage-pricing equation (1) in the two-period mortgage example of Section 3:







∗
∗
∗
1 = Et Q∗1t iFt + γt+1
+ Q∗2t iFt + γt+2
1 − γt+1
+ ... ,
where
Q∗Jt

J

≡

β
j=1

1
uc,t+j
uc,t+j−1 1 + πt+j

J = 1, 2, ...

The terms related to Uγt and URt in the general form of the optimality conditions arise because the mortgage payment m∗t entering the budget constraint of the capital owner pertains
to payments on the entire outstanding mortgage debt, not just the new loan. In this case,
the terms related to Uγt and URt capture the marginal eﬀect of lt∗ on the average interest
and amortization rates of the outstanding debt, and thus the marginal eﬀect of lt∗ on the
mortgage payments on the outstanding debt.
The wedge
Rearranging the ﬁrst-order condition for xHt (A13) yields
vct pHt (1 + τHt ) = βEt Vh,t+1 ,
where the wedge τHt is given by


Vd,t+1
V
V
γ,t+1
R,t+1
.
τHt ≡ −θEt 1 + β
+ ζDt (κ − γtα )β
+ ζDt (iM
t+1 − Rt )β
vct
vct
vct
For the same reasons as above, the wedge is more complicated than in the case of the twoperiod mortgage. It becomes a straightforward inﬁnite-horizon extension of equation (3) in
Section 3 if the housing investment decision is once-and-for-all and there is no outstanding
mortgage debt (i.e., ζDt = 0 and ζl,t+j = 0, for j = 1, 2, ...):
!



M

"
τHt ≡ −θEt 1 − Q1t iM
,
t+1 + γt+1 + Q2t it+2 + γt+2 (1 − γt+1 ) + ...
where

J

QJt ≡

β
j=1

1
vc,t+j
.
vc,t+j−1 1 + πt+j

64

Appendix B: Computation
Overview
The equilibrium is computed using a linear-quadratic (LQ) approximation method for
distorted economies with exogenously heterogenous agents (see Hansen and Prescott, 1995),
adjusted along the lines of Benigno and Woodford (2006). Further modiﬁcation, described
below, is made to handle reﬁnancing.
In a nutshell, the method approximates the recursive competitive equilibrium problem of
the original economy, speciﬁed in Section 4, with a corresponding linear-quadratic problem.
The method involves iteration on quadratic Bellman equations (one for each agent type)
subject to linear individual, aggregate, and market clearing constraints. The ﬁxed point of
the iteration is a pair of (quadratic) value functions for the homeowner and capital owner,
P#H (z, S) and P#C (z, S), and a set of (linear) aggregate decisions rules and pricing functions,
$ (z, S), where z is a vector of exogenous state variables and S is a vector of endogenous
W
aggregate state variables, as speciﬁed in Section 4. This function is accompanied by a
#
resulting set of linear laws of motion for the endogenous state variables, S  = Ω(S,
z).
The centering point of the LQ approximation is the steady state, satisfying the equilibrium conditions listed in Appendix A, and the LQ approximation of the original Bellman
equations is computed using numerical derivatives. All variables in the approximation are
either in percentage deviations or percentage point deviations (for interest, inﬂation, and
amortization rates) from the steady state. Before computing the equilibrium, the model is
made stationary by expressing all nominal variables in real terms and replacing ratios of
price levels with the inﬂation rate, as in Appendix A (as a result, pt is replaced with πt in
the vector Wt , speciﬁed in Section 4, and pt−1 drops out of the vector zt ).
Return functions in Bellman equations
The Hansen-Prescott method needs to be modiﬁed along the lines of Benigno and Woodford
(2006) because the laws of motion for the mortgage variables are nonlinear. This means that
these equations cannot be substituted out into the per-period utility functions, as is normally
done in LQ approximation procedures. The modiﬁcation involves forming a Lagrangian for
each agent, consisting of the per-period utility function and the respective laws of motion for
the mortgage variables. The Lagrangian is then used as the return function in the Bellman
equation being approximated. This adjustment is necessary to ensure that second-order
cross-derivatives of the utility function and the constraints are taken into account in the
LQ approximation. This modiﬁcation, as applied to the homeowner, is described in detail
by Kydland et al. (forthcoming). The speciﬁcation for the capital owner is analogous. We
therefore refer the reader to that paper for details.
An alternative procedure would be to log-linearize the equilibrium conditions in Appendix
A and use a version of the Blanchard-Kahn method, or a method of undetermined coeﬃcients, to arrive at the equilibrium decision rules and pricing functions. As is well known,
these methods yields the same linear equilibrium decision rules and pricing functions as the
modiﬁed LQ approximation method.

65

Certainty equivalence
The linear equilibrium decision rules and pricing functions computed as described above
are characterized by certainty equivalence. That is, the coeﬃcients of the linear functions
$ (z, S) loading onto z and S depend only on the conditional means of future values of the
W
exogenous state variables, implied by their AR(1) processes. Not on higher moments. One
implication of the certainty equivalence is that the FRM rate in the approximated model
conforms with the expectations hypothesis.
Computing business cycle moments and impulse-responses
The business cycle moments used to cross-validate the model are based on artiﬁcial data
from 150 runs of the model. In a single run, a sequence of innovations [ At , πt , bt , qt ], for
t = 1, ..., 150, is drawn from their respective iid normal distributions. The AR(1) processes
for the exogenous state variables are then used to generate a sequence of the vector z (for
$ (z, S) and S  = Ω(S,
#
t = 1, ..., 150), which is then fed into the endogenous functions W
z) to
recursively generate a sequence of the endogenous variables of interest.
When computing impulse-responses, either to cross-validate the model or in the main
computational experiments, all exogenous state variables except the one of our interest are
held constant at their unconditional means. A path for the exogenous state variable of our
interest is generated by setting its innovation equal to a particular value in period t = 1
and to zero in all subsequent periods. The path of the state variable is then generated using
$(z, S) and
the variable’s AR(1) process and this path is fed into the endogenous functions W
#
S  = Ω(S,
z) to recursively generate a sequence of the endogenous variables. Because the
model is stationary, after the initial impulse in t = 1 that moves the economy away from the
steady state, all variables converge back to the steady state.
Handling reﬁnancing
The computational method needs to be modiﬁed in the case of reﬁnancing. With reﬁnancing, the economy can operate under two regimes: one in which iFt ≥ Rt and t = 
and another in which iFt < Rt and t = t . We therefore compute two sets of approximate
$2 (z, S)
$1 (z, S) for the ﬁrst regime and W
equilibrium decision rules and pricing functions, W
for the second regime (and two sets of the corresponding laws of motion for S). The point of
approximation is the steady state, which (as explained in Appendix A) is common to both
regimes. Given that the economy can operate under two regimes, the endogenous linear
$1 (z, S) and W
$2 (z, S) have to take into account the fact that the economy can
functions W
switch between them. This is relatively straightforward to implement in the case of the
experiments of Section 7. There are two reasons for this. First, after the initial decline,
in response to the negative inﬂation target shock, iFt converges monotonically back to the
steady state. Second, from the law of motion for the interest rate on outstanding debt follows
that iFt is a marginal rate of Rt+1 . Therefore, if iFt falls below the steady state and converges
back monotonically, iFt and Rt cross paths only once. That is, the economy switches from the
regime iFt < Rt (which occurs on impact of the shock) to the regime iFt ≥ Rt only once along
the convergence path. Therefore, once the economy is in the latter regime, it stays in it until
it converges to the steady state. Further, the point in which it switches is deterministic. It
occurs some N periods after the initial impact of the shock, where N is endogenous.
66

To compute the equilibrium decision rules and pricing functions for the impulse-responses
$1 (z, S)
under reﬁnancing, we proceed in two steps. First, we compute the approximation W
F
for the case it ≥ Rt . This involves the usual procedure described above, as the economy
stays in this regime once it is in it. Denote the pair of the ﬁxed-point quadratic value
functions (one for each agent type) that result from this step as P#1 (z, S). To compute the
equilibrium decision rules and pricing functions for the case of iFt < Rt , we modify the
usual procedure in two ways. First, we use as a staring point of the iterative procedure
on the Bellman equations the pair of value functions P#1 (z, S). Second, we do not iterate
$1 (z, S) and W
$2 (z, S) this way, we
until a ﬁxed point, but only N times. After obtaining W
generate impulse-response functions and check whether the N we have used in computing
$2 (z, S) is consistent with the resulting impulse-responses; i.e., whether iF and Rt cross
W
t
paths N periods after the shock. If not, we change N and repeat the steps until consistency
is obtained. For the calibrated persistence of the shock, N = 60. It turns out that for N
this far in the future, the responses in the ﬁrst 40 periods we are looking at obtained for the
two-regime economy are almost identical to the responses obtained under ‘naive’ decision
rules and pricing functions that do not take into account the fact that the economy will
switch to the second regime 60 periods after the shock (the naive decision rules and pricing
functions are obtained as a ﬁxed point of the usual iterative procedure assuming that the
economy is always in the iFt < Rt regime).

Appendix C: Data counterparts to variables
This appendix describes the data used to calculate the aggregate ratios employed in calibrating the model. Adjustments to oﬃcial data are made to ensure that the data correspond
conceptually more closely to the variables in the model. To start, for reasons discussed
by Gomme and Rupert (2007), the following expenditure categories are taken out of GDP:
gross housing value added, compensation of general government employees, and net exports.
In addition, we also exclude expenditures on consumer durable goods (as our ‘home capital’
includes only housing) and multifamily structures (which are owned by corporate entities
and rented out to households mainly in the 1st and 2nd quintiles of the wealth distribution).
With these adjustments, the data counterparts to the expenditure components of output in
the model are constructed from BEA’s NIPA tables as follows: consumption (C) = the sum
of expenditures on nondurable goods and services less gross housing value added; capital investment (XK ) = the sum of nonresidential structures, equipment & software, and the change
in private inventories; housing structures (XS ) = residential gross ﬁxed private investment
less multifamily structures; and government expenditures (G) = the sum of government
consumption expenditures and gross investment less compensation of general government
employees. Our measure of output (Y = C + XK + XS + G) accounts, on average (19582006), for 74% of GDP. BEA’s Fixed Assets Tables and Census Bureau’s M3 data provide
stock counterparts to capital and housing investment: capital stock (K) = the sum of private
nonresidential ﬁxed assets and business inventories; housing stock (H) = residential assets
less 5+ unit properties.51
51
Separate stock data on 2-4 unit properties are not available, but based on completions data from the
Census Bureau’s Construction Survey, 2-4 unit properties make up only a tiny fraction of the multifamily
housing stock.

67

Appendix D: Estimation of mortgage debt servicing costs
A key measurement for calibrating the model concerns the mortgage debt servicing costs of
homeowners. Unfortunately, such information for the United States is not readily available.
Four diﬀerent procedures are therefore used to arrive at an estimate. The four procedures
exploit the notion that the homeowners in the model correspond to the 3rd and 4th quintiles
of the U.S. wealth distribution. Some of these estimates arguably overestimate the debt servicing costs, while others underestimate it. Nevertheless, all four procedures yield estimates
in the ballpark of 18.5% of pre-tax income, the value used to calibrate the model.
1. Estimate based on income from the Survey of Consumer Finances
The ﬁrst procedure, for FRM (1972-2006) and ARM (1984-2006), combines data on
income from the Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) and the model’s expression for debt
servicing costs. Suppose that all mortgage debt is FRM.52 The model’s expression for steadystate debt-servicing costs, (R + γ)D/(pwN − pτ Ψ), can then be used to compute the average
debt-servicing costs of homeowners. The various elements of this expression are mapped into
data in the following way: D/(pwN − pτ Ψ) corresponds to the average ratio of mortgage
debt (for 1-4 unit structures) to the combined personal income (annual, pre-tax) of the
3rd and 4th quintiles, equal to 1.56; R corresponds to the average FRM annual interest
rate for a conventional 30-year mortgage, equal to 9.31%; and γ corresponds to the average
amortization rate over the life of the mortgage, equal to 4.7% per annum. This yields debtservicing costs of 22%. This estimate is likely an upper bound as some of the outstanding
mortgage debt in the data is owed by the 5th quintile (the 1st and 2nd quintiles are essentially
renters) and the eﬀective interest rate on the stock in the data is likely lower than the average
FRM rate due to reﬁnancing. When all mortgage debt is assumed to be ARM, this procedure
yields 17.5% (based on the average Treasury-indexed 1-year ARM rate for a conventional
30-year mortgage).
2. Estimate based on Financial Obligation Ratios
The second estimate is based on Federal Reserve’s Financial Obligation Ratios (FOR) for
mortgages (1980-2006). FOR report all payments on mortgage debt (mortgage payments,
homeowner’s insurance, and property taxes) as a fraction of NIPA’s share of disposable
income attributed to homeowners. For our purposes, the problem with these data is that
members of the 5th quintile of the wealth distribution are also counted as homeowners in
the data (as long as they own a home), even though they do not represent the typical
homeowner in the sense of Campbell and Cocco (2003). To correct for this, we apply the
share of the aggregate SCF personal income, attributed to the union of the 3rd, 4th, and
5th quintiles of the wealth distribution, to aggregate disposable income from NIPA. This
gives us an estimate of NIPA disposable income attributed to these three quintiles. This
aggregate is then multiplied by the ﬁnancial obligation ratio to arrive at a time series for
52

Federal Reserve’s Flow of Funds Accounts provide data on mortgages and we equalize mortgage debt in
the model (D) with the stock of home mortgages for 1-4 family properties. The Flow of Funds data, however,
include mortgage debt issued for purchases of existing homes, second mortgages, and home equity loans. In
contrast, the model speaks only to ﬁrst mortgages on new housing. The data thus provide an upper bound
for D in the model.

68

total mortgage payments. Assuming again that all mortgage payments are made by the
3rd and 4th quintiles, the total mortgage payments are divided by NIPA personal (pre-tax)
income attributed to just these two quintiles (calculated by applying the SCF shares). This
procedure yields average debt-servicing costs of 20%.
3. Estimate based on wealth quintiles from the Survey of Consumer Finances
Third, we use the ratio of all debt payments to pre-tax family income for the 50-74.9
percentile of the wealth distribution, reported in SCF for 1989-2007. The average ratio
is 19%. About 80% of the payments are classiﬁed as residential by the purpose of debt,
yielding an average ratio of 15.2%. A key limitation of this procedure is that the data
exclude the 1970s and most of the 1980s—periods that experienced almost twice as high
mortgage interest rates, on average, than the period covered by the survey. Another issue is
that the information reported in the survey is not exactly for the 3rd and 4th quintiles.
4. Estimate based on Consumer Expenditure Survey
The fourth procedure is based on the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX), 1984-2006.
This survey reports the average income and mortgage payments (interest and amortization)
of homeowners with a mortgage. To the extent that homeowners without a mortgage are
likely to belong to the 5th quintile of the wealth distribution—they have 100% of equity in
their home and thus have higher net worth than homeowners with a mortgage—the survey’s
homeowners with a mortgage should closely correspond to the notion of homeowners used in
this paper (CEX does not contain data on wealth). The resulting average, for the available
data period, for mortgage debt servicing costs of this group (pre-tax income) is 15%. Given
that the data do not cover the period of high mortgage rates of the late 1970s and early
1980s, like the third estimate, this estimate probably also underestimates the debt servicing
costs for the period used in calibrating the model.
Taken together, the four procedures lead us to use 18.5%, a value in the middle of the
range of the estimates, as a target in calibration.

69

