NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PRIVATE INVESTMENT IN
R&D To SIGNAL ABILITY TO
PERFORM GOVERNMENT CONTRACTS

Frank R. Lichtenberg

Working Paper No. 1974

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 1985

Financial support from the National Science Foundation (via grant
PRA 85—12979 to NBER), and from the MacArthur Foundation Faculty
Research Program at Columbia University, is gratefully acknowledged.
Oonald Siegel provided capable research assistance. Remaining
errors are my own. The research reported here is part of the
NBER's research program in Productivity. Any opinions expressed
are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

Working Paper #1974
July 1986

Private Investment in R&D to Signal Ability to PerformGovernment Contracts

ABSTRACT

Official government statistics on the "mission—distribution" of
U.S. R&D investment are based on the assumption that only the government

sponsors military R&D. In this paper we advance and test the
alternative hypothesis, that a significant share of privately—financed

industrial R&D is military in orientation. We argue that in addition to
(prior to) contracting with firms to perform military R&D, the
government deliberately encourages firms

their own

expense,

to

sponsor defense research at

to enable the government to identify the firms most

capable of performing certain government contracts, particularly those

for major weapons systems. To test the hypothesis of, and estimate the
quantity of, private investment in 'signaling' R&D, we estimate variants
of a model of company R&D expenditure on longitudinal, firm—level data,

including detailed data on federal contracts. Our

estimates

imply that

about 30 percent of U.S. private industrial R&D expenditure in 1984 was
procurement— (largely defense—) related, and that almost half of the
increase in private R&D between 1979 and 1984 was stimulated by the
increase in Federal demand.

Frank R. Lichtenberg
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
725 Uris Hall
Nevd York, NY 10027

Private Investment in R&D to Signal
Ability to Perform Government Contracts

Frank R. Lichtenberg

The U.S. defense buildup that began in 1979 has intensified the
public debate about the size and rate of growth of the defense budget in

general, and defense-related R&D expenditure in particular. A key issue
in the debate about defense R&D is whether too large or too small a

fraction of the natio&s scientific and technical resources are being
allocated to defense, as opposed to civilian, research. If there were
extensive technological spillovers from defense-oriented research to
civilian-oriented research, the distinction between the two would be

neither very meaningful nor very important. In our view, however, there
is little empirical evidence to support the claim that much recent or
planned military research is likely to benefit civilian technologies.1
Explanations for the low and possibly declining rate of spillover have
been offered by Thurow (1986), among others.
If the tradeoff between the nation's ability to promote military and
civilian technological progress is fairly steep, a correct accounting of
the distribution of national investment in R&D by "mission" (defense vs.

civilian) appears to be a worthwhile objective. I submit that at least
some of the government's official statistics concerning the mission-

distribution of R&D are misleading in this regard. According to data

brief survey of some empirical evidence on the incidence of
spillovers from military to civilian research is presented in Lichten—
berg (1985).

2

published by the National Science Board and the National Science Foundation, only the government, and not private industry, sponsors (finances) defense—related R&D; the private sector sponsors only civilian

R&D. The purpose of this paper is to provide a theoretical explanation
for, and to test empirically, the alternative hypothesis, that industrial
contractors sponsor a significant amount of military R&D, due to incen-

tives deliberately provided to them by the government to do so. We also
provide estimates of the quantity (and share) of private R&D investment
that is induced by federal procurement and, hence, is largely military in
orientation.

As we observe in the next section, previous investigators have
provided various kinds of evidence of private investment in R&D oriented

toward defense and other federal government missions. Such investment
occurs because the government establishes rewards for, and subsidizes the

costs of, procurement-related R&D expenditure. What has not, in our
opinion, been adequately explained, is why it is in the government's

interest to encourage this investment. After all, the government can
directly contract with firms to perform R&D on its behalf. The government contracted with industrial firms for $20.2 billion worth of R&D in

1983, almot one—third the total value of R&D performed by these firms.
Since it engages in such extensive contracting for R&D services, why does
the government evidently also provide firms with incentives to sponsor

relevant R&D on their own? From a different perspective, under what
conditions might the government seek to induce private investment in a
particular area of R&D, rather than directly contracting for this R&D?
We attempt to provide answers to these questions in Section II of

the paper. Our explanation is based on the assumption that in some cases

3

the government has imperfect information about the ability of various
potential contractors to perform a given R&D contract (or other contracts

involving great technical uncertainty). In these cases, the government
invites firms to "signal" their ability to perform the contract: it

"design and technical competitions." Signaling entails the
utilization of contractors' R&D personnel and facilities. For a signal
sponsors

to

effectively convey information about contractor ability, the cost of

generating the signal (R&D investment) must be at least partially borne
by the prospective contractor, rather than by the government.
In Section III of the paper, we propose an econometric model for
testing the hypothesis that federal procurement in general, and procurement via design and technical competition in general, induces consider-

able private R&D investment. Variants of this model are estimated on
longitudinal, firm—level data on R&D investment, sales, and government
contracts obtained from the Compustat General Annual Industrial File and

the Federal Procurement Data System. In Section IV we report estimates
of the model and compute from them the aggregate quantity (and share in

total R&D investment) of private R&D induced by federal procurement. A
suimnary and concluding remarks are presented in Section V.

II

We begin this section by citing two important pieces of evidence
that a significant share of private R&D investment is defense-related.
We then develop an explanation of why the government seeks to promote
private investment in military R&D, in addition to directly contracting
for such R&D.

4

The first piece of evidence consists of budgetary data on the

government's Independent Research and Development (IR&D) program.2 Under
the

provisions

of this program, DoD and NASA contractors are permitted to

charge part of the costs of their R&D efforts that are not

supported by

specific contracts as overhead on cost-reimbursement contracts.

Major

defense contractors negotiate advance agreements with these agencies that
impose ceilings on the amount of R&D expense for which contractors can be

reimbursed. In order for the costs of a project to be eligible for
reimbursement, under the IR&D program, the project must be demonstrated to

have "potential military relevance." Also, in order to have any of its
R&D expenses reimbursed, a company must have some DoD or NASA contracts.
Major defense contractors reported having incurred total IR&D costs of

$3.9 billion in 1983. This represents about 9.2 percent of NSF's estimate of $42.6 billion for "company and other fundsfor R&D". (i.e.,

non-contract R&D) in industry in 1983. Firms were reimbursed for $1.6
billion (about 40 percent) of this expenditure by DoD and NASA. According to the IR&D budget data, then, firms spent $2.3 billion on projects
with "potential military relevance" for which they were not reimbursed in
1983.

A second type of evidence is provided by Scherer's (1984) analysis
of "linked" R&D and patent data of the largest R&D-performing companies.
A team of students supervised by Scherer attempted to classify each of
about 15,000 U.S. patents (obtained by 443 companies between June 1976
and March 1977) by "industry of use,1' i.e., to identify the sector(s) of

2See Reppy (1977) and Winston (1985) for detailed discussions
of the IR&D program.

5

the economy in which (most intensive) use of the invention was

anticipated.

-

Scherei "assigned" R&D-expenditures to each patent by

assuming that the value of R&D "embodied in" (invested to obtain)

any

particular patent was equal to the average R&D expenditure per patent of

the line of business receiving the patent. This assignment procedure
enabled classification of R&D expenditures, as well as of patents, by

industry of use. Two of the industries of use defined by Scherer were
"defense and space operations" and "government, except postal and de-

fense." He estimated the value of company-sponsored R&D "used" by these

sectors to be $1206.3 million and $378.7 million, 1l3 and 3.6 percent,
respectively, of the total amount of company-funded R&D ($10.64 billion)

attributed to these companies.3 Thus, according to Scherer's methodology, the federal government is the primary beneficiary of about 15 per-

cent of company-sponsored industrial R&D expenditure. These estimates
are based, of course, on judgments concerning the classification of
patents by industry of use, and on the imputation of "average" R&D expenditures per patent to specific patents.
Thus, both the IR&D budget data and the "linked" patent R&D data
suggest that a non-negligible fraction -- on the order of 10 percent --

of

private R&D investment is oriented toward defense or other federal

missions. The econometric evidence presented in the next section suggests that the fraction is significantly larger and has increased sub-

stantially in recent years. Before considering that evidence, however,

3These estimates were obtained using what Scherer termed the
'1private goods" assumption, according to which a patent (and its associated R&D expenditure) benefitted (was assigned to) only one, rather than
several, industries of use.

6

we seek to explain why the government provides financial incentives for
firms to sponsor such research, in addition to, or instead of, directly

contracting with them. As anticipated above, our explanation is based on
the

premise that the goverment has imperfect information about the

ability of potential contractors to perform specific R&D projects.
The idea that the government's information in the context of R&D
contracting is incomplete is not a novel one. Rogerson (1984) developed
a theory of optimal R&D contracting predicated on the assumption that it
is costly or infeasible for the government to monitor either the outcome
of a project performed by a contractor (i.e., how "successful" the
project was in achieving its objectives) or the effort (expense) invested

in the project. Rogerson argued that if it is difficult for the government to observe the outcome of the project, and if the financial reward
to the contractor is greater if he reports a successful outcome than if
he reports an unsuccessful one, then the contractor has an incentive to

misrepresent the outcome, i.e., to overstate the degree of success. In
practice, a contractor is likely to earn higher rewards if he reports a

successful outcome; in particular, he is likely to be awarded "followon"
contracts for further development, and possibly also for production,

training, maintenance, spare parts, and so forth. To eliminate the
contractor's incentive to distort the outcome of the project, the government could offer a fixed fee for performance of R&D contracts, i.e.

,

a

reward that is independent of the reported outcome. (Presumably, under
this scheme follow-on contracts would not be awarded to the R&D perform-

er, even if the project were a success.) However, this mode of contracting suffers from a number of defects, one of which arises for the

following reason. Suppose, as Rogerson does, that the government has

7

difficulty monitoring contractor effort. Assume that the probability of
a successful outcome increases with the quantity of effort. If the
contractor's reward does not depend upon the reported outcome, the
contractor maximizes his net income by expending minimum possible (perhaps zero) effort on the project, and by (truthfully) reporting failure.
As Rogerson observes, the difficult problem facing the government is to
design an optimal contract that "achieves a balance between the three
competing concerns of inducing effort, inducing truthful revelation, and
allocating risk:'4

The work of Rogerson and others on optimal R&D contracting addresses
the important problem of how the government should contract with a
specific firm, given the difficulty of monitoring the effort on or

outcome of the project. But due to its incomplete information, the
government faces an additional difficulty, one that is logically prior to
that of writing an optimal contract: choosing the right firm with which

to contract. We assume that both R&D projects and prospective R&D
contractors (firms) are heterogeneous: some firms are more qualified to

perform a given R&D project than other firms. By more qualified, I mean
that they will have a higher probability of success from a given effort,
or will require less effort to achieve a given probability of success.
In the case of some projects, the government may know (or at least

believe that it knows) the identity of a firm

that

is best qualified to

perform the project. In these situations the government may contract
with the finn it has identified on a noncompetitive basis. Only about 30
percent of the value of DoD R&D contracts are awarded on this basis,

4Rogerson (1984), p. 4.

8

however.5 In the case of the remaining 70 percent of R&D contracting,
the government does not know (although it may have subjective probability beliefs concerning) which of a relatively small number of finns is

best qualified to perform the contract. How can the government discover
the identity of the firm most capable of performing the contract?
The market for government R&D contracts is by no means the only
market in which the buyer has imperfect information about the quality
of products or services offered by different sellers.

Employers have

incomplete knowledge of the ability of (hence the quality of labor
services provided by) job applicants; consumers are uncertain about the

quality of various brands of a product. A number of theoretical models
of markets characterized by this kind of imperfect information show that
it is equilibrium behavior for sellers to invest in acquiring, and for

buyers to rely on, signals of quality and ability. Spence (1974) has
argued that employers may use information about job applicants' investments in education as signals of their underlying ability, and thus make

wage offers on the basis of educational attainment. Kihistrom and
Riordan (1984), developing ideas advanced by Nelson, argue that advertising expenditures may signal unobservable product quality to con-

sumers. We hypothesize that prospective federal contractors signal
their ability to perform R&D and related contracts by producing elaborate technical proposals, which entails utilization of R&D personnel and

facilities. In order to demonstrate the applicability of the signaling

5The 30 percent figure reflects our treatment of follow-on awards after
design and technical competition as competitive contracts. Although
these contracts are officially classified as noncompetitive, since they
are awarded to the winner of design and technical competitions, we
regard them as being awarded on a competitive basis.

9

concept to the market for government R&D contracts, it is useful to

briefly review Spence's model of job market signaling. We then descibe
the government's principal method of awarding R&D contracts, procurement

by design and technical competition. We postulate that the government
sponsors these competitions in order to encourage contractor signaling.
Spence hypothesizes that employers are willing to make high wage
offers to high—ability job applicants, and low offers to low—ability
applicants, but that employers cannot directly observe applicant ability.

In the absence of that information, employers may make wage offers to
applicants based on the value of an observable atttribute which, they

believe, signals ability. Spence argued that for an attribute to function as a signal of ability, three conditions must be satisfied: (1) the

value of the attribute must be subject to the applicants control; (2) it
must be costly (to the applicant) to increase the value of the attribute;
and (3) the cost of increasing the value of the attribute must be lower

for applicants of higher ability.6 Spence hypothesized that educational
attainment functions as a signal of ability in the job market. Employers
make subjective evaluations of job applicants' ability (and hence make
wage offers) on the basis of the quantity of investment in education
applicants have made: higher wage offers are made to individuals with

more education. High-ability workers find it worthwhile to invest in
education in order to secure higher wage offers, but due to their higher

costs of acquiring education, low-ability workers do not. An interesting

6lnstead of assuming asymmetry of costs of signalling (and equality
of returns), Xihlstrom and Riordan assume asymmetry of returns -- greater
returns to signalling by the high-quality seller -- and equality of
costs.

10

feature of signalling models is that multiple equilibria often exist: any
of a number of initial employer beliefs (about the relationship between

the value of the signal and ability) may be self-confirming. Some of the
equilibria may be Pareto-inferior to others. In the signalling model
(high-ability) individuals invest in education not because it increases

their productivity (which is the motive for investment in education
according to human capital theory) but "merely' because it signals their

(exogenously) higher productivity. It is true that the social rate of
return to educational investment will be positive if signalling improves
the allocation of applicants to jobs, placing high-ability individuals in

jobs requiring high ability, and conversely. But the private rate of
return is likely to exceed, perhaps by a substantial amount, the social
rate of return, resulting in significant overinvestment in education.

Let us return to consider the problem of government selection of an

R&D contractor under uncertainty about contractor qualifications. When
the government is (initially) unable to identify the most qualified
contractor, it sponsors something called a design and technical competi-

tion. The following is a brief characterization of of the modus operandi
of design and technical competitions; a signaling interpretation of

these competitions is provided below. The competition begins "officially" when a federal agency (DoD or NASA) issues a formal Request for
Proposals (RIP). Many analysts have noted, hoiiever, that potential
contractors are aware of the government's interest in particular areas of
technology, and attempt to influence the "shape" of government demand for

innovations, long before the publication of REP's. Indeed, a contractor
who first learned about a project from an REP would be effectively out of

the running for that project. Danhof has observed that "it is an impor—

11

tant part of the contractual process that the firm's representatives
participate in the informal discussions that long precede the establishment of requirements and in the debate as alternatives are narrowed.1'
In the case of DoD procurement, the mean and median number of firms
to submit proposals in response to-an RIP is about three or four. In
four of the seven (presumably "representative") DoD

competitions consid-

ered by Fox, three firms submitted proposals; in two of the competitions,
four firms did, and in one competition, seven firms.

about one out of four competitive proposals for

Danhof notes that

aerospace (DoD) contracts

is successful. About one of every nine bids for competitive NASA contracts is successful.

In view of the fact that the Rip's are on the order of 1100 to 2500
pages in length, it is perhaps not suprising that the typical proposal

ranges in length from 23,000 to 38,000 pages. The five proposals submitted under the C-IA program totalled 240,000 pages. The proposals gener-

ally consist of three main sections. The technical section is the
largest, comprising about two-thirds of the total proposal. In this
section, the company explains how it plans to meet the performance

specifications set forth in the RIP. In the management section, the
company attempts to convince the govermnent that it has the necessary
manpower and the appropriate management and control techniques to suc-

cessfully perform the project. Cost estimates and supporting documentation are presented in the cost section of the proposal.

Once the proposals for a given procurement program have been submit-

ted, an elaborate review process begins. Various committees assign
"scores" to numerous aspects of each company's proposal, and the individ-

ual scores are combined using a predetermined set of weights. Proposal

12

evaluation appears generally to take about three months, during which
time tens of thousands of government-employee manhours are engaged in the

"source-selection" process. The firm that submits the proposal receiving
the highest score is generally awarded the contract.

We believe that it is both natural and useful to interpret design

and technical competitions as signaling phenomena. The signal of
contractor ability to perform the contract that the government relies on

is the score on the technical proposal. Each firm has its own (possibly
stochastic) "score cost function" (and a dual "score production function") that relates the cost of preparing the proposal to the (expected)

score to be received by the proposal. We hypothesize that there are
positive and increasing marginal costs of improvements in the score.
Following the logic of the Spence model, in order for the score on the
proposal to effectively signal ability to perform, two additional condi-

tions must be satisfied. First, the cost of preparing a proposal of any

given score must be lowest for the most capable contractor. That this
should be the case seems quite plausible. Second, the cost of preparing
the proposal must be at least partially borne by the contractor. The
government could, after all, contract with finns to produce proposals.
But if all costs of proposal preparation were borne by the government,
proposals would not effectively convey information about contractor

ability. Evidently, contractors must place some of their own resources
"at risk" if they are to demonstrate their capability to the government.

Although it would be inappropriate for the government to underwite all
contractor costs of proposal preparation, it might be appropriate for it
to subsidize such expenditures if it believed contractors would under-

13

invest in signaling in the absence of subsidies.7 The existence of the
Th&D program, which, we indicated above, subsidizes private military

research expenditure, might perhaps be justified on these grounds:
without IR&D reimbursements, design and technical competitions might
yield an insufficient quantity of information about contractor ability.8
We have argued that the government sponsors design and technical
competitions, which elicit signaling investments by potential contractors, in order to acquire information about contractor qualifications to

provide R&D and related services and products. There is, however, an
alternative hypothesis that could account for the government's use of

this method of procurement. According to this view, federal agencies
sponsor these competitions not in order to acquire information about
contractor ability --

they want to hire --

they know in advance of the competition which firm
but in order to impress (or signal) Congress that

they are committed to competition in procurement. Judging from the
periodic Congressional hearings and reports on the subject (see, for
example, U.S. Congress (1969)), there is strong Congressional demand for
competition in procurement, and procurement officals must pursue polices
that at least appear to be consistent with this objective.

7The socially optimal (efficient) quantity of signaling investment
is the quantity at which the marginal (expected) benefit (assumed to be
diminishing) of the information transmitted equals the marginal cost
(assumed to be increasing) of transmitting the information. The mar-

ginal benefit is measured in terms of the increase in the probability of
choosing

the most qualified firm, and the increase in the probability of
success (or reduction in costs) resulting from choosing the most
qualified firm.

81f the rate of subsidy varies across firms, as it appears to do
under the IR&D program, it is important that it not be very negatively
correlated with contractor ability. If the least capable firms receive

14

Roberts (1964) has argued that, in practice, source selection does
not operate according to the three tenets of official procurement
policy: (1) maximum competition; (2) objective (numerical) proposal

evaluation; and (3) independent, multilevel review. With regard to the
second two principles, he notes first that scores on technical proposals
essentially reflect evaluators' prior beliefs about contractor ability,

and are scarcely influenced by the merits of the proposal. He also
observes that there are strong political pressures for higher—level
reviews of source-selection decisions to endorse (rubber-stamp) the

actions of lower—level reviews. But his analysis of a sample of 41 DoD
R&D contract awards does not suggest an absence of competition in the

case of most contracts. That there is generally effective competition

is implied by the following data. The technical initiator of an R&D
project typically provides a list of "recommended firms" for the pro-

ject. Edwards reports the following distribution of 41 R&D contracts,
by number of recommended companies:

Number of Companies
Recommended
1

2or3
4to21

Number of
Contracts
6
9

26
41

Thus, at least two firms were recommended in the case of 35 out of 41
(85 percent) of the contracts; at least four firms in the case of 63

the largest subsidies, they might be most likely to produce winning
proposals.

15

percent.9 Moreover, overall mare than twice as many companies were
solicited by the agency to submit proposals as were recommended by the

technical initiator. An average of seven firms competed for contracts
when only one firm was recommended; between 10 and 40 companies were
solicited when two or three were recommended.

Of course, even if procurement officials know in advance which firm
they want to perform the contract, and sponsor the design and technical
competition merely to appease Congressional demand for (the appearance
of) competition, unless firms also know that the outcome is predetermined, the competition would still be expected to elicit substantial R&D

investment. And even if a firm is aware of its status as the "desired
sole source" for a project (i.e., it is the only recommended firm), the
firm may (correctly) perceive that it is required to submit a respect-

able technical proposal. Although desired sole sources are normally
awarded the contract, Edwards cites a case in which a desired sole
source lost because it "insulted the agency by sending in an 'advertis-

ing brochure.' Evidently, even a company that is 'in' can sometimes get
too cocky," i.e., not devote sufficient effort to proposal development.
We conclude this section by briefly reviewing some case-study and
anecdotal evidence regarding private R&D investment in pursuit of govern-

ment contracts. Edwards describes an unpublished study by Thomas Allen
at lilT of companies' proposal efforts related to 14 small ($30—$50

thousand) R&D contract awards. Allen found the total cost of all company proposal efforts in each competition ranged from 3 to 150 percent

9Edwards notes, however, that the lists of recommended firms were
often not in alphabetical order, suggesting that procurement officials
may have favored a subset of recoimnended firms.

16

of the direct cost of the contract awarded. Total proposal effort
appeared to be related more to the number of bidders than to the value

of the contract. Another study of 36 firms bidding for a single large
R&D contract estimated that each bidder spent three to four thousand

engineering manhours on its proposal. The estimated combined 45 to 60
engineering man—years reflects effort only at the prime contractor level;
subcontractors must also generate technical data for prime contractors.

Estimates of the amount of R&D investment made by single firms in

specific periods or competitions have occasionally been reported. Gorgol
noted that "the Lockheed Aircraft Corporation was estimated to have spent
about $75 million of its own money in the period 1964-66 to improve its
competitive position in relation to the contract possibilities it viewed

as likely to materialize. For example, more than 1000 employees were
working on the C-5A proposal."1° Lockheed continues to make such investments today: according to one of its vice presidents, Lockheed spent "in
the low hundreds of millions of dollars," and assigned hundreds of its
most able managers and technicians to research on the Advanced Technical
Fighter, prior to submitting (along with six other companies) a 3000-page

technical proposal for the aircraft project in February 1986.11 Competition for "Star Wars" (Strategic Defense Initiative) research contracts

has also elicited company R&D investment. In 1984, the government's
Strategic Defense Initiative Organization "challenged companies to enter

10Gorgol (1972), p. 33.

New York Times (1986)

17

what it called a horse race to devise the best Star Wars blueprint. A
herd of 300 firms submitted initial applications, but SOlO narrowed the
field to five, each of which will receive a $5 million grant to work on

its designs." According to the head of GTE's Star Wars effort, "the
price of admission to this game is much higher than usual." GTE normally
Lays out between $100,000 and $1 million of its own funds to develop a

bid for a research grant, but as of October 1985 it had spent about $3
million on Star Wars proposals.'2
While the anecdotal evidence is certainly consistent with our
hypothesis of private investment in R&D to signal ability to perform
government contracts, it is not adequate for formally testing the hypoth-

esis or for estimating the quantity (and share) of private R&D investment

undertaken for this purpose. A basis for formal testing and estimation
is provided, however, by the econometric model presented in the next
section.

III

In this section we propose an econometric methodology for testing
the hypothesis of, and estixnatingthe quantity of, private investment in

R&D to signal ability to perform government contracts. The methodology
we propose is a generalization and extension of that used in previous
investigations of the reduced-form relationship between company R&D
expenditure (or other measures of innovative activity such as patents)
and sales (or other measures of firm size such as assets).

12 .

Time Magazine (1985).

18

If one is willing to regard a finn-size variable such as sales as a
proxy for the extent of a firm's market (or growth in sales as a proxy
for growth in demand for the firm's products-cum-innovations), then the
"indivisibility"

ty

property of innovations suggests that innovative activi-

should be an increasing function of firm size. As Kamien and Schwartz

(1982) observe, development costs are fixed costs, independent of the
number of units of output produced, whereas more revenue is collected if

output is larger. Hence, the larger the market, the greater the number
of process and product improvements that are likely to appear profitable.
The objective of most previous studies of the relationship between
inputs or outputs of innovative activity and firm size has been to test
the Schumpeterian hypothesis that large firms tend to sponsor a dispro-

portionate amount of innovation. In perhaps the most recent such study,
Bound et al. (1984) computed regressions of the log of R&D expenditure
on the log of sales and its square or the log of gross plant, using

cross-sectional data for 1479 firms. They concluded that both very small
and very large firms are more R&D intensive than average-size firms, and
rejected the existence of any significant R&D threshold.

We are interested in investigating the effect of the composition, as
opposed to the size, of demand for a firm's products on its R&D intensi-

ty, or propensity to sponsor R&D. A firm's total sales may be interpreted as the sum of its sales to each of its customers. In particular,
it is the sum of its sales to the federal government (G0V) and to other

customers (0Th). A regression equation of company R&D expenditure (CRD)
on total sales (SALES) embodies the a priori restriction that government

and other sales have the same effect on R&D expenditure. The most
important respect in which we extend and generalize previous econometric

19

studies of the determinants of privfle R&D investment is by relaxing this
restriction, by classifying (disaggregating) SALES into its components
GOV and 0TH, and subclassifying GOY by method of procurement (competitive

vs. other) and by commodity (R&D vs. other). By disaggregating sales in
this manner; we purport to determine the extent to which government
procurement in general, and procurement via design and technical competition in particular, stimulates private R&D investment.

In order to get consistent estimates of the (relative) effects of
government and nongovernment demand on private R&D investment, we believe
that two additional methodological extensions are necessary. The first
involves testing for the presence of correlated firm- (and year-) effects
by computing both random—effects and fixed-effects estimates of the
following model.using longitudinal, firm-level data:

(1)

Cli]).

=

it

i.X..
.jJ].t ÷ a.1+ cS t + u,it
3.

i1, ...,N

t1,...,T

where CRD. represents company-sponsored R&D expenditure of firm i in
year t, and X.. represents sales of type j by firm

i

in year t. The

individual (firm) effects a. reflect the influence of all unobserved
time—invariant, firm—specific determinants, whereas the year effects
capture the effects of changes over time in unmeasured determinants of
CRD which

are common to all firms. It is well known that there are two

basic approaches to the estimation of model (1): "random effects" estimation and "fixed effects" estimation. In the random effects framework,
the values of the individual and year effects are regarded as realizations of a random variable assumed to be distributed independently of the

20

regressors and of u.
it

.

In

the fixed-effects framework, the a. and 6
1

t

are regarded as unknown parameters to be estimated. Under the null
hypothesis that the individual effects are uncorrelated with the regressors, the random effects (RE) estimator is both consistent and asymptotically efficient, while the fixed effects (FE) estimator is consistent

but inefficient. Under the alternative hypothesis of correlated individual effects, only the FE estimator is consistent.

Clearly, which esti-

mator should be chosen depends upon whether or not the null hypothesis
is true. Fortunately, }Iausman (1978) has developed a test for determin-

ing whether we should reject or fail to reject the null hypothesis.

The

test statistic is a measure of the distance between the FE and RE estimates; large values of this statistic should cause us to reject the

null, and therefore to regard only the FE estimates as consistent. All
of the models considered below were estimated by both RE and FE, and the
ilausman test statistic based on the difference between these estimates

was computed; in every case, the null hypothesis was decisively rejected. This is not very surprising since, as }fausman and others have noted, unobserved individual effects are unlikely, in general, to be uncor-

related with the regressors. In view of these findings, we report in
Section IV only FE ("within-firm") estimates.
The second econometric extension that may be required to obtain
consistent parameter estimates is estimation of the (fixed-effects) model
by instrumental variables (IV) rather than by ordinary least squares

(OLS). There are at least two reasons why one might expect OLS estimates
of equation (1) to be inconsistent: simultaneous—equations bias, and

errors-in—variables. The consistency of OLS estimates is predicated on
the assumption that a firm's sales is exogenous relative to its R&D

21

expenditure. Although Mairesse and Siu (1984) were unable to reject the
hypothesis that (total) sales is exogenous with respect to R&D, in view
of our above characterization of design and technical competitions, it is
quite plausible that the part of a firm's sales accounted for

by govern-

ment contracts (at least those awarded by design and technical competition) is partly determined by its (current or past) R&D

expenditure.

Thus, although total sales appears to be exogenous, it is unlikely that
the (typically relatively small) government-sales component is.
Errors-in-variables (or, equivalently, errors in classifying firm
sales into government and nongovernmeut components) arise mainly because,
as discussed below, "government sales" is defined, perforce, as the value
of federal prime contract actions (obligations) by firm and year. Error

may result from both the fact that we are treating obligations as sales

and from inability to account for subcontracting. There is a question as

when federal contract actions are "recognized" as revenue (sales) by
the firm's accountants. We assume, in the absence of reliable informato

tion

on this issue, that contract actions during a given year are re-

flected in that year1s sales figure. With regard to subcontracting, it
might be argued that subcontracting should be taken into account when

classifying the firm's sales by customer. It might be desirable, for
example, topartition the firm's sales into three components: sales
directly to the government of products produced by the firm (i.e., prime
contract awards minus subcontracts awarded to other firms); sales indirectly to the government (i.e., subcontracts awarded under other firms'

prime contracts); and nongovernment sales. This kind of disaggregation
would enable us to assess the extent of private R&D investment undertaken

in pursuit of subcontracts. Unfortunately, there are at present no

22

comprehensive and reliable data on the incidence of subcontracting at the

firm level.13 DoD data suggest that at least 38 percent of the value of
prime contracts awarded to business firms is subcontracted.14
Let us briefly consider the consequences for our parameter estimates
likely to result from errors in measuring government sales and, hence, in
classifying total sales (assumed to be measured without error) into its

components. First, because, as discussed above, the Hausman specification test indicated that the fixed-effects model was appropriate, we have

adopted the "within-firm" estimator. Within this estimation framework
(at least certain kinds of) "permanent" errors in measuring a firm's

government sales are likely to be inconsequential; they will be absorbed

by the individual effect for that firm. If we assume that the nonpermanent component of the measurement error has the usual classical
properties (i.e., uncorrelated with the "true" regressors and with the
disturbance term), then a result reported by Griliches concerning the
effect of measurement error in a multiple regression implies that the
difference between the coefficients on government and nongovernment sales
should be biased toward zero.15

13The Defense Acquisition Regulatory Council is currently considering
an amendment to the DoD acquisition regulations that would require
large prime contractors to submit quarterly statistical reports on
first—tier contracting.

l4See Department of Defense (1985), p. 81.

15This result can be established as follows. Suppose the true model
may be expressed as

Y =

+

p222 + U

23

We attempt to address the problems posed by both potential
endogeneity of government sales and errors in measuring government sales
by computing instrumental-variable estimates (using putatively exogenous
instruments for government sales), as well as OLS estimates, of our model

of private R&D investment. A statistic measuring the distance between
the OLS and IV estimates may be computed to test the null hypothesis that
the assumptions required for consistency of the OLS estimator (i.e.,
government sales exogenous and measured without error) are satisfied.
In view of the fact that we are trying to measure the effect of
exogenous shifts in the government's demand for each firm's products—
cum-innovations, the instrument for firm i's actual government contracts
in year t

is

an an estimate of its potential contracts in that year.

Potential contracts is defined as the total (across all firms) value in
year t of government contracts for two-digit FSC (Federal Supply Code)

products and services that the firm

ever

sold to the government during

where y denotes company R&D expenditure, z1 denotes true government
sales, z2 denotes true nongovernment sales, and all variables are measured as deviations from firm means. This model may be rewritten as

y =

=

(-

+

22 ÷

U

y2j+D2z+u
is

+ z2 denotes total sales, and y E
where z E
P2- Suppose 21
not observed but we observe a noisy indicator of 2j, x, related to it by

where c is a classical measurement error assumed to be uncorrelated with
all other variables. Griliches shows that plim(b
y) = yA/(1 where X var(t)/var(x) and p is the sample correY*tion coefficient
between x and z. Thus, the least squares estimate of y is biased toward
zero (estimates of
and f2 are biased toward equality). Also, provided
that p > 0 (which is true for our sample), the bias is "transmitted,"
with an opposite sign, to the other coefficient: Plim(byz.x - Pt) =
-p[bias y]. See Griliches (1984), pp. 22-23.

24

the sample period 1979-1985. This may be expressed algebraically as
follows:

POT. =
it

where

13.. =

1

if firm

i

i

13. .

*

AGG.

jj

ever sold product j to the government

during the period 1979—1985;
=

AGGit =

0 otherwise

total

(across firms) value of government contracts

for product j in year t.

In order for POT.
to be a valid instrument for GUy, in the GRID
it
it

equation, the variables on the BBS of (2) should be exogenous relative to

CRD. It seems reasonable to maintain that this is the case, i.e., that
neither the lines of business the firm was engaged in, nor the aggregate
volume of government procurement in those markets, was determined by the
firm s rate of R&D investment. 16

Testing certain hypotheses requires that we disaggregate government

sales into various components, e.g., R&D and non—R&D. In order to have
as many instruments as there are government-sales variables, the potential contracts variable is disaggregated into components in exactly the
same way as the (actual) contracts variable.. For example, potential
contracts is divided into potential R&D contracts and potential non—R&D
contracts, and these are used as instruments for actual R&D and non-R&D
contracts, respectively.

16Obviously, using POT as an instrument is similar to using industry
dummy variables as instruments, albeit in highly restricted form.

25

In the remainder of this section we provide a brief description of
the data sources and procedures we have used to develop a data base

suitable for estimation of the model outlined above. We have constructed
a panel consisting of annual observations on company R&D expenditure,
total sales, and government sales, for each of 187 firms during the years

1979-1984. Data on company sponsored R&D expenditure and on total sales
of the company are taken from the Compustat General Annual Industrial

File. Data on sales to the federal government (more precisely, on the
net value of obligations to the firm under federal contract actions) are

derived from the Federal Procurement Data System. The sample was constructed as follows. The Federal Procurement Data Center (FPDC) provided
to the author a computer tape containing records of all federal (prime)

contract actions of the 1500 industrial firms who had the largest total

value of contracts during 1979-1984 (FPDC began operation in 1979). This
tape contained records of almost 1.3 million contract actions. Each
record indicates the month in which the contract action occurred, and the

contract actions for each firm were aggregated to the annual level. We
then matched the federal contract data, by firm and year, to the corresponding data on sales and company-sponsored R&D from the Compustat file.
The Compustat file included data for only 187 out of the 1500 firms, many

of which are not publicly traded companies. The firms that are included
in both the FPDC and Compustat files (and therefore in our sample),

though, tend to be the largest firms, measured either by CRD, sales, or
value of federal contracts.

Table 1 presents summary statistics, by year, for our sample of
firms, and, for purposes of comparison, selected published U.S. aggregate

time-series. Total sample values of four data items -- company-spon-

26

Table 1

SAMPLE AGGREGATES AND COMPARISON NATIONAL DATA

(all

amounts in billions of dollars)

AGGREGATES FOR SAMPLE OF 187 FIRMS

YEAR

COMPANYSPONSORED
R&D
EXPENDITURE

SALES

1979

17.8

748.3

41.1

7.8

1980

20.7

826.3

46.6

8.5

1981

23.6

908.4

56.8

9.2

1982

26.4

898.9

72.7

1983

29.0

931.2

79.3

15.0

1984

34.4

994.1

85.8

16.3

VALUE OF
FEDERAL
CONTRACTS

VALUE OF
FEDERAL
R&D CONTRACTS

U.S. NATIONAL DATA

"COMPANY

DoD
PRIME

AND OTHER
YEAR8

CONTRACT

FUNDS FOLD
R&D"

SALESC

AWARDS

1'FEDERAL

d

FUNDS FO
R&D"

1979

25.7

1215.0

58..5

12.5

1980

30.5

1354.0

66.7

14.0

1981

35.4

87.2

16.4

1982

39.5

102.5

18.5

1983

42.6

121.1

20.2

1984

124.9

aAll data except DoD contracts on calendar-year basis; contract awards
on fiscal—year basis.
bsource. NSF, R&D in Industry
CNet sales of R&D performang manufacturing companies.
dDOD Prime Contract Awards to Businesses for Work in the U.S.
Source: DoD Prime Contract Awards Fiscal Year 1984, Table 3.

27

sored R&D, sales, value of federal contract actions, and value of R&D
contract actions —-

are shown. In 1983, these 187 firms reported

a total

of about $29 billion of company-sponsored R&D expenditure, or about 68
percent of NSF's estimate of U.S. aggregate industrial R&D expenditure.17
The value of federal obligations to these firms for R&D was about $15
billion in 1983, which is 74 percent of NSF's estimate of federal funds

for industrial R&D. The share of federal R&D in total (company +

fed-

eral) industrial R&D expenditure is about a third in both sample and
national data.

Recall that the method of contracting hypothesized to elicit (the
most intense) private R&D investment is procurement by design and techni-

cal competition. Unfortunately, while the FPDS data do distinguish
negotiated competitive procurement from other methods of contracting
(e.g., negotiated noncompetitive or formally advertised procurement),
they do not distinguish between the two principal methods of negotiated
competitive procurement: price competition, and design and technical

competition. Moreover, as the summary

data

published by DoD presented in

Table 2 indicate, design and technical competitions account for only
about one-fourth of the value of negotiated competitive contracts.'8

By

17Because company R&D expenditures that are reimbursed under the IR&D
program are included in the NSF estimate but evidently excluded from the
Compustat (10K-based) data, this fraction may understate the true share
of these companies in national R&D expenditure.

18Although under 10 percent of the value of DoD contracts are
officially recorded as competitive contracts awarded on the basis of
design and technical competition, an additional 27 percent are designated
"follow—on" contracts after design and technical competition, awarded on

a nonompetitive basis to the winner of the competition. Hence in

reality

37 percent of the value of DoD contracts are awarded, initially
or eventually, on the basis of these competitions.

28

Table 2
Distribution of DoD FY1984 Negotiated
Competitive and Noncompetitive Procurement, by Method
(All figures in billions of dollars)

All
Method of Procurement
Competitive
Design and technical competition
Price competition

contracts

R&D
contracts'

11.6
35.0

4.4
0.4

Follow—on after Competition
After design and technical competition
After price competition

31.6
4.1

4.6
0.1

Noncompetitive

34.3

3.9

Catalog or market price
Total, all methods
1

...

0.9

117.6

13.4

See text for definition of R&D contracts for purposes of this table.

*less than $0.05 billion.

29

cross-classifying contracts by whether or not they are competitive and by
whether or not they are for R&D, however, we can isolate one class of
contracts --

i.e.,

competitive R&D contracts --

which are awarded almost

entirely on the basis of design and technical competition.19

Thus if, as

we hypothesize, design and technical competitions provide the greatest
stimulus to private R&D investment, competitive R&D contracts should have

the largest coefficient of the contract types which we can identify,

given the data available to us. Since about one-fourth of competitive
non-R&D contracts are awarded by design and technical competition, the
coefficient on this category would be expected to be smaller in magnitude

but still positive, and larger than the coefficients on other (follow-on
and noncompetitive) contracts (whether or not for R&D), which are not
awarded (at least directly) on the basis of a design and technical
competition.

Finally, before turning to our parameter estimates, we thought it
might be of interest to present data on the distribution of design and
technical competition awards by product and service.

These data provide

an indication of the product fields in which the hypothesized

company-

sponsored signaling R&D is concentrated. Due to the data limitations
cited above (i.e., inability to distinguish price competition from de-

19The distribution of contracts by method shown in the second column
of Table 2 reflects the distribution of contracts which cite statutory
authority 10 U.S.C. 2304(4)(ll) ("experimental, developmental, test, or
research") as their authorization for exception to the requirement for
formal advertising. Whenever procurement officials wish to employ any
method of procurement other than formal advertising, they must cite one
of 17 possible reasons for not advertising enumerated in the U.S. Code.
The eleventh such reason is that they are contracting for experimental,
developmental, test, or research services. Contracts citing this reason
are treated as tR&D contracts" for the purposes of Table 2.

30

sign and technical competition), we present data on the distribution of
follow-on contracts (almost 90 percent of which follow design and tech-

nical competitions) rather than that of competitive contracts.2° A list
of the top 25 (4-digit Federal Supply Code) products and services,
ranked by value of follow-on contracts, is presented in Table 3.

These

products and services account for over three-fourths of the total value

of follow-on contracts. Not surprisingly, virtually all of these products and services are defense- and space-related.

Iv

In

this section we present and interpret estimates of the model of

company R&D expenditures developed in the previous section. OLS and IV
estimates of the fixed-effects version of equation (1) are presented in

Table 4. We begin by disaggregating SALES into only two components:
government contracts (sales), and nongoverrunent sales. In column (la),

OLS estimates of the regression of ORD on GOV and 0Th are reported. The
coefficient on GOV is about 2.26 times as large as the coefficient on
0Th; moreover, the difference between these two coefficients is highly

statistically significant.21 IV estimates of the same model, using

20We note, however, that over 90 percent of the value of competitive
R&D contracts are for defense and space R&D.

21The ratio of coefficients is similar to (slightly smaller than)
that obtained when a similar equation was estimated on panel data for 88
business segments (lines of business) observed annually during the period
1978—1983. The ratio estimated from those data (derived from the
Compustat Industry Segment File) was 2.67.

25

22
23
24

21

19
20

11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18

7
8
9
10

6

5

4

3

2

I

Rank

Aircraft Fixed Wing
Gas Turbines & Jet Engines Aircraft
Aircraft Rotary Wing
R&D-Missile & Space Sys-Eng Dev
Elct Countermeasure & Quick Reac Eq
R&D-Aircraft-Eng Dev
Guided Missiles
Guided Missile Systems, Complete
Airframe Structural Components
Hiscl Aircraft Accessories Comps
Submarines
Combat Assault & Tactical Veh
Guided Missile Components
Nuclear Reactors
Radar Eq Airborne
Space Vehicles
Space Vehicle Components
R&D-Electronics & Comm Eq-Eng 0ev
R&D-Space Trans Systems-Opsy Dev
Cruisers
Msc Elect & Electronic Components
Radar Eq Except Airborne
Misc Communication Eq
Guided Missile Subsystems
Prof Svcs/Systems Engineering

Product or Service

1.0
1.0
0.9
0.7
0.7

1.1

1.6
1.4
1.4
1.4
1.3
1.4
1.4
1.3

1.7

24.1
10.2
4.5
4.2
4.0
2.6
2.1
1.9
1.9
1.8

Percent of
Follow-on
Contracts

Twenty-five Products and Services Accounting for Largest Value
of Follow-on Contracts, Ranked by Value of Contracts

Table 3

75.9

24.1
34.3
38.8
42.9
41.0
49.6
51.7
53.7
55.6
57.3
59.0
60.6
62.0
63.4
64.8
66.2
67.6
68.9
70.2
71.4
12.5
73.5
74.4
75.2

Cumulative
Percent

32

"potential government sales" as an instrument for actual government

sales, are presented in column lb. The coefficient on 0Th is unchanged
by using an instrument for GUy, but the IV estimate of the GO'? coefficiexit is almost twice as large as the OLS estimate.

The IV estimates

imply that a dollar of government demand (sales) induces over four times
as much R&D expenditure as a dollar of rzongovernment demand.

We performed the instrumental—variables test for errors-in—variables
discussed by Hausman (1978), by running the regression of ORB on GUy,
0TH, and the residual from the regression of GOV on its instrument

(potential contracts). The coefficient on this residual was significantly different from zero (t =

2.7),

indicating that we should reject

the null hypothesis that GOV is measured without error (or, more general-

ly, is uncorrelated with the disturbance). Consequently, only the IV
estimates should be regarded as consistent.

We can use these coefficients to estimate the total quantity of
private R&D expenditure induced by government sales; this estimate may be
considered in relation to three different measures of R&D investment: (1)

the quantity of private R&D expenditure induced by sales of all types;
(2) the quantity of federal contract R&D; and (3) the quantity of IR&D

investment. The quantity of private R&D investment induced by sales of a
particular type is calculated as total sales of that type times the

estimated (IV) coefficient on that type of sales. Estimates of the
quantity of private R&D induced by both government and nongovernment

sales are presented in Table 5. As indicated, the estimated share of
government-sales-induced R&D expenditure in total induced R&D expenditure
increased from 19.8 percent in 1979 to 28.7 percent in 1984.

Moreover,

33

Table 4
OLS and IV Estimates of "Within" Regressions
of Private R&D Expenditure on Sales Classified by Type
Annual Data 1979-1984 for 187 Firms
Ct—ratios in parentheses)

Column
Estimation
Technique

la

lb

2a

2b

3a

3b

4a

4b

OLS

IV

OLS

IV.

OLS

IV

OLS

IV

Variable
.023
(16.0)

.023
(15.8)

.052
(6.5)

.098
(4.9)

.024
(16.0)

.023
(15.7)

Contracts

.017
(0.6)

.080
(0.4)

Non-R&D
Contracts

.058
(5.9)

.110
(3.8)

J{ongovernment.

.023
(15.7)

.023
(14.9)

Competitive
Contracts

.148
(5.6)

.417
(2.2)

Noncompetitive
Contracts

.037
(4.2)

.047
(1.2)

.022
(15.2)

.023
(13.9)

Competitive
R&D Contracts

.480
(5.4)

1.498
(1.2)

Competitive
Non-R&D Contracts

.147
(4.8)

.467
(1.8)

Sales

Government
Contracts

R&D

- .204

Noncompetitive
R&D Contracts
Noncompetitive
Non—R&D Contracts

Sum of Squared

(0.8)

.075
(6.7)

.057
(1.2)

5568

5561

5482

5315

928

927

927

925

Residuals/ 1000

Residual Degrees
of Freedom

-.452

(4.3)

34

almost half (48.7 percent) of the increase in total induced R&D expenditure during this period was induced by the increase in government sales.
Our estimates of government-sales-induced CRD investment, considered
in relation to contract R&D expenditure, suggest that there is slightly

more than 50 cent& worth of private, procurement-related R&D investment
for every dollar of contract R&D. Stated differently, about one-third of
the industrial R&D investment associated with government procurement is
privately financed.

Because data on IR&D costs and reimbursements are available only at
the national level, in order to compare government-sales-induced ORB
expenditures to IR&D outlays, we need to estimate the former for the

country as a whole, not merely for the sample of 187 firms. We do this
by multiplying the government-sales coefficient (.098) by the aggregate

value of DoD prime contract awards. (Because DoD accounts for only about
80 percent of the total value of federal procurement, this is probably a
conservative estimate of the amount of private R&D investment induced by

total federal procurement.) As indicated in Table 6, the resulting
estimates of aggregate CRD expenditure induced by DoD prime contract
awards are $5.7 billion in 1979 and $11.9 billion in 1983 (the last year

for which we have IR&D data). These figures are about three times as
large as the corresponding estimates of total IR&O costs incurred by

industry ($2.1 and $3.9 billion, respectively). Moreover, the CRDexpenditure data upon which our estimate of the government-sales coefficient is based evidently exclude IR&D costs for which companies are

reimbursed by DoD or NASA. These agencies typically reimburse about 40

percent of IR&D costs incurred. Hence it is to the total IR&D costs not
reimbursed by federal agencies that our estimates of government-sales-

35

Table 5

Calculation of Share of Government—Sales-Induced
CRD Expenditure in Total Induced CR0 Expenditure

Year
Line

Description*

(1)

Total government sales

(2)

Total nongovernment sales

(3)

Government-sales—induced
CRD expenditure (.098 '

Line
(4)

(5)

(6)

1984

41.1

85.8

44.7

707.7

908.3

200.6

4.03

8.41

4.38

Nongoverninent-sales-induced
CR0 expenditure (.023
Line (2))

16.28

20.89

4.61

Total Induced CRD Expenditure (Line (3) + Line (4))

20.31

29.30

9.99

19.8%

28.7%

48.7%

(1))

Share of Government-salesinduced CR1) expenditure in
Total induced CR0 expendi-

ture (Line (3)
*All

Change,
1979 to 1984

1979

Line(S))

figures except those in line (6) in billions of dollars.

36

induced private R&D expenditure ought to be compared. As the comparison
of the second and fourth lines of Table 6 indicates, unreimbursed IR&D
costs are only about one-fifth as large as the value of

privately-

financed, procurement-related R&D expenditures implied by our model. The
IR&D budget data appear to significantly understate the extent of private
investment in defense-related R&D.
The model of GRID expenditure in which SALES is disaggregated into

two components —-

(all)

government, and nongovernment -—

is

useful for

estimating the amount of private R&D investment stimulated by federal

procurement as a whole. We hypothesize that it is procurement by design
and technical competition that provides the greatest stimulus to private

R&D investment. As discussed above, we can test this hypothesis by
estimating a version of the model in which government sales is crossclassified by method of procurement (negotiated competitive vs. other)

and by commodity (R&D vs. other). Before presenting these estimates, we
report estimates of models in which government sales is classified by a

single attribute. These estimates are useful for purposes of comparison
with previous econometric studies of the effect of federal procurement

on private R&D investment. These studies have focused exclusively on
the R&D component of procurement, and have not considered the effects of
different methods of procuring R&D on private R&D expenditure.
Column 2 of Table 4 displays estimates of the CRD equation in which

government sales is classified into R&D and non—R&D components. In the
case of both the OLS and the IV estimates, the coefficient on government
R&D is not significantly different from zero, whereas the coefficient on

other government sales is positive and highly significant. One might

37

Table 6
Comparison of Estimates of Aggregate CRD Expenditure
Induced by DoD prime Contract Awards with
Total and Unreimbursed IR&D Costs Incurred by Industry

Line
(1)

(2)

Description
Aggregate value of DoD
Prime Contracts Awards

(4)

1983

58.5

121.1

5.7

11.9

Estimated CR11 expenditure
induced by DoD Prime
Contract Awards (.098 *

Line
(3)

1979

(1))

Total IR&D Costs incurred
by industry

2.1

3.9

Total IR&D Costs incurred
minus DoD and NASA reimbursements

1.3

2.3*

*Estimated
Sources: Line (1): see Table 1.
Lines (3), (4): Science Indicators, 1985, Appendix table 2—16.

38

well infer from these estimates that previous studies have been concerned with the portion of procurement which has the smaller and less signi-

ficant effect on private R&D investment. But before we conclude that
private R&D investment is essentially unresponsive to changes in the extent of R&D contracting, it behooves us to consider arguments and evidence in support of a subtler hypothesis: that some R&D procurement
stimulates, and other R&D procurement depresses, the rate of private R&D

expenditure. The insignificance of R&D procurement in general maybe
masking the offsetting effects of different methods of contracting for
R&D services.

Estimates of the model in which government sales is classified by

method of procurement are presented in column 3 of Table 4. In the case
of both the OLS and IV estimates, the effect of competitive contracts is,
as expected, substantially larger and more significant than the effect of

the other types of contracts. The restriction that the two methods of
procurement have the same effect on private R&D is decisively rejected:
the t-ratio on the difference between competitive and other coefficients

is 3.8 in the case of the OLS estimates and 2.0 in the IV case. The IV
estimate of the coefficient on competitive contracts is about three times
as large as the OLS estimate, and implies 42 cents of private R&D investment per dollar of competitive awards.

Estimates of the CRD model in which government sales is crossclassified by method of procurement and by whether or not the contract

is for R&D are presented in column 4 of Table 4. Consider first the OLS
estimates. Consistent with our hypothesis, the coefficient on competi-

39

tive R&D contracts has the largest (and a highly significant) coeffici-

ent.22 For this finding to be consistent with our earlier finding (in
column 2) that R&D contracting in general has an insignificant effect on
private R&D investment, non-negotiated-competitive R&D contracts should

have a sizable negative effect on CR0. The estimates suggest that this
is indeed the case: the coefficient on this component of government

sales is negative and significantly different from zero. Evidently, the
competitive award of R&D contracts tends to stimulate private R&D investment, but firms tend to reduce their own R&D spending when the value of
R&D contracts awarded to them on a non-negotiated-competitive basis in-

creases. Non—R&D contracts, on the other hand, appear to have a positive effect regardless of the method of contracting.

Whereas all of the OLS estimates in column 4 are highly significantly different from zero, the IV estimates are at best only marginally

significant. Presumably, this lack of significance reflects the deterioration in quality (extent of correlation) of the "potential contracts"
variables as instruments for their corresponding "actual contracts"
counterparts as the extent of disaggregation of actual and potential

government sales increases. Nevertheless, it is reassuring that the
signs and relative magnitudes of the IV estimates in column 4 are generally similar to those of the OLS estimates.

22Since about 17 percent of competitive non-R&D contracts are
awarded via .DTC, a smaller but positive and significant coefficient on
these contracts conforms with expectations.

40

V

Official government statistics on the distribution of the nation's
R&D expenditures by "mission'1 are predicated on the assumption that only

the government sponsors military R&D. But IR&D budget data, analyses of
patents, and-anecdotal evidence all suggest that a significant fraction

of company—sponsored R&D expenditure is defense—related. We have argued
that firms sponsor such research because the government deliberately
provides them with incentives to do so, i.e.

,

it establishes rewards for,

and subsidizes the costs of, private military R&D investment.
Since the government simply contracts with firms to perform a
substantial amount of R&D, the question arises why, and under what
circumstances, does the government encourage private R&D investment
rather than (or in addition to) directly contracting for R&D services.
We have provided an explanation for this behavior which is based on the
notion that the government often has imperfect information about the
ability of various firms to perform R&D and similar contracts involving

great technical uncertainty. In these situations, the government sponsors design and technical competitions, which may be interpreted as
solicitations to companies to signal their ability to provide services

and products. Signaling requires considerable R&D investment, which
must be at least partially at firms' own expense for the signal to be
informative.

Estimation of variants of an econometric model of company-sponsored
R&D expenditure enabled us to both test the hypothesis of, and estimate

the quantity of, private investment in signaling R&D. Our estimates
imply that there is about 50 cents worth of private, procurement-related

41

("contract—seeking")

R&D for every dollar of contract R&D.

The amount of

private procurement— (largely defense—) related R&D expenditure appears
to be substantially greater than thç reported costs incurred by contrac-

tors under the IR&D program. We estimate that in 1979 —-

before

the

major defense buildup had begun -- about 20 percent of private R&D
investment was induced by (related to) federal procurement. Nearly half

of the increase in company R&D expenditure between 1979 and 1984, during
which time federal national defense

purchases grew much more rapidly than

nondefense demand, was stimulated by growth in government sales. By
1984,

R&D accounted for about 30 percent of

private R&D spending.

According to the official goveinment statistics, the fraction of the
nation's total R&D (company- plus

government-sponsored) investment

devoted to military research increased from 23 percent in 1979 to 30

percent in 1984. Treating all of the private R&D investment we have
estimated to be associated with procurement as military R&D would increase this share to 32 percent in 1979 and 45 percent in 1984. While
this procedure may result in some overstatement of the defense share of

R&D, these estimates are, we think, much closer to the truth than the

official estimates. The latter appear to substantially overstate U.S.
investment in R&D relevant

in the

to meeting the challenge posed by competitors

civilian technology race (e.g.

,

Japan, less than one percent of

whose R&D is military), and to understate investment devoted to meeting
the challenge posed by our major competitor (the Soviet Union) in the
military technology race.

42

References

Bound, John, et al. (1984), "Who does R&D and who patents?" in
Z. Griliches (ed.), R&D, patents, and productivity (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press).
Daithof, Charles H. (1968), Government Contracting and Technical Change
(Washington: Brookings Instition)

Department of Defense (1985), Prime Contract Awards, Fiscal Year 1984
(Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office).
Fox, Ronald (1974), Arming America: how the U.S. buys weapons (Boston:
Harvard Business School Division of Research).
Gorgol, John (1972), The military-industrial firm: a practical theory
and model (New York: Praeger Publishers).

Griliches, Zvi (1984), "Data problems in econometrics," NBER Technical
Working Paper No. 39, July.
Hausman, Jerry (1978), "Specification tests in econometrics,"
Econometrica, vol. 46, no. 6, pp. 1251-1271.
Kamien, N., and N. Schwartz (1982), Market structure and innovation
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
Kihlstrom, Richard E., and Michael Ii. Riordan (1984), "Advertising as a
signal," Journal of Political Economy, vol. 92, no. 3, pp. 427-450.

Lichtenberg, Frank R. (1985), "Assessing the impact of federal industrial R&D expenditure on private R&D activity," paper presented
to the National Academies of Sciences/Engineering workshop on The
Federal Role in Research and Development, Washington, D.C., November
21—22.

Mairesse, Jacques, and Alan Siu (1984), "An extended accelerator model
of R&D and physical investment," in Z. Griliches (ed.), R&D,
patents, and productivity (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
National Science Board (1983), Science indicators/the 1985 report
(Washington,D.C.).
National Science Foundation, Research and development in industry,
various years.
New York Times (1986), "7 Competing to Build Fighter," February 20.
Reppy, J. (1977), "Defense department payments for 'company-financed'
R&D," Research Policy 6, pp. 396-410.

