                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 CULTURE AND INSTITUTIONS

                                           Alberto Alesina
                                           Paola Giuliano

                                        Working Paper 19750
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19750


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2013




We thank Benjamin Friedman and Andrei Shleifer for useful conversations and Janet Currie, Steven
Durlauf, and six anonymous referees for excellent comments. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Alberto Alesina and Paola Giuliano. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Culture and Institutions
Alberto Alesina and Paola Giuliano
NBER Working Paper No. 19750
December 2013, Revised December 2014
JEL No. P16,Z1

                                             ABSTRACT

A growing body of empirical work measuring different types of cultural traits has shown that culture
matters for a variety of economic outcomes. This paper focuses on one specific aspect of the relevance
of culture: its relationship to institutions. We review work with a theoretical, empirical, and historical
bent to assess the presence of a two-way causal effect between culture and institutions.


Alberto Alesina
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center 210
Cambridge, MA 02138
and IGIER
and also NBER
aalesina@harvard.edu

Paola Giuliano
Anderson School of Management
UCLA
110 Westwood Plaza
C517 Entrepreneurs Hall
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and IZA
and also NBER
paola.giuliano@anderson.ucla.edu
    1. Introduction
         Recent research demonstrates that cultural variables determine many economic choices—
they even affect the speed of development and the wealth of nations.2 Researchers are now striving
to better understand the mechanisms.
         In this paper, we investigate what we know about one specific mechanism: the relationship
between culture and institutions. Both terms are often vague in the literature; we devote space to
defining them properly, and we also sum up how various authors have defined them differently.
         Culture and institutions are endogenous variables, determined, possibly, by geography,
technology, epidemics, wars, and other historical shocks. Can any causal link between the two be
established? How do culture and institutions interact?
         One notable study—by Putnam et al. (1993), on social capital in Italy—illustrates how
complex these issues are. Putnam and his colleagues took advantage of a natural experiment
involving an institutional reform: in the early 1970s, Italy’s central government established 15 new
regional governments. 3 Ideally, they would function identically throughout the country, but in
practice they didn’t. The discrepancy was most pronounced between the center-north and the south.
Putnam and his colleagues hypothesized that the variance was due to regional differences in levels of
cooperation, participation, social interaction, and trust—four key “social capital” traits. They argued
that these regional differences—dating back at least as far back as the 12th century—are a function
of whether the given region had experienced the institution of free cities. Free cities developed a
form of early participatory democracy, generating a feeling of belonging to a polity, whose
functioning could guarantee both protection from aggression and the provision of public goods. As
a result, citizens of free cities developed a deep sense of civic and cooperative behavior, a cultural
trait they transmitted from generation to generation.
         Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2013) formally tested this hypothesis, finding considerable
support for it. A contemporary Italian city’s social capital, a “cultural” variable determining the
success or failure of its institutions, correlates with its historical experience as a free city in the
Middle Ages. Thus, an institutional variable, the free-city arrangement, influenced a long-lasting
cultural change that still affects Italy’s local governments. If cultural values were not so persistent,

2
  Several economics papers have investigated what are the cultural traits relevant for development, their persistence and
their historical origins. Several surveys have analyzed some of these aspects [see Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2006)
and Fernandez (2008, 2011)]. For an informal treatment of the question of how cultural values affect development, see
Landes (1998).
3 The reform, which implemented an article originally approved in the 1945 constitution, can be reasonably construed as

independent of regional development.

                                                           2
being a free city in the 12th century would have nothing do with today’s institutions. At the same
time, this long-lasting cultural trait was sparked by early forms of local self-determination, an
institutional feature.
           The experience of a free city in the Middle Ages is clearly not an exogenous variable. For
example, even within central and northern cities, there is variation regarding which cities could more
easily become free, due to geographic features that made them more or less capable of defending
themselves against the emperor. Like geography, many other factors could have determined the
relative efficiency of local governments in Italy. Yet, the complex interaction between culture and
institutions is interesting, regardless of the “ultimate” causes.
           Those who study culture are well aware of the importance of institutions and, as we
document below, they try as well as they can to isolate the effect of culture from institutions—
probably because the importance of institutions is fairly well established.4 Since cultural economics is
in its infancy, those who write about institutions don’t seem to worry much about whether
institutions are well identified and isolated from cultural influences, which may be problematic.
Some may argue that culture is a vague variable and difficult to measure. One of our ancillary goals
here is to try to clarify these definitional issues.
           The rest of our paper is structured as follows. In section 2, we define what culture means in
the economic literature, and how it is measured. Many contributions to the literature since the last
two surveys discuss the relevance of culture on economic outcomes. Thus, we provide a map of the
main cultural traits used in economics and their correlations. We also provide definitions and
measurements of formal institutions. In section 3, we scrutinize the relationship between culture and
institutions, first by reviewing existing empirical and theoretical literature that shows how culture can
affect formal institutions, and then by reviewing recent studies that show how formal institutions
affect culture. Then, we document the interplay between culture and formal institutions and review
the literature on how they jointly determine economic development.


      2. Definitions and measurement of culture and institutions
           2.1. Definitions of culture
           Defining culture is an arduous task. We start by providing a definition, distinguishing
between empirical and theoretical definitions of culture. The reason for the distinction is that the
mapping between empirical and theoretical concepts is often not straightforward.

4   Various controversies remain regarding how, where, and in what sense institutions matter. See Glaeser et al. (2004).

                                                              3
         On the empirical side, most papers (if not all) follow the definition adopted by Guiso,
Sapienza, and Zingales (2006), where culture is defined as “those customary beliefs and values that
ethnic, religious, and social groups transmit fairly unchanged from generation to generation.”
Empirical papers, therefore, combine values and beliefs in the same definition.
         On the theoretical side, values and beliefs are often treated differently. Several authors have
developed models in which culture means beliefs about the consequences of one’s actions, but
where these beliefs can be manipulated by earlier generations or by experimentation. For example,
Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2008b) show how individual beliefs are initially acquired through
cultural transmission and then slowly updated through experience, from one generation to the next.
They use an overlapping generation model, in which children absorb their trust priors from their
parents and then, after gaining real-world experience, transmit their updated beliefs to their own
children. In this setting, multiple equilibria are possible. In the no-trust-no-trade equilibrium, beliefs
of mistrust are transmitted from parents to children, who eventually shun trade and therefore do
not learn about the trustworthiness of the population. Conversely, in the high-trust-high-trade
equilibrium, parents transmit trust beliefs to their children, which encourages trade and learning
about the true trustworthiness in the population. A temporary shock to trust can move a society
permanently from one equilibrium to the other. Greif (1994) integrates game-theory and
sociological concepts to define the relevance of cultural beliefs. In his view, “sociologists and
anthropologists consider the organization of society to be a reflection of its culture, an important
component of which is cultural beliefs. Cultural beliefs are the ideas and thoughts common to
several people that govern interaction—between these people and between them, their gods, and
other groups—and differ from knowledge in that they are not empirically discovered or analytically
proved. In general, cultural beliefs become identical and commonly maintained, and
communicated.” Greif asserts there is a subset of “rational cultural beliefs, which capture people’s
expectations with respect to actions that others will take in various contingencies. … Past cultural
beliefs that sustain Nash equilibria provide focal points in repeated social interactions or when
there are multiple equilibria.”5
         Still others view culture as a more primitive phenomenon embodied in values and
preferences (see, for example, Akerlof and Kranton, 2000). This definition, also used in psychology
(Pinker, 1997; Kaplow and Shavell, 2007) emphasizes the role of emotions in motivating human

5The importance of focal points was also recognized by Schelling (1960), who describes “focal points for each person’s
expectation of what the other expects him to expect to be expected to do.”

                                                          4
behavior.
            The two interpretations are not mutually exclusive. Benabou (2008) shows that values and
beliefs interact systematically. He incorporates “mental constructs” into a political-economy model
and shows that these mental constructs interact with institutions to generate different beliefs, which
could persist over time.
            Empirical investigation of the relevance of culture on economic outcomes is fairly new in
economics. So far, the goal of most cultural economics papers has been to establish the relevance
of culture. Economists have devoted scant attention to disentangling differences between a belief
and a value component. The term culture, thus far, has been ambiguous, indicating both values and
beliefs.6
            For example, views differ on inequality and redistribution. Luttmer and Singhal (2011)
highlight the “value component” and show a strong cultural persistence in the formation of
preferences for redistribution by documenting a correlation between preferences for redistribution
among second-generation immigrants and preferences for redistribution in the country of origin. 7
Meanwhile, Alesina and Fuchs-Schündeln (2007) and Giuliano and Spilimbergo (2014) have shown
that preferences for redistribution can be affected by political regimes or macroeconomic shocks—
emphasizing the beliefs aspect of culture.
            Similar ambiguity exists in recent studies of the role of women in society. Alesina, Giuliano,
and Nunn (2013) emphasize the value components of attitudes about women’s participation in the
labor force, by showing a strong correlation between female labor force today and female
participation in agriculture in preindustrial societies; the origin of which originated in differences in




6 Culture is a relevant concept in many other disciplines. An important paper in anthropology (Geertz, 1973) posits that

culture is “a historically transmitted pattern of meanings embodied in symbols, a system of inherited conceptions
expressed in symbolic forms by means of which men communicate, perpetuate, and develop their knowledge about
and their attitudes toward life.” Kinship, too, has been seen as a symbolic system and social institution. Another view in
anthropology (Boyd and Richerson, 1985, 2005) is perhaps closer to the definition in economics. The authors define
culture as decision-making heuristics or rules of thumb that have evolved to serve our need to make decisions in
complex and uncertain environments. Using theoretical models, the authors show that if acquiring information is either
costly or imperfect, using heuristics or rules of thumb in decision making can arise optimally. By relying on general
beliefs, values, or gut feelings about the right thing to do in different situations, people may not always behave
optimally, but they do save on the costs of obtaining information they need to always behave optimally. Culture refers
to these decision-making heuristics, which typically manifest themselves as values, beliefs, or social norms. If decision-
making heuristics manifest themselves as values, beliefs, or social norms, this definition could be similar to the one
used in empirical papers such as Guiso et al. (2006).
7 Alesina and Glaeser (2004) relate this view to long-lasting differences in views about poverty that differentiate, for

instance, Americans from Europeans.

                                                            5
agricultural technologies hundreds of years ago. 8 Meanwhile, Fogli and Veldkamp (2011) and
Fernandez (2013) emphasize a beliefs component to explain the increase in female labor-force
participation over time. These two papers—which independently investigate how changes in
culture generate changes in female labor-force participation over time—present a dynamic model
of culture in which people hold heterogeneous beliefs regarding the relative long-run payoff for
women who work in the market versus those who work at home. Both papers conclude that female
labor-force participation has increased over time as beliefs evolve due to intergenerational learning.9
         2.2. Definitions of formal institutions
         North (1990) defines institutions as “the humanly devised constraints that structure human
interactions. They are made up of formal constraints (rules, laws, constitutions), informal constrains
(norms of behavior, convention, and self-imposed codes of conduct), and their enforcement
characteristics.” In North’s theory, formal rules are created by the polity, whereas informal norms
are “part of the heritage that we call culture.” Institutions, he says, are “the rules of the game.”
Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2006) define institutions as mechanisms through which social
choices are determined and implemented; they distinguish between economic institutions and
political institutions. The latter are mechanisms for the distribution of political power across
different socioeconomic groups. Political power, in turn, determines economic institutions. For
example, in Acemoglu (2003) institutions are represented by an indicator denoting which political
pressure group in a given set has the power to control social choice. Institutional change is then the
result of voluntary concessions by the controlling group, possibly under the threat of social contract.
         Greif (2006a) defines an institution as “a system of social factors that conjointly generates a
regularity of behavior”—by “social factors,” he means “man-made, nonphysical factors that are
exogenous to each person they influence,” including “rules, beliefs, norms, and organizations.”
         The two definitions are somewhat related, with one main difference. In North’s definition,
the rules of the game are distinct from the way the game is played. Greif, on the other hand, does
not regard institutions as exogenously specified rules. Instead, he treats institutions as endogenous,


8 For another example on how differences in technology can affect norms, see Fernandez-Villaverde et al. (forthcoming).
The authors construct a model of altruistic parents exercising a direct socializing effort on their daughters, at a cost, that
rationalizes how technological improvement in contraception leads to a greater incidence in premarital sex and to a
change in sexual mores.
9 Cultural differences are not the only factors that explain female labor-force participation. The literature highlights

competing stories, such as the importance of technological progress in home production, like the dishwasher
(Greenwood, Seshadri, and Yorugoklu, 2005), or medical progress (Albanesi and Olivetti, 2009). For other explanations
of changes in female labor-force participation, see Galor and Weil (1996), Costa (2000), and Goldin and Katz (2002).
For a summary of the history of female labor-force participation, see Goldin (1990).

                                                              6
emphasizing that the behavior of actors who enforce the rules of the game must be explained by
institutions. According to Greif, institutions represent equilibria of a game rather that the rules of
the game.
        The problem with both definitions of institutions is that they overlap too much with
culture, as “norms” and “conventions” are used to define both institutions and culture. This is
especially true for Grief’s definition, which we find too broad and hard to quantify.
        Given this ambiguity, measuring culture and institutions separately would be possible only
if one counts formal institutions (formal legal systems, formal regulation) as institutions. Thus,
when we describe our measurement and when we review the literature on the interaction between
culture and institutions, we refer to culture as values and beliefs (one could say informal rules) and
to institutions as formal institutions. (This approach is also followed in most of the empirical papers
trying to disentangle the two concepts.)
        Semantically speaking, we find it counterproductive and confusing to label culture (meaning
values and beliefs) as informal institutions. We find it confusing to label “everything”—from, say,
the level of reciprocal trust in a society to constitutional rules about voting systems—as institutions.
Clearly—this is the crux of our paper—culture (or informal institutions) and formal institutions are
interrelated, but the label “informal institutions” implies that formal institutions determine informal
ones and that the latter are of secondary importance. Once we agree that formal and informal
institutions interact, and that either one may cause the other, then identifying certain values and
beliefs as culture or informal institutions becomes merely a matter of semantics. We prefer the term
culture over informal institutions; we find it more appropriate and less confusing. Similarly, for brevity,
we sometimes refer to formal institutions simply as institutions. Formal and informal institutions (or
culture, as we prefer to call them) can be complementary and can interact. Think, for instance,
about legal formal institutions and trust. The former work better in a society with a high level of
trust, at the very least because with more trust comes less litigation. Or, different cultural traits
about the family and the relationships between its members affect the legal organization of the
welfare state. In fact, the main theme of the present paper is precisely the study of the interaction
between formal institutions and culture.
        2.3 Measurement
        Economists have measured culture in three ways: by using survey data; by looking at
second-generation immigrants to isolate the impact of culture, holding constant the economic and
institutional environment; and by collecting experimental evidence. Fernandez (2008) details the

                                                     7
three approaches at length. We discuss them briefly below, then turn our attention to survey data,
the most commonly used method for studying the interaction between culture and institutions.10
         The most common tool for measuring culture is through survey questions11: the answers to
which are aggregated at the country level to measure values and beliefs. 12 These country-level
summaries are then correlated with economic outcomes (see Knack and Keefer, 1997, for the
relationship between trust and income).13 Drawbacks to this approach include reverse causality and
omitted variables. Economists have tried solving these problems in several ways, with varying
success: Gorodnichenko et al. (2013a, 2013b), Guiso et al. (2009), and Alesina et al. (2013)) used
instrumental variables, though the exclusion restriction has been problematic. Tabellini (2010) and
Duranton et al. (2009) constructed cultural variables at the regional level, using country fixed
effects to capture omitted cross-country differences. Tabellini (2010) has also used regional
instruments to solve the problem of reverse causality and omitted variables at the regional level;
however, despite progress, this does not solve the exclusion restriction problem. Alesina et al.
(2013) went one step further, not only examining variation across countries and subnational
districts but also using within-country variation controlling for subnational-district fixed effects.14
         The second way of measuring the role of culture, holding institutions constant, is to look at
the way immigrants from different countries behave in the same destination country, typically (but
not always) the United States. This approach should capture vertical transmission of cultural traits.15
The literature has been using mostly second-generation immigrants, who constitute a more


10 Many recent papers have investigated the historical determinants of culture. Nathan (2009, 2013) summarizes the main
determinants in six different groups: historical U.S. migration, traditional farming practices, the slave trade, European
history, religion, and early-childhood experiences or various episodes in a person’s life. See Nunn (2009, 2013) for all the
relevant references. A recent literature has also looked at the deep roots of inter-generationally transmitted traits. For a
general discussion on this topic, see Spolaore and Wacziarg (2013).
11 The World Values Survey is the tool most commonly used for cross-country comparison. Other barometers—the

Latino Barometer, Asian Barometer, Eurobarometer, and Afrobarometer, for example—focus on specific regions of the
world. For the United States, it’s the General Social Survey.
12 Another approach to calculating culture at the country level consists of taking the coefficients of the country fixed

effects of a regression where the left-hand-side variable is the cultural value/belief after controlling for various
individual-level characteristics. This approach solves concerns that the country-level average fails to capture the age
composition of the population, differences in human capital, and so on.
13 Most papers, starting from Knack and Keefer (1997), follow this strategy. For a review, see Guiso et al. (2006). For

other more recent examples, see Aghion et al. (2010), Alesina et al. (forthcoming), Alesina and Giuliano (2010, 2011b,
2013), Alesina, Giuliano, and Nunn (2013), Galasso and Profeta (2012), Guiso et al. (2009), Luttmer and Singhal (2011),
Pinotti (2012), and Gorodnichenko et al. (2013a, 2013b).
14 The authors use evidence from eight different census datasets, linking each ethnic group to its historical agricultural

technology. As the link with culture is made at the individual level, they can control for subnational district
characteristics.
15 See Bisin and Verdier (2001) for a model of vertical transmission and Bisin and Verdier (2011) for a general review of

various channels of cultural transmission.

                                                             8
appropriate sample than first-generation immigrants because issues of disruption and selection due
to migration are more attenuated. Though the issue of selection due to migration is mitigated, it
could still be a concern. Different groups immigrated for different reasons and at different times,
hence the nature of self-selection differs. Most papers discuss how the nature of self-selection biases
the results.
         This approach involves running regressions where the left-hand-side variable is the outcome
among second-generation immigrants and the dependent variable is the same outcome in the
country of origin. The regressions show the relevance of culture, holding institutions constant, since
immigrants face the same institutional environment. Persistence of cultural traits among second-
generation immigrants has been found for female labor-force participation (Alesina and Giuliano,
2010; Fernandez and Fogli, 2010).16 Giuliano (2007) shows that living at home with parents is also a
cultural trait that immigrants bring with themselves. Luttmer and Singhal (2011) look at preferences
for redistribution and find that immigrants from societies where the welfare state is more generous
maintain those preferences in their destination countries.17 Grosjean (forthcoming) shows that crime
levels in U.S. counties today correlate to the settlement of the counties by herders from Scotland.
The percentage of Scottish-Irish immigrants is a proxy for the prevalence of a “culture of honor”
and the associated violence that were transmitted from generation to generation. In this case, the
percentage of immigrants of a certain origin can be seen as a proxy for certain cultural beliefs.18
         By observing people from different countries in the same institutional environment, the
evidence coming from the study of second-generation immigrants shows that some cultural traits
travel with people when they move to a society with different institutions and values. Therefore,
cultural values are persistent; when immigrants move to a place with different institutions,
overwhelmingly their cultural values change gradually, if ever, but rarely within two generations.
         Giavazzi et al. (2014) go further, presenting evidence on the speed of evolution (or lack
thereof) of a wide range of values and beliefs of different generations of European immigrants to
the United States. This paper is the first to provide evidence of transmission beyond the second

16 Fernandez and Fogli (2010) find similar results for fertility.
17 The authors use data from the European Social Survey and study immigrants in 26 destination countries.
18 On the relationship between a culture of honor in the United States and the presence of Scottish-Irish immigrants, see

Nisbett et al. (1996). A different view on the culture of honor in the South is proposed by Wyatt-Brown (1982, 2001).
The author sees the ethos of honor at the heart of the traditional southern culture. According to the author, the defense
of slavery was compelled by commitment to honor and duty and cannot be explained simply by material interests and
racial imperatives. Christian religious thoughts and sentiments were also central to southern life (proslavery arguments
often drew on biblical literalism). These pillars of race and religion in turn supported secession and strengthened the will
to fight in the Civil War. The legacy of dishonor and humiliation that came with the Confederate defeat gave rise to the
white racist rage that erupted in the 1890s.

                                                             9
generation. They find that persistence differs greatly across cultural attitudes. Moreover, their study
of higher-generation immigrants supports both evolving and persistent traits, while limiting the
analysis to the second generation unduly emphasizes persistence. Further research is needed to
understand which cultural traits persist (and why) and which tend to disappear more quickly.
         Experimental evidence—the third tool for measuring the role of culture—has shown how
people from different cultures behave differently when playing trust, public good, and ultimatum or
dictator games. The classic reference is Henrich et al.’s (2001) study of small-scale societies. A
critical issue with the experimental evidence is the external validity: How much can be generalized by
games played with small groups and extrapolate general conclusions from them about a country, an
ethnic group etc.?
         Experiments constitute an additional resource to measure cultural values such as trust, in
addition to the subjective measures that can be obtained by survey data. We will review this literature
more closely in section 3, where we look at the interaction between culture and institutions.
         We turn our attention now to the cultural traits that have so far received the most attention
in the empirical literature. In describing these variables, we refer to culture as both preferences and
beliefs, without distinguishing between the two; this is the approach taken in most papers that used
these measures.
Generalized trust
         The most studied cultural trait is generalized trust toward others, where others refers to
people the respondent does not know.19 The importance of this trait cannot be overemphasized.
Arrow (1972) writes, “Virtually every commercial transaction has within itself an element of trust,
certainly any transaction conducted over a period of time. It can be plausibly argued that much of
the economic backwardness in the world can be explained by the lack of mutual confidence.”
         This variable is measured in two ways: with surveys and laboratory experiments. In surveys,
the question typically is, “Generally speaking, would you say that most people can be trusted or that
you can’t be too careful when dealing with others?” Possible answers are typically either, “Most
people can be trusted” or “Need to be very careful.” This question can be found in such surveys as
the World Values Survey (WVS), the General Social Survey (GSS), and the European Social Survey,



19 Many surveys ask questions regarding trust toward various institutions such as parliaments, governments, large
corporations, and banks. While in part the response to these questions may reflect cultural biases, they may simply
measure the efficiency or corruption of these institutions. We don’t consider these variables in this paper. We discuss the
issue of trust within a family, in the context of our treatment of cultural values regarding the family.

                                                            10
and in most of the Barometers (the Latino Barometer, the Afrobarometer, the Asian Barometer,
etc.).20
           Individual characteristics such as education are positively correlated with trust. Historically
discriminated-against minorities (African Americans, for one) have lower levels of generalized trust
(Alesina and La Ferrara, 2000). Uslaner (2005) has shown that trust is a moral value, a persistent
individual feature that doesn’t depend much on life experiences.21
           Trust travels less well across than within racial or nationality groups. The level of trust is
lower in ethnically diverse U.S. cities (Alesina and La Ferrara, 2000, 2002) and neighborhoods
(Putnam, 2000). Also, people tend to trust members of their own nationality more than they trust
foreigners (Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales 2009).22
           Trust affects economic development (Knack and Keefer, 1997), individual performance
(Butler et al., 2014),23 financial development, participation in the stock market, and trade (see Guiso,
Sapienza, and Zingales, 2004, 2008a, 2009), innovation (Fukuyama, 1995), and firm productivity
(Bloom, Sadun, and Van Reenen, 2012; La Porta et al., 1997). For a review of the impact of trust on
various economic outcomes, see Algan and Cahuc (2013).
           The second way of measuring trust is with experiments, primarily trust games. The most
common is a two-player, sequential-moves game of perfect information in which the first mover, the
“sender,” endowed with some fixed amount of money, chooses how much money to send to the
second mover, the “receiver.” Any money sent is increased by the experimenter according to a


20
   In most studies, this measure has been used as a proxy for social capital, i.e., “those persistent and shared beliefs and
values that help a group overcome the free rider problem in the pursuit of socially valuable activities” (see Fukuyama,
1995; Putnam, 2000; and Guiso et al., 2011). Another definition of social capital involves its relationship with networks.
Coleman (1988), for example, discusses closure in social networks, emphasizing the ability of small groups to monitor
and pressure each other to behave. According to the closure argument, social capital is created by a network of strongly
interconnected elements. A broader view of social capital is summarized in Durlauf and Fafchamps (2005), who
distinguish “three main underlying ideas: (1) social capital generates positive externalities for members of a group; (2)
these externalities are achieved through shared trust, norms, and values, and their consequent effects on expectations
and behavior; (3) shared trust, norms, and values arise from informal forms of organizations based on social networks
and associations. The study of social capital is that of network-based processes that generate beneficial outcomes
through norms and trust.”
21 He supports his claim by using two panel surveys—the 1972-74-76 American National Election Study (ANES) and

the 1965-1973-1982 Parent-Child Socialization Study. Two-thirds of young people and more than 70% of their parents
were consistent trusters or mistrusters.
22 These authors also show that this feature of trust may explain various forms of “home bias” observed in portfolio

composition and various financial transactions.
23 Whereas at the aggregate level a positive correlation exists between trust and economic development, at the individual

level the relationship is hump-shaped. Butler et al. (2014) hypothesize that highly trusting people tend to assume too
much social risk and thus be cheated more often, ultimately performing less well than people closer to the mean
trustworthiness of the population. At the other end of the spectrum, people with overly pessimistic beliefs avoid being
cheated but give up profitable opportunities, and thus underperform.

                                                            11
commonly known function before being allocated to the receiver. The receiver then chooses to
return any amount to the sender, ending the game. With purely own-money-maximizing players, the
Subgame Perfect Nash Equilibrium of this one-shot game is simple: receivers never return any
money and consequently senders never send any money. The sender’s behavior is used as a measure
of trust, whereas the receiver’s behavior proxies for trustworthiness. Only with trust and
trustworthiness can the pair hope to increase profits. In fact, in many such experiments people
“trust” each other and cooperate.24
         A large experimental literature has distinguished between trust toward fellow group
members versus out-group members, and trust within and outside the clan. In myriad studies on
trust toward group members versus out-group members—in which participants were divided into
groups with trivially defined distinctions 25 —participants were willing to share more money or
cooperate more with in-group members than with out-group members (Eckel and Grossman, 2005;
Charness, Rigotti, and Rustichini, 2007; Chen and Li, 2009; Chen and Chen, 2010; and Butler, 2013).
The results are similar when people belong to groups defined according to deeply rooted
distinctions. In a classic study of trust in the clan (Fershtman and Gneezy, 2001), participants play a
trust game with opponents of distinct ethnic affiliations. The experiment took place in Israel, with
two ethnic groups: Ashkenazic Jews, the descendants of European Jews, and Eastern Jews, the
descendants of African and Asian Jews. The authors found that the amount of money transferred to
Eastern Jews was significantly lower than that transferred to Ashkenazic Jews. Further, mistrust of
Eastern Jews was common not only among Ashkenazic Jews but also among Eastern Jews
themselves.26
         Cross-country studies find that people tend to trust their compatriots more than they do
people from other nationalities (Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales, 2009). The authors also highlight
significant differences in how a certain country is “trusted” on average by foreigners, consistent with
a trustworthiness interpretation of trust (Greeks, at the bottom of the distribution, are trusted much
less than Swedes, who are near the top of the trust distribution). These differences in bilateral trust
are crucial for explaining various types of international financial transactions and trade.

24 For a discussion on the correlation between survey measures of trust and laboratory measures of trust, see Glaeser et
al. (2000) and Fehr et al. (2002).
25 The experimental literature focuses on trivially defined distinctions (such as expressed preferences between pairs of

abstract paintings by Klee and Kandisky) because the experimental method is driven by the search for the minimal group,
or the weakest cohesion that will produce discriminatory behavior. The aim here is to understand whether group
behavior is a generic human trait, rather than the outcome of blood, religion, or other deeply rooted traditions.
26 Other studies on the trust game played among observable cultural groups are Bornhorst et al. (2010), Fershtman et al.

(2005), and Willinger et al. (2003).

                                                          12
Individualism versus collectivism
         Several contributions (Greif, 1994; Gorodnichenko et al., 2013a, 2013b) have focused their
attention on one specific dimension of culture: individualism versus collectivism. Many cross-
cultural psychologists consider this the main dimension of cultural variation across countries (Heine,
2008). Gorodnichenko and Roland (2013a) explain why individualism can be relevant for growth. By
emphasizing personal freedom and achievement, individualism awards social status to personal
accomplishments such as innovation. At the same time, this trait can make collective action more
difficult because people pursue their own interests without internalizing collective interests.
Collectivism, on the contrary, makes collective action easier, because people are more able to
internalize group interests, but, by encouraging conformity, discourages innovation. To show that
individualism is good for growth, the authors built an endogenous growth model that captures the
trade-off between the two traits.
         The commonly used measure for individualism comes from Hofstede (2001). Individualism,
measured in different societies by interviewing IBM employees in 30 countries, indicates the degree
to which people are integrated into groups. In individualistic societies, personal achievements and
individual rights are stressed. People are expected to stand up for themselves and their immediate
family, and to choose their own affiliations. In contrast, in collectivistic societies, people act
predominantly as members of a cohesive, lifelong group or organization. 27 Another measure of
individualism has been developed by cross-cultural psychologist Shalom Schwartz (1992). He calls
the measure of individualism “mastery,” the importance of getting ahead by being self-assertive.28

27 In addition to individualism, Hofstede (2001) studies four other orthogonal cultural dimensions: power distance,
masculinity, uncertainty avoidance, and long-term orientation. Power distance focuses on the degree of equality, or
inequality, between people in a given country. It represents the extent to which the less powerful members of
organizations and institutions accept that power is distributed unequally. Masculinity reflects the degree to which a
society reinforces the traditional masculine-work role model of male achievement, control, and power. The assertive pole
has been called “masculine” and the caring pole “feminine.” Uncertainty avoidance captures a society’s attitude toward
uncertainty, while long-term orientation is associated with such values as thrift and perseverance as opposed to respect
for tradition and fulfilling social obligation, which are associated with short-term orientation. Hofstede’s measures have
faced criticism, but they constitute by far the most used and cited cultural framework in international business,
management, and applied psychology. Hofstede’s cultural database has been expanded to almost 80 countries. The most
current version of the data is available at http://www.geert-hofstede.com/.
28 Schwartz (1992) identified a set of 45 individual values recognized across cultures, covering all value dimensions

needed to explain intercountry cultural variation. He subsequently surveyed school teachers and college students from 67
countries, averaged the scores on each of the 45 values, and identified seven dimensions along which national cultures
could differ. These dimensions are conservatism, intellectual autonomy, affective autonomy, hierarchy, egalitarian
commitment, mastery, and harmony. Conservatism represents a culture’s emphasis on maintaining the status quo, and
on restraining actions or desires that may disrupt the solidarity of the group or the traditional order. Intellectual and
affective autonomy refer to the extent to which people are free to independently pursue their own ideas and intellectual
directions, and their affective desires, respectively. Hierarchy denotes the extent to which it is legitimate to distribute
power, roles, and resources unequally. Egalitarian commitment refers to the extent to which people are inclined to

                                                            13
Family ties
         Another important cultural value is the relevance of family ties in society. Banfield (1958)
and Coleman (1990) focus on different cultural traits regarding family values. Both authors notice
that societies based on strong ties among family members tend to promote codes of good conduct
within small circles of related persons (family or kin); in these societies, selfish behavior is
considered acceptable outside the small network. On the contrary, societies based on weak ties
promote good conduct outside the small family/kin network, enabling one to identify oneself with a
society of abstract individuals or abstract institutions.
         Alesina and Giuliano (2010) measure the strength of family ties using three WVS questions,
capturing beliefs on the importance of the family in a person’s life, the duties and responsibilities of
parents and children, and the love and respect for one’s own parents. This measure is used to study
the impact of culture on a variety of outcomes, including labor-force participation of women, young
adults, and the elderly; political participation; measures of generalized trust; household production;
and geographical mobility (see Alesina and Giuliano, 2010, 2011b, 2013). Basically, societies that rely
too much on the family have less generalized trust and lower civic sense. In addition, according to
the “male breadwinner hypothesis,” societies with strong family ties tend to have greater home
production, mostly done by women, young adults, and older people. Additional measures of family
ties can be derived by objective measures such as frequency of contact between family members or
how close to the parents children live after they leave their parental house. For instance, in Spain,
Greece, and Italy, about 70% of children live less than five kilometers from their parents’ home,
while in Denmark the figure is less than 30%.29
         Strong family ties are also at the core of industrial structures based on family firms. Using a
measure of family ties similar to the one used by Alesina and Giuliano (2010), Bertrand and Schoar
(2006) show that in cultures with strong family ties, family capitalism is more common and a larger
percentage of firms are family businesses. 30 The authors show that this industrial structure is
suboptimal: nepotism in hiring normally decreases the average quality of the firm; in addition,
managers, who are normally family members, tend to be too risk-averse. Finally, on average, family



voluntarily put aside selfish interests to promote the welfare of others. Mastery expresses the importance of getting
ahead by being self-assertive, while harmony denotes the importance of fitting harmoniously into the environment.
29 See Alesina, Algan, Cahuc, and Giuliano (forthcoming).
30 A family business is one in which a family holds control of a company, either by not trading it publicly or by holding a

majority stake if it is publicly traded. See also Caselli and Gennaioli (2011) for evidence regarding inefficiencies in the
management of family firms.

                                                            14
firms tend to remain smaller. Several studies looking at European and Latin American countries
show that, on average, family firms perform less well than nonfamily firms.
         Greif (2005, 2006b) uses the distinction between nuclear family and extended kinship groups
to study how the nuclear family in medieval times helped establish and grow corporations. Extended
kinship groups helped facilitate trade and establish trust-based relationships. Greif and Tabellini
(2012) show that the presence of the nuclear family in Europe as opposed to the clan (a group
consisting of families that traced their patrilineal descent back to one common ancestor, who settled
in a given locality) in China was a key to explaining divergent patterns of urbanization in Europe and
China.
         Todd (1983, 1990) argues that different forms of family structures explain the diffusion of or
resistance to social changes in Europe, including Protestantism, secularism, and the acceptance and
diffusion of communism. Todd characterizes family types along two dimensions: vertical and
horizontal. The vertical relationship—between parents and children—is either “liberal,” if children
become independent from their parents at an early age and leave their parental home as soon as they
get married, or “authoritarian,” if children continue to depend on their parents in adulthood and still
live with them after marrying. The horizontal relationship—between siblings—is either “egalitarian,”
when siblings receive an equal share of family wealth after their parents’ death, or “non-egalitarian,”
when parents favor one offspring at the expense of the others and transmit family wealth only to
one child.
         Todd’s two dimensions yield four possible types of family organization: the absolute nuclear
family (liberal vertical relationship; non-egalitarian horizontal relationship), the egalitarian nuclear family
(liberal; egalitarian), the stem family (authoritarian; non-egalitarian), and the communitarian family
(authoritarian; egalitarian). 31 Absolute nuclear families are widespread in the United States, the
United Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand, the Netherlands, and Denmark. Egalitarian nuclear
families are prevalent in Italy, Spain, Greece, Portugal, Romania, Poland, Latin America, and
Ethiopia. Stem families are common in Austria, Germany, Sweden, Norway, the Czech Republic,
Belgium, Luxembourg, Ireland, Japan, Korea, and Israel. Communitarian families are common in




31
  Todd's family classification is based on historical monographs dating back to the Middle Ages, throughout Western
Europe. These monographs were collected by the church or other legal powers to track their local population and levy
taxes. When Todd combined these historical monographs with census data from the 1950s, he found that the four
family arrangements have persisted throughout Europe since the Middle Ages.

                                                        15
Russia, Bulgaria, Finland, Hungary, Albania, China, Vietnam, Cuba, Indonesia, and India.32 Todd
provides no empirical analysis, but his historical narrative, with some descriptive statistics, describes
the various family systems and how they could be related to political and economic outcomes.
         Duranton et al. (2009) use Todd’s classification of family ties to explain regional disparities
across Europe in household sizes, educational attainment, social capital, labor-force participation,
sectoral structure, wealth, and inequality. Galasso and Profeta (2012) use Todd’s classification to
show that family structures are crucial for explaining different types of pension systems, and that
Todd’s definition of nuclear and extended family is strongly correlated to the measure of family ties
defined in Alesina and Giuliano (2010).33
Generalized morality
         Tabellini (2008a, 2010) measures the relevance of generalized morality and limited morality
in fostering economic development. “Limited morality” exists where cooperative behavior is
extended only toward immediate family members; “generalized morality” exists where cooperative
behavior is extended toward everyone in society. The idea comes from Platteau (2000), who posited
that “in hierarchical societies, codes of good conduct and honest behavior are confined to small
circles of related people (such as members of the family or the clan). Outside this small network,
opportunistic and highly selfish behavior is regarded as natural and morally acceptable. By contrast,
in modern democratic societies the rules of good conduct are valid in all social situations, not only in



32 In his provocative book On the Origin of English Individualism, Macfarlane (1978) distinguishes two “ideal types” of
societies based on different family structures: the peasant society, based on the extended household, self-sufficient
villages, limited geographical and social mobility, early marriage arranged by the family, high fertility because children are
an economic asset, and patriarchal and communal moral values; and the modern society, based on the nuclear family,
production for trade, interdependence of towns, controlled fertility, late marriage, and moral individualism. His main
idea was that England displayed most of the features of modernity at least as far back as the 14th century. Therefore,
there was no transition to modernity.
33 A voluminous literature in anthropology has focused on other types of societal organizations, such as the clan (a

unilineal group of relatives living in one locality), the kin group (a collection of various clans that comprises “socially
recognized relationships based on supposed as well as actual genealogical ties” [Winick, 1956, page 302]) or the ethnic
group (“a group that entertains a subjective belief in their common descent because of similarities of physical type or of
customs or both, or because of memories of colonization and migration. This belief must be important for group
formation; furthermore it does not matter whether an objective blood relationship exists” [Weber, 1978, page 389]). For
more on the relationship between kinship groups and economic outcomes, see La Ferrara and Milazzo (2011) on how
kinship differences in inheritance rules can affect economic outcomes; Fafchamps (2000) and Fisman (2003) on how
belonging to the same clan affects access to credit; Luke-Munshi (2006) on how belonging to the same clan increases the
probability of employment and of finding high-paying jobs. For a review on the relevance of kinship ties in development,
see La Ferrara (2010). Further, interesting experimental evidence shows how differences in kinship ties affect behavior in
trust and ultimatum games. Barr (2004), for example, compared two groups of villages in Zimbabwe: a group of villages
set up in 1997 as resettlements consisting almost entirely of unrelated households and a control group of non-resettled
villages made up almost exclusively of kin. She found lower levels of trust in resettled villages, which she interprets as a
result of lower density in kinship ties.

                                                             16
a small network of friends and relatives.” This idea is related to (possibly extended) family ties and
also collectivist versus individualistic societies.34
         To measure generalized morality, Tabellini (2008a) combines using a principal component
analysis two questions taken from the WVS: a measure of generalized trust (as described above) and
the value attached to respect for other people as a fundamental belief that should be transmitted
from parents to children. In a companion paper, Tabellini (2010) combines questions on four
measures, including trust, respect for other people, the importance of obedience as one of the
qualities that parents should transmit to their children, and how much people feel they have free
choice and control over their lives, compared to how much they feel that what they do has no real
effect on what happens to them. Both measures of generalized morality are relevant in explaining
economic development across countries and among regions of Europe.
         His work is open to criticism: the WVS contains numerous questions, so it is fair to ask why
Tabellini chose those precise questions. Also, as we discuss below, the concept of generalized
morality seems a combination of attitudes such as trust and individualism.
Attitudes toward work and the perception of poverty
         Cultural attitudes toward work are obviously crucial. The Weberian argument about the birth
of capitalism in a sense relies on this trait: the Protestant revolution, according to Weber, implied a
different attitude toward hard work and success in the current life relative to the Catholic doctrine
predominant in Europe at the time.35 This belief is measured using a question from either the WVS
or the GSS that typically asks about the relevance of hard work versus luck in determining success in
life.
         Recent research has emphasized different views about the role of hard work. Some people
believe that hard work is the avenue to success, a road open to many, leading to relatively high social
mobility.36 Others believe that success is determined mostly by luck and personal connections; where
this belief persists, social mobility is low. These views tend to be deeply ingrained: people whose
views differ may face the same reality and maintain for a long time different opinions about whether

34 Greif and Tabellini (2012) associate generalized morality with the diffusion of the nuclear family in Europe and limited
morality with China, where the clan was more diffused.
35 The idea that a Protestant work ethic determined the higher prosperity of Protestant regions has been recently

disputed. Becker et al. (2009) find that it was the instruction in reading the Bible that generated Protestant prosperity
through accumulation of human capital. Cantoni (forthcoming), using data on 272 cities in the German Lands of the
Holy Roman Empire, find that Protestantism exerted no effect on economic growth. For a critical view of Weber’s
hypothesis, see Camic et al. (2004) and Gorski (2003).
36 Among OECD countries, social mobility (measured using estimates of the extent to which sons’ earning levels

correlate with those of their fathers) is low in the United Kingdom, Italy, the United States, and France. By contrast, it is
comparatively high in the Nordic countries, Australia, and Canada.

                                                            17
hard work is the key to success (Alesina and Glaeser, 2004). Several papers have shown that beliefs
concerning the income-generating process could be central in determining forms of economic
organization (Piketty, 1995; Benabou and Ok, 2001; Alesina, Glaeser, and Sacerdote, 2001; Benabou
and Tirole, 2006; and Di Tella, Galiani, and Schargrodsky, 2007). Doepke and Zilibotti (2008) define
a “middle class” belief using the work-versus-luck variable as well as a variable regarding the
importance of thriftiness as a value to be transmitted to children. These authors argue, similarly to
Weber, that these two values were relevant for stimulating industrialization and the demise of the
landed aristocracy.
         A related issue concerns views about poverty. One question from the WVS asks whether the
respondent believes that the poor could become rich if they tried hard enough.37 This statement
could also imply a moral judgment regarding the poor: are they lazy or unfortunate?38 Alesina and
Glaeser (2004) document the chasm between Americans and Europeans regarding attitudes toward
the poor. They discuss the evolution of this difference, and they relate this difference to the relative
generosity of the respective welfare states. They also emphasize that poverty is viewed with less
sympathy when correlated with racial differences, namely when the poor are disproportionately
racial (or, more generally, linguistic or religious) minorities.39
         Alesina and Giuliano (2011a), using WVS data, show that expectations about social mobility
are strongly correlated to views about the poor. Alesina and Glaeser (2004) argue that Americans’
and Europeans’ differing beliefs about this issue go a long way toward explaining why the European
welfare state is so much more generous than the American one. They also investigate the origins of
this difference.
The relationships among cultural traits
         Cultural traits are clearly interconnected. For example, in defining generalized versus limited
morality, Tabellini (2008a) claims that the notion of limited morality reaches back to “amoral
familism,” a term coined by Banfield (1958) in his study of a village in Southern Italy. According to
Banfield, the concept of morality is valid only within the family, whereas amoral behavior is
considered morally acceptable and justified when interacting with people outside the family. Strong
family ties and limited morality are difficult to tease out if one follows this definition. Also,


37 The WVS asks respondents their opinion about whether most people in the country have a chance of escaping from

poverty or very little chance of escaping from it.
38 The WVS asks respondents their opinion about why some people in the country live in need. Two different opinions

emerge: People are poor because of laziness and lack of will power, or people are poor because of an unfair society.
39 For more on this point, see Alesina, Michalopoulos, and Papaioannu (2013).


                                                        18
generalized morality and trust are often treated as synonymous (see Tabellini, 2008a; Glaeser et al.,
2000; and Guiso et al.; 2006, 2008b), because high levels of trust are typically associated with high
social capital and high civil capital. This is apparent in the generalized morality variable, whose
principal component includes trust among the different measures.
        Gorodnichenko and Roland (2014) try to compare certain culture traits by linking findings
from social psychology to the economic literature. Using evidence from cross-cultural psychology
(Heine, 2008, 2010; Oyserman et al., 2002), they argue that the individualism-collectivism cleavage is
the single most relevant dimension of cultural traits. In cultural psychology, the differences between
individualism and collectivism have deep roots that affect different forms of behavior: they relate to
different visions of self, differences in cognitive behavior, behavioral and motivational differences,
and relational differences. The crucial distinction is between the independent self and the
interdependent self (Markus and Kitayama, 1991), which in turn is associated with different
cognitive models and relational differences. For example, the independent self will tend to interact in
the same way with everybody, whereas the interdependent self will interact differently with in-group
people than with others with whom relationships are less important or frequent (the out-group).
This difference could help explain why more generalized trust exists in individualistic cultures than
in collectivistic cultures, or why individualistic and collectivistic societies have different family
structures.
        If one looks at the cross-country correlations among cultural traits (Table 1), most of them
are correlated, though not perfectly, as one would expect. In one case, the high correlation is forced:
the one between trust and generalized morality, since the latter includes trust among its components.
In other cases—for instance, the one between family ties and individualism—the correlation is
expected.




                                                  19
                                       Table 1. Correlations among cultural traits
                                              Family         Generalized           Individualism            Trust           Work-
                                                ties          morality                                                       luck
          Family ties                             1
          Generalized morality               -0.49***              1
          Individualism                      -0.48***           0.60***                    1
          Trust                              -0.57***           0.83***                0.50***                 1
          Work-luck                          0.33***             -0.08                  -0.24*               -0.02             1
Data on individualism come from Hofstede (2001). The remaining variables are authors’ calculations using five waves of
the World Value Survey. Family ties is the principal component of three questions: one about how important the family is
in one person’s life (on a scale from 1 to 4); and two that ask respondents to agree with one of two statements: One does
not have the duty to respect and love parents who have not earned it versus Regardless of what the qualities and faults of one’s parents are,
one must always love and respect them; and Parents have a life of their own and should not be asked to sacrifice their own well-being for the
sake of their children versus It is the parents’ duty to do their best for their children even at the expense of their own well-being. Generalized
morality is the principal component of three questions: one taking a measure of trust (defined below) and two asking
respondents whether respect and obedience are qualities that children should be encouraged to learn at home. For trust,
respondents are asked, Generally speaking, would you say that most people can be trusted or that you can’t be too careful when dealing
with others? Possible answers are either Most people can be trusted or Need to be very careful. For work-luck, respondents are
asked to choose between two statements: In the long run, hard work usually brings a better life or Hard work does not generally
bring success; it is more a matter of luck and connections. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level.


           In Figure 1, world maps depict the geographical distribution of the various cultural traits.
Northern European countries, together with the United States, Australia, and New Zealand, have
high levels of trust, individualism, and generalized morality. The United States also emphasizes effort
(as opposed to luck) as the main driver of economic success, a belief less prevalent in Northern
European countries. Since this belief is strongly related to preferences for redistribution, the
difference could be due to the vastly differing U.S. and European welfare systems (Alesina and
Glaeser, 2004).
           The Scandinavian countries exhibit the lowest measure of family ties while the measures for
African, Latin American, and some Asian countries are among the highest. Southern Europe
measures high, but not among the highest. Similarly, the United States appears to have strong family
ties, though the magnitude of the score is driven mostly by the question on the importance of the
family in a person’s life and not by the questions on links between parents and children.
Individualism is particularly high in the United States, Australia, and Northern Europe.40
           Within each country, there is often substantial heterogeneity across regions. For instance,
Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2004), Tabellini (2010), and Alesina and Giuliano (2013) take
advantage of regional differences regarding generalized morality, trust, and family values inside the
regions of Italy, Europe, and the whole world, respectively. This regional heterogeneity is quite

40
  Italy, despite having strong family ties and a relatively low level of trust, appears to score high on this value, which is
surprising.

                                                                       20
useful empirically, as we shall see below, since it allows studying the correlation of culture with
various economic variables, holding national institutions constant. Regional variations, often large,
also implicitly demonstrate that national institutions in general don’t automatically generate a
uniform culture, even though national rulers often try to enforce (sometimes aggressively)
homogeneity on their regions and populations.41
Measurement of (formal) institutions
            One of the most common measures of formal institutions is an index of protection against
expropriation (see Acemoglu et al., 2001). These data, collected from Political Risk Services, report a
value between 0 and 10 for each country and year, with 0 corresponding to the lowest protection
against expropriation. Glaeser et al. (2004), however, object to this variable as a measure of
institutions, arguing that it’s an equilibrium outcome and not an institution. For example,
democracies and dictatorships can exhibit the same level of “protection of property rights.”
            Other standard measures of formal political institutions include constraints on the executive
and indices of democracy. Variables have also been constructed to measure the “quality of
government”—broadly speaking, a measure of well-functioning of the public sector—such as
control of corruption and efficiency of the bureaucracy.
            Then there’s the legal system. La Porta et al. (1997, 1998) provided a measure of legal rules
governing investor protection for many countries using national commercial (primarily corporate
and bankruptcy) laws. The authors argue that legal rules protecting investors varied systematically
among legal traditions or origins, with the laws of common-law countries (originating in English law)
being more protective of outside investors than the laws of civil-law (originating in Roman law),
particularly French civil-law, countries. Subsequent research showed that the influence of legal
origins on laws and regulations is not restricted to finance. Government ownership of banks (La
Porta et al., 2002), the burden of entry regulations (Djankov et al., 2002), labor-market regulations
(Botero et al., 2004) vary systematically across legal families.
            Finally, regulatory institutions—such as labor-market regulations, regulations of markets for
goods and services, antitrust laws, and various regulatory-environment indices—have been coded
and assembled by the OECD, the World Bank, Djankov et al. (2002), and Botero et al. (2004),
among others.
            A good summary of the institutional qualities characteristics associated with governance is
the World Bank’s Worldwide Governance Indicator (WGI). The WGI, a report on six dimensions

41   See Laitin (2007) and Alesina and Reich (2013) for discussions on this point.

                                                              21
of governance for 215 countries from 1996 to 2011,42 found that institutional features are strongly
correlated—at least 0.8 among the various WGI indicators. Easterly and Levine (2003) also show
that they are strongly correlated with the standard measure of protection of property rights, one of
the most used measures of institutions. 43 As such, they are normally used interchangeably in the
empirical analysis.
        These measures of institutions have been widely used. Glaeser et al. (2004), however,
emphasize some conceptual problems with them44—they neither measure policy constraints nor are
they stable; rather, they are measures of policy choices45—and suggest ways to improve the way
institutions are measured. For example, they suggest that constitutional measures would be a better
measure because they constraint behavior and are more likely to be permanent. At the same time,
they note that “it is possible that these constitutional measures are noisy, and it is certain that ‘rules
on the books’ are different from what actually takes place in a country. But this is precisely the point:
the institutional outcomes that scholars have used as measures of constraints have little to do with
the constitutional constraints, raising doubts about the effectiveness of changing political rules.”
        From this proposition, it therefore seems that one should measure both de jure and de facto
institutions and asses when they deviate. Glaeser et al. (2004) suggest some measures of institutions
that could be appropriate: two dealing with electoral systems (“plurality” and “proportional
representation”) and two dealing with judicial constraints on government (“judicial independence”
and “constitutional review”). The first two measures are motivated by the work of Persson and




42 These six dimensions are voice and accountability (the extent to which a country’s citizens are able to participate in
selecting their government, as well as freedom of expression, freedom of association, and a free media), political stability
and absence of violence (measuring perceptions of the likelihood that the government will be destabilized or overthrown
by unconstitutional or violent means, including politically motivated violence and terrorism), government effectiveness
(about the quality of public services, the quality of the civil service, and the degree of its independence from political
pressures; the quality of policy formulation and implementation; and the credibility of the government’s commitment to
such policies), regulatory quality (the ability of the government to formulate and implement sound policies and
regulations that permit and promote private-sector development), rules of law (capturing perceptions of the extent to
which citizens have confidence in and abide the rules of society, and in particular the quality of contract enforcement,
property rights, the police, and the courts, as well as the likelihood of crime and violence), and control of corruption (the
extent to which public power is exercised for private gain, including both petty and grand forms of corruption, as well as
“capture” of the state by elites and private interests).
43 Various datasets, such as the Quality of Government Dataset, compiled by the Quality of Government Institute at

Goteborg University, have combined numerous measures of institutional features (including property rights and rule of
law) for a large set of countries from 1946 to the present.
44 The authors cite the International Country Risk Guide, the Governance Indicators of the World Bank, and the Polity

IV measures.
45
   The authors stress two relevant characteristics of institutions: that they constrain behavior and that they are permanent
or stable.

                                                            22
Tabellini (2003), and the second two are taken from La Porta et al. (2004). 46 These objective
measures are also only weakly correlated with the other institutional measures that the authors
themselves criticize. These considerations should be taken into account when using institutional
measures in the empirical analysis.


     3. The relationship between culture and institutions
        Generally, studies looking at the relationship between culture and institutions tend to isolate
one causal aspect, favoring one of two directions. A more promising research agenda has, on the
other hand, emphasized a feedback effect between the two—given this interdependence, both
institutions and culture co-evolve, which can generate multiple stable equilibria with different sets of
self-enforcing institutions and cultural norms. In this section, we first review the set of papers
looking at univariate causal explanations; we then discuss the papers looking at the joint evolution of
culture and institutions and their effect on economic activity.
         3.1. From culture to formal institutions
Historical narratives of the relevance of culture on formal institutions
         Several studies on the relevance of culture on institutions provide historical narratives of
specific cases. Fischer (1989), studying the evolution of institutions in the United States, documents
how cultural beliefs brought by the four migration waves of the original settlers generated stark
differences in laws. First came the Puritans, arriving in Massachusetts from East Anglia. Known for
valuing education and order, they introduced laws promoting universal education and justice,
together with town meetings and town covenants mimicking those of their country of origin. Next
came the Virginia Cavaliers, who settled in the Chesapeake Bay from the South and Southwest of
England. Their beliefs emphasized group inequality as a natural state of the world; they introduced
laws with low taxes and low government spending and placed little emphasis on education. The
Quakers, who arrived next from England’s North Midlands and settled in the Delaware Valley,
revered personal freedom, and thus established institutions emphasizing equal rights and limited
government intervention. The final wave, the Scottish-Irish, arrived from Northern England,
Scotland, and Ireland, settling in the backcountry of the U.S. South. They believed in freedom from
any constraint and, as a result, espoused minimal government intervention and a limited justice


46Judicial independence is the average of three components: (1) the tenure of highest ordinary court judges, the tenure
of administrative court judges, and a dummy coded 1 if judicial decisions are a binding source of law. Constitutional
review is the sum of the rigidity of constitutions and the extent of judicial review (none, limited, or full).

                                                            23
system. Clearly, the beliefs brought to the United States by these four groups were crucial
determinants in the establishment and subsequent development of the first institutions in the United
States.
          A second historical example is provided by Greif (1994), who analyzed the cultural
differences between medieval Maghribi and Genoese traders. Maghribis held “collectivist” Judeo-
Muslim beliefs and norms, which led them to develop different institutions from their
“individualistic” Christian counterparts. The prevalence of collective relationships within a closely
knit, exclusive group implied for the Maghribis an informal enforcement mechanism and therefore
the lack of effective legal contract enforcement. The Genoese society, characterized by
individualistic cultural beliefs, experienced a higher demand for legal contract enforcement than the
collectivistic, kin-based community of the Maghribi traders. The Genoese developed formal
institutions, including codified contract laws, double-entry bookkeeping, bills of lading, and other
precursors of modern business practices. In Greif’s view, therefore, different cultural values gave
rise to the feasibility of private alternatives to the public legal system as a basis for economic
transactions.
          A third example aims for a cultural interpretation of the development of political systems
around the world. In a provocative book, Todd (1990) argues that the development of political
systems around the world is a function of underlying values ingrained in people from an early age
through family systems: parent-child relations within the family determine the attitude toward liberal
or authoritarian ideologies, whereas egalitarian inheritance practices among siblings lead to
egalitarian ideologies. The appeal of differing modern ideologies results from their mirroring the
character of various family types; and such ideologies spread only so far as the geographical extent
of the family systems with which they have similarities. This, in his views, should partially explain
differences in ideologies around the world, including communism, Nazism, and Anglo-Saxon
liberalism. Todd argues that communism prevailed in societies with communitarian families
(vertically authoritarian; horizontally egalitarian) because people were accustomed at home to the
same authoritarian system adopted by government institutions. On the other hand, the absolute
nuclear family of England (liberal; non-egalitarian) was fertile ground for the development of non-
egalitarian capitalism, individualism, and market freedom. 47 Note the connection between Todd’s

47Todd’s theory has never been tested formally and perhaps suffers from anthropological determinism. The literature on
the diffusion of communism, is certainly more complex. Pipes (1994) had a different view on the popularity of
Communism in the Soviet Union. His view was that the October Revolution was, rather than a popular general uprising,
a coup foisted by a small number of intellectuals, which established a one-party dictatorship that was repressive from the

                                                           24
argument regarding the extended egalitarian family and the prevalence of communism with the
“collectivist” society in Greif (1994). In both cases, a horizontal line (the clan in Greif, the
communitarian family in Todd) interferes with the value of individualism, which brought about
modern forms of capitalism. Alesina and Glaeser (2004) also relate the lack of development of a
communist party in the United States with, among other things, the culture of individualism and the
views about poverty discussed above, similar to what proposed by Lipset and Marks (2001).48
         By analyzing these three experiences, we begin to glean the effect of culture on institutions
from a historical perspective. Several recent papers have pushed the historical analysis forward,
undertaking more formal tests of the impact of culture on institutions. We review these papers
below.
The impact of culture on financial institutions
         Finance has been widely investigated to discern interaction between culture and institutions.
The literature yields a critical insight: trust can fundamentally affect financial development. The main
idea is that different levels of trust may imply different needs regarding investors’ protection and
other regulatory variables. Financial institutions cannot “cause” financial development if cultural
variables work against it. The legal system can enforce financial contracts, but without trust it would
be costly to involve courts in financial transactions. Thus, cultural values (especially trust) lead to the
development of financial markets and meaningful regulation.
         This argument is developed by Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2004, 2008a, 2008b) in their
examination of the role of trust in determining attitudes toward financial transactions and the
development of financial markets—in short, the “financial depth” of a country. These papers
provide a range of insights. First, trust is strongly related to how people invest and participate in
financial markets. The variation is large within the same legal system; in fact, they analyze within-
country variation. For instance, use of cash, participation in the stock market, and use of bank loans
versus loans from friends are all variables that affect the financial structure of a country, and these
authors show that cultural values affect it much more than “standard” variables such as risk aversion.



start. Similarly, Figes’ (1989) view is that younger and more literate peasants and migrant townsmen were the ones who
became the rural bureaucrats of the Bolshevik regime. This view, however, is controversial. A series of scholars, under
the influence of the French Annales School, has instead sustained the interpretation that the Russian Revolution was a
movement from below. Note, however, that some similarity exists between Pipes and Todd. Pipes also argued in favor
of the totalitarian school, which sees the Third Reich, the Soviet Union, and Fascist Italy as totalitarian regimes united
by their antipathy toward democracy. In Todd’s view, there is also some similarity among totalitarian regimes, whose
ideologies are compatible with an authoritarian structure of the family.
48 In a similar vein, Sombart (1976) discusses reasons for the lack of a successful communist party in the United States.


                                                           25
         The authors also assert that, at the macroeconomic level, taking into account cultural values
could shed light on several puzzles in finance. For instance, stock-market participation is higher in
countries with a higher level of trust; differing levels of trust could therefore explain low
participation rates in various countries. Also, they find that trust is much higher among citizens of
the same country; thus, investors hold a higher percentage of domestic assets than they “should,”
based on pure theories of portfolio diversification. They also show that a bilateral matrix of trust
across countries explains a remarkable amount of cross-border holding of equities and foreign direct
investment.
         How does this work relate to La Porta et al.’s (1997, 1998) emphasis on legal institutions as
determinants of financial development? Perhaps this is an example of what Greif defines as the
social equilibrium including a combination of legal institutions and cultural variables. The interaction
of certain legal origins (Anglo-Saxon ones) and a high level of trust in those countries (as discussed
above) lead to financial development.
         Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2004) also show that differences in bilateral trust across pairs
of countries have strong explanatory power in a standard gravity equation for trade flows. This
correlation is robust to the inclusion of legal origins and institutions.49 Obviously, issues of reverse
causation are a first-order problem here. Bilateral trade may increase bilateral trust, rather than the
other way around. The authors address this issue using instrumental variables. As an instrument for
trust, they use commonality of religion and a measure of somatic distance. 50 They also show an
additional supporting piece of evidence: the correlation of bilateral trust and trade is strong for
differentiated products and absent for standardized ones, like oil. Mutual trust is in fact more likely
to be relevant only in markets where quality control, tastes, and diffusion of information are more
important relative to a standardized market.
The impact of culture on formal legal institutions

49 Differences in the legal system could originate, in turn, from differences in cultural values, such as religious beliefs.
Kuran (2005) shows that Islamic inheritance laws were an obstacle to the formation of the modern corporation, as
emerged in Italy during the Renaissance. Community-building was central to Islam’s mission. At the birth of Islam, the
Arabian Peninsula was divided into tribes bound together by blood ties. The strong bonds within one’s own tribe
implied that intertribal alliances formed for defensive purposes were inherently unstable, fostering insecurity and
retarding wealth creation. Islam responded to this broad need by promoting communal bonds based on religion rather
than descent. The formation of these communal bonds was guaranteed by the presence of the wars, a type of
unincorporated trust. The reason for such an institution was based on the need to have an institution based on an
individual instead of one involving self-governance by an organized group (like corporations during the Renaissance, for
example.)
50 The measure of somatic distance is based on the average frequency of three specific traits in the indigenous population,

taken by Biasutti (1954): height, hair color (pigmentation), and cephalic index (the ratio of the length and width of the
skull).

                                                            26
         Licht et al. (2005) study whether laws on the books in different societies reflect the
prevailing national culture. They find that national scores of cultural value dimensions correlate with
indices of shareholder voting rights and of creditor rights. In particular, they find that a national
culture that promotes assertiveness in reconciling conflicting interests and that promotes tolerance
for the resulting uncertainty is consistent with using litigation to deal with economic conflicts.51 The
authors also show that correlations between culture and legal rules hold regardless of other major
characteristics of countries; that they are not due to a reverse causal impact of legal rules on culture52;
and that they persist in the face of formal legal reforms. As a result, national culture may impede
reforms and induce path dependence in corporate governance systems.53
         Murrell et al. (2011), in studying 17th-century England, constructed annual data on cultural
dynamics and institutional development. To construct measures on institutions, they used reports on
18th-century court decisions that cite the statutes and earlier cases used by judges to support
decisions and by lawyers to litigate. The cultural variable reflects data on word usage in a catalog of
publications (books, pamphlets) from the 17th century, the English Short Title Catalogue. The authors
capture the diffusion of the Whigs—who emphasized the virtues of freedom and sought to limit the
powers of the monarchy—by tracing patterns in the use of words emblematic of that culture. The
authors then use a vector error correction model, which relates changes in culture and institutions to
each other and to deviations of each from their long-run relationship. The main finding is that
cultural diffusion spurs the development of case and statutory law. Although the choice of cultural
variable could be problematic—reporting words that are emblematic to the Whigs could be
endogenous—the exercise is very interesting, one of the few that features a time series of both

51
   Culture is measured using data from Schwartz (1992) and Hofstede (2001). The authors test two hypotheses: (1)
Greater reliance on concrete legal rules enforceable in the courts is stronger in nations high on the Schwartz cultural
orientation of Mastery (which emphasizes assertiveness, venturing, and active determination of one’s destiny) and low on
his Harmony orientation (which opposes head-on confrontation and should therefore discourage embodying economic
interests in strict legal form and enforcing them in court). These cultural emphases are compatible with empowering
investors and encouraging them to fight for their rights. (2) Investors’ legal rights are stronger in nations high on the
Hofstede Individualism dimension and low on his Uncertainty Avoidance dimension. Individualism (versus Collectivism)
legitimizes the pursuit of personal interests rather than deference to others’ decisions and interests. Uncertainty
Avoidance affects the way power in organizations is exercised. High Uncertainty Avoidance is consistent with
empowering authorities who control, whereas low Uncertainty Avoidance is compatible with corporate constituencies
ready to challenge one another with indeterminate outcomes.
52 The authors use episodes of British rule as an instrument for culture. The exclusion restriction is problematic for this

case, as being ruled by Britain could have affected many outcomes, including the law.
53 Stulz and Williamson (2003) also show that culture matters for investor rights. They used countries’ predominant

religion and language as proxies for culture. In particular, they show that religion is important for creditor rights but not
for shareholder rights. Further, language and religion are important for enforcement of rights. They also show that
culture and legal origin affect different aspects of financial development, finding that stock-market development depends
on a country’s legal origin, whereas debt markets and banking development depend on culture.

                                                            27
culture and institutions, a much better framework than cross-country regressions for evaluating their
interaction.
The impact of culture on democracy
          Understanding the underlying causes of democratization is one of the key questions in social
science. Lipset (1959) emphasized the importance of economic development. As a result, most of
the empirical literature has focused on this specific determinant; however, it finds the relationship
between development and democracy mostly a feature of cross-sectional data, and when performing
panel data analysis, the correlation disappeared (see Acemoglu et al., 2008). Almond and Verba
(1963) were the first to attempt to quantify the relevance of culture for democracy. They interviewed
a sample of 1,000 people in five countries (the United States, Mexico, Great Britain, Germany, and
Italy) and defined a measure of political attitudes.54 They argued that political culture is crucial to the
operation of any political system. The study had several limitations, including a small sample size, a
limited set of countries, and no discussion of reverse causality.
          More recently, Gorodnichenko and Roland (2013b) studied the importance of culture as a
determinant of democratization. The authors construct a simple model of democratization that
includes individualist and collectivist cultures. They show that countries with a more individualistic
culture, despite potentially being less able to overcome collective-action problems, are more likely to
adopt democracy faster than countries with a collectivistic culture. Empirically, they show that there
is a strong causal effect from individualistic cultures to average polity scores, controlling for other
determinants of democracy. To establish causality, the authors use (alternatively or together) two
instrumental variables: a measure of genetic distance between countries (as a proxy for vertical,
parent-to-child cultural transmission) and a measure of historical pathogen prevalence (this should
have pushed communities to adopt more collectivist values emphasizing tradition and less openness
to foreigners). The idea that individualism and collectivism can affect the functioning of democracy
is plausible; in a companion paper, however, the authors also show that individualism is crucial for
economic development. Given the possibility that the instrumental variables don’t satisfy the


54 Political culture is made up of cognitive, affective, and evaluative orientations toward the political system. They
identify three types of political cultures: (1) parochial, in which no clear differentiation of specific political roles and
expectations exists among actors, i.e., “political specialization is minimal”; (2) subject, in which institutional and role
differentiation exists in political life, but toward which the citizen stands in largely passive relations; and (3) participant, in
which the relationship between specialized institutions and citizen opinion and activity is interactive. They summarize
this general schema as follows: “A participant is assumed to be aware of and informed about the political system in both
its governmental and political aspects. A subject tends to be cognitively oriented primarily to the output side of
government: the executive, bureaucracy, and judiciary. The parochial tends to be unaware, or only dimly aware, of the
political system in all its aspects.”

                                                               28
exclusion restriction, some doubts remain on the causality from culture to democratization. In
addition to omitted variables, reverse causality could also be a concern, as people who live in a
democratic regime could be more inclined to embrace individualist values.
         Cultural variables have been proven to be relevant not only for establishing a democracy but
also for its functioning.55 Nannicini et al. (2012) show that in localities with a higher level of social
capital,56 citizens are more likely to hold politicians accountable for the aggregate social welfare of
the community. They will punish politicians who pursue vested interests and grab rents for specific
groups. In contrast, uncivic agents vote based on their own or group-specific interests and are more
tolerant of amoral politicians. Nannicini et al. (2012) convincingly test the prediction of their model
by using cross-district variation in the criminal prosecution of Italy’s parliament members, who, they
find, are much less frequently reelected in districts with higher social capital. These results confirm
the intuition by Banfield (1958). In his study of a village in Southern Italy, he argued that the lack of
social capital made villagers uninterested in checking up on self-interested politicians. In fact, these
checkups constitute a public good, which like any other is undersupplied when social capital is low.
         Well-functioning political institutions also need citizens who are interested in and participate
in politics, including voting at least occasionally, engaging in time-consuming activities, and staying
informed. Alesina and Giuliano (2011b) show that strong family ties are negatively correlated with
political participation. Once again, this is consistent with the argument by Banfield (1958).
         3.2.     From formal institutions to culture
The impact of exogenous institutional changes and shocks on culture
         To isolate the effect of formal institutions on culture, one needs to identify institutional
changes that are reasonably exogenous to cultural evolution. Empirically, the effect of formal
institutions on culture has been isolated in various ways.
         One possible source of institutional change for which we have data is the advent and fall of
Communism in Central and Eastern Europe. Roland (2004) argues that the culture of these
countries has changed little as a result of Communism. He documents that cross-country
comparisons of various views as captured by the WVS do not change that much across countries as
a result of Communism: specific values and beliefs existed in these countries before the transition,
and they hardly changed afterward. They encompassed a more authoritarian view of government


55Glaeser et al. (2007) argue that human capital is another precondition for democratic institutions to work.
56They follow Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2010), defining social capital as civic capital, “those persistent and shared
beliefs and values that help a group overcome the free rider problem in the pursuit of socially valuable activities.”

                                                           29
and a preference for more government responsibility over the economy. Moreover, these values and
beliefs do not appear to have converged toward those existing in advanced democracies and market
economies, be it the EU-15 or the United States. Roland’s idea is that institutional evolution in these
regions seems to follow a long-run path shaped in large part by a country’s long-run history. In
contrast, the recent history of communism seems to leave fewer traces than its long-run history.
         Shiller et al. (1992) exploited the collapse of the Soviet Union and East Germany to explore
the potential impact of socialism on individual attitudes. By using surveys on six countries, they
found little evidence of the so-called Homo Sovieticus.57
         Both studies, though providing an intriguing hypothesis, suffer from several limitations. The
sample size is not so large (especially with Shiller); in addition, we think the authors could have
better attempted to test for age cohort effects and geographical differences to verify more
convincingly whether living under a Communist regime permanently affected attitudes. Indeed,
different results emerge when a more stringent identification strategy (Alesina and Fuchs-Schündeln,
2007) is adopted. The authors use two vastly exogenous events to the preferences of Germans:
separation due to a military defeat (and the border determined by postwar agreements between the
Allies) and reunification due to the collapse of the Soviet Union. Taking advantage of the fact that
before the separation the inhabitants of East and West Germany were ex ante uniform, 58 these
authors explore, using German opinion surveys after reunification, the effect of 50 years of
Communism on Germans’ beliefs and preferences, focusing on people’s views about the role of the
state in the economy and in providing services and social insurance. They find that East Germans
after reunification remain more pro-government than West Germans, possibly as a result of
indoctrination or more simply because they had gotten used to an intrusive government. 59 Alesina
and Fuchs-Schündeln (2007) show that the convergence of preferences between former East



57 The authors study three former communist countries (Russia, Ukraine, and Eastern Germany) and three advanced
capitalist economies, the United States, Japan, and Western Germany. Their sample consists of 2,670 interviews.
58 The authors tested for systematic differences along various dimensions. To test whether the two regions were similar

in terms of income, the authors analyzed the average per capita incomes of different German regions, as well as
subregions of Prussia, in 1928, 1932, and 1936. The authors found no significant difference. To control for the
possibility that Prussians might have had different beliefs, they include a dummy for being under the Prussian empire
(part of former Prussia belonged to the Federal Republic of Germany and part to the German Democratic Republic). At
the dawn of the 20th century, the areas that became East and West Germany were also quite similar along many
economic dimensions, including the percentage of the population working in industry, agriculture, or commerce. In the
elections of 1899, finally, around the same number of constituencies in both areas voted primarily in favor of the Social
Democrats. If anything, the West was more in favor of state intervention than the East.
59 Obviously, the authors control for the fact that former East Germans may be more pro-government than former

West Germans simply because they are on average poorer.

                                                           30
Germans and West Germans is proceeding relatively quickly and might be complete in two
generations.60
         Overall, the results on the advent and fall of Communism in Central and Eastern Europe
appear to be mixed, with earlier studies finding no effect. We believe this may be due to small
sample sizes and the inability to control for age-cohort effects and geographical characteristics;
Alesina et al. (2007) show more convincingly that living under the Communist regime had strong
effects on people’s attitudes.
         A second set of papers isolates the relevance of formal institutions by looking at countries
belonging to different historical empires. Several empirical strategies were employed to isolate the
importance of empires.
         Becker et al. (2011) focus on the Hapsburg Austrian Empire, known for its well-functioning,
well-respected bureaucracy, at least when compared to other empires in Eastern Europe, such as the
Ottoman and Russian Empires. This regime created trust in government institutions by developing
modern state institutions and enforcing the rule of law. To test whether confidence in institutions
persists today, the authors compare people living in communities located within 200 kilometers of
each other on either side of the Habsburg border, exploiting the geographical discontinuity created
in Eastern Europe by the Habsburg Empire. In order to avoid capturing unobserved country
heterogeneity, they use country fixed effects to restrict the analysis to variation within individual
modern-day countries. 61 Though they find some effect on various measures of trust toward the
government, not all measures of trust show significant differences, so the results are interesting but
inconclusive.
         Grosjean (2011) examines location pairs within Eastern Europe and shows that the longer a
pair was under the same empire historically, the more similar the reported social trust of the
locations’ citizens today. 62 Peisakhin (2010) surveyed 1,675 people living in 227 villages located
within 25 kilometers of the Habsburg-Russian border that divided Ukraine between 1772 and 1918.


60 Paul Hollander (1999) had a different interpretation for the decline of communism, according to which the causality
runs in the opposite direction. He documents a change in beliefs among leaders and political elites, using a case study
method, consisting of analyzing the life stories of 22 Soviet and East European Communists, including early defectors,
leaders, and functionaries. In particular, he notes a change in the ideology of the elite, “their loss of political will,
intertwined with their eroding sense of legitimacy, […] appears to be the crucial factor in unraveling of the communist
systems.” It is unclear whether this limited evidence can sustain the book’s broader argument. For one thing, the group
he examined can hardly be taken as representative of the Soviet elite as a whole.
61 The Habsburg border cuts through five countries today: Montenegro, Poland, Romania, Serbia, and Ukraine.
62 The data include 21,000 households in 1,050 primarily sampling unit. The relevant empires in her sample are the

Ottoman, the Austro-Hungarian, the Russian, and the Prussian.

                                                           31
Relying on information on cultural traits based on answers to survey questions, Peisakhin (2010)
documents a wide range of statistically significant cultural differences between the two groups.
        An interesting example of how a political shock could shape religious differences is analyzed
by Botticini and Eckstein (2005, 2007). The authors link Jewish population dynamics, educational
and occupation choices, conversion, and migration to the same episode: the destruction of the
Second Temple in the first century. Before the destruction of the temple, the two main groups were
the Sadducees, who accepted only the Written Torah and adopted the Hellenistic culture, and the
Pharisees, who aimed to expand the study of both the Written Torah and Oral Torah among all
Jews and opposed the expansion of Greek language and culture. When the temple was destroyed,
the Pharisees became the dominant group. They replaced sacrifices, which could only be performed
in the temple, with the study of the Torah in the synagogues, whose main function was to provide
religious instruction to children and adults.
        The authors show that the norm requiring Jewish fathers to educate their sons determined
several major patterns in Jewish history: on the one hand, Jewish farmers who invested in education
gained a comparative advantage and the incentive to enter urban skilled occupations during the vast
urbanization in the newly developed Muslim empire. This was also at the origin of the voluntary
diaspora of the Jews in search of worldwide opportunities in crafts, trade, and money lending. At the
same time, the shock also implied a slow process of conversion from Judaism among illiterate Jewish
farmers who lived in subsistence economies: according to the authors, between 30% and 60%
(depending on location) of the Jewish population, decided to leave Judaism and convert to other
religions, mainly Christianity. Most Jewish converts to Christianity were uneducated and low-
income.
        Overall, an initial shock implied the diffusion of a costly religious norm requiring fathers to
educate their sons. This norm, in turn, could not survive in the long run in subsistence farming
economies, where literacy did not increase earnings, and could instead survive only in those places in
which Jewish people could find occupations in which their earnings rose significantly from literacy.
The paper provides an interesting historical reconstruction of how an initial shock affected religious
norms and how this change in turn had long-term economic effects.
        Wars and economic shocks can also shape values and beliefs. The research into war’s effect
on attitudes has explored how a recent history of violence could shape norms of fairness. Whitt and
Wilson (2007), for example, in looking at how people treat their in-group and their out-group,
observe how much money people send in a dictator game to an anonymous but ethnically

                                                  32
identifiable counterpart. The sample comprises 681 Muslims, Croats, and Serbs in postwar Bosnia-
Herzegovina. The results indicate that a norm of fairness persists, despite preferential in-group
treatment and a distinct out-group effect. In a similar vein, Bauer et al. (2011) test the specific
prediction that the experience of intergroup conflict shifts individual psychological motivations to
favor in-group egalitarianism. The authors administered a series of social-choice tasks, designed to
isolate in-group egalitarian motivations from selfish or generalized egalitarian and altruistic
motivations, to over a thousand children and adults who were differentially affected by war in both
the Republic of Georgia and Sierra Leone. The authors show that exposure to conflict-related
violence between the ages of 7 and 20 shifts people’s motivations to greater equality for in-group
members. Overall, their results suggest that psychological reactions triggered by war during a
particular developmental window generate more in-group-oriented egalitarian motivations. Other
studies use behavioral games to link war and social motivations; in one, an ultimatum game
conducted before, during, and after the Israel-Hezbollah conflict demonstrates that living in a
society under an active, ongoing external threat temporarily increases the willingness of senior
citizens to punish non-cooperators and reward cooperation (Gneezy and Fessler, 2011). Voors et al.
(2012) reveal that in Burundi, people who have experienced war-related violence share more with
their neighbors.63
         Giuliano and Spilimbergo (2014) look at how the experience of macroeconomic shocks
when young affects beliefs regarding the role of luck versus effort as a determinant of economic
success, as well as preferences for redistribution and political behavior. The authors show that
individuals who grew up during a recession tend to support greater government redistribution,
believe that luck is more relevant than effort in determining economic success in life, and vote more
for left-wing parties.64
         The authors combine evidence from three data sources. First, they identify the effect of
recessions on beliefs, exploiting time and regional variation in macroeconomic conditions using data
from the 1972–2010 General Social Survey, which allows them to control for nonlinear time-period,
life-cycle, and cohort effects, as well as a host of background variables. Second, they use longitudinal
evidence drawn from the National Longitudinal Survey of the High School Class of 1972 (NLS72)
to corroborate the age-period-cohort specification and look at heterogeneous effects of experiencing

63 Acemoglu et al. (2011) study the effect of the Napoleonic conquest on the institutions of the regions that fell under
French domination. This paper, however, does not investigate cultural effects.
64 Malmendier and Nagel (2011) show that recessions make people more risk-averse and lower their propensity to invest

in the stock market.

                                                          33
a recession during early adulthood. Finally, they confirm their findings with a sample of 37 countries
whose citizens experienced macroeconomic disasters at different points in history, using data from
the WVS.
Experimental evidence
        An alternative approach for identifying the effect of institutions on culture is to observe in
laboratory experiments how people behave in different institutional settings. In their seminal work,
Henrich et al. (2001) study 15 small, preindustrial societies and show that group-level differences in
economic organization and the degree of market integration explain much of the behavioral
variation across societies: the higher the degree of market integration and the higher the payoffs of
cooperation, the greater the level of cooperation in experimental games. Gneezy, Leibbrandt, and
List (2012) look at the evolution of trust, cooperation, and coordination in different Brazilian fishing
villages. In villages located by the sea, fishermen work in teams; in villages located around a nearby
lake, fishing is an individual activity. Fishermen from both societies took part in seven experiments:
a trust game, an ultimatum game, a donation game, a lottery game, a public-goods game, a
coordination game, and a competition game. The authors find that the sea fishermen trust and
cooperate more and are more able to coordinate group actions than their lake fishermen
counterparts.
        Herrmann et al. (2008) conducted large-scale cooperation games with and without
punishment opportunities in 16 cities (which should be a proxy for a different institutional
environment). They find that cooperation and antisocial punishment is highest in Boston and
Melbourne and lowest in Athens and Muscat. The order is highly correlated with the rule of law and
the transparency of institutions in the corresponding country.
        All these papers are consistent with the argument that people internalize social norms that
emerge from specific circumstances (war, economic shocks) or specific needs (the fishermen in
Brazil) and support the idea that differences in the institutional environment play a decisive role in
the prevalence of various types of norms.
        A more sophisticated class of experiments involves manipulation of formal rules. Compared
to the simpler approach of observing people in a different institutional environment, this approach
allows for a controlled experiment to estimate how people change their culture depending on
exogenous variation in the rules of the games.
        A set of experiments on the impact of democratic rules on behavior (Tyran and Feld, 2006;
Ertan, Page, and Putterman, 2010; and Sutter et al., 2010) find that punishment and rewards in

                                                  34
public-goods games have a greater impact on behavior when they are allowed democratically. The
concern with these sets of experiments is selection: even if groups are formed randomly, groups
choosing a particular policy could still have different preferences than those that don’t choose that
policy. Dal Bo et al. (2010) solve the problem of selection by studying whether the effect of a policy
depends on whether it is imposed endogenously or exogenously. The authors design a laboratory
experiment to study how democracy affects cooperation. In particular, they are able to distinguish
how cooperation changes when a policy is imposed endogenously through a democratic process or
imposed exogenously. In the study, subjects participate in several prisoners’ dilemma games and may
choose, by simple majority, to establish a policy that could encourage cooperation by imposing fines
on non-cooperators. In some cases the experimental software randomly overrides the subjects’ votes
and imposes the policy. Before proceeding to play again with either the original or the modified
payoffs, the subjects are informed of whether payoffs are modified and whether it was decided by
their vote or by the computer. The authors show that the effect of the policy on the percentage of
cooperative actions is 40% greater when the policy is democratically chosen by the subjects than
when it’s imposed by the computer.
       The drawback of the experimental literature is its external validity, as formal rules in
experimental games differ from real-world institutions. This concern is common to all experimental
literature, but in some cases—for example, testing the existence of complex social interactions in a
small group as a proxy for large real-world societies—the problem of external validity is more
difficult to overcome. Dal Bo et al. (2010), consistent with this view, ague that, though the extent to
which their results apply to state- or national-level democratic processes is unclear, the results may
still be useful in understanding democratic processes in small settings, such as villages in low-income
countries, or in understanding the effects of worker participation in firms, and the design of
procedures in small groups such as academic departments. (For example, the effects of a policy to
monitor schoolteachers’ attendance that arise when the policy is randomly allocated across schools
may be quite different from the effects of a policy chosen in part by teachers in each school.)
       Other research in a non-experimental setting supports the notion that democratic
institutions may affect cooperative behavior. Bardhan (2000) finds that farmers are less likely to
violate irrigation rules when they themselves have crafted those rules. Frey (1998) finds that Swiss
cantons with greater democratic participation face lower tax evasion. Levine and Tyson (1990),
Bonin, Jones, and Putterman (1993), and Black and Lynch (2001) find that worker participation in
workplace decisions may boost productivity. Several issues with the above-mentioned evidence

                                                  35
could arise: societies or groups with democratic institutions may differ from societies or groups
without those institutions (Swiss cantons with great democratic participation may differ from
cantons with low democratic participation because of other differences, for example civic capital).
Second, democratic societies or groups may choose different institutions or policies. Finally, there is
a selection into policy, since democratic choice allows groups with different characteristics to choose
different policies. Experiments allow researchers to circumvent these threats to identification.
Culture and the market
        Bowles (1998) emphasizes the role of the fundamental economic institution, the market, in
the formation of preferences/culture. He develops a model in which the basic intuition is that the
distribution of cultural traits in a population is determined as the equilibrium of a system whose
exogenous elements are subject to the long-term influence of markets and other economic
institutions. Economic institutions affect the evolution of preferences by changing these exogenous
determinants of the cultural equilibrium.
        Bowles’ main conclusion is that economic institutions (i.e., the market) may affect
preferences through five different channels: their direct influence on situational construal, forms of
rewards, the evolution of norms, task-related learning, and their indirect effects on cultural
transmission itself. He concludes that “the production and distribution of goods and services in any
society is organized by a set of rules, among which are allocation by fiat in states, firms, and other
organizations. … Particular combinations of these rules give entire societies modifiers such as
“capitalist,” “traditional,” “communist.” … One risks banality, not controversy, in suggesting that
these allocation rules therefore influence the process of human development, affecting personality,
habits, tastes, identities, and values.” Further, he states, “the argument that economic institutions
influence motivations and values is plausible, and the amount of evidence consistent with the
hypothesis is impressive.” In particular, several ethnographic and historical studies recount the
impact of modern economic institutions on traditional or indigenous cultures. (See Bowles, 1998, for
a review of these studies.) He also argues that the rise of feminist values, the reduction in family size,
and the transformation of sexual practices coincided with the extension of women’s labor-force
participation.
        This last point has been more formally developed by Fernandez (2013) and Fogli and
Veldkamp (2011), who show how women learn about the long-run payoffs from working by
observing nearby employed women. Culture would then quickly evolve over time as a result of this
process: when few women participate in the market, information is scarce and participation rises

                                                   36
slowly. As information accumulates, the effect of maternal employment becomes less uncertain and
female labor-force participation increases.
Regulation and culture
        Regulations are institutional characteristics that could shape differences in values. Gruber
and Hungerman (2008) study the effect of changes in regulation (shopping hours) on religious
practices (church attendance). The authors identify a policy-driven change in the opportunity cost of
religious participation based on changes in “blue laws,” state laws that prohibit retail activity on
Sunday. Many states have repealed these laws in recent years, raising the opportunity cost of
religious participation. The authors show that when a state repeals its blue laws, religious attendance
falls, as do church donations and spending. Repealing the laws may not be an exogenous event; in
addition, declining levels of religiosity may have led to the laws being repealed, rather than the other
way around. The authors address these concerns by including several controls for a state’s
socioeconomic circumstances. In addition, they do a placebo exercise by including a dummy for the
two years before the blue-law repeal. The dummy is insignificant. As a further test, the authors note
that if omitted factors drive down religious participation, they are also likely to reduce participation
in other group activities. The authors find that whereas blue-law repeals do lower church-group
membership, they exert no effect on the probability of being a member of any other group.
        Di Tella et al. (2007) conduct an experiment among squatters in Buenos Aires who randomly
received land titles. The authors show that receiving land titles changes a wide range of beliefs and
values (such as individualism, the role of merit, and trust). Another interesting example is a study
done by Kohn et al. (1990) over a period of three decades. The authors, using evidence from Japan,
the United States, and Poland based on a sample of male employees, show that one’s position in an
occupation hierarchy strongly affects the person’s valuation of self-direction and independence in
their children, intellectual flexibility, and personal self-directness. These results are not driven by
selection. In a series of related studies, longitudinal data provide instruments to address the question
of reciprocal causation, leading to evidence of a substantial casual effect of occupationally
determined values on other people’s values, orientation, and cognitive functioning.
        In summary, the arguments about the effects of institutions on culture rely on experimental
evidence and on historical natural experiments where institutions vary in locations with common
geographical, cultural, and other socioeconomic characteristics. Both methods are convincing, with
some caveats. Experimental evidence might be difficult to generalize outside the laboratory; or at
least similar conclusions can be drawn for specific real-world situations (see the comment on Dal Bo

                                                  37
et al., 2010, above). If one wants to play devil’s advocate, even the identification of the natural
experiment as a change in institution could be debatable, as institutions generally reflect the cultural
attitudes of the institution builders (as discussed for Fisher, 1989).
         In the next section, we discuss a more promising line of research that doesn’t try to identify
a single cause but rather looks at the interactions between culture and institutions.
         3.3.     The interaction between culture and formal institutions
         The most promising approach, both theoretically and empirically, to studying the interaction
between culture and institutions recognizes and embraces a two-way effect to explain economic
development and other types of economic outcomes, rather than stressing causality in one direction
or the other. Recent contributions have looked at the coevolution of culture and institutions, leading
to multiple equilibria characterized by a combination of some types of culture and some types of
formal institutions. The general idea underlying this approach is that a country (or a region or an
ethnic group, for example) shares certain cultural values, which leads to the choice of certain
institutions. In turn, certain institutions lead to the survival (and transmission across generations) of
certain cultural values.
         Below we describe various papers that explore this interaction. What they have in common
is their analysis of the two-way relationship. This interdependence generates, in all models, multiple
stable equilibria, with different sets of self-reinforcing institutions and cultural norms. This
coevolutionary structure has been applied to several cultural traits: cooperation, trust, family ties,
individualism, and fairness.
The coevolution of cooperation and formal institutions
         Tabellini (2008b) provides a formal model of the interplay between culture and legal
institutions, which enforce contracts.65 The model has three ingredients: (1) two potential cultural
traits (generalized versus limited morality), one of which values cooperation more than the other:
cooperation between the immediate family and the clan (limited morality) is relatively easy to sustain;
cooperation among distant (i.e., less connected) players (generalized morality) is more difficult to
sustain. People face moral costs if they don’t cooperate in a prisoner’s dilemma game, even when the
game is played only once. These costs decrease as the distance between players grows; (2) a
mechanism of vertical cultural transmission of values, with parents exerting costly effort to instill



65 Tabellini (2008b) builds on Dixit (2004) and also on Bisin and Verdier (2001) for the model of intergenerational
transmission of values.

                                                         38
cooperation; (3) formal institutions (which enforce cooperation) endogenized through majority
voting.
          The larger the share of cooperative players, the more it is in everybody’s interest to
cooperate and the more parents will teach children to cooperate. This kind of complementarity gives
rise to the possibility of multiple equilibria, one with limited morality and one with generalized
morality. Well-functioning legal institutions may increase both the cost of noncooperation and the
number of cooperative players. This effect, combined with the complementarity described above,
may switch a society from an equilibrium with limited morality to one with generalized morality. On
the other hand, with generalized morality the need for institutional interventions to punish cheating
is less frequent, leading to better-functioning institutions and reduced caseloads. Good institutions
and generalized morality are therefore self-reinforcing. Good institutions foster generalized morality,
reducing legal caseloads and court crowding. Poor institutions do the opposite, decreasing morality
and making people more litigious, cluttering the legal system. Tabellini’s paper also implies that
globalization—in which economic interactions are more and more common amongst distant
players—makes the need for good legal enforcement and generalized morality even more
important.66
          Acemoglu and Jackson (2012) disagree in part, arguing that norms of cooperation may
evolve quickly and sometimes respond to leaders or institutional changes. The motivation for their
paper comes from the historical observational differences in cultural, social, and political behavior
between Northern and Southern Italy. Whereas the literature has emphasized that “amoral familism”
and lack of “generalized trust” are at the origin of the “inability of the villagers to act together for
their common good” (Banfield, 1958), these differences are not set in stone. The authors refer to
Locke (2002), who provides examples from the south of Italy and northeastern Brazil, where starting
from conditions similar to those emphasized by Banfield, trust and cooperation emerged at least in
part as a result of “leadership” and certain specific policies. In addition to leadership by prominent
agents, social norms could also be affected by institutions or policies that encourage more
cooperative behavior. Whether the examples of leadership leading quickly to generalized trust are
the exception or the rule remains to be seen. Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2013) provide
convincing empirical evidence of the long-term persistence (over several centuries) of cooperation



 Jackson (2013) extends the Tabellini model to a case of joint production. For a related model, in which law and
66

morality can be substituted, see Bonhet, Fey, and Huck (2001).

                                                      39
and trust in Italy, spanning numerous political regimes, leading to the different functioning of
modern political institutions.67
            The interaction of culture and institutions has also been studied using cultural-evolution
models (see Bowles and Gintis, 2010). The authors define culture as the set of preferences and
beliefs acquired by means other than genetic transmission. What distinguishes humans from animals
is the way we acquire information. For most animals, genetic transmission and individual learning
are the only means for acquiring information. Humans, by contrast, also acquire information
through social learning. Social learning, or cultural transmission, as opposed to individual learning,
takes the forms of vertical (parents to children), horizontal (peer to peer), and oblique (non-parental
elder to younger) transfer of information.
            The authors use institutions to explain the evolution of altruistic behavior over time. In
particular, their idea is that group competition and culturally transmitted group differences in
institutional structures are crucial in explaining the evolution of cooperative behavior among
humans. Group differences in institutional structures persist over long periods due to the nature of
institutions as “conventions,” common practices adhered to by virtually all group members because
the relevant behaviors are mutual best responses, conditioning on the expectation of similar
behaviors by most others.
            The conventional nature of institutions accounts for their long-term persistence and also
their occasional rapid change under the influence of shocks. In their model, when new members of
the population mature or immigrate, they adhere to the existing institutions, not because of
conformist learning but because this is a best response, as long as most others do the same. In that
sense, institutions are group-level characteristics; successful institutions, like the European national
states, produce many replicas, while unsuccessful institutions disappear. Institutions may replicate
when a successful group grows or when a group with unsuccessful institutions succumbs to a
military, ecological, or other challenge. The novelty of their evolutionary approach is that institutions,
as individual characteristics, are subject to selection. For example, food sharing beyond the family,
which reduces within-group differences in material well-being, attenuates within-group selective
pressures. Groups adopting institutions such as food sharing help proliferate group-beneficial
individual traits, including altruism.
The coevolution of culture and regulation


67   Their work confirms the hypothesis of Putnam et al. (1993) that we discussed in the introduction.

                                                             40
       Whereas Tabellini (2008b) has only a theoretical framework to explain the coevolution of
culture and institutions, three recent papers have also contained an empirical study of this
interaction. Aghion et al. (2010) look at the interaction between generalized trust and regulation.
Aghion el al. (2011) examine contemporary labor markets and identify a negative interaction
between the existence of cooperative labor relations and the severity of a state-mandated minimum
wage. Alesina et al. (forthcoming) look at the positive relationship between the strength of family
ties and the strength of labor-market regulation.
       Aghion et al. (2010) present a model and provide empirical evidence to explain the
coevolution of trust and regulation. In their framework, trust is defined as beliefs resulting from
family decisions about civicness. The model, similarly to Tabellini (2008), has three elements: (1)
Two cultural traits: being civic or being uncivic. People need to make two decisions, whether to
become civic and whether to become entrepreneurs or choose some form of routine production
(such as state production). Those who become uncivic impose a negative externality on others when
they become entrepreneurs (for example pollute), those who become civic do not. (2) A mechanism
of cultural vertical transmission according to which children are thought to become civic or uncivic
by their parents. (3) A political mechanism (such as voting) that allows the community to regulate
entry into entrepreneurial activity when the expected negative externalities are large. Regulation
constrains choices, hence negative externalities, but is at the same time implemented by government
officials, who demand bribes when they are un-civic.
       When people expect to live in a civic community, they expect low levels of regulation and
corruption, and so become civic. When they expect to live in an uncivic community, they expect
high levels of regulation and corruption, and do not become civic. The model has two equilibria: one
with a large share of civic individuals and no regulation, and another in which a large share of
uncivic individuals support heavy regulation.
       In the empirical part, the authors test several predictions of the model; relevant for our
purposes are a negative correlation not only between trust and regulation but also between trust and
demand for regulation. The authors take the evidence on the demand for regulation as consistent
with the link running from distrust to regulation. To show that the other effect is also present, from
regulation to trust, they examine the experiment of transition from socialism, which was a radical
reduction in government control in low-trust societies. Their model predicts that such a reduction
should lead to, among other things, an increase in the demand for government control at a given
level of trust and a reduction in trust in the short run. Their results hold using three different

                                                    41
datasets: the WVS, the International Social Survey Program (ISSP), and the Life in Transition Survey
(LITS). 68 The authors find consistent evidence that distrust leads to support for government
regulation. Although the exercise uses within-country variation—the authors can therefore include
country fixed effects—the drawback of their empirical strategy is that certain omitted variables could
drive both the demand for regulation and distrust. For the evidence regarding transition economies,
the drawback is that the end of Communism could have caused other changes in addition to the
liberalization of entrepreneurial activity that drives the change in trust.69
         Aghion, Algan, and Cahuc (2011) also have a model of interaction between regulations and
culture. The sequence of decisions in the model is as follows: the trade union decides whether to
invest in the quality of labor relations; people vote to elect a government that sets a minimum wage;
workers decide whether to join the trade union; wages are set by employers for nonunionized
workers and by wage negotiation for unionized workers.
         In this framework, higher-minimum-wage regulation reduces the benefits to workers of
trying to cooperate with firms. Therefore, more stringent minimum-wage regulations crowd out
cooperation between firms and workers. In turn, less cooperative firm-worker relationships increase
the demand for minimum-wage regulation. This interdependence explains the observed negative
relationship between the minimum wage and cooperative labor relations.
         To identify the effect of attitudes on institutions, the authors use historical data on state
attitudes toward labor-market relations from Crouch (1993), who classifies states in three categories
regarding labor-market relations: (1) Four states that were hostile to the development of unions and
consequently prone to directly regulating labor markets and settling disputes through centralized
decisions. This group consists of the main Catholic countries in Europe, namely France, Italy, Spain,

68
   The WVS poses general questions concerning attitudes toward competition and state intervention. The ISSP contains
specific questions on the regulation of wages and prices. The LITS provides evidence on 28 post-Communist countries
in Europe and Central Asia, and it has questions on preferences for market versus planned economies.
69
   Similar conclusions have been reached by Pinotti (2012), Carlin, Dorobantu, and Viswanathan (2009), and Francois
and Ypersele (2009). Pinotti (2012), looking at the correlation between trust and regulation, shows that variations in
entry regulations around the world mostly reflect demand pressures from people at large, as captured by differences in
trust. His contribution, when compared to Algan et al. (2010), is to address the implications of these findings for the
cross-country pattern of trust, regulation, and market failures. He shows that, keeping constant the trust-driven
component of demand for government intervention across countries, regulation is no longer associated with worse
economic outcomes. Carlin et al. (2009) look at how trust evolves in the market, what the optimal level of government
regulation is, and how this intervention affects trust and economic growth. They show that when the value of social
capital is high, government regulation and trustfulness are substitutes. In this case, government intervention decreases
economic growth. On the other hand, when the value of social capital is low, regulation and trust may be complements.
Francois and Ypersele (2009), using data from the General Social Survey, found a strong positive relationship between
individual trust and the competitiveness of the sector in which an individual works. Their idea is that competition
mitigates incentives for free-riding by imposing a costly shutdown on poor-performing firms, making employees more
trustworthy, which increases trust.

                                                          42
and Portugal. In these countries, the central government needed to establish its authority over the
Catholic Church and to confront all forms of organized interests, including worker organizations.
The second category comprises seven countries where the state was neutral regarding labor
organizations: Belgium, Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Finland, the United Kingdom, and Ireland. The
third category comprises countries where the state that encouraged union involvement in the
regulation of labor markets: Austria, Germany, the Netherlands, and Switzerland.
       The dependent variable of Aghion et al.’s (2011) specification is the quality of labor relations
in OECD countries in 2000 as a function of the attitudes of the state toward unions in the 19th
century. The authors find that attitudes affected institutions even after controlling for the
unemployment rate and other labor-market institutions (including replacement rate, benefit duration,
employment protection, and tax wedge). To establish the opposite channel of the effect of
institutions on attitudes, the authors look at the impact of union density in the home country in
1950 on the current unionization attitudes of first- and second-generation immigrants in the United
States born after 1950.
       Alesina et al. (2013) study the interaction between family ties and the regulation of labor
markets. The model has three different components: (1) a difference in cultural values, specifically in
the strength of family ties; (2) a mechanism of vertical cultural transmission, in which people choose
the strength of family ties to transmit to their children; (3) a majority-vote political mechanism,
which allows people to choose the degree of labor-market regulation.
       Flexible labor markets require that people move geographically to maximize their
opportunities, find the best match with a firm, and get the best-paying job. This model is efficient
when mobility is painless. However, in societies with strong family ties, staying close to family is
important, and the mobility required by a free labor market can be painful. With unregulated labor
markets, local firms would have a monopolistic power over immobile workers, who would demand
labor regulation to counteract this power. This can lead to two different equilibria. One is laissez-
faire, with high mobility and unregulated labor markets; this occurs when family ties are weak. When
family ties are strong, the other equilibrium evinces labor-market rigidity with minimum-wage and
firing restrictions. Given the cultural value placed on family ties, labor-market regulation is
preferable to laissez-faire; even though laissez-faire produces higher income per capita, it rarefies
family relations. If family ties are sufficiently strong, this relaxation of family relationships can
reduce individual utility so much that welfare can be higher with a regulated labor market. The



                                                  43
authors show how preferences for labor-market institutions are strongly associated with family
values, even within countries.
       The findings imply a two-way effect between family ties and labor-market regulation. An
inherited culture of strong family ties leads to a preference for labor-market rigidity; the latter, in
turn, makes it optimal to teach and adopt strong family ties. In fact, a regulated market creates
unemployment and lower wages, and the family provides the necessary social insurance. In other
words, the benefits of a strong family enjoying the pleasures of living together necessitate an
inefficient institution: labor-market regulations with firing costs and binding minimum wages.
Regulated labor markets survive despite their obvious economic costs. Incidentally, this explains
why in large parts of Europe where family ties are stronger, labor-market deregulation is one of the
most difficult reforms to implement. In Northern European countries, a “flex security” system has
proven successful: unemployment is lower and participation in the labor force higher than in
Southern Europe. In general, Southern European countries rely much more on the family than
Northern European ones to provide social insurance for the unemployed.
       In their empirical section, the authors also show that culture is more primitive than
institutions by looking at the family values that European descendants have inherited from forebears
who migrated to the United States before 1940. They found a strong effect of culture in the
determination of labor-market institutions.
       The four studies have in common a similar theoretical building block, consisting of
differences in the original cultural values, a mechanism of vertical transmission, and a political
mechanism for choosing the type of regulation. All the models provide a rationale for multiple
equilibria in institutions and cultural values; countries with heterogeneous beliefs can end up in
different equilibria; but also, as in Algan et al. (2011), countries starting with the same beliefs in
cooperation can diverge and end up in different equilibria, depending on historical idiosyncracies.
       Two of the papers (Aghion et al., 2011; Alesina et al., 2013) empirically adopt an
identification strategy in which cultural traits are measured in the past as a result of cultural
transmission across generations. These past cultural values are then used as main dependent
variables for institutions that were created much more recently, thus limiting the issue of reverse
causality. Of course, the problem of omitted variables is not solved completely using this approach:
a common factor could have caused both persistence in specific cultural traits and development of
specific institutions. Aghion et al. (2010) use the end of Communism in Eastern Europe as a natural
experiment, but even in this case concerns remain that Communism could have changed some other

                                                  44
variables that also could have influenced institutions and cultural variables. Despite these limitations,
we believe the papers provide sufficient evidence of a feedback effect between culture and
institutions.
The culture of work and the redistributive state
         Models with multiplicity of equilibria have also been used to explain the relationship
between the culture of work and the redistributive state.70 Alesina and Angeletos (2005) highlight the
interaction between culture and institutions regarding fairness and redistribution. They develop a
model in which income could derive from ability or luck. Voters, in addition to caring about their
own income, dislike the notion of inequality due to luck rather than to effort and ability. Multiple
equilibria can occur. In one equilibrium, income taxes are high, effort low, the share of individual
income due to luck is high, and desired taxes are high, since luck-generated inequality is viewed
negatively by voters. In the other equilibrium, taxes are low, effort is high, the fraction of income
explained by luck is low, and desired taxes are relatively low.71 The motivation was to capture a U.S.
versus Europe difference along the lines suggested informally by Alesina, Glaeser, and Sacerdote
(2001) and Alesina and Glaeser (2004).72 The feedback here is from cultural values (views about
poverty) to choice of certain redistributive policies, which reinforce cultural values. Extensive
literature based on answers to surveys (see the review by Alesina and Giuliano, 2011a) shows that
people who believe that the poor are unfortunate are much more likely to support redistributive
policies.73
         Alesina, Cozzi, and Mantovan (2012) develop these ideas by tracing the evolution over time
of ideas of fairness, measured inequality, and preferences for redistribution. They show that long-
lasting differences in welfare policies result from initial cultural differences about what is and isn’t
fair about the initial level of inequality. Imagine a society where “at the beginning” wealth inequality
was all due to birth, nobility, and the like. Compare it to another society where initial wealth


70 In Piketty (1995), multiple equilibria in beliefs and redistributive policies can originate from the heterogeneity in initial
beliefs and how hard it is for people to learn the true costs and benefits of redistribution.
71 Benabou and Tirole (2006) present a different model that leads to similar conclusions, though based on different

behavioral assumptions.
72 Using happiness data, Alesina, Di Tella, and MacCulloch (2004) show that Americans are less sensitive to inequality.
73 In the United States, race is important in explaining redistribution. Lee and Roemer (2006) identify two mechanisms

through which racism among American voters decreases the degree of redistribution. The first, which has also been
suggested by other authors (Alesina et al., 2001; Luttmer, 2001), suggests that voter racism decreases the degree of
redistribution due to an anti-solidarity effect: voters oppose government transfer payments to minorities whom they
view as undeserving. The second mechanism is that some voters who desire redistribution nevertheless vote for the anti-
redistributive party (the Republicans) because the party’s position on race issues is more consonant with their own. They
classify this effect as the “policy bundle effect.”

                                                              45
distribution was the result of effort, entrepreneurship, and so on. We can think of the former as
Europe, where hundreds of years of feudal instructions created deeply rooted class divisions based
on birth. We can think of the latter as the United States, where the initial distribution of wealth was
much more the result of successes and failures of entrepreneurs, and of new waves of immigrants.
The United States never had feudal institutions, and wealth inequality was accepted as fairer than in
Europe. Precisely for this reason, the absence of preindustrial feudal institutions in the United States
led Marx and Engels to doubt that communist ideology would succeed there.74
           Alesina, Cozzi, and Mantovan (2012) show that these different initial conditions at the birth
of capitalism, due to different preindustrial institutions, led to long-lasting cultural differences
regarding the perception of poverty, the need for extensive government intervention, and the (lack
of) respect for the wealthy. These early differences in cultural values still strongly influence policy
choices today. These beliefs have become self-sustaining: the more wealth is redistributed via
government intervention, the less some people see it as fair, because it is not the market but rather
politicians, special interests, and various pressure groups that determine where public money goes.
           In this set of models, the multiplicity of equilibria and the long-term persistence come from
an initial heterogeneity in beliefs. In addition, shocks may lead to rapid changes in attitudes. For
instance, the cultural revolution of the 1960s (this is not the place to discuss its origins) generated a
more favorable attitude toward redistribution, even in the United States. And, the recent financial
crisis, which exposed enormous wealth accumulated in the financial sector, may have created an
antimarket cultural shift, with the associated rhetoric of the “top 1 percent.”
Individualism and institutions
           Gorodnichenko et al. (2013a) test empirically whether individualism causally affects
institutions or vice versa. To test first for a causal effect of individualism on institutions, the authors
regress measures of institutions at the country level (given by the protection against expropriation
risk, also used in Acemoglu et al., 2001), on the measure of individualism taken by Hofstede (2001)
and a series of controls for geography, a dummy for continents, and the percentages of population
practicing major religions. Individualism is instrumented using a specific measure of genetic markers,
given by Mahalanobis distance between the frequency of blood types in a given country and the
frequency of blood types in the United States (the most individualistic country in their sample).
Here’s the idea behind the instrument: to the extent that culture is transmitted mainly from parents


74   See also Sombart (1976).

                                                    46
to children, so are genes.75 In addition, when the authors use genetic distance as an instrumental
variable, they don’t postulate a causal relationship between genes and cultural attributes such as
individualism; they simply exploit the correlation between genetic distance and cultural differences
across populations, as both genes and culture are transmitted from parents to offspring. Since the
measure of genetic distance uses only neutral genetic markers, which have no direct effect on fitness
and thus on cultural outcomes, this variable is likely to satisfy the exclusion restriction. To test for
causality in the other direction—institutions on individualism—the authors regress measures of
individualism at the country level on measures of institutions (the variables described above).
Institutions are instrumented with settler mortality (see Acemoglu et al., 2001).
            The authors find that individualism exerts a positive, significant effect on institutions, thus
implying a flow of causality from individualistic culture to institutions. However, the effect of
institutions on culture is not robust across specifications. The authors conclude that the effect of
institutions on culture might be less robust than the other way round, with the caveat that they drew
their conclusions from a small sample—only 35 observations.
Culture, institutions, and economic outcomes
            The feedback effect between culture and institutions is particularly relevant in explaining
economic growth and other economic outcomes, such as participation in the labor market or the
provision of public goods.
            Doepke and Zilibotti (2008) model the interaction between economic opportunities and
preference formation through parental investments (concerning the rate of time preferences and the
taste for leisure) around the Industrial Revolution. The idea is simple but powerful. Before the
Industrial Revolution (when capital markets were imperfect), the rich could rely on rental income
and therefore develop a taste for leisure. The middle class, working instead in occupations requiring
effort, skill, and experience, had to invest in two cultural values: patience (low discount factor) and
work ethic. The specific attitudes of the middle class, in turn, became the key determinant of
economic success once the Industrial Revolution had transformed England. A limitation of the
paper is why this pattern happened only in England and not in other countries.
            Tabellini (2008a and 2010) explores the interconnection between institutions and generalized
morality to explain differences in development throughout Europe. He studies regions in eight
European countries in which differing levels of generalized morality resulted from different
historical experiences. Comparing regions within today’s countries, the author shows that differing

75   For a critical view of the use of genetic distance in economics, see Giuliano, Spilimbergo, and Tonon (2014).

                                                              47
levels of generalized morality are persistent, are correlated with good functioning of current
institutions, and are favorable to economic development. Current morality is related to the level of
human capital accumulated in the 18th century, and to the level of democratization and
independence the regions gained from absolute monarchs. Thus institutions in the distant past led to
the development of a culture of generalized morality, which in turn helped foster well-functioning
current institutions.
            This argument is related to the work by Putnam et al. (1993) and Guiso, Sapienza, and
Zingales (2013) on the development of social capital in free medieval cities in Italy. In this case as
well, ancient institutions led to long-lasting cultural changes, which affected the functioning of
current institutions, as we discussed in the introduction.
            Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2013, 2014) study the relative importance of culture and
institutions in Africa. In their first paper, the authors look at the spatial distribution of ethnicities
before colonization in Africa and show that historical local institutions, 76—in particular, measures of
precolonial political centralization and not national institutions—can explain within-ethnicity
differences in economic performance, using as a proxy satellite images of light density at night. To
rule out the possibility that precolonial political centralization is capturing some other omitted
variable, the authors control for geographical, ecological, and natural-resource endowment at the
ethnic level. In addition, they show that the results do not depend on observable ethnic differences
in culture, occupational specialization, and the structure of economic activity before colonization.
            In their second paper, the same authors reached a more nuanced conclusion. They claim that
one cannot disentangle institutional features of a society from its long-term cultural traits, which are
transmitted intergenerationally within ethnic groups. Those deeper ethnic and cultural traits, rather
than national institutions, affect economic outcomes in Africa. For their main identification strategy,
the authors exploit the fact that political boundaries on the eve of African independence partitioned
more than 200 ethnic groups across adjacent countries. They then compare the economic
performance of the same ethnic groups, who were now partitioned in different countries and thus
subject to different national institutions. With this identification strategy, they can hold constant
geographical and ethnicity-specific cultural traits. They found that cross-border differences in
national institutions do not systematically translate into differences in economic performance within
partitioned ethnicities—in particular, the positive correlation between national institutions and
development disappears with the inclusion of ethnicity fixed effects.

76   For the relevance of historical local institutions, see also Gennaioli and Rainer (1997).

                                                                48
        The authors highlight two additional results: first, they show that conditioning on the degree
of precolonial centralization and the dependence on agriculture and pastoralism substantially
weakens the cross-sectional coefficient on the national institutions proxy. This finding is consistent
with studies of the African historiography, downplaying the role of national institutional structures
and stressing instead the key role of ethnicity-specific traits related to the role of chiefs, culture, and
precolonial organization. Second, they find evidence of substantial heterogeneity—in particular, that
national institutions correlate with subnational development, but only when both partitions are close
to the respective capital cities. They claim that this is consistent with insights from the African
historiography, stressing the inability of states to broadcast power in regions far from the capital.77
        Engerman and Sokoloff (1997) give a different interpretation of the role of culture and
institutions in the determination of development: both represent an indirect mechanism through
which geography affects economic outcomes. In their work, different factor endowments—in
particular, soil suitability for growing sugar, coffee, rice, and in general crops characterized by high
market value and economies of scale—helped foster the creation of a small elite, the diffusion of
slavery, and the implementation of policies and institutions that perpetuated such inequality,
lowering incentives for investment and innovation. This was in contrast to societies that were based
on the cultivation of small-scale crops (grain and livestock), which had a more equitable distribution
of wealth and better long-term economic performance.
        Giavazzi et al. (2013) look at the relative importance of culture and institutions in
determining three labor-market outcomes: the employment rate of women, average hours worked,
and the employment rate of the young. The authors find that culture matters in two of the three
outcomes; however, policies and other institutional characteristics also matter when one considers
their endogeneity. Attitudes toward women’s role in the family and attitudes toward leisure are
statistically and economically important determinants of the employment rate of women and average
hours worked. The measure of attitudes toward youth independence does not appear to be
important in explaining the employment rate of the young. The two significant policy variables
affecting the female employment rate and average hours worked are the index of employment
protection legislation/tax wedge and benefits. To reach their conclusions, the authors use a
Generalized Method of Moments framework that allows them to obtain consistent estimates when
culture is endogenous and labor-market outcomes persist over time. They use religious beliefs as

77This result is consistent with models of country formation and geographical and cultural distance from the capital
(Alesina and Spolaore, 2004; Alesina and Reich, 2013).

                                                        49
predetermined variables in the GMM framework, and their lagged values as an instrument. They also
test the robustness of their analysis using as an instrument the attitudes of second- (or higher-)
generation immigrants to the United States who arrived from different countries at different points
in time. The basic idea is that the evolution in the attitudes of U.S. immigrants is correlated with that
of attitudes in the country of origin, but not with the idiosyncratic component of the error term in
the labor-market-outcomes equations.
         Padró y Miguel, Qian, and Yo (2013) study the joint interaction of political institutions and
social capital in determining the provision of public goods in Chinese villages.78 The authors argue
that elections in Chinese villages are more effective at choosing politicians who provide more public
goods in villages where social capital is higher and generalized trust is high relative to personalized
trust. Identification comes from time variation in the introduction of village elections, as the village
had no voice in choosing when or whether to hold elections. In particular, with a difference-in-
differences strategy, they look at the presence of public goods before and after elections in various
villages. The main result is that elections have very little effect in villages with low social capital and a
big effect in villages with high social capital. One of their contribution is trying to distinguish kinship
trust from generalized trust. As a proxy for kinship trust, they use the presence of ancestral halls,
where people go to venerate the dead relatives of their extended family. The authors show that this
proxy is inversely related to the smooth functioning of democracy.
         The above-mentioned papers all advance the idea that culture and institutions are
complementary. A more general approach is provided in Bisin and Verdier (in progress as of this
writing): they develop a more general model in which, depending on the economic environment and
initial conditions, culture and institutions might complement each other, or might act as substitutes,
contrasting each other and limiting their combined ability to promote economic growth. They posit
an interesting idea: even when new institutions are introduced to increase economic growth, their
effect depends on whether the appropriate cultural trait develops to support the new institution.79

78
   The authors measure social capital with the presence of village temples, considered as a form of voluntary
organization. They collect data showing that the presence of temples is correlated with the presence of other voluntary
organizations.
79
   In their theoretical work, Bisin and Verdier define institutions as mechanisms through which social choices are
delineated and implemented—a definition similar to Acemoglu’s, but much more general. In Acemoglu et al. (2006),
political institutions are mechanisms for distributing political power across different socioeconomic groups; in turn,
political power determines economic institutions that govern economic activity. In Acemoglu et al. (2003), for example,
institutions are represented by an indicator of which political pressure group in a given set has the power to control
social choice. Institutional change, then, results from voluntary concessions by the controlling group, possibly under
threats of social conflict. Bisin and Verdier depart from the notion that institutions contain political power and control
embedded in one single group. Their measure is more general; specifically, institutions are modeled as Pareto weights

                                                           50
        More empirical work is needed to convincingly test hypotheses related to the interaction of
culture and institutions. The most successful approach should be able to trace the full impact of
culture and institutions through time, examining specific channels and mechanisms. Whoever
undertakes this work will need to collect and compile new data on the evolution both of cultural
traits and of institutions.


   4. Conclusions
        What roles do culture and institutions play in determining the wealth of nations? We have
argued here that it would be wrong to claim the causal superiority of either. Culture and institutions
interact and evolve in a complementary way, with mutual feedback effects. Thus, the same
institutions may function differently in different cultures, but culture may evolve in differing ways
depending on the type of institutions. We discussed many examples of this interaction, for different
types of institutions (such as political and legal institutions, regulation, and the welfare state) and
different cultural traits (including trust, family ties, individualism, and generalized morality). We also
discussed in detail definitional issues, which are important both for clarity of models and for
measurement.
        Though the studies we’ve reviewed have done much to emphasize the presence of a
feedback effect, two major tasks lay ahead.
        First, we need to better understand the mechanisms driving the interaction. Most of the
studies still tend to examine an event in isolation from other events, except possibly to account for
other covariates. However, the joint dynamics of culture and institutions can be much more
complex and highly nonlinear. Therefore, linear regression methods tend to be less appropriate than
more structural analyses of the data.
        Second, we need to better understand channels of causality. Most of the papers we’ve
reviewed try to isolate one direction of causality, by using instrumental variables or by looking at
historical exogenous shocks. The existence of complementarities between culture and institutions
hinders identification. While much progress has been made in isolating the importance of culture
and institutions, we need to do more to fully understand their complementarities and how they
jointly affect development. To find empirical answers to these questions, researchers will need to



associated to the different groups in the social-choice problem. Institutional change, therefore, happens more
incrementally than revolutions and regime changes.

                                                     51
assemble a chronology of both cultural change and institutional change and then examine the inter-
relationships between them.
References
Acemoglu, D., 2003, “Why Not a Political Coase Theorem?” Journal of Comparative Economics, 31, 620-
       652.
Acemoglu, D., Cantoni, D., Johnson, S., and J.A. Robinson, 2011, “The Consequences of Radical
       Reforms: The French Revolution,” American Economic Review, 101: 3286–3307.
Acemoglu, D. and M. Jackson, 2012, “History, Expectations, and Leadership in the Evolution of
       Social Norms,” MIT mimeo.
Acemoglu, D., Johson, S. and J. Robinson, 2001, “The Colonial Origins of Comparative
       Development: An Empirical Investigation,” American Economic Review, 91: 1369–1401.
Acemoglu, D., Johnson, S. and J. Robinson, 2006, “Institutions as a Fundamental Cause of Long-
       Run Growth,” in Handbook of Economic Growth, Aghion, P. and S. Durlauf, eds., Amsterdam:
       North-Holland.
Acemoglu, D., Johnson, S., Robinson, J. and P. Yared, 2008, “Income and Democracy,” American
       Economic Review, 98, 808-842.
Acemoglu, D. and J. Robinson, 2006, Economic Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy, Cambridge
       University Press, Cambridge.
Aghion, P., Algan, Y., and P. Cahuc, 2011, “Civil Society and the State: The Interplay Between
       Cooperation and Minimum Wage Regulation,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 9
       (1), 3–42.
Aghion, P., Algan, Y., Cahuc, P., and A. Shleifer, 2010, “Regulation and Distrust,” The Quarterly
       Journal of Economics, 125(3): 1015–1049.
Akerlof, G. and R. Kranton, 2000, “Economics and Identity,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
       115(3), 715–753.
Albanesi, S. and C. Olivetti, 2009, “Gender Roles and Medical Progress,” NBER WP 14873.
Alesina, A. and G.M. Angeletos, 2005, “Fairness and Redistribution,” American Economic Review, 95(4),
       960–980.
Alesina, A., Algan, Y., Cahuc, P, and P. Giuliano, forthcoming, “Family Values and the Regulation
       of Labor,” Journal of the European Economic Association
Alesina, A., Cozzi, G., and N. Mantovan, 2012, “The Evolution of Ideology, Fairness, and
       Redistribution,” 2012, The Economic Journal, 122 (565), 1244–1261.

                                                   52
Alesina, A., R. Di Tella, and R. MacCulloch, 2004, “Inequality and Happiness: Are Europeans and
        Americans Different?” Journal of Public Economics, 2004, 88(9–10), 2009–2042.
Alesina, A. and N. Fuchs-Schündeln, 2007, “Goodbye Lenin (or Not?): The Effect of Communism
        on People,” American Economic Review, 97(4): 1507–1528.
Alesina, A. and P. Giuliano, 2010, “The Power of the Family,” Journal of Economic Growth, 15, 93–125.
Alesina, A. and P. Giuliano, 2011a, “Preferences for Redistribution,” Handbook of Social Economics, in
        J. Behnabib, A. Bisin and M.O. Jackson (eds.).
Alesina, A. and P. Giuliano, 2011b, “Family Ties and Political Participation,” Journal of the European
        Economic Association, 9(5): 817–839.
Alesina, A. and P. Giuliano, 2013, “Family Ties,” in Handbook of Economic Growth, P. Aghion and S.
        Durlauf (eds.), North Holland, Elsevier.
Alesina, A., Giuliano, P., and N. Nunn, 2013, “On the Origins of Gender Roles: Women and the
        Plough,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128 (2): 469–530.
Alesina, A. and E. Glaeser, 2004, Fighting Poverty in the US and Europe: A World of Difference, Oxford
        University Press.
Alesina, A., Glaeser, E., and B. Sacerdote, 2001, “Why Doesn’t the United States Have a European-
        Style Welfare State?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 187–254.
Alesina, A. and E. La Ferrara, 2000, “Participation in Heterogeneous Communities,” Quarterly Journal
        of Economics, 115, 857–904.
Alesina A. and E. La Ferrara, 2002, “Who Trusts Others?” Journal of Public Economics, 85, 207–234.
Alesina A., Michalopoulos, S., and E. Papaioannou, 2013, “Ethnic Inequality,” NBER WP 18512.
Alesina A. and B. Reich, 2013, “Nation Building,” NBER WP 18839.
Alesina A. and E. Spolaore, 2004, The Size of Nations, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Algan, Y. and P. Cahuc, 2013, “Trust, Growth, and Well-Being: New Evidence and Policy
        Implications,” in Handbook of Economic Growth, P. Aghion and S. Durlauf (eds.), North
        Holland, Elsevier.
Almond, G. and S. Verba, 1963, The Civic Culture. Political Attitude and Democracy in Five Nations, Sage
        Publications New York.
Arrow, K., 1972, “Gifts and Exchanges,” Philosophy & Public Affairs, 1(4), 343–362.
Banfield, E., 1958, The Moral Basis of a Backward Society, Free Press, New York.
Bardhan, P., 2000, “Irrigation and Cooperation: An Empirical Analysis of 48 Irrigation Communities
        in South India,” Economic Development and Cultural Change, 48 (4): 847-865.

                                                   53
Barr, A., 2004, “Kinship, Familiarity, and Trust: An Experimental Investigation,” in Foundation of
        Human Sociality: Economic Experiments and Ethnographic Evidence from Fifteen Small-Scale Societies,
        Henrich, J., Boyd, R., Bowles, S., Camerer, C., Fehr, E., and H. Gintis (eds.), Oxford
        University Press.
Bauer, M., Cassar, A., Chytilova, J., and J. Henrich, 2011, “War’s Enduring Effects on the
        Development of Egalitarian Motivations and In-group Biases,” mimeo, CERGE-EI.
Becker, S. O., Boeckh, K., C. Hainz, and L. Woessmann, 2011, “The Empire Is Dead, Long Live the
        Empire,” CAGE WP 40.
Becker, S.O. and L. Woessmann, 2009, “Was Weber Wrong? A Human-Capital Theory of
        Protestant Economic History,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124 (2), 531–596.
Benabou, R., 2008, “Ideology,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 6(2–3), 321–352.
Benabou, R. and E. Ok (2001), “Social Mobility and the Demand for Redistribution: The POUM
        Hypothesis,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116, 447–487.
Benabou, R. and J. Tirole, 2006, “Beliefs in a Just World and Redistributive Politics,” The Quarterly
        Journal of Economics, 121(2), 699–746.
Bertrand, M. and A. Schoar, 2006, “The Role of Family in Family Firms,” Journal of Economic
        Perspectives, 20 (2), 73–96.
Biasutti, R., Le Razze e i Popoli della Terra, UTET, Torino.
Bisin, A. and T. Verdier, 2001, “The Economics of Cultural Transmission and the Dynamics of
        Preferences,” Journal of Economic Theory, 97, 298–319.
Bisin, A. and T. Verdier, 2011, “The Economics of Cultural Transmission and Socialization,”
        Handbook of Social Economics, in J. Behnabib, A. Bisin and M.O. Jackson (eds.).
Bisin, A. and T. Verdier, in progress, “The Joint Evolution of Culture and Institutions,” mimeo,
        New York University
Black, S. and L. Lynch, 2001, “How to Compete: The Impact of Workplace Practices and
        Information Technology on Productivity,”Review of Economics and Statistics, 83 (3): 434-445.
Bloom, N., R. Sadun, and J. Van Reenen, 2012, “The Organization of Firms Across Countries,”
        Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127 (4): 1663-1705.
Bonhet I., B. Frey, and S. Huck, 2001, “More Order with Less Law: On Contract Enforcement,
        Trust, and Crowding” American Political Science Review, 95(1), 131–144.
Bonin, J., Jones, D. and L. Putterman, 1993, “Theoretical and Empirical Studies of Producer
        Cooperatives: Will Ever the Twain Meet?”, Journal of Economic Literature, 31 (3): 1290-1320.

                                                    54
Bortnhorst, F., Ichino, A., Kirchkamp, O., Schlag, K.H., and E. Winter, 2010, “Similarities and
        Differences When Building Trust: The Role of Cultures,” Experimental Economics, 1(3), 260–
        283.
Botero, J., Djankov, S., La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, and A. Shleifer, 2004, “The Regulation of
        Labor,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119 (4), 1339–1382.
Botticini, M. and Z. Eckstein, 2005, “Jewish Occupational Selection: Education, Restrictions, or
        Minorities?” Journal of Economic History, 65(4), 922–948.
Botticini M. and Z. Eckstein, 2007, “From Farmers to Merchants, Voluntary Conversions and
        Diaspora: A Human Capital Interpretation of Jewish History,” Journal of the European Economic
        Association, 5 (5), 885-926.
Bowles, S., 1998, “Endogenous Preferences: The Cultural Consequences of Markets and Other
        Economic Institutions,” Journal of Economic Literature, 26: 75–111.
Bowles, S. and H. Gintis, 2010, “A Cooperative Species: Human Reciprocity and Its Evolution,”
        Princeton University Press.
Boyd. R. and P. J. Richerson, 1985, Culture and the Evolutionary Process, Chicago: University of Chicago
        Press.
Boyd, R. and P. J. Richerson, 2005, The Origin and Evolution of Culture, Oxford University Press.
Butler, J., 2013, “Trust, Truth, Status and Identity,” EIEF, mimeo.
Butler, J., Giuliano, P., and L. Guiso, 2014, “The Right Amount of Trust,” UCLA, mimeo.
Camic, C., Gorski, P. and D. Trubek (eds.), 2004, Max Weber’s Economy and Society: A Critical
        Companion, Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press.
Cantoni, D., forthcoming, “The Economic Effects of the Protestant Reformation: Testing the
        Weber Hypothesis in the German Lands,” Journal of the European Economic Association
Carlin, B. I., Dorobantu, F., and Viswanathan, S., 2009, “Public Trust, the Law, and Financial
        Investment,” Journal of Financial Economics, 92(3), 321–341.
Caselli, F. and N. Gennaioli, 2011, “Dynastic Management,” Economic Inquiry, 51(1), 971–996.
Charness, G., Rigotti, L., and A. Rustichini, 2007, “Individual Behavior and Group Membership,”
        American Economic Review, 97(4), 1340–1352.
Chen, R. and Y. Chen, 2011, “The Potential of Social Identity for Equilibrium Selection,” American
       Economic Review, 101(6): 2562–2589.

Chen, Y. and S.X. Li, 2009, “Group Identity and Social Preferences,” American Economic Review, 99(1):
       431–457.

                                                   55
Coleman, J.S., 1988, “Social Capital in the Creation of Human Capital,” American Journal of Sociology
        94, 95-120.
Coleman, J.S., 1990, Foundations of Social Theory, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Costa, D., 2000, “From Mill Town to Board Room: The Rise of Women’s Paid Labor,” The Journal of
        Economic Perspectives, 14(4), 101-122
Crouch, C., 1993, Industrial Relations and European State Traditions, Clarendon Press, Oxford
Dal Bo, P., Foster, A., and L. Putterman, “Institutions and Behavior: Experimental Evidence on the
        Effects of Democracy,” American Economic Review, 100 (5), 2205–2229.
Di Tella, R., Galiani, S.F., and E.S. Schargrodsky, 2007, “The Formation of Beliefs: Evidence from
        the Allocation of Land Titles to Squatters,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 22(1), 209–241.
Dixit A., 2004, Lawlessness and Economics: Alternative Models of Governance, Princeton University Press,
        Princeton, N.J.
Djankov, S., La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., and A. Shleifer, 2002, “The Regulation of Entry,”
        Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(1), 1–37.
Doepke, M. and F. Zilibotti, 2008, “Occupational Choice and the Spirit of Capitalism,” The Quarterly
        Journal of Economics, 123(2), 747–793.
Duranton, G. and Rodriguez-Pose, A., 2009, “Family Types and the Persistence of Regional
        Disparities in Europe,” Economic Geography, 85, 23–47.
Durlauf., S. and M. Fafchamps, 2005, “Social Capital,” Handbook of Economic Growth, in Aghion, P.
        and S. Durlauf (eds.), Handbook of Economic Growth, North Holland: Elsevier
Easterly, W. and R. Levine, 2003, “Tropics, Germs, and Crops: How Endowments Influence
        Economic Development,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 50(1), 3–39.
Eckel, C. and P. Grossman, 2005, “Managing Diversity by Creating Team Identity,” Journal of
        Economic Behavior and Organization, 58: 371–392.
Engerman, S. and K. L. Sokoloff, 1997, “Factor Endowments, Institutions, and Differential Paths of
        Growth Among New World Economies: A View from Economic Historians of the United
        States,” in: Harber, ed., How Latin America Fell Behind, Stanford: Stanford University Press,
        260–304.
Ertan, A., Page, T. and L. Putterman, 2009, “Who to Punish? Individual Decisions and Majority
        Rule in Mitigating the Free Rider Problem,” European Economic Review, 53 (5): 495-511.
Fafchamps, M., 2000, “Ethnicity and Credit in African Manufacturing,” Journal of Development
        Economics, 61, 205–235.

                                                    56
Fehr, E., Fischbacher, U., Schupp, B., Von Rosenbladt, and J. Wagner, 2002, “A Nation-Wide
        Laboratory. Examining Trust and Trustworthiness by Integrating Behavioral Experiments
        into Representative Surveys,” CESIFO Working Paper.
Fernandez, R., 2008, “Culture and Economics,” The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, second
        edition, S.N. Durlauf and L.E. Blume (eds.), Palgrave Macmillan.
Fernandez, R., 2011, “Does Culture Matter?” in: Handbook of Social Economics, J. Behnabib, A. Bisin
        and M.O. Jackson (eds.).
Fernandez, R., 2013, “Cultural Change as Learning: The Evolution of Female Labor Force
        Participation Over a Century,” American Economic Review, 103(1): 472–500.
Fernandez, R. and A. Fogli, 2010, “Culture: An Empirical Investigation of Beliefs, Work, and
        Fertility,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 1(1), 146–177.
Fernandez-Villaverde, Greenwood, J. and N. Guner, 2013, “From Shame to Game in One Hundred
        Years: A Macroeconomic Model of the Raise in Premarital Sex and Its De-Stigmatization,,”
        Journal of the European Economic Association, forthcoming.
Fershtman, C. and U. Gneezy, 2001, “Discrimination in a Segmented Society: An Experimental
        Approach,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(1): 351–377.
Fershtman, C., Gneezy, U., and F. Verboven, 2005, “Discrimination and Nepotism: The Efficiency
        of the Anonymity Rule,” Journal of Legal Studies, 34(2), 371–396.
Figes, O., 1989, Peasant Russia, Civil Was: The Volga Countryside in Revolution: 1917-1921, Clarendon
        Press.
Fisher, D. H., 1989, Albion’s Seed: Four British Folkways in America, New York: Oxford University
        Press.
Fisman, R., 2003, “Ethnic Ties and the Provision of Credit: Relationship-Level Evidence from
        African Firms,” Advances in Economic Analysis and Policy, 3(1).
Fogli, A. and L. Veldkamp, 2011, “Nature or Nurture? Learning and the Geography of Female
        Labor Force Participation, Econometrica, 79(4), 1103–1138.
Francois, P. and Van Ypersele, 2009, “Doux Commerce: Does Market Competition Cause Trust?”
        UBC, mimeo.
Frey, B., 1998, “Institutions and Morale: The Crowding-out Effect,” in Economics, Values and
        Organization, ed. A. Ben-Ner and L. Putterman, 437-460, New York: Cambridge University
        Press.
Fukuyama, F., 1995, Trust: The Social Virtues and the Creation of Prosperity, New York: Free Press.

                                                    57
Galasso, V. and P. Profeta, 2012, “When the State Mirrors the Family: The Design of Pension
        Systems,” Bocconi University, mimeo.
Galor, O. and D. Weil, 1996, “The Gender Gap, Fertility and Growth,” American Economic
        Review, 86(3), 374-87
Geertz, C., 1973, The Interpretation of Cultures. New York: Basic Books.
Gennaioli, N. and I. Rainer, 2007, “The Modern Impact of Precolonial Centralization in Africa,”
        Journal of Economic Growth, 12 (3), 185–234.
Giavazzi, F., Petkov, I. and F. Schiantarelli, 2014, “Culture: Persistence or Evolution”, Boston
        College WP 853.
Giavazzi, F., Schiantarelli, F., and M. Serafinelli, 2013. “Attitudes, Policies and Work,” Journal of the
        European Economic Association, 11 (6), 1256-1289
Giuliano, P., 2007, “Living Arrangements in Western Europe: Does Cultural Origin Matter?” Journal
        of the European Economic Association, 5(5), 927–952.
Giuliano, P. and A. Spilimbergo, 2014, “Growing Up in a Recession,” Review of Economic Studies, 81
        (2), 787-817.
Giuliano, P., Spilimbergo, A., and G. Tonon, “Genetic Distance, Transportation Costs, and Trade,
        Journal of Economic Geography, forthcoming.
Glaeser, E., Laibson, D., Scheinkman, J., and Soutter, C., 2000, “Measuring Trust,” Quarterly Journal
        of Economics, 115, 811–846.
Glaeser, E., R. La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, F., and A. Shleifer, 2004, “Do Institutions Cause
        Growth?” Journal of Economic Growth, 9, 271–303.
Glaeser E., G. Ponzetto, and A. Shleifer, 2007, “Why Does Democracy Need Education?” Journal of
        Economic Growth 12, 77–99.
Gneezy, U. and D.M. Fessler, 2012, “Conflict, Sticks, and Carrots: War Increases Prosocial
        Punishments and Rewards, Proceedings of the Royal Society of Biology, 279, 219–233.
Gneezy, E., Leibbrandt, A., and J. List, 2012, “Ode to the Sea: On the Emergence of Social Norm,”
        University of Chicago, mimeo.
Goldin, C., 1990, Understanding the Gender Gap: An Economic History of American Women, New York:
        Oxford University Press
Goldin, C. and L. Katz, 2002, “The Power of the Pill: Oral Contraceptives and Women’s Career and
        Marriage Decisions”, Journal of Political Economy, 110(4), 730-770



                                                    58
Gorodnichenko, Y. and G. Roland, 2013a, “Culture, Institutions, and the Wealth of Nations,” UC
        Berkeley, mimeo.
Gorodnichenko, Y. and G. Roland, 2013b, “Culture, Institutions, and Democratization,” UC
        Berkeley, mimeo.
Gorodnichenko, Y. and G. Roland, 2014, “Understanding the Individualism-Collectivism Cleavage
        and its Effects: Lessons from Cultural Psychology,” UC Berkeley, mimeo.Gorski, P., 2003,
        The Disciplinary Revolution: Calvinism and the Rise of the State in Early Modern Europe, Chicago:
        University of Chicago Press.
Greenwood, J., Seshadri, A. and M. Yorugoklu, 2005, “Engines of Liberation,” Review of Economic
        Studies, 72(1), 109–133.
Greif, A., 1994, “Cultural Beliefs and the Organization of Society: A Historical and Theoretical
        Reflection on Collectivist and Individualistic Societies,” Journal of Political Economy, 102(5),
        912–950.
Greif, A., 2005, “Commitment, Coercion, and Markets: The Nature and Dynamics of Institutions
        Supporting Exchange,” in: The Handbook of New Institutional Economics, C. Menard and M.M.
        Shirley (eds.), Norwell, Mass: Kluwer Academic Publisher.
Greif, A., 2006a, Institutions and the Path to the Modern Economy: Lessons from Medieval Trade, Cambridge
        University Press.
Greif, A., 2006b, “Family Structure, Institutions, and Growth: The Origins and Implications of
        Western Corporations,” American Economic Review, 96(2): 308–312.
Greif, A. and G. Tabellini, 2012, “The Clan and the City: Sustaining Cooperation in China and
        Europe,” IGIER WP 445.
Grosjean, P., 2011, “The Weight of History on European Cultural Integration: A Gravity Approach,”
        American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 101(3): 504–508.
Grosjean, P., forthcoming, “A History of Violence: The Culture of Honor as a Determinant of
        Homicide in the U.S. South,” Journal of the European Economic Association
Gruber, J. and D. Hungerman, 2008, “The Church Versus the Mall: What Happens When Religion
        Faces Increased Secular Competition?” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(2), 831–862.
Guiso, L., Sapienza, P., and L. Zingales, 2004, “The Role of Social Capital in Financial
        Development,” American Economic Review, 94(3), 526–556.
Guiso, L., Sapienza, P., and L. Zingales, 2006, “Does Culture Affect Economic Outcomes?” Journal
        of Economic Perspectives, 20(2): 23–48.

                                                   59
Guiso, L., Sapienza, P., and L. Zingales, 2008a, “Trusting the Stock Market,” Journal of Finance, 63(6),
        2557–2600.
Guiso, L., Sapienza, P., and L. Zingales, 2008b, “Social Capital as Good Culture,” Journal of the
        European Economic Association, Vol. 6 (2–3), 295–320.
Guiso, L., Sapienza, P. and L. Zingales, 2009, “Cultural Biases in Economic Exchange?” Quarterly
        Journal of Economics, 124(3), 1095–1131.
Guiso, L., Sapienza, P., and L. Zingales, 2011, “Civic Capital as the Missing Link,” Handbook of Social
        Economics, Vol. 1a, J. Behhabib, A. Bisin, and M.O. Jackson (eds.).
Guiso L. Sapienza P., and L. Zingales, 2013, “Long-Term Persistence,” Northwestern University,
        mimeo.
Heine, S. J., 2008, Cultural psychology, W.W. Norton & Company
Heine, S. J., 2010, “Cultural Psychology” in Handbook of Social Psychology, D. Fiske, D. Gilbert and G.
        Lindzey.
Henrich, J., Boyd, R., Bowles, S., Camerer, C., Fehr, E., Gintis, H. and R. McElreath, 2001, “In
        Search of Homo Economicus: Behavioral Experiments in 15 Small-Scale Societies,”
        American Economic Review, 91(2): 73–78.
Herrmann, B., Thoni, C., and Gachter, S., 2008, “Antisocial Punishment Across Societies,” Science,
        319(5868), 1362–1367.
Hofstede, G., 2001, Culture’s Consequences: Comparing Values, Behavior, and Organizations Across Nations,
        second edition. Sage Publications.
Jackson K., (2013) “Contract Enforceability and the Evolution of Social Capital,” The Journal of
        Economic Law and Organizations, 29, 60–77.
Kaplow, L. and S. Shavell, 2007, “Toward a Theory of a Moral System That Optimally Channels
        Behavior,” Journal of Political Economy, 115, 494–514.
Knack, S. and P. Keefer, 1997, “Does Social Capital Have an Economic Payoff? A Cross-Country
        Investigation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(4), 1252–1288.
Kohn, M. et al., “Position in the Class Structure and Psychological Functioning in the United States,
        Japan, and Poland,” American Journal of Sociology, 95(4), 964–1008.
Kuran, T., 2005, “The Absence of the Corporation in Islamic Law: Origins and Persistence,”
        American Journal of Comparative Law, 53, 785–834.
La Ferrara, E., 2010, “Family and Kinship Ties in Development: An Economist’s Perspective,” in:
        Culture, Institutions and Development, J.P. Platteau (ed.), Routledge.

                                                     60
La Ferrara, E. and A. Milazzo, 2011, “Customary Norms, Inheritance, and Human Capital. Evidence
        from a Reform of the Matrilineal System in Ghana,” Bocconi University, mimeo.
Laitin, D., 2007, Nations States and Violence, Oxford University Press, Oxford, U.K.
Landes D., 1998, The Wealth and Poverty of Nations, Norton, New York.
La Port, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Pop-Eleches, C. and A. Shleifer, 2004m “Judicial Checks and
        Balances”, Journal of Political Economy, 112 (2), 445-470.
La Porta R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., and R. Vishny, 1997, “Legal Determinants of External
        Finance,” Journal of Finance, 52(3), 1131–1150.
La Porta R., Lopez de Silanes, F. Shleifer, A., and R. Vishny, 1998, “Law and Finance,” Journal of
        Political Economy, 106 (6), 1113–1155.
La Porta R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., and R. Vishny, 1999, “The Quality of Government,”
        Journal of Law Economics and Organization, 15(1), 222–279.
La Porta R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., and R. Vishny, 2002, “Government Ownership of
        Banks,” The Journal of Finance, 57(1), 265–301.
Lee, W. and J. Roemer, 2006, “Racism and Redistribution in the United States: A solution to the
        problem of American exceptionalism”, Journal of Public Economics, 1027-1052.
Levine, D. and L. Tyson, 1990, “Participation, Productivity, and the Firm’s Environment,” in Paying
        for Productivity: A Look at the Evidence, ed. A. S. Blinder, 183-237, Center for Economic
        Progress and Employment Series. Washington, DC: Brookings Institutions.
Licht, A., Goldschmidt, C. and S. Schwartz, “Culture, Law and Corporate Governance,” 2005,
        International Review of Law and Economics, 25, 229-255.
Lipset, S. M., 1959, “Some Social Requisites of Democracy: Economic Development and Political
        Legitimacy”, American Political Science Review, 53, 69-105.
Lipset, S. M. and Marks, G. W., 2001, “It Didn’t Happen Here: Why Socialism Failed in the United
        States”, Norton, New York.
Locke, R.M., “Building Trust,” in: Mezzogiorno and Politiche di Sviluppo, A. Flora (ed.), Naples: Edizioni
        Scientifiche Italiane, 109–133.
Luke, N. and K. Munshi, 2006, “New Roles for Marriage in Urban Africa: Kinship Networks and
        the Labor Market in Kenya,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 88(2), 264–282.
Luttmer, E., 2001, “Group Loyalty and the Taste for Redistribution”, Journal of Political Economy, 109,
        500-528



                                                    61
Luttmer, E. and M. Singhal, 2011, “Culture, Context, and the Taste for Redistribution,” American
        Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 3(1): 157–179.
Macfarlane, A., 1978, The Origins of English Individualism: The Family Property and Social Transition, Wiley-
        Blackwell.
Malmendier, U., and S. Nagel, 2011, “Depression Babies: Do Macroeconomic Experiences Affect
        Risk-Taking?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126, 373–416.
Markus, H. R. and Kitayama, S., 1991, “Culture and the Self: Implications for Cognition, Emotion
        and Motivation”, Psychological Review, 98(2), 224-253.
Michalopoulos, S. and E. Papaioannou, 2013,a “Pre-Colonial Ethnic Institutions and Contemporary
        African Development,” Econometrica, 81(1), 113–152.
Michalopoulos, S. and E. Papaioannou, 2014, “National Institutions and Subnational Development
        in Africa,” 2013, Nannicini, T., Stella, A., Tabellini, G., and U. Troiano, 2012, “Social Capital
        and Political Accountability,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 5, 222–250.
Murrell, P. and M. Schmidt, 2011, “The Coevolution of Culture and Institutions in Seventeenth
        Century England”, University of Maryland, mimeo.
North, D., 1990, Institutions, Institutional Change, and Economic Performance, Cambridge University Press,
        Cambridge.
North, D., 1991, “Institutions”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 5(1), 97-112.
Nunn, N., 2009, “The Importance of History for Economic Development,” Annual Review of
        Economics, 1(1), 65–92.
Nunn, N., 2013, “Historical Development,” in: Handbook of Economic Growth, Vol. 2, Aghion, P. and
        S. Durlauf (eds.), North-Holland.
Oyserman, D., Conn, H. M. and Kemmelmeier, M., 2002, “Rethinking Individualism and
        Collectivism: Evaluation of Theoretical Assumptions and Meta-Analyses”, Psychological
        Bulletin, 128, 3-72
Padró i Miguel, G., Qian, N., and Y. Yao, 2013, “Making Democracy Work: The Effect of Social
        Capital on Elections and Public Goods in China,” Yale University, mimeo.
Persson, T. and G. Tabellini, 2003, The Economic Effects of Constitutions, Cambridge, MA: The MIT
        Press.
Peisakhin, L., 2010, “Living Historical Legacies: The “Why” and “How” of Institutional Persistence,”
        Yale University, mimeo.



                                                     62
Piketty, T., 1995, “Social Mobility and Redistributive Politics,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110,
        551–584.
Pinker, S., 1997, How the Mind Works, New York: W. W. Norton & Company.
Pinotti, P., 2012, “Trust, Regulation and Market Failures,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 94(3),
        650–658.
Pipes, R., 1994, Russia under the Bolshevik Revolution, Vintage Books, New York
Platteau, J.P., 2000, Institutions, Social Norms, and Economic Development, Academic Publishers and
        Routledge.
Putnam, R., Leonardi, R., and R.Y. Nanetti, 1993, Making Democracy Work, Princeton, NJ: Princeton
        University Press.
Putnam, R., 2000, Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American Community, New York: Simon and
        Schuster.
Roland, G., 2004, “Understanding Institutional Change: Fast-Moving and Slow-Moving Institutions,”
        Studies in Comparative International Development, 38(4), 109–131.
Schelling, T., 1960, The Strategy of Conflict, Cambridge: Harvard University Press
Schwartz, S.H., 1992, “Universals in the Content and Structure of Values: Theory and Empirical
        Tests in 20 Countries,” in: Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, M. Zanna (ed.), New
        York: Academic Press.
Shiller, R., Boycko, M., Koborov, M., Winter, S., and T. Schelling, 1992, “Hunting for Homo
        Sovieticus: Situational Versus Attitudinal Factors in Economic Behavior,” Brookings Papers on
        Economic Activity, 1, 127–194.
Spolaore, E. and R. Wacziarg, 2013, “How Deep Are the Roots of Economic Development?”,
        Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 51 (2), 325-369.
Stulz, R. and R. Williamson, 2003, “Culture, Openness and Finance”, Journal of Financial Economics, 70
        (3), 313-349.
Sombart, W., 1976, Why Is There No Socialism in the United States? White Plains
Sutter, M., Haigner, S. and M. Kocher, 2010, “Choosing the Carrot or the Stick? Endogenous
        Institutional Choice in Social Dilemma Situations,” Review of Economic Studies, 77 (4): 1540-
        1566.
Tabellini, G., 2008a, “Institutions and Culture,” Journal of the European Economic Associations, 6(2–3),
        255–294.



                                                     63
Tabellini, G., 2008b, “The Scope of Cooperation: Values and Incentives,” Quarterly Journal of
        Economics, 123(3), 905–950.
Tabellini, G., 2010, “Culture and Institutions: Economic Development in the Regions of Europe,”
        Journal of the European Economic Association, 8(4), 677–716.
Todd, E., 1983, The Explanation of Ideology: Family Structures and Social Systems, Basic Blackwell, New
        York.
Todd, E., 1990, L’Invention de l’Europe, Seuil, Paris.
Tyran, J. R. and L. Feld, 2006, “Achieving Compliance when Legal Sanctions are Non-deterrent”,
        Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 108 (1): 135-156.
Uslaner, E., 2005, “Trust as a Moral Value,” in: Handbook of Social Capital, D. Castiglione, J.W. van
        Deth, and G. Wolleb (eds.), Oxford University Press.
Voors, M., Nillesen, E.E., Verwimp, P., Bulte, E. H., Lesink, R., Van Soest, D., et al., 2012, “Violent
        Conflict and Behavior: A Field Experiment in Burundi,” American Economic Review, 102(2),
        941–964.
Weber, M., Economy and Society, 1978, G. Roth and C. Wittich (eds.), Berkeley: University of
        California Press.
Whitt, S. and R.K. Wilson, 2007, “The Dictator Game, Fairness, and Ethnicity in Postwar Bosnia,”
        American Journal of Political Science, 51 (3), 655–668.
Willinger, M., Keser, C., Lohmann, C., and J.C. Usunier, 2003, “A Comparison of Trust and
        Reciprocity Between France and Germany: Experimental Investigation Based on the
        Investment Game,” Journal of Economic Psychology, 24(4), 447–466.
Winick, C. (1956), Dictionary of Anthropology, New York: Philosophical Library.
Wyatt-Brown, B., 1982, Southern Honor: Ethics and Behavior in the Old South, New York: Oxford
        University Press
Wyatt-Brown, B., 2001, The Shaping of Southern Culture: Honor, Grace and War, 1760s-1890s, Chapel Hill:
        University of North Carolina




                                                      64
                      Figure 1: Geographical Distribution of Cultural Values




                                        Generalized trust




Trust
(.4639733,1]
(.3163583,.4639733]
(.1946096,.3163583]
[0,.1946096]
No data




                                          Individualism




Individualism
(.7294118,1]
(.4411765,.7294118]
(.1647059,.4411765]
[0,.1647059]
No data




                                               65
                           Family Ties




Family Ties
(.8077196,1]
(.6565442,.8077196]
(.4523764,.6565442]
[0,.4523764]
No data




                       Generalized Morality




Generalized Morality
(.4877727,1]
(.3426272,.4877727]
(.2580903,.3426272]
[.0476627,.2580903]
No data




                        Work-Luck Beliefs




Work - Luck
(.5767357,1]
(.460053,.5767357]
(.3106456,.460053]
[0,.3106456]
No data




                               66
67
