NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PER-CAPITA INCOME AS A DETERMINANT OF INTERNATIONAL TRADE
AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLICIES
James R. Markusen
Working Paper 19754
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19754
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2013

This paper originated following an invitation to present a paper at the conference Environmental Protection
and Sustainability Forum, held at the University of Exeter April 13-15, 2011, which reignited a long-dormant
interest in trade policy. The first draft was finally written while a visitor at Hitotsubashi University,
and I thank my colleagues there for a delightful and productive three months. I am primarily a trade
economist and have been away from environment issues for a couple of decades. So I am currently
seeking and reading related papers. I am especially interested in finding empirical work that estimates
something like an income elasticity of demand for environmental quality. The views expressed herein
are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by James R. Markusen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Per-capita Income as a Determinant of International Trade and Environmental Policies
James R. Markusen
NBER Working Paper No. 19754
December 2013
JEL No. F1,F18,Q56
ABSTRACT
International trade policy analysis has tended to focus on the production side of general equilibrium,
with policies such as a tariff or carbon tax affecting international and internal income distributions
through a Heckscher-Ohlin nexus of factor intensities and factor endowments. Here I move away from
this structure to focus on demand and preferences. The specific context is an international environmental
externality such as carbon emissions, and I assume a high income elasticity of demand for environmental
quality. I analyze how per-capita income differences between two countries affect their abatement
efforts in a non-cooperative policy-setting game. This outcome can then be used as a disagreement point
to analyze cooperative Nash bargaining. In both outcomes, the poor country makes a lower abatement
effort in equilibrium; indeed, it may make none at all and cooperative bargaining with only abatement
levels as an instrument may offer no gains. Other features include a novel terms-of-trade externality
in which an abating country passes on a part of its abatement cost to its trading partner, in which case
the non-cooperative and cooperative outcomes are identical under special symmetry assumptions.
When per-capita income differences are large, the poor country may be worse off when the rich country
abates. Finally, I examine “issue linking” in international bargaining, in which one country is both large
and rich, and hence has both a high tariff and a high abatement effort in a non-cooperative equilibrium.
James R. Markusen
Department of Economics
University of Colorado
Boulder, CO 80309-0256
and NBER
james.markusen@colorado.edu

1.

Introduction

Much of the literature on trade policy concentrates on the production side of general
equilibrium. In the trade/environment literature for example, a typical model might involve the
nexus among factor intensities in production, factor endowments of countries, and pollution
intensities across goods. A common question might be how changes in trade or environmental
policy of one country then change total world pollution and the distribution of pollution
emissions across countries (e.g., the carbon leakage and pollution-haven literatures).
Considerations of the role and determinants of the demand for environmental quality
across countries and hence endogenous policy are less featured, with the exception of a few
papers on the environmental Kuznets curve. Per-capita income differences have, of course,
played a prominent role in climate negotiations (most recently in Poland), with poor countries
arguing again having to bear restrictions while high income countries want an even burden
sharing. Many of the arguments strike me as playing at ethics, such as arguing whether or not
the high-income countries’ historic contribution to the stock of atmospheric CO2 means that they
should bear much of the burden. Economic analysis seems lacking.
The principal focus of the paper is on how the per-capita income levels of and differences
between two countries affect their abatement efforts in a non-cooperative policy-setting game.
This outcome can then be used as a disagreement point to analyze Nash bargaining to solve for a
cooperative outcome. To attack this problem, I develop a model of non-homothetic preferences
in which environmental quality has a high income elasticity of demand. At the same time, the
usual production side factors just mentioned are neutralized via the use of a novel constant
elasticity of substitution transformation function. Global, trans-boundary pollution depends only
on both countries’ total production and resources withdrawn from production are used in an
abatement activity, financed by a non-distortionary tax. Comparative advantage in two
consumption goods links the countries through trade, such that more abatement by either country
shifts world commodity prices in that country’s favor by withdrawing resources from production.
After developing the general two-country model, I present a simplified version which I
call the “model of the model”, with which we can derive analytical solutions for best responses
by each country to the other country and how these best response functions and the noncooperative Nash equilibrium relate to the levels of and differences between per-capita incomes
in the two countries. Following this, I develop the a general simulation model using a relatively
novel optimization solver in GAMS. I model the general-equilibrium policy problem as an
MPEC (mathematical programming with equilibrium constraints). In a non-cooperative
outcome, each country chooses an abatement tax, and a tariff in a later section, to maximizing its
utility given the tariff and tax of the other country, with the two-country general-equilibrium
model as a constraint set. Cooperative outcomes can be found using non-cooperation as a
disagreement outcome, which I contrast to other reference solutions for world welfare.
A couple of basic results are apparent in the analytical model, illustrated again in the
general-equilibrium model. One result is that optimal abatement policy produces a non1

2
monotonic Kuznet’s curve. As per-capita income rises from a very low level, environmental
quality falls, but later rises as an abatement policy is instituted, with the share of income devoted
to abatement increasing in per-capita income. Second, non-cooperative policy is characterized
by “policy leakage”’; that is, a government will reduce its abatement effort in response to an
increase by the other country. Third, an interesting result emerges when the two countries are
identical and have a strong pattern of comparative advantage. Because an abating country passes
on half the cost to the other country in a non-cooperative equilibrium, it turns out that the noncooperative and cooperative outcomes are identical in a special case.
The main project is to examine non-cooperative and cooperative outcomes with respect
to abatement efforts by two countries of equal total income. Allowing the per-capita income of
the countries to differ holding total income constant (e.g., one country has fewer but more
productive households), the Nash non-cooperative policy outcome has a higher abatement effort
by the high-income country and a lower effort by the poor country relative to when both
countries have identical per-capita incomes. The same is true for a cooperative Nash bargaining
outcome using the non-cooperative outcome as the disagreement outcome.
Two further experiments are conducted on this question. In the first alternative to the
base case, comparative advantage is eliminated so that there is no trade and no effect of one
country’s abatement on the terms of trade. This reduces the non-cooperative abatement effort of
both countries, since a small increase in abatement no longer shifts the terms of trade in that
country’s favor. I note that it can now be the poor country that gains more at both the
cooperative and non-cooperative outcome relative to zero abatement by both countries (it does
not have a terms-of-trade loss).
In the second alternative case, the difference in the per-capita income of the two
countries is widened considerably (returning to base-case comparative advantage). One
interesting result is that the poor country may be made worse off by an optimal abatement effort
by the rich country, since the term-of-trade deteriorating for the poor country may outweigh the
smaller benefits of any spillover improvement to its environment. This case also illustrates an
important policy point, which is that there may be no gains to cooperation if abatement efforts
are the only instrument available to the two countries in their bargaining.
A natural extension of the analysis is to consider “issue linking” in international
bargaining. Specifically, there is the standard motive for protection in that an import tariff
improves a country’s terms of trade. Is there a role for linking together bargaining on abatement
efforts with trade liberalization? A clear possibility occurs when the rich country is also large,
so that it will have a high tariff in a Nash equilibrium in tariff rates, as well as a high abatement
tax. I present a case in which linking helps the small poor country without harming the large
rich country, but bargaining theory suggests that robust results are unlikely.
Before turning to a brief literature review, two motivating data plots are given in Figures
1a and 1b. Figure 1a plots an environmental sustainability index from the Global
Competitiveness Report against the log of country per-capita income. While there is variation in

3
the data, it is clear that richer countries have more sustainable policies despite having a lot more
production and consumption. Because the policies behind this are unclear, Figure 1b show data
on a specific policy. Although their focus is different from mine, Broner, Bustos and Carvalho
(2012) have essentially shown a relationship between environmental standards and per-capita
income, using the national standards on the maximum lead content of gasoline (petrol) across
countries. I have gone to the source of this data (Lovei 1998) and show it in a plot against log
per-capita income for the same year as the lead-content data (1996) from World Bank statistics
in Figure 1b. Richer countries adopt tougher and more costly standards.
There is an immense amount of literature related to this paper, in part because it overlaps
a little with three quite separate agendas. First there is the trade and environment literature.
Second, there is a literature on income elasticities of demand generally and willingness to pay for
environmental goods specifically. Third, there is a literature on bargaining and linked games. I
have done a little work in all three areas but am an expert in none individually. I’ll offer a short
review, but will surely miss some things that are important. Please let me know.
The trade-and-environment literature is extensive, but few papers seem to include any
theoretical consideration of per-capita income and non-homothetic preferences. Clearly,
Copeland and Taylor’s (2004) review article is a starting point, with other features in Copeland
and Taylor (1994) and (2005). Papers embedding non-homothetic preferences in generalequilibrium trade models include Hunter (1991), Hunter and Markusen (1988), and Markusen
(1986, 2013). There is a significant empirical literature on the environmental Kuznet Curve,
relating environmental quality (or inversely pollution) to per-capita income or some other
measure of development. Papers include Chiu (2012), Deacon and Norman (2006), Grossman
and Krueger (1995), Selden and Song (1994) and Tang (2012). Evidence for a non-monotonic
Kuznets Curve (environmental quality at first falls, then rises with per-capita income) seems
mixed, but there are many separate factors at work other than simply preferences.
On the environmental economics side, there is a literature examining the income
elasticity of demand for environmental quality and the income elasticity of willingness to pay.
These are not the same as noted by Flores and Carson (1997) and it will be true in my model that
the income elasticity of demand exceeds the income elasticity of willingness to pay.. Evidence
that these income elasticities are clearly greater than one is mixed: evidence is presented in
Hökby and Söderqvist (2003) and Kriström and Riera (1996) casts some doubt on this. Pearce
(2006) summarizes evidence from a number of studies and, while there is a lot of variance,
provides some support for environmental quality being an income-elastic good, a finding more
strongly supported in Deacon and Norman (2006).
Finally, there is a general literature on cooperative and non-cooperative policy outcomes
and issue linking in trade policy (in turn drawing on pure-theory literature which I will not
discuss), generally or in a few cases explicitly on environmental negotiations. Literature
includes Abrego, Perroni, Whalley and Wigle (2001), Bagwell and Staiger (2001), Conconi and
Perroni (2002), Gori and Lambertini (2013), Harstad (2012a, 2012b), Horstmann, Markusen and
Robles (2005), Markusen (1975), Markusen, Morey and Olewiler (1995), and Markusen and

4
Wigle (1989), and Spagnolo (2000). I find it hard to draw general conclusions here. It is
certainly the case that issue linking can result in Pareto improvements for negotiating partners:
there are more instruments to hit multiple targets (trade barriers, environmental protection). But
it is also not hard to produce special cases where one country is worse off by linking.

2.

Income and the Environment

In this section, I consider an international policy question that is of current interest: the
relationship between trade policy and international environmental policy with a global pollutant
such as CO2. Assume that we have two final consumption goods (X1, X2), one environmental
good (E), and two countries (n, s), where n (north) will be the higher per-capita income country.
Final goods are produced by a CET (constant elasticity of transformation) technology,
with one input L, with Lx denoting the total efficiency units of labor allocation to production.
(1)

where F is the elasticity of transformation along the production frontier. The alphas, normalized
to sum to one, are parameters that indicate comparative advantage when they differ across
countries. Use n and s superscripts to denote countries,
(and therefore,
)
indicates that the north has a comparative advantage in good X1 and the south has a comparative
advantage in good X2.
This transformation function is presented in an appendix to the paper, which also shows
two further results. First, the unit (Lx = 1) revenue or national-product function is given by
(2)
Second, the optimal outputs of the Xi at Lx = 1 are found by applying Shepard’s lemma to (2):
(3)

5
Relative production of X1 and X2 thus depend on prices and comparative advantage. The total
output of Xi is given by (3) multiplied by the total labor allocated to production Lx.
(4)
It may help to interpret the "’s to note from (2) and (3) that, if all prices equal one, then "i will
give the value share of Xi in total output.
Let E* be the level or “endowment” of world environmental quality at zero production.
Pollution is modeled as a reduction in the endowment of good E and is proportional to the total
aggregate input Lx in both countries. Input L can also be used for an abatement activity, such as
planting trees which absorb CO2. Aggregate labor in each country is then divided between
production and abatement:
where is effective labor supply (explained shortly).
Pollution

= Reduction in E endowment =

Abatement

= Addition to the E endowment =

(5)

For any allocation of labor between production and abatement in the two countries,
world environmental quality is then given by:
(6)
Abatement is financed by consumption taxes in n and s: tn , ts. The government uses tax
revenue to hire labor away from production and pays it to plant trees. Thus public policy, via the
consumption tax, determines the allocation of the composite input L between production and
abatement. Specifically, the equal taxes on both goods is equivalent to a tax t on the labor input
to production. Budget balance then requires tax revenues twLx to equal abatement expenditures
wLa where w is the wage rate. Thus the tax rate (in either country) will equal the ratio of labor in
abatement to labor in production.
share of labor in abatement (

)

(7)

The advantage of this simple model is that it implies “neutrality” in several senses. By
neutrality I mean:
=>
=>
=>
=>

no pollution-intensive sector
no comparative advantage in polluting sector
no factor-intensity, factor-endowment issues
no pollution-from-consumption-versus-production issue

6
The dominant model in the trade-and-environment literature has only one sector that pollutes,
This leads to policy results that are very sensitive to:
=>
=>
=>

which factor is intensive in which good
which good is the country’s comparative advantage good
whether pollution is from consumption or production

Here we avoid these issues. However, at the same time, allowing the "i’s to differ across
countries generates a comparative advantage motive for trade and gains from trade in the X’s.
This will be important since world prices will change as one country withdraws labor from
production in order to increase abatement. This terms-of-trade change in the relative prices of
the two X goods will always favor the environmentally conscious country, a point I will return to
shortly.
Preferences are Stone-Geary, lower case letters for per-capita or “household” quantities.
Household utility in either country is given by
(8)
where e0 is a positive parameter for each household in each country which creates the nonhomotheticity: up to a critical level of income, there will be no demand for (or not willingness to
pay for) additional environmental quality. It can be useful to think of e0 as an endowment good
given to each household which cannot be traded: every household can watch the sunset and that
is a perfect substitute for a cleaner environment. E is the (world) environmental good supply
given in (6) and is a pure (non-rivaled and non-excludable) public good. So each consumer in
each country gets to consume the entire world supply.
Let

denotes the demand for environment in country i,
is country i’s per-capita (household) income or labor productivity
is the number of households in country i
is the total effective labor supply in i, equal to productivity per household
time the number of households. L is used as numeraire, so country i’s total
income is given by
is the price (willingness to pay) by a single household h for environment in i.

Consumer (household) optimization yields:
(9)

7
(10)
The result is the one just noted: up to the threshold per-capita income given in (10), there is no
demand for environmental quality. Once the threshold income is reached,
(note that ((-1) < 0)

(11)

At a constant price, the income elasticity of demand for E is greater than one once the threshold
is reached. In equilibrium, E must be the same for all consumers in all countries (perfect global
public good). So for (11) to hold, it must be that the willingness to pay pe differs across
countries. This (private) willingness to pay can be found by inverting (11).1
(12)
Since the environment is a public good (non-rivaled and non-excludable), optimal policy
depends on the aggregate benefits of the good across households. The “planner’s problem” is to
maximize the aggregate equivalent of (8):
, where
.
The social-welfare maximizing level of E, analogous to (11), is given by
where

is i’s total income

(13)

When this is set equal to the (exogenous) quantity of E, the price that produces equality is
denoted by , which I’ll term the “social willingness to pay”. Invert (13).
(14)
The income elasticity of social willingness to pay (for a fixed E) with respect to mi, holding hi
constant is one, while the income elasticity with respect to hi holding mi constant is less than one.
Holding total income Mi constant, an increase in per-capita income is a reduction in the
number of households hi, and so the social willingness to pay rises. Note that this passes one
1

Note from (11) and (12) that the income elasticity of demand for E (greater than one), is greater
than the income elasticity of willingness to pay (equal to one in (12)). This difference is explored in
Flores and Carson (1997).

8
simple check: if preferences are homothetic such that e0 = 0, then the social willingness to pay
depends only on total income and not per-capita income and the value of demand is a constant
share of total income:
. Note also that with or without homotheticity, the social
price in (14) is greater than the private willingness to pay in (12) for h > 1.
From (14), the ratio of the social willingness to pay in n and s is given by
(15)
Since E is common to the two countries, we get the following results:
Result: country n will have the higher willingness to pay if:
(a)

both countries have the same total income but country n has a higher per-capita
income (Mn = Ms, hn < hs).

(b)

both countries have the same number of households, but n has a higher per-capita
income and therefore higher total income (Mn > Ms, hn = hs ).

(c)

both countries have the same per-capita income, but country n has more
households and therefore higher total income (hn = Dhs, Mn = DMs, D > 1).

Willingness to pay does not easily translate into an optimal tax rate (abatement effort) in
this model. The introduction of this tax by one country will lead to an increase in E for both
countries, lowering the willingness to pay for environment by the passive country: the q’s are
endogenous to the tax. Thus non-cooperative and cooperative tax rates will differ. Secondly, an
optimal tax must take into account the effect of withdrawing resources from production to use in
abatement on the terms of trade in goods. This terms-of-trade effect can partially compensate
country n for the lower production of goods when it uses resources for abatement, but it creates a
corresponding lost for country s.
In order to understand the terms-of-trade effect, consider some restrictive assumptions in
order to derive a clear expression for the effect of abatement by one country on the terms of
trade. First, assume that the elasticity on transformation is zero, so that goods are produced in
fixed proportions in each country, with that proportion depending on the country’s alpha
parameters. Assume that there is free trade in goods, so that the world production ratio equals
the (inverse) consumer price ratio in equilibrium (since the goods are Cobb-Douglas symmetric
substitutes in consumption). We then have:

9
(16)
Let country n withdraw a unit of labor from production. Differentiating (16), we have:
(17)
where we will assume that country n has the comparative advantage in good 1:
and
.
Assume that the countries are identical initially and that there are no initial abatement
taxes, so that
where
is the total endowment of each country. Second, assume
symmetry in the comparative advantage parameters such that
Because

and

.

= 1 (symmetry in production and consumption), (17)

simplifies to (shown in the appendix)
or

The effect of country n withdrawing a unit of labor from production

(18)

is to

reduce the relative price of country s’s export good X2 (country s has a deterioration in its terms
of trade) with the size of this effect proportional to the comparative advantage spread
.

3.

Analytical solutions for special cases

.
Continue to assume that
is the same in both countries and the production ratio
in each country is fixed as we have just done. But one country (n) may have fewer numbers of
more productive households. Two special cases are instructive.
: no comparative advantage and hence no trade in goods. Country s has
no adverse terms-of-trade effect and benefits from the reduction in admissions from
country n.
This is shown in Figure 2a, where the (right angle) production frontiers are initially the same

10
and country n’s frontier moves in with labor transferred to abatement. All the reduction in
commodity consumption is borne by country n while both countries benefit from an increase in
E.
, that is,

= 0: each country is fully specialized. Country s has

the maximum possible adverse terms-of-trade effect but does benefit from the reduction
in emissions from country n.
This is shown in Figure 2b: because of Cobb-Douglas preferences between X1 and X2, the world
price ratio changes so that both countries share the same reduction in commodity consumption.
Fully half the burden of withdrawing resources from production by country n is shifted to
country s. With Cobb-Douglas demand, each country will have the same income M:
since

which follows from (8), and the symmetry of the alphas

(19)

.

With identical Cobb-Douglas sub-utility functions over X1 and X2, the countries will have
identical (X1, X2) consumption bundles regardless of the level of country n’s abatement effort. In
other words, the change in the terms-of-trade change fully compensates country n (relative to
country s) for its unilateral abatement effort. Both countries have an identical consumption loss
and the same aggregate improvement in the environment. We would expect that the fullspecialization case should lead to higher non-cooperative abatement efforts as each country
passes part of the burden of its tax to its partner.
Consider first the case of no comparative advantage. From our earlier assumptions,
utility of country n is given by
(20)

where

. Using the explicit function form in (8) and exploiting the

symmetry between the two consumption goods, this becomes

(21)

11
The non-cooperative (Nash) solution is found by taking the derivative of (21) with respect to
holding

constant. This derivative rearranges to:
complementary (z) to

(22)

If the first-order condition holds with strict equality, then the complementary variable is strictly
positive and vice versa.
Give equal weights to all three goods, such that , = ( = 1/3. (22) simplifies to
(23)

z
Let E* = 0 to make things even simpler. Then divide through (23) by

z

.

since

(24)

Although I will use a consumption tax in the general-equilibrium model, a very simple tax is just
one on all labor. With L as numeraire, the budget-balance condition that tax revenues equal
payments to labor in abatement is given by
or
. (24) and the corresponding
equation for country s become

z

z
(25)

These are Nash best-response functions giving each country’s “optimal” (non-cooperative) tax as
a function of its rival’s tax. Clearly, the taxes are strategic substitutes. An increase in the
North’s tax improves the environment, therefore reducing the South’s marginal willingness to
pay, and therefore reducing the South’s tax. Each country’s best response tax is increasing in its
per-capita income.
Assuming that the two equations have an interior solution (both taxes positive), the
solution is:
(26)

12
Each country’s tax is increasing in its per-capita income and decreasing in the other country’s
per-capita income, the two country’s total incomes constant by assumption. The difference
between the two countries’ taxes is given by:
(27)
The symmetric solution when both countries have the same per-capita incomes is
critical m:

(28)

where the critical m is the common value of m at which (28) holds with equality at t = 0. Taxes
will be zero at any lower level of m. Once the tax kicks in at
, further increases in m,
raise the tax rate, and so the share of resources devoted to abatement.
Now consider the case of full specialization, with country n producing X1 and s producing
X2, continuing to assume a common value of . The situation follows from equation (19) and
Figure 1b. Each country’s consumption will be half the world output of each good, so the
identical consumption bundles are:
and
. Utility in the North is:
(29)
where

. Notice in (29) that n’s consumption of X2 is now not reduced

by its own abatement effort. As we did above, (29) can be written as

(30)
With the first-order condition given by

z

(31)

Assuming again equally consumption weights such that that , = ( = 1/3, we have

z

(32)

13
Divide through by

as before and use

and

. (32) yields the best-

response functions

z

z
(33)

Assuming an interior solution, we have
(34)
The difference between the tax rates in this solution is
(35)
The symmetric solution when both countries have the same per-capita incomes is
critical m:

(36)

Comparing (36) to (28), we see that non-cooperative taxes are higher under full
specialization, where each country can pass on part of the burden of its tax to the other country.
The critical m, the level of income at which a tax is first introduced, is lower in the case of full
specialization (36).
The weak inequalities in (25) and in (33) each constitute two linear complementarity
problems in the non-negative tax variables. Figure 3 shows a numerical example of these two
cases, in which e0 = 2. Moving to the right on the horizontal axis, per-capita income increases
for the North, with the South’s income being the reciprocal of the North’s. The taxes diverge
under growing income inequality and the taxes under full specialization are greater than under no
comparative advantage.
Now let’s consider a cooperative outcome or a Nash bargaining outcome using the noncooperative outcome as a disagreement point. Impose the assumptions that both countries are
the same size ( is the same) and have the same per-capita income (
).
Since everything is symmetric in this special case (including equal taxes in the non-cooperative
outcome), the cooperative outcome will involve a common abatement effort
, and
the solution can be represented by maximizing the utility of either country under the assumption
of equal abatement efforts. Second, the solution will be the same in either the no-comparative-

14
advantage case or the full-specialization case. In the latter case, each country produces
of its specialization good and trades half of that for the other country’s good, consuming
of each good. In the no-comparative-advantage case, each country both produces
and consumes

of each good. So both cases will yield the same cooperative outcome

given the symmetry assumptions. Dropping the country superscript on
for each country is maximized with respect to a common value of

and h in (21), utility

Equation (21) becomes
(37)

The cooperative and Nash-bargaining solution is found by taking the derivative of (37) with
respect to . This derivative rearranges to:
complementary (z) to

(38)

Give equal weights to all three goods, such that , = ( = 1/3. (38) simplifies to
(39)

z
Let E* = 0 to make things even simpler. Then divide through (39) by
as before.

and use

and

(40)
Here we have an interesting result that the cooperative outcome is the same as the noncooperative outcome under the full-specialization assumption (equation (36)). Under the latter,
each country raises its tax non-cooperatively because it can pass on half the burden to the other
country. Under all our special symmetry assumptions, this substitutes perfectly for a country
raising its tax in order to cooperatively internalize its externality on the other country.
Two final comments before moving on to general equilibrium. First, it is probably clear
that an economy can exhibit a non-monotonic Kuznets’ curve. Starting from a very low m, the
optimal taxes are zero as income increases, meaning that there is an unambiguous fall in E.
Eventually taxes kick in, and after that the tax rates rise with m, and so the share of labor devoted
to abatement rises. At some point, environmental quality may exceed the initial quality, an

15
outcome we will see in the next section. Second, note from the best-response functions (26) and
(33) that we can have something I dub “policy leakage”. As one country increases its abatement
tax and effort, the environment improves and so the optimal response of the other country is to
lower its tax. This is reinforced to the extent that the increase in the first country’s tax makes the
second country poorer through the terms-of-trade effect and hence lowers its willingness to pay.

4.

The general-equilibrium simulation model

The model developed above seems simple, but there is a lot more simultaneity if relative
commodity outputs are endogneous and countries may differ in size (L) as well as per-capita
incomes. Optimal policy depends on income, for example, and income depends on the policy
chosen, both by determining the domestic resources available for production of goods and
through the international general-equilibrium terms-of-trade effect. Note, for example, that the
simple result in (18) requires severe assumptions and even then it is only locally valid in the
neighborhood of zero abatement. So let’s turn to a numerical general-equilibrium model to see
how per-capita income matters for cooperative and non-cooperative outcomes.
The model belongs to a class of problems loosely known as MPEC: mathematical
programming with equilibrium constraints. In our case, the set of equilibrium constraints is the
two-country general-equilibrium model. The latter, in turn, is known as an MCP: mixed
complementarity problem. This is a set of weak inequalities with associated non-negative
variables such as quantities and prices. When a weak inequality holds as an equality, the
complementary variable is positive, zero if the inequality is strict in equilibrium.
The MPEC consists of maximizing some function such as a Nash bargaining function
(cooperative) with respect to instrument variables such as tax rates (pollution taxes and/or tariffs)
subject to the economic equilibrium constraint set. A non-cooperative Nash equilibrium is found
by iteration: maximize the welfare of i holding j’s taxes constant, then hold i’s taxes constant at
the solution values and maximize j’s welfare, repeat. This converges to a best-response, noncooperative outcome in about eight iterations. There is one small difference from the model
above that has no effect on any results.2 Here is a description of the model.
(A)

Alternative objective functions
welfare of country n
welfare of country s
joint welfare (or Nash bargaining function)

2

I define a composite output quantity Z in each country equal to the left-hand side of (1),
analogous to a Dixit-Stiglitz composite differentiated good in monopolistic-competition models. This
carries a price pz which can be useful in comparing the relative price of consumption to the environment.

16
(B)

(C)

The mxm economic equilibrium problem (constraint set): 28 inequalities and unknowns
Inequalities

Complementary Variables

marginal cost $ price
production of Z by n, s
trade in X1, X2 by n, s
welfare in n and s
abatement activities in n and s

quantities
quantities of Z
quantities traded
welfare in n and s
quantity of abatement

2
4
2
2

prices
market clearing: supply $ demand
supply / demand for Zn, Zs
supply / demand for Xi in n, s
supply / demand for L in n and s
supply / demand for welfare
supply / demand for abatement in n, s
supply / demand for environment good

prices of Z in n, s
prices of Xi in n, s
prices of L in n, s
price index in n, s
price of abatement in n, s
willingness to pay in n, s

2
4
2
2
2
2

income balance: income $ expenditure
income balance for n,s

income in n,s

2

auxiliary equations
pollution reduction = abatement
pollution = emissions

pollution abatement
pollution

1
1

Additional unmatched instrument variables chosen to optimize welfare:
pollution abatement effort (abatement tax) in countries n, s
tariffs imposed by countries n, s

(D)

Number

2
2

The MPEC (mathematical programming with equilibrium constraints)
Maximize objective function, subject to:
instruments: pollution abatement taxes and tariffs in n, s
mxm economic equilibrium problem constraint set

4
28

A sample program, written and solved in GAMS, is provided in appendix two to the paper.

17

5.

Policy experiments3

The first policy experiment is shown in Figure 4. This considers environmental quality
as a function of per-capita income, where I make the countries identical (in total and in percapita incomes) for simplicity. Productivity or “effective” labor units per household are
increased holding the number of households constant. The MPEC solves for the optimal taxes or
abatement effort at each level of income (productivity).
This produces a non-monotonic Kuznets curve in Figure 4 as we expect. At very low
levels of per-capita income, there is no demand for abatement or additional environmental
quality and the latter falls with increases in productivity. At a critical level around 0.9 in this
experiment, there is a positive demand for additional environmental quality and the tax kicks in.
The tax rate rises steadily thereafter due to the non-homotheticity, and is equal to 0.25 on the
right-hand boundary where environmental quality is now higher than in the very poor county.
What is perhaps not so obvious is that there is still some non-monotonicity in the Kuznets
curve with homothetic demand. This is due to the fact that the initial fixed endowment of E =
E* is to high or rather the demand price too low to justify abatement at low income levels.
Intuitively, a really poor country would want to sell off some of the environmental good if it
could under either homothetic or non-homothetic demand. Adding the non-homotheticity
assumption shifts the minimum point to the right in Figure 4 (not shown). If there was no initial
endowment of E, E* = 0, then the homothetic case would produce a constant tax rate at all levels
of income such that environmental quality is a linear function of income passing through the
origin, while the non-homothetic case continues to look like Figure 4, E can go negative
provided that -E < e0). This possibly expected result occurs only when E* = 0.
The next exercise is to examine how cooperative and non-cooperative policy outcomes
depend on per-capita income. Some result are shown in Figure 5. In all cases, the total
incomes( ) of the countries are equal. There is a strong pattern of comparative advantage in the
case considered,

, and F = 1. Thus when per-capita incomes and taxes are

unequal, there will be a fairly strong terms-of-trade effect that favors country n.
The solid boxes in Figure 5 show an outcome when the two countries have equal percapita incomes (or same number of equally productive households). Each country’s (unilateral)
optimal tax is shown when the other country’s tax is zero as are the non-cooperative Nash
equilibrium rates. There is no difference in the values of the taxes across countries in this latter
equilibrium as we expect to be the case. The (equal) cooperative tax rates are Nash bargaining
3

Somewhat different parameterizations are used here than in simplified analytical model. Here
environmental quality is:
with
.A
consumption tax is used instead of a labor tax, though there is a simple relationship between them as can
be seen from (10): the equivalent labor tax is equal to t/(1+t) where t is the consumption tax. These are
simply for expositional purposes and do not affect the qualitative results in any way.

18
outcomes where the disagreement outcome is the non-cooperative Nash equilibrium. The
cooperative rates are considerably higher than the non-cooperative ones as shown in Figure 5.
The terms-of-trade in both outcomes is one and there is no trade in goods.
The second set of outcomes, shown with a slash through the boxes in Figure 5, assumes
that country n has a per-capita income 1.5 times that of country s. Total incomes are the same as
in the first case (solid boxes), so country n now has fewer, more productive households while s
has more, less productive households. Figure 5 shows that the non-cooperative equilibrium
shifts to a higher tax for country n and to a lower tax for country s (as we would expect). The
cooperative Nash bargaining outcome using the non-cooperative outcomes as the disagreement
point shifts from the equal-per-capita-income scenario in about the same way.
As suggested earlier, country n will be partially, perhaps significantly, compensated for
its higher abatement effort by an improvement in its terms of trade. Specifically, the relative
price of good X1, country n’s export good, is 1.12 at the non-cooperative Nash outcome and 1.14
at the cooperative outcome (these are equal to one at the solution with equal m’s).
Table 1 presents numerical values for these results and compares them to several
alternative scenarios. The first three columns of number are the case where country n’s percapita income is 1.5 times that of country s as in Figure 5. The first row gives the welfare values
when there is no intervention by either country, where these welfare values are normalized at
one. The second and third row of Table 1 give the welfare values for the non-cooperative and
cooperative outcomes, and the lower panel the corresponding tax rates (PTAXN, PTAXS), which
are those in Figure 5. Note that the non-cooperative outcome results in a substantial welfare gain
over non-intervention: unlike a non-cooperative tariff “war” for example, here the noncooperation is a failure to internalize a positive rather than a negative externality.
The tax rates that maximize the Cobb-Douglas world welfare function and a Rawlsian
welfare function are also shown (world welfare is the minimum of the two countries’ welfare
levels. In the fourth and fifth rows of Table 1 (and tax rates below).. The Cobb-Douglas is
equivalent to a Nash bargaining outcome when the disagreement outcome for both countries is
zero
An interesting feature of these results is that country n is actually the relative gainer over
the no-intervention outcomes (except the Rawlsian one). How much of this is simply due to the
fact that country n places a much higher value on the environment at the no-intervention point,
and how much might be due to the this terms-of-trade effect? In order to examine this question,
I compute an alternative scenario in which there is no comparative advantage:
Results are shown in columns 3 and 4 of Table 1. Here we see some significant
differences. First, the relative gainer is reversed in the cooperative and non-cooperative Nash
outcomes. Now country s is the relative gainer. This verifies the conjecture that the terms-oftrade effect that favors the higher-tax country n in columns 1 and 2 is indeed important in
determining the relatively larger gains for country n in those columns. Second, note in the lower

19
part of the Table that the non-cooperative rates for both countries are lower when there is no
comparative advantage. This is clearly due to the fact that raising your tax rate has no
compensating beneficial effect on the terms of trade with no comparative advantage. Third, the
cooperative Nash is almost unchanged from the comparative-advantage case, which seems to
follow from section 3: cooperative internalizes the terms-of-trade externality to the extent there
is one.
The CD maximum rates are also unchanged in alternative scenario 1, because there is no
terms-of-trade effect when the countries have the same rates. Fourth, the Rawlsian maximum
rate is now lower for country n and higher for country s. I think that the intuition here is that,
starting from the Rawlsian taxes with comparative advantage, removing comparative advantage
reduces the welfare of high-tax country n and raises it for country s. The Rawlsian outcome then
adjusts n’s tax down and s’s tax up in alternative scenario 1.
A second alternative case is presented in columns 5 and 6 of Table 1. Comparative
advantage is reinstated, but country n now has ten times the per-capita income of country s.
Results are now that country s has a zero tax rate at both the cooperative and non-cooperative
Nash outcomes. The non-cooperative outcome is in fact a Pareto optimum: there are no gains
from cooperative. Second, note that country s is indifferent between the no-intervention
outcome and the cooperative or non-cooperative equilibrium (in fact, I search until I found the
per-capita income difference, a factor of ten, that gave this borderline result). If I push the size
difference a little higher, then country s is actually worse off than with no intervention. Country
s places little value on improved environmental quality and suffers a negative terms-of-trade
effect when country n imposes its abatement tax. The relative price of country n’s export good is
1.22 at the cooperative and non-cooperative tax rate of 0.41 in alternative scenario 2.
Alternative case 2 also gives large difference between CD world welfare maximum tax
rates and the Rawlsian rates. The CD rates are again equal to one another, while country n bears
all the abatement effort in the Rawlsian equilibrium, which is equal to the non-cooperative Nash
equilibrium in all respects.
The model is then used to consider an experiment in which countries agree to a common
tax rule tn = ts, and then bargain over the level of this shared tax rate. The countries are initially
identical in total and per-capita incomes, and then the per-capita income of country s is reduced
holding its total income constant (more but less productive households). Results are shown in
Figure 6, where the common tax rate is on the horizontal axis. Both countries’ welfare levels are
shown by the curve “country n’s welfare” when they have the same per-capita income. Now
lower country s’s per-capita income to one-fifth and then one-tenth of country n’s per-capita
income. The curve for country n does not change, while that for country s is flatter and has its
maximum at a lower level of per-capita income. When the difference between the countries’
per-capita incomes is a factor of ten, country s cannot gain at any common tax rate. Thus having
agreed on an “equal sharing rule” and then bargaining on the rate, the outcome is a zero rate
when the per-capita-income difference is large. This has some clear applications to situations
such as the Kyoto protocol, where there was considerable controversy over whether or not the

20
poor and rich countries should suffer the same proportional cuts in carbon emissions. The result
was that the poor countries did not participate at all, which is consist with the model here.
Now I turn to issue linking and introduce two additional policy instruments: import
tariffs for countries n and s. We will assume that country n has five times both the total income
and the per-capita income of country s. Comparative advantage is the same as we used
earlier:
and F = 1. A shorted version of the GAMS program (it doesn’t solve for
all scenarios) is attached at the end of the paper. The no-intervention case shown in the first row
of Table 2 fixes the four policy instruments at zero.
Tables 2 then gives the non-cooperative Nash equilibrium in the second row, where each
country jointly chooses its abatement tax and tariff for fixed values of the other country’s
instruments.4 This is solved as an iterative MPEC. Country n’s welfare is maximized with
respect to PTAXN and TARN holding PTAXS and TARS constant. Then the solution values of
PATXN and TARN are held constant and the welfare of country s is maximized with respect to
PTAXS and TARS. The iteration converges to the non-cooperative Nash equilibrium in about six
to eight iterations.
Table 2 shows that, not surprisingly, country n has a high abatement tax and tariff.
Country s has a small tariff and a zero abatement tax. The tariff difference would be expected by
any trade economist from simple non-cooperative tariff theory given the size difference. Table 2
notes a substantial welfare improvement over no intervention for both countries: country s
benefits more from n’s abatement effort than s is hurt by n’s tariff. However, I imagine a case
can easily be produced in which country s is worse off than in the no-intervention equilibrium.
Four cooperative bargaining outcomes are then computed using the Nash equilibrium as a
disagreement point in Table 2. The first computes an isolated environmental tax bargain, tariffs
held at their Nash values. The second computes an isolated tariff bargain, abatement taxes held
at their Nash values. One interesting result here is that there are no gains to an isolated
environment negotiation. No Pareto improving changes in taxes can help and nothing will come
of such a negotiation (sound familiar?). The isolated tariff negotiation does produce a positive
result, as country n lowers its tariff significantly in exchange for country s eliminating its tariff.
In the third case using the non-cooperative outcome as a disagreement point (row 5 of
Table 2), country n offers a lower tariff in exchange for a positive abatement effort by country s.
In my view, this is what some writers and politicians in high-income countries want to do: offer
trade liberalization in exchange for environmental and labor standards to poor countries. Results
in Table 2 indicate a Pareto improvement with the north trading trade liberalization for
4

The welfare numbers are normalized at 1.0 in the non-cooperative outcome in the second row,
but I should note that the difference in the welfare levels is nowhere near a factor of five: n’s welfare is
about twice that of country s. This is due to a large relative price advantage for country s: the relative
price ratio is 0.472 or inverting, the relative price of country s’s export good X2 is 2.121.

21
abatement by the south.
Row 6 of Table 2 takes the non-cooperative Nash outcome as a disagreement outcome
and computes a cooperative bargaining solution treating all four instruments as endogenous
variables. Here the outcome is a zero abatement tax and a zero tariff for country s. Country n
bears the burden of abatement and, in exchange, retain a high tariff but substantially less than the
non-cooperative tariff.
Row 6 emphasizes the fact that free trade may not be achievable even in the fourinstrument case using the Nash equilibrium as the disagreement outcome. Row 7, the final one
in Table 2, therefore adds a final instrument which is a transfer payment to the other four
instruments. In this case, the outcome does involve free trade as intuition probably suggests. It
requires a large transfer payment from s to n: in effect, s bribes n into free trade (this transfer
result is driven by the trade distortion, not the environment distortion). Row 7 also indicates that
the north should bear all of the abatement effort. This is being driven by country size: with s a
lot smaller, the world is scarce in good X2, south’s comparative-advantage good, and abundant in
X1, north’s comparative-advantage good. Thus efficiency dictates that the real cost of the
abatement should fall on X1, meaning the north does the abatement.
It is interesting to see, in both Table 1 and Table 2, that cooperative bargaining does not
extract much in the way of additional gains. The non-cooperative outcomes do a “good job” of
extracting gains, since the non-internalized pollution externality is a positive spillover between
countries. I have no reason to believe that this specific result has great generality beyond this
specific case: results are suggestive and illustrative.
Finally, I’ll just note in passing (without showing another simulation) a point alluded to
in the analytical section. The model is characterized by “policy leakage”, a term I will use to
indicate one country reducing its abatement effort in response to an increase in its trading
partner’s abatement effort. There is no particular role for differences in per-capita income here,
but I thought a couple of brief comments are worthwhile having developed the model. Most
literature that I am aware deals with leakage through changes in market prices when one country
imposes a carbon tax, for example, and the other country is (countries are) passive. Action by
the first country lowers world fossil fuel prices and so firms and consumers in the passive
country will use more. This traditional mechanism doesn’t work here by virtue of the fact that
there is no carbon-intensive sector and hence no relative price change lowering fossil fuel prices
in response to one country’s tax. Instead, leakage occurs in non-cooperative outcomes insofar as
the abatement efforts of countries are “strategic substitutes”. A higher tax in n improves the
environment and lowers the willingness to pay in country s. This is nothing other than a freerider problem in environmental policy.

22

6.

Summary and Conclusions

The purpose of the paper is to make the case that per-capita income has an interesting
role to play in cooperative and non-cooperative international trade policy. The setting is a world
with a global environmental externality such as CO2 pollution and consumers who have a high
income-elasticity of demand for environmental quality. While some of the results are not
surprising, there are a number of interesting subtleties than may have gone unnoticed.
A couple of basic results are that (a) environmental quality will exhibit a u-shape with
respect to per-capita income, an example of an environmental Kuznets curve. (b) noncooperative outcomes will involve “policy leakage”: an increase in one country’s abatement
effort improves the world environment and hence leads the other country to reduce it’s effort.
But the bulk of the paper focuses on countries with different per-capita incomes. I show that a
poorer country will have a lower abatement effort in both a non-cooperative outcome and in a
Nash bargaining outcome using the non-cooperative equilibrium as a disagreement outcome. It
may be that the poor county makes no abatement effort in a non-cooperative outcome and,
beginning from that equilibrium, it may be that there are no gains to bargaining when abatement
taxes are the only instrument available to the countries.
I believe that the terms-of-trade externality is rather novel: when a country withdraws
resources from production to abate, it effectively shrinks its economy, and this will move the
world terms of trade in its favor. Thus it passes on part of the cost of abatement to the nonabating country. I show a case using the simple analytical model where fully half the cost is
passed on, and so it turns out that the non-cooperative and cooperative outcomes are the same.
The final section of the paper allows countries to set tariffs as well as abatement taxes,
and focuses on the case where the rich country is large, and so has both a high tariff and a high
abatement tax. Part of the advantage of the numerical model, using the relatively new MPEC
solver in GAMS, is that we can compute a Nash equilibrium in four instruments. Then using this
as a disagreement outcome, we can compute bargaining outcomes for linked or unlinked
negotiations. Results are interesting, but my (superficial) knowledge of bargaining theory
suggests that general results (e.g., is it better to link) are unlikely to be found.
In the area of understanding how we got to where we are, the results here may help
explain why the high-income countries often seem to give up more than they get in international
negotiations (some will surely dispute this assertion), such as the Kyoto Protocol. While this
may indeed be all or in part due to simple altruism, some of our results here suggest that this is
also predicted by standard economic theories of cooperative and non-cooperative behavior.
Specifically, with environmental quality a high-income-elasticity good, standard theory predicts
a high abatement effort by high income countries, no need to appeal to altruism.

23
APPENDIX
First, the algebra on the CET transformation function, the national product function and
the supply functions. I derive the unit national product function: the revenue derived from one
unit of labor input into production.
(A1)

(A2)

(A3)

(A4)
(A5)
Inverting this gives unit supply functions: the optimal output of each good for one unit of
labor input into production.
(A6)

(A7)

(A8)

24
(A9)
This gives us the unit national product function, which could also be termed the producer
price index in an analogy to the CES consumer price index so widely used in monopolistic
competition and economic geography.
(A10)
The unit national product function or producer price index is also CET, a self-dual prorerty
familiar from the CES demand literature. Substitute this into the supply functions above.
(A11)
This gives us more compact unit and total supply functions.
(A12)
Second, the algebra for the terms-of-trade effect under the special assumptions noted in
the text.
(A13)

(A14)
Assume that the countries are identical initially and that there are no initial abatement
taxes, so that
where
is the total endowment of each country. Second, assume
symmetry in the comparative advantage parameters such that

.

Then (A14) can be simplified to
(A15)

25
Because

and

= 1 initially, this further simplifies to
or

The effect of country n withdrawing a unit of labor from production

(A16)

is to reduce the

relative price of country s’s export good (country s has a deterioration in its terms of trade) with
the size of this effect being proportional to the size of comparative advantage spread.

26
REFERENCES
Abrego, Lisandro, Carlo Perroni, John Whalley, and Randall M.Wigle (2001), “Trade and
Environment:Bargaining Outcomes from Linked Negotiations,” Review of International
Economics 9, 414–28.
Bagwell, Kyle and Robert Staiger (2001), “Domestic Policies, National Sovereignty and
International Economic Institutions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 519–62.
Broner, Fernando A., Paula Bustos and Vasco M. Carvalho (2012), “Sources of Comparative
Advantage in Polluting Industries”, CEPR discussion paper 9111.
Caron, Justin, Thibault Fally and James R. Markusen (2012), “Skill Premium and Trade Puzzles:
a Solution Linking Production and Preferences”, working paper.
Chiu, Yi-Bin (2012), “Deforestation and the Environmental Kuznets Curve in Developing
Countries: A Panel Smooth Transition Regression Approach”, Canadian Journal of
Economics 60, 177-194.
Conconi, Paola and Carlo Perroni (2002), “Issue Linkage and Issue Tie-In in Multilateral
Negotiations,” Journal of International Economics 57, 423–47.
Copeland, Brian R. and M. Scott Taylor (1994), “North-South Trade and the Environment”,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, 755-787.
Copeland, Brian R. and M. Scott Taylor (2004), “Trade, growth, and the environment”, Journal
of Economic Literature 42, 7-71.
Copeland, Brian R. and M. Scott Taylor (2005), “Free trade and Global Warming: a TradeTheory View of the Kyoto Protocol”, Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management 49, 205-234.
Deacon, Robert T. and Catherine S. Norman (2006), “Is the environmental Kuznets curve an
empirical regularity?”, in Robert Halvorsen and David F. Layton (Eds.), Explorations in
Environmental and Natural Resources Economics: Essays in Honor of Gardener M.
Brown, Jr. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar Publishing, Inc.
Flores, Nicholas E. And Richard T. Carson (1997), “The Relationship between Income
Elasticities of Demand and Willingness to Pay”, Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management 33, 287-295.
Gori,Guiseppe and Luca Lambertini (2013), “Trade Liberalization between Asymmetric
Countries with Environmentally Concerned Consumers”, Regional Science and Urban
Economics 43, 549-560.

27
Grossman, Gene M., and Alan B. Krueger (1995), “Economic Growth and the Environment”,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 110, 353-377.
Harstad, Bård (2012), “Buy Coal! A Case for Supply-Side Environmental Policy”, Journal of
Political Economy 120, 77-115.
Harstad, Bård (2012), “Climate Contracts: A Game of Emissions, Investments, Negotiations, and
Renegotiations”, Review of Economic Studies 79, 1527-1557.
Hökby, Stina and Tore Söderqvist (2003), “ Elasticities of Demand and Willingness to Pay for
Environmental Services in Sweden”, Environmental and Resource Economics 36, 361383.
Horstmann, Ignatius J., James R. Markusen and Jack Robles (2005), “Multi-issue Bargaining and
Linked Agendas: Ricardo Revisited or No Pain No Gain”, Review of International
Economics 13, 185-204.
Hauer, Grant, and C. Ford Runge. "Trade-Environment Linkages in the Resolution of
Transboundary Externalities." The World Economy 22.1 (1999): 25-39.
Hunter, Linda (1991), “The Contribution of Non-homothetic Preferences to Trade”, Journal of
International Economics 30, 345-358.
Hunter, Linda and James R. Markusen (1988), "Per-Capita Income as a Determinant of Trade,"
in Robert Feenstra (editor), Empirical Methods for International Economics, Cambridge:
MIT Press 89-109.
Kriström, Bengt and Pere Riera ((1996), “Is the Income Elasticity of Environmental
Improvements Less than One?”, Environmental and Resource Economics 7, 45-55.
Kuznets, Simon (1966), Modern Economic Growth: Rate, Structure and Spread, Yale University
Press.
Limao, Nuno. "Trade policy, cross-border externalities and lobbies: do linked agreements enforce
more cooperative outcomes?." Journal of International Economics 67.1 (2005): 175-199.
Lovei, Magda (1998), “Phasing out Lead from Gasoline: Worldwide experience and Policy
Implications”, World Bank Technical Paper No. 397.
Markusen, James R. (1975), "Cooperative Control of International Pollution and Common
Property Resources," Quarterly Journal of Economics 89, 618-632.
Markusen, James R. (1986). "Explaining the Volume of Trade: An Eclectic Approach." American
Economic Review 76, 1002-1011.

28
Markusen, James R. (2013), “Putting Per-Capita Income back into Trade Theory”, Journal of
International Economics 90, 255-265.
Markusen, James R., Edward Morey and Nancy Olewiler (1995), "Competition in Regional
Environmental Policies with Endogenous Plant Location Decisions", Journal of Public
Economics 56, 55-77.
Markusen, James R., and Randall Wigle (1989), “Nash Equilibrium Tariffs for the U.S. Canada:
The Roles of Country Size, Scale Economies, and Capital Mobility”, Journal of Political
Economy 97, 368-386.
Pearce, David W. (2006), ‘‘Framework for assessing the distribution of environmental quality,” in
Ysé Serret and Nick Johnstone (Eds.), The Distributional Effects of Environmental Policy.
Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar Publishing, Inc.
Selden, T.M., and D.Q. Song (1994), “Environmental Quality and Development - Is there a
Kurznets Curve for Air-Pollution Emissions”, Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management 27, 147-162.
Spagnolo, G. (2000), “Issue Linkage, Delegation, and International Policy Cooperation,”
manuscript.
Tang, John (2012), ‘Pollution Havens and the Trade in Toxic Chemicals: Evidence from U.S.
Trade Flows”, Australian National University working paper.
World Bank (2011), http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.PCAP.PP.CD?page=3

TABLE 1:

Welfare and abatement taxes under alternative secnarios
Base case: h's per-capita income
1.5 that of country f

Alternative case 1: no
comparative advantage

Alternative case 2: h's
per-capita income
10 times that of f

Welfare h

Welfare f

CD welfare
index*

Welfare h

Welfare f

Welfare h

Welfare f

PTAX = 0

1.000

1.000

1.000

1.000

1.000

1.000

1.000

Non-cooperative NE

1.207

1.196

1.201

1.136

1.120

1.161

1.000

Coop Nash
NE outside option

1.237

1.217

1.227

1.197

1.255

1.161

1.000

CD world welfare
index max*

1.290

1.173

1.231

1.290

1.173

1.261

0.936

Rawlsian world
welfare max**

1.225

1.225

1.225

1.237

1.228

1.161

1.000

PTAXH

PTAXF

PTAXH

PTAXF

PTAXH

PTAXF

Non-cooperative NE

0.32

0.08

0.24

0.03

0.41

0

Coop Nash
NE outside option

0.51

0.21

0.51

0.22

0.41

0

CD world welfare
index max*

0.35

0.35

0.35

0.35

0.20

0.20

Rawlsian world
welfare max**

0.57

0.20

0.48

0.28

0.41

0

TAX RATES

*Cobb-Douglas index used is (WELH)^0.5*(WELF)^0.5; welfare h,f normalized to 1 at zero taxes
**Rawlsian welfare index is MIN(WELH, WELF); welfare h,f normalized to 1 at zero taxes

TABLE 2Welfare and abatement taxes under alternative linking secnarios
Country n has five times the total income and per-capita income of country s

Welfare n

Welfare s

PTAXN

PTAXS

TARN

TARS

No intervention

0.731

0.788

0

0

0

0

Non-cooperative Nash
each county coordinates
their tax and tariff

1.000

1.000

0.386

0

1.567

0.196

Cooperative Nash usin non-cooperative outcome
as disagreement outcome
Isolated environment
negotiation

1.001

1.008

0.451

0.036

1.567

0.196

Isolated tariff
negotiation

1.008

1.048

0.386

0

1.015

0

Bargain over TARN and
PTAXS

1.005

1.025

0.386

0.150

0.692

0.196

Bargain over all four
instruments

1.009

1.059

0.452

0.034

1.015

0

Bargain over all four
1.024
1.075
instruments
with transfer s to n ( = 22.0% of s's income)

0.541

0

0

0

Figure 1a: Environmental sustainability index and per-capita income
(World Economic Forum, Global Competitiveness Report 2012-2013)
1.25

adj R2 = 0.273

ESI = 0.60 + 0.040*ln(PCI)
(8.84) (5.51)
t-stats

1.2

Environment Sustainability index
(WEF, 2012-13)

1.15

1.1

1.05

1

0.95

0.9

0.85

0.8

0.75
6

7

8

9

10

11

12

Log per capita income (WEF 2012-13, 2011 data)

Maximum lead content of gasoline: grams per litre, 1996

Figure 1b: Maximum lead content of gasoline (petrol) in
relation to log GDP per-capita at PPP
1.1
1

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6

0.5
0.4
0.3

LEAD = 1.292 - 0.105*ln(GCAP)
(37.103) t-stat

0.2

adj R2 = 0.246

0.1
0
-0.1
4

5

6

7

8

9

ln GDP per-capita at PPP exchange rates, 1996

10

11

Figure 2a: Effect of abatement by country n on the commodity consumption
of both countries: no comparative advantage

X2

Initial production frontiers of
both n and s: no abatement

Composite commodity
consumption of s (and n
initially)

Production frontier of country n
after resources used for
abatement
p1/p2

p1/p2

Composite commodity
consumption of n after
abatement

X1

Figure 2b: Effect of abatement by country n on the commodity consumption
of both countries: complete specialization

X2

Production point of country s
Composite commodity
consumption of s and n initially
after abatement by n
Composite commodity
consumption of s and n initially

p1/p2 initially
Production point
of country n after
abatement

p1/p2 after
abatement

Initial production point of
country n before abatement

X1

Figure 3: Abatement taxes and per-capita income
(model of the model)
0.7

0.6

north tax
under FS
0.5

Abatement taxes

full
specialization

north tax
under NCA

0.4

0.3

0.2

south tax
under FS
0.1

no comparative
advantage
0
0.95

1

south tax
under NCA

1.05

1.1

1.15

1.2

1.25

1.3

1.35

1.4

Per-capita income of country n (country s = 1 / country n)

Figure 4: Welfare, environmental quality
1.75

13

9

1.5

5

1.25

enviromental quality: right-hand axis
1

1

0.75

-3
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

1.4

Per-capita income level

1.6

1.8

2

Environmental quality index

Per-capita welfare level

per-capita welfare: left-hand axis

Cooperative Nash bargaining:
n higher per-capita
Nash eq. default option
n's optimal tax at s's tax = 0
n higher per-capita
0

45
Non-cooperative Nash equilibrium:
n higher per-capita

n's optimal tax
at s's tax = 0
equal per-capita

Cooperative Nash bargaining:
equal per-capita income

Non-cooperativeNash equilibrium:
equal per-capita income

s's optimal tax at n's tax = 0
equal per-capita

0.40

0.39

0.38

0.37

0.36

0.35

0.34

0.33

0.32

0.31

0.30

0.29

0.28

0.27

0.26

0.25

0.24

0.23

0.22

0.21

0.20

0.19

0.18

0.17

0.16

0.15

0.14

0.13

0.12

0.11

0.10

0.09

0.08

0.07

0.06

0.05

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

s's optimal tax at n's tax = 0
n higher per-capita
0.00

0.60
0.59
0.58
0.57
0.56
0.55
0.54
0.53
0.52
0.51
0.50
0.49
0.48
0.47
0.46
0.45
0.44
0.43
0.42
0.41
0.40
0.39
0.38
0.37
0.36
0.35
0.34
0.33
0.32
0.31
0.30
0.29
0.28
0.27
0.26
0.25
0.24
0.23
0.22
0.21
0.20
0.19
0.18
0.17
0.16
0.15
0.14
0.13
0.12
0.11
0.10
0.09
0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.00

Country
f's tax

Figure 6: Infeasibility of an equal tax bargaining rule (ptaxn = ptaxs)
when countries differ greatly in per-capita income: PCIN = 10*PCIS
160

150

Welfare of countries n and s

Country h's tax

Figure 5: Effect of differing per capita income on equilibria

140

Country n's welfare
130

120

Country s's welfare: PCIN = 5*PCIS
110

100

90

Country s's welfare: PCIN = 10*PCIS
80
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

Equal taxes: ptaxn = ptaxs (countries sizes identical)

0.6

Page 1
C:\jim\RESEARCH\per-cap-income\environment paper\gms extra files\link-mpec-app.gms Monday, November 25, 201
$TITLE:LINK-MPEC.GMS

cooperation over all four policy instruments

$ONTEXT INITIAL CALIBRATION (countries h = n in paper, f = s in paper)
calibrated to initial abatement taxes constrained to equal zero
Rows = markets;
row sums zero: zero profits
Columns = sectors; column sums zero: market clearing, income balance
ZH
ZF
PXH
180
PYH
20
PXF
20
PYF
180
PWH
PWF
PLH
-200
PLF
-200
PENVH
PENVF

XHF
-80

XFF

YFF

YFH
80

WH
-100
-100

80

WF

CONSH

CONSF

-100
-100

-80
300

-300
300

-300
200
200

-100

100(a)
-100

100(b)

(a):100 = 100 units of initial E endowment plus e_0 = 100
minus 100 units of pollution generated by production =
(b):100 = 100 units of initial E endowment plus e_0 = 100
minus 100 units of pollution generated by production =
$OFFTEXT

equals 200
100 for WH
equals 200
100 for WF

PARAMETERS
VALH
per-capita income paramater for the S-G preferences - h
VALF
per-capita income paramater for the S-G preferences - f
SIGMA
elasticity of transformation between X and Y
ENDOWLH factor endowment of country h
ENDOWLF factor endowment of country f
WELHN
disagreement outcome for country h in bargaining
WELFN
disagreement outcome for country f in bargaining;
VALH = 1;
VALF = 1;
SIGMA = 1;
ENDOWLH = 200; ENDOWLF = 200;
WELHN = 1;
WELFN = 1;
VARIABLES
WELH
welfare of country h
WELF
welfare of country f
WELG
value of Nash bargaining objective function;
POSITIVE VARIABLES
ZH
activity for composite X-Y commodity output in
ZF
activity for composite X-Y commodity output in
XHF
export activity: X from h to f
YHF
export activity: Y from h to f
XFH
export activity: X from f to h
YFH
export activity: Y from f to h
WH
welfare index for h (activity for "production"
WF
welfare index for h (activity for "production"
ABH
abatement activity for h
ABF
abatement activity for f

h
f

of WH)
of WF)

Page 2
C:\jim\RESEARCH\per-cap-income\environment paper\gms extra files\link-mpec-app.gms Monday, November 25, 201

PZH
PZF
PXH
PXF
PYH
PYF
PLH
PLF
PWH
PWF

price
price
price
price
price
price
price
price
price
price

of
of
of
of
of
of
of
of
of
of

Z (composite X-Y) in h
Z (composite X-Y) in h
X in h
X in f
Y in h
Y in f
composite factor L in h
composite factor L in f
welfare in h (real consumer price index)
welfare in f (real consumer price index)

PABH
PABF
PENVH
PENVF

price (cost) of the abatement activity in h
price (cost) of the abatement activity in f
consumer valuation of environmental quality in h
consumer valuation of environmental quality in h

CONSH
CONSF

consumer income in h
consumer income in f

POLRED
POL

pollution reduction due to combined abatement in h and f
pollution generated by production of ZH and ZF

PTAXH
PTAXF
TARH
TARF

pollution
pollution
tariff in
tariff in

tax in h - receipts allocated to abatement in h
tax in f - receipts allocated to abatement in f
country h
country f;

EQUATIONS
WELFAREH welfare of country h
WELFAREF welfare of country f
WELFAREG Nash bargaining objective function
COSTZH
COSTZF
COSTXHF
COSTYHF
COSTXFH
COSTYFH

pricing
pricing
pricing
pricing
pricing
pricing

equation
equation
equation
equation
equation
equation

for
for
for
for
for
for

ZH
ZF
XHF
YHF
XFH
YFH

(cost
(cost
(cost
(cost
(cost
(cost

=G=
=G=
=G=
=G=
=G=
=G=

price)
price)
price)
price)
price)
price)

-

comp
comp
comp
comp
comp
comp

var
var
var
var
var
var

ZH
ZF
XHF
YHF
XFH
YFH

COSTWH
COSTWF

pricing equation for WH
pricing equation for WH

COSTABH
COSTABF

pricing equation for ABH (cost =G= price) - comp var ABH
pricing equation for ABF (cost =G= price) - comp var ABF

MKTPZH
MKTPZF
MKTPXH
MKTPYH
MKTPXF
MKTPYF

market
market
market
market
market
market

clearing
clearing
clearing
clearing
clearing
clearing

equation
equation
equation
equation
equation
equation

for
for
for
for
for
for

ZH
ZF
XH
YH
XF
YF

-

complementary
complementary
complementary
complementary
complementary
complementary

variable
variable
variable
variable
variable
variable

PZH
PZF
PXH
PYH
PXF
PYF

MKTPLH
MKTPLF
MKTPWH
MKTPWF

market
market
market
market

clearing
clearing
clearing
clearing

equation
equation
equation
equation

for
for
for
for

LH
LF
WH
WF

-

complementary
complementary
complementary
complementary

variable
variable
variable
variable

PLH
PLF
PWH
PWF

(cost =G= price) - comp var WH
(cost =G= price) - comp var WF

Page 3
C:\jim\RESEARCH\per-cap-income\environment paper\gms extra files\link-mpec-app.gms Monday, November 25, 201

MKTPABH
MKTPABF
MKTENVH
MKTENVF

mkt
mkt
mkt
mkt

clear
clear
clear
clear

for abatement in h: taxes = expenditure
for abatement in F: taxes = expenditure
environment in h: supply = demand
environment in f: supply = demand

-

comp
comp
comp
comp

PABH
PABF
PENVH
PENVF

ICONSH
ICONSF

income balance equation in h - complementary variable ICONSH
income balance equation in f - complementary variable ICONSF

APOLRED
APOL

pollution reduction = abatement by h and f - comp var POLRED
pollution generated by production by h and f - comp var POL;

*specify equations and inequalities
WELFAREH.. WELH =E= WH;
WELFAREF.. WELF =E= WF;
WELFAREG.. WELG =E= ((WH - WELHN)*(WF - WELFN));
COSTZH..
COSTZF..
COSTXHF..
COSTYHF..
COSTXFH..
COSTYFH..

200*PLH =G= 200*PZH;
200*PLF =G= 200*PZF;
80*PXH*(1+TARF) =G= 80*PXF;
80*PYH =G= (80*0.999)*PYF;
80*PXF =G= (80*0.999)*PXH;
80*PYF*(1+TARH) =G= 80*PYH;

COSTWH..

300*((PXH*(1+PTAXH))**(1/3) * (PYH*(1+PTAXH))**(1/3)
* PENVH**(1/3)) =G= 300*PWH;
300*((PXF*(1+PTAXF))**(1/3) * (PYF*(1+PTAXF))**(1/3)
* PENVF**(1/3)) =G= 300*PWF;

COSTWF..

COSTABH.. 100*PLH =G= 100*PABH;
COSTABF.. 100*PLF =G= 100*PABF;
MKTPZH..
MKTPZF..
MKTPXH..
MKTPYH..
MKTPXF..
MKTPYF..

200*PZH =E= 200*(0.9*PXH**(1+SIGMA)
+ 0.1*PYH**(1+SIGMA))**(1/(1+SIGMA));
200*PZF =E= 200*(0.1*PXF**(1+SIGMA)
+ 0.9*PYF**(1+SIGMA))**(1/(1+SIGMA));
0.9*200*ZH*(PXH/PZH)**SIGMA - 80*XHF + 80*XFH
=G= 100*WH*PWH/(PXH*(1+PTAXH));
0.1*200*ZH*(PYH/PZH)**SIGMA - 80*YHF + 80*YFH
=G= 100*WH*PWH/(PYH*(1+PTAXH));
0.1*200*ZF*(PXF/PZF)**SIGMA - 80*XFH + 80*XHF
=G= 100*WF*PWF/(PXF*(1+PTAXF));
0.9*200*ZF*(PYF/PZF)**SIGMA - 80*YFH + 80*YHF
=G= 100*WF*PWF/(PYF*(1+PTAXF));

MKTPLH..
MKTPLF..
MKTPWH..
MKTPWF..

ENDOWLH =G= 200*ABH + 200*ZH;
ENDOWLF =G= 200*ABF + 200*ZF;
300*WH =G= CONSH/PWH;
300*WF =G= CONSF/PWF;

MKTPABH..
MKTPABF..
MKTENVH..
MKTENVF..

200*PABH*ABH =G=
200*PABF*ABF =G=
(100+100*VALH) +
(100+100*VALF) +

PTAXH*200*WH*PWH/(1+PTAXH);
PTAXF*200*WF*PWF/(1+PTAXF);
100*POLRED - 100*POL =G= 100*WH*(PWH/PENVH);
100*POLRED - 100*POL =G= 100*WF*(PWF/PENVF);

Page 4
C:\jim\RESEARCH\per-cap-income\environment paper\gms extra files\link-mpec-app.gms Monday, November 25, 201
ICONSH..
ICONSF..

CONSH =E= ENDOWLH*PLH +((100+100*VALH)+100*POLRED-100*POL)*PENVH
+ 80*YFH*PYF*TARH;
CONSF =E= ENDOWLF*PLF +((100+100*VALF)+100*POLRED-100*POL)*PENVF
+ 80*XHF*PXH*TARF;

APOLRED.. POLRED =G= 4*(ABH + ABF);
APOL..
POL =G= (ZH + ZF)/2;
*declare model definition, including matching equations and variables
*in the economics equilibrium constraint set (general-equilibrium model)
MODEL NHD /
WELFAREG
WELFAREH
WELFAREF
COSTZH.ZH
COSTZF.ZF
COSTXHF.XHF
COSTYHF.YHF
COSTXFH.XFH
COSTYFH.YFH
COSTWH.WH
COSTWF.WF
COSTABH.ABH
COSTABF.ABF
MKTPZH.PZH
MKTPZF.PZF
MKTPXH.PXH
MKTPYH.PYH
MKTPXF.PXF
MKTPYF.PYF
MKTPLH.PLH
MKTPLF.PLF
MKTPWH.PWH
MKTPWF.PWF
MKTPABH.PABH
MKTPABF.PABF
MKTENVH.PENVH
MKTENVF.PENVF
ICONSH.CONSH
ICONSF.CONSF
APOLRED.POLRED
APOL.POL /;
*set starting values
ZH.L = 1; ZF.L = 1; XHF.L = 1; YHF.L = 0; XFH.L = 0; YFH.L = 1;
WH.L = 1; WF.L = 1; ABH.L = 1; ABF.L = 1;
PZH.L = 1; PZF.L = 1; PXH.L = 1; PXF.L = 1; PYH.L = 1; PYF.L = 1;
PLH.L = 1; PLF.L = 1; PWH.L = 1; PWF.L = 1;
PABH.L = 1; PABF.L = 1; PENVH.L = 1; PENVF.L = 1;
CONSH.L = 300; CONSF.L = 300; POLRED.L = 0; POL.L = 1;

Page 5
C:\jim\RESEARCH\per-cap-income\environment paper\gms extra files\link-mpec-app.gms Monday, November 25, 201

*choose numeraire
PXH.FX = 1;
VALH = 1;
VALF = 1;
ENDOWLH = 200;
ENDOWLF = 200;
* simplist scenario: outside options are zero
* equivalanet to maximzing Cobb-Douglas world welfare function
WELHN = 0;
WELFN = 0;
OPTION MPEC = NLPEC;
* benchmark replication with ptax constrainted to = 0
PTAXH.FX = 0;
PTAXF.FX = 0;
* solve command specifying maximand
SOLVE NHD USING MPEC MAXIMIZING WELG;
* allow taxes to be set endogenously
PTAXH.LO = 0; PTAXH.UP = +INF;
PTAXF.LO = 0; PTAXF.UP = +INF;
* solve for joint max
SOLVE NHD USING MPEC MAXIMIZING WELG;

