                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    EXPORT OR MERGE? PROXIMITY VS. CONCENTRATION IN PRODUCT SPACE

                                       Marc-Andreas Muendler

                                         Working Paper 19751
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19751


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2013




I thank Alan Spearot for generously sharing the sector-country-year aggregates of his global M&A
transactions data. An early version of this manuscript circulated under the title "Market Access: Enter
and Extract, or Merge and Match?" The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research. An Online Supplement at
http://econ.ucsd.edu/muendler/papers/abs/enter.html documents equilibrium existence under parameter
restrictions.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Marc-Andreas Muendler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Export or Merge? Proximity vs. Concentration in Product Space
Marc-Andreas Muendler
NBER Working Paper No. 19751
December 2013
JEL No. F12,F23,L12,L13

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper proposes a proximity-concentration tradeoff in product space as a determinant of horizontal
foreign direct investment (FDI). Firms that enter a foreign market by exporting are able to capture
consumer surplus from introducing a differentiated product with characteristics that the incumbent
cannot match. In relatively globalized product space, in contrast, consumers perceive an entrant's difference
to existing products as less pronounced, so a consumer's virtual distance costs in product space are
lower and a merger with an incumbent (horizontal FDI) offers pricing power that allows the entrant
to extract consumer rent. Lower physical trade costs of shipping make Bertrand price competition
fiercer in differentiated product space and can provide an additional incentive for a merger. A basic
product space model with a linear Hotelling setup can therefore explain why FDI has become more
frequent in recent periods in the presence of falling trade costs. Cross-border merger and acquisitions
data support the model's prediction that horizontal FDI grows relatively faster than exports in differentiated
goods industries, compared to homogeneous-goods industries.


Marc-Andreas Muendler
Department of Economics, 0508
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
and NBER
muendler@ucsd.edu
1 Introduction
Foreign direct investment (FDI) has far outpaced global trade and output over the past decades. Be-
tween 1980 and 2007, FDI flows rose from 49.7 billion U.S. dollars to 2.0 trillion U.S. dollars—a
forty-fold increase.1 Trade flows, in contrast, rose from 2.1 trillion U.S. dollars to only 17.0 trillion
U.S. dollars over the same period 1980-2007—an increase by a factor of slightly more than 8, far
below the factor of 40 for FDI.2 Over the same period, trade costs and tariffs have fallen markedly.
Hummels (2007) reports that air transportation costs have come down by 92 percent between 1955
and 2004 and that ocean shipping costs exhibit a steady, though considerably smaller, 20-year decline
since the mid 1980s.
       These empirical developments might pose a puzzle for the frequent explanation of foreign direct
investment as horizontal, by which firms trade off the economies of scale from concentrating pro-
duction in a single plant against market presence with a production site in the destination country to
“jump” borders and avoid trade costs (e.g. Brainard 1997, Helpman, Melitz and Yeaple 2004, Ekholm,
Forslid and Markusen 2007). All else equal, falling tariffs and trade costs would predict that firms
favor exporting more often, rather than undertaking horizontal FDI, because now the advantages from
plant-level economies of scale should outweigh the avoidance of trade costs more frequently. One
explanation for the fast growth of foreign direct investment in the presence of falling trade costs may
therefore be that recent foreign direct investment flows are more frequently than in earlier periods
vertical in nature, whereby firms relocate stages of their production process to an affiliate in a host
country that offers more favorable factor costs (e.g. Helpman 1984, Antràs 2003, Antràs and Helpman
2004).3
       This paper outlines a different potential explanation. Much FDI arguably continues to be hori-
   1
      The value for 1980 is the reported four-year average nominal total inward FDI flow (United Nations Center on
Transnational Corporations 1991), and for 2007 it is the single year of nominal total inward FDI (United Nations Confer-
ence on Trade and Development 2013). Over the course of the Great Recession since 2008, world inward FDI dropped to
1.35 trillion U.S. dollars by 2012.
    2
      World Development Indicators (databank.worldbank.org/databank/download accessed December 21, 2012).
    3
      Of course, another explanation may be that not all else is equal. Plant-level economies of scale may have changed
simultaneously, making concentration less attractive, or the firm-size distribution may have evolved, helping a larger
fraction of firms overcome the fixed costs of horizontal FDI. Moreover, the distinction between vertical and horizontal
FDI can be blurred (see, e.g., Feinberg and Keane 2006, Alfaro and Charlton 2009). Foreign affiliates may need to import
intermediate inputs from their parent company, so that falling trade costs can propel vertical and horizontal FDI jointly.
Moreover, foreign affiliates may need to source intermediate inputs from arm’s length suppliers in the parent’s home
country, so that third-party vertical relationships and falling trade costs contribute to horizontal FDI.



                                                            1
zontal, consistent with evidence for recent decades (e.g. Carr, Markusen and Maskus 2001, Markusen
and Maskus 2002). A possibility is that the proximity-concentration tradeoff that firms face is not ge-
ographic in nature. Instead, the proximity-concentration tradeoff arises in product space. This paper
posits and explores two hypotheses related to globalization of product space: one hypothesis con-
cerns a change in virtual distance costs for consumers in product space, and one hypothesis addresses
a change in physical trade costs for firms and its consequences for competition in product space.
       The first hypothesis is that globalization changes product space so that consumers perceive virtual
distance between an additional entrant’s product and existing varieties, including those from domestic
incumbents, as less pronounced. Globalization homogenizes tastes. When firms, who had served
their national markets almost exclusively, first expanded globally, they exported. Given their diverse
origins, their product characteristics differed markedly across national markets. After export entry,
the newly introduced foreign products met preferences of some consumers more closely than did the
incumbents’ varieties before, and the entrants were able to extract some of the consumer surplus that
their differentiation generated. Export proliferation, however, gradually crowded the product space
at the destination markets, changing tastes to become more alike so that consumers now view an
entrant’s difference to existing firms as less relevant. Entry through horizontal FDI, with a cross-
border merger or acquisition of an incumbent, is therefore relatively more attractive in recent years.4
The advantages of integrating two firms’ operations through merger or acquisition may be numerous.
A commonly referenced motive is “synergies” that help raise production or sales efficiencies. An
important implication in the context of the first hypothesis is that such synergies tend to result in more
homogeneous product characteristics and less diverse after-sales services. Mergers and acquisitions
therefore do not tend to crowd product space further. A benefit for the merging companies is that the
integrated firm can exert market power in pricing.
       Concretely, this paper shows in a linear Hotelling model that, if the entrant’s main product char-
acteristics are sufficiently different from the local incumbent’s product characteristics, then the early
entrant is able to attract a consumer group whose tastes were not well served before. The newly cap-
tured demand, and some of the consumer surplus generated from matching the tastes more closely,
contributes to the early entrant’s profit. As globalization progresses and virtual distance costs decline
   4
     As Barba Navaretti and Venables (2004, p. 9-10) state in their empirical summary of multinational firms, mergers and
acquisitions account for the dominant share of FDI flows. From 1987 to 2004, between 44 and 76 percent of FDI flows
in the world, and between 63 and 92 percent of FDI flows into industrialized countries, were cross-border mergers and
acquisitions.


                                                           2
further, however, product space becomes more homogenized. When consumers become less sensi-
tive to product differentiation in a Hotelling model, merging with the incumbent firm becomes more
attractive than entry because the merged company can extract additional consumer rent through pric-
ing power. A main result shows that, in markets with consumers who perceive differences between
products as less relevant, a merger is relatively more attractive than entry.
   The second hypothesis states that, as globalization reduces physical trade costs of shipping for
export market entrants, oligopoly profits erode markedly. The reason is that high shipping costs serve
as a commitment device of exporters to restrain the fierceness of Bertrand price competition in differ-
entiated product space. As trade costs come down, profits from export entry erode and so do profits
of the local incumbent, making a merger relatively more attractive. Even though the undifferentiated
single product of a merged company generates lower consumer surplus than the distinct products of
foreign exporters and local incumbents would generate, that loss in overall consumer surplus, which
firms partly extract as profits, can weigh less heavily than profit erosion under fiercer price competi-
tion. In a linear Hotelling model a decline in trade costs can erode total duopoly profits of a foreign
entrant and an incumbent faster than joining products into a single variety under a merger, so that
horizontal FDI can become more attractive with declining physical trade costs.
   An immediate implication of this proximity-concentration tradeoff in product space is that, in
industries manufacturing differentiated goods, both falling virtual distance costs and falling physical
trade costs should propel cross-border mergers and acquisitions (M&A) faster than exports. The
reason is that, in industries with differentiated goods, both consumers can become less sensitive to
differentiation in product space over time and price competition can vary in fierceness, whereas in
industries that manufacture homogeneous goods product differentiation is of unchanged, and little,
relevance. Consistent with this double prediction, evidence from comprehensive data on global cross-
border M&A transactions for the period 1980-2006 by country and industry shows that growth in
FDI activity in differentiated industries outpaces FDI growth in homogeneous industries, whereas
export growth exhibits the converse relative change in the countries and industries for which M&A
transactions are recorded.
   This paper’s main model is based on a Hotelling linear city model, a main predecessor of hori-
zontal differentiation models (Hotelling 1929). Several families of models in the literature share its
main feature that each individual consumer’s decision is binary, purchasing the product from a given


                                                    3
producer if tastes are sufficiently close to the product characteristics or price sufficiently low, and
not purchasing otherwise. Consumer tastes are continuously distributed so that demand is continu-
ous in ranges, and discontinuous at points when consumers choose not to buy. There are important
recent extensions of the Hotelling model, among other generalizations for example those to multiple
product characteristics (Irmen and Thisse 1998), multiple product purchases (Kim and Serfes 2006)
and consumer switching over time (Sajeesh and Raju 2010). To establish the conceptual tradeoff be-
tween proximity and concentration, this paper returns to the basic Hotelling setup. A second family
of differentiated taste models is based on Salop’s (1979) circular city model, which is typically imple-
mented under the assumption that an additional entrant leads to a relocation of all incumbents along
the circle so that the distances between all active firms are equal around the circle. This modelling
device facilitates demand derivations but is less attractive in the context of this paper where product
characteristics are considered to be producer specific and lasting so that entry should not result in
relocations of incumbents. Third, there are families of models in richer taste spaces, including for in-
stance a Chamberlinian model by Helpman (1981), in which a consumer has a most preferred product
type on a circle of varieties, and non-linear space based on network methods (see e.g. Hadjinicola,
Charalambous and Muller 2013).5
       Several key determinants for mergers or acquisitions have been stressed in the literature. As men-
tioned above, efficiency-related reasons such as unit cost reductions, the joint use of complementary
assets or research and development compatibility, economies of scale, or other synergies can cause
mergers and prominently inform anti-trust policy (e.g. Teece 1980, Bloch 1995, Farrell and Shapiro
2001, Davidson and Ferrett 2007). Mergers can attempt to create market power by forming monopo-
lies or oligopolies (e.g. d’Aspremont and Gabszewicz 1986, Kamien and Zang 1990, Gowrisankaran
1999). Mergers may generate opportunities for diversification and reduce cost or demand uncertainty
(e.g. Zhou 2008). Mergers have also been shown to provide market discipline if they change inef-
ficient management at the target firm or to counteract market discipline if they allow the acquirer
management to over-expand (Andrade, Mitchell and Stafford 2001). This paper sets aside issues of
uncertainty and is instead closely related to the first two reasons for mergers: synergies and market
power. Andrade et al. (2001) present systematic evidence that mergers improve the newly forged
   5
     A fourth and separate family of models considers competition with non-homogeneous substitutes, partly to study
incentives for information sharing (e.g. Raith 1996). Related demand systems with non-homogeneous substitutes do not
endogenize the choice of product differentiation as consumers demand all substitutes in a given ratio that depends on
relative prices.


                                                         4
firm’s operating performance relative to industry peers.
   In an influential paper, Mitchell and Mulherin (1996) consider merger activity over the last cen-
tury and emphasize two main facts: Mergers occur in waves and, within a wave, mergers cluster by
industry. These findings are typically interpreted as evidence that mergers occur as a reaction to un-
expected shocks to industry structure. Andrade et al. (2001) argue that deregulation has become a
dominant factor for national mergers, accounting for nearly half of the domestic merger activity since
the late 1980s. This paper takes a cross-border perspective and emphasizes falling physical trade costs
and a global homogenization in tastes as other potential sources of shocks. A number of recent papers
build on real-options theories of irreversible mergers to show that acquirers might make their bids
in merger waves because postponing an acquisition, which may provide gains from more favorable
future market conditions, is more costly at times of strong merger activity when each firm is at higher
risk of being preempted by a rival (Toxvaerd 2008). This paper sets aside such dynamic considera-
tions but nevertheless produces predictions that are consistent with empirical insights emphasized in
that literature (Bernile, Lyandres and Zhdanov 2012, Hackbarth and Miao 2012). The frequency of
horizontal mergers should be higher in relatively more concentrated industries (in this paper inter-
preted as industries with consumers who are less sensitive to differentiation) and higher in industries
that generate stronger synergies (in this paper by standardizing products). To my knowledge, the lit-
erature on mergers has not directly explored the idea that cost or sales synergies can also result in a
limitation of available product characteristics. This paper highlights that a merged company foregoes
the opportunity to extract consumer surplus because of its concentration of product characteristics in
product space. In contrast, export entry generates a closer proximity of products to consumer tastes
but results in reduced pricing power for the firms, especially if physical trade costs fall in addition
to a homogenization of virtual distance costs. As product markets globalize, this tradeoff between
concentration under a merger and proximity under entry shifts. Horizontal FDI becomes relatively
more profitable than export entry when globalization homogenizes tastes and when physical trade
costs erode.
   The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. Starting with the symmetric case of no physical
trade costs and firms with identical unit costs, Section 2 derives the effects of product entry for a
duopoly in differentiated product space. Section 3 turns to the opposite case of a cross-border merger
in differentiated product space. Section 4 then analyzes the market conditions, and virtual distance


                                                  5
costs in product space in particular, under which one entry mode dominates the other. Section 5
introduces physical trade costs, shows that price competition becomes fiercer with the reduction of
physical trade costs, and analyzes which entry mode dominates the other under varying market con-
ditions. Section 6 subjects the model’s main prediction to empirical evidence. Section 7 concludes.



2    Foreign Entry
Consider Hotelling’s linear city model. A continuum of consumers is uniformly distributed along a
real line of length one. Individual consumer k is at position xk ∈ [0, 1] and has utility


                                     Uk = s̄ − pi − (ℓi − xk )2 · t,                                 (1)


where s̄ denotes utility from consuming one unit of the good. In this model, all consumers have unit
demands and purchase either one or no variety of the good. There are two components of disutility.
First, a consumer has to pay a price pi to firm i from which she purchases. Second, firm i is located
somewhere along the unit line at ℓi ∈ [0, 1] and consumer k has to cover a distance ∥ℓi − xk ∥ in
product space when consuming firm i’s variety. The disutility of covering that virtual distance in
product space is (ℓi − xk )2 · t.
    This section analyzes the strategic interaction between two firms: an incumbent in the domestic
market and an entrant from abroad. In this two-firm model, the virtual distance parameter t reflects
the consumers’ perception of differentiation in product space. When t is low, consumers are relatively
insensitive to the producers’ locations in product space and view an entrant’s differentiation from the
existing firm’s product as less relevant or less pronounced. As globalization progresses, and tastes
across the world become more homogeneous, the virtual distance parameter t falls and consumers
perceive the difference between the most recent foreign entrant and an incumbent as minor. When
t is high, in contrast, consumers suffer a strong disutility from the virtual distance to their preferred
variety. A high t therefore corresponds to the notion of a relatively under-served product space in
this framework and little globalization. If no entry occurs, each consumer can only buy from the
incumbent or choose to not make any purchase. If entry occurs, each consumer can choose between
two firms, and to buy or not. The relevant case to explain is that of an incumbent with product
characteristics that appeal to a consumer segment different from the consumer segment most attracted

                                                    6
to the foreign entrant’s product. To make product space concrete, and without loss of generality, this
paper considers an incumbent located in the lower half of the unit interval with product characteristic
ℓI = λI ≤ .5 and an entrant located in the upper half with product characteristic ℓE = 1 − λE > .5.
The parameter λE is the entrant’s distance from point 1 on the unit line, and λI is the incumbent’s
distance from point 0. The incumbent being in the lower half and the entrant in the upper half of the
unit interval implies that 1 − λE > λI .
   There are two key parameter relations in this setup. A first key parameter is the degree of differ-
entiation between the two firms. The degree of differentiation Λ can by measured by the difference
(1 − λE ) − λI :
                                           Λ ≡ (1 − λE ) − λI .

We will consider this degree of differentiation as determined by the firms’ past pattern of product
development, when they used to target mostly their local customers, and therefore as given when the
incumbent and entrant set their optimal pricing strategies.
   A second fundamental of the model regulates the firms’ rents. The rents crucially depend on the
ratio between potential consumer surplus s̄ − c and the disutility from virtual distance to the offered
product characteristic t. The consumer valuation of the good is s̄. The unit cost of the good is its
production cost c. The difference between surplus s̄ and unit cost c is the potential consumer surplus.
For now we consider the symmetric case where both firms have the same unit cost c. The resulting
surplus-disutility ratio σ,
                                                    s̄ − c
                                               σ≡          ,
                                                       t
captures the market’s attractiveness and the potential rents from a firm’s perspective. In the entry
game version that we consider in this section, all consumers will be reached and choose to buy the
good from one or the other firm given equilibrium prices. The surplus-disutility ratio therefore does
not play a role for reaching additional consumers. However, the surplus-disutility ratio regulates the
magnitude of the available rent for a merger. If the product differentiation disutility parameter t is low
(after globalization has made tastes more similar), then offering only a single variety after a merger
does not reduce demand much. As a consequence for later sections, falling virtual distance costs t
can make a merger relatively more attractive than foreign entry.




                                                    7
       After entry, consumer k purchases from the incumbent if and only if


                                     pI + (λI − xk )2 t ≤ pE + (1 − λE − xk )2 t.


Consumers to the left of some critical consumer at X therefore purchase from the incumbent, and
consumers to the right of the critical point buy the entrant’s variety. The critical consumer’s position
is implicitly given by the indifference condition


                                     pI + [X ∗ − λI ]2 t = pE + [1 − λE − X ∗ ]2 t,


or equivalently
                                                   λI + (1 − λE ) pE − pI
                                          X∗ =                   +        .                                             (2)
                                                         2          2Λt
The critical consumer is half way between the two firms (the first term) unless the two firms’ prices
differ. When prices differ, then a larger share of consumers buys from the lower-priced firm so the
critical consumer is further away from the lower-priced firm (by the second term). The critical con-
sumer’s position in equilibrium is therefore a function of the entrant’s and incumbent’s equilibrium
prices, X ∗ = X(pI , pE ).
       The incumbent and the entrant strategically set prices under Bertrand competition. Both firms face
the same constant unit cost of production c. (See Section 5 for the case with asymmetric unit costs.)
Given a conjectured price choice pE of the entrant, the incumbent maximizes profit


                                              πI (pE ) = max (pI − c) · X ∗
                                                            pI


and, given a conjectured incumbent price pI , the entrant maximizes profit


                                          πE (pI ) = max (pE − c) · [1 − X ∗ ].
                                                       pE


The two firms’ first-order conditions for profit maximizing prices are equivalent to6

                  1[        (                ) ]                             1[        (                ) ]
          p∗I =     pE + c + (1 − λE )2 − λ2I t             and      p∗E =     pI + c + (1 − λI )2 − λ2E t .
                  2                                                          2
   6
       The second-order conditions are satisfied, with the second derivative of the profit functions equal to −1/(tΛ) < 0.



                                                                 8
   In Nash equilibrium, the two first-order conditions are jointly satisfied and result in prices

                              Λ                                        Λ
                 p∗I = c +      [3 + (λI − λE )] t   and p∗E = c +       [3 − (λI − λE )] t,           (3)
                              3                                        3

with associated profits

                             Λ                                               Λ
          πI∗ (λI , λE ) =      [3 + (λI − λE )]2 t and   πE∗ (λI , λE ) =      [3 − (λI − λE )]2 t,   (4)
                             18                                              18

assuming that all consumers purchase one of the two firms’ products in equilibrium.
   Adding the two firms’ profits yields total duopoly profit:
                                                      [       (                   )2 ]
                                                                  2λI − (1 − Λ)
                        πI∗ (λI , Λ) + πE∗ (λI , Λ) = Λ 1 +                              t             (5)
                                                                        3

after replacing λE = (1 − Λ) − λI . For a given incumbent location λI , a higher degree of product
differentiation Λ between entrant and incumbent strictly raises total duopoly profit. Under the main-
tained assumption that all consumers on the unit interval buy the good in equilibrium, total duopoly
profit does not depend on the surplus-disutility ratio σ.
   The necessary and sufficient condition that every consumer in the lower half of the unit interval
buys in equilibrium is that s̄ − p∗I − (λI )2 t ≥ 0, and the necessary and sufficient condition that every
consumer in the upper half of the unit intervals buys in equilibrium is that s̄ − p∗E − (λE )2 t ≥ 0. Note
that if λI ≥ λE then, whenever the consumer at ℓk = 0 buys the good from the incumbent in the lower
half of the unit interval, then the consumer at ℓk = 1 also buys the good from the entrant in the upper
half of the unit interval. Similarly, if λI < λE then, whenever the consumer at ℓk = 1 buys the good
from the entrant in the upper half of the unit interval, then the consumer at ℓk = 0 also buys the good
from the incumbent in the lower half of the unit interval. As a consequence, one condition implies the
other, and we can state equivalently
                        
                           Λ(                     )
                              3 + [2λI − (1 − Λ)] + (λI )2       if λI ≥ λE
                  σ≥        3                                                                          (6)
                      Λ (3 − [2λI − (1 − Λ)] ) + [λI − (1 − Λ)]2 if λI < λE
                     
                       3

after replacing λE = (1 − Λ) − λI . Under these conditions consumers at both extremes of the unit


                                                      9
interval buy the good in equilibrium.
       In addition, all consumers between the two firms’ locations λI and (1 − λE ) must buy the good
in equilibrium. Suppose the incumbent is closer to the middle with λI ≥ λE and condition (6) holds.
Then all consumers with a location ℓk ≤ λI buy the good. Moreover, all consumers in the interval
ℓk ∈ [λI , X ∗ ] also buy the good if λI ≥ X ∗ − λI , and all consumers in the interval [X ∗ , (1 − λE )]
buy the good if λE ≥ (1 − λE ) − X ∗ . Note that the latter restriction is equivalent to 2λE ≥ 1 − X ∗
and implies the former restriction for λI ≥ λE . Conversely, consumers between the two firms’
locations buy the good when λI < λE under the former restriction, which is equivalent to 2λI ≥ X ∗ .
Plugging (2) in for X ∗ and simplifying those restrictions yields the following combined condition.
All consumers on the unit interval buy the good in equilibrium under the joint sufficient conditions7
         
        Λ(
                              )
          3 + [2λI − (1 − Λ)] + (λI )2        ∧ 11(1 − Λ) − 10λI ≥ 3 if λI ≥ λE
 σ≥     3                                                                                                             (7)
     Λ (3 − [2λI − (1 − Λ)] ) + [λI − (1 − Λ)]2 ∧ 10λI + (1 − Λ) ≥ 3 if λI < λE .
    
      3

       The following proposition states the duopoly results.

Lemma 1 If condition (7) is satisfied so that all consumers on the unit interval buy the good in
duopoly equilibrium, then total duopoly profit (5) is independent of the surplus-disutility ratio σ and
strictly increases in the degree of differentiation Λ.

       Duopoly profit (5) increases in the degree of differentiation Λ because price competition is less
fierce when the two firms are further apart in product space. Concretely, the mutually optimal price
equations (3) imply that p∗I increases in Λ for given λI and p∗E increases in Λ for given λE . Duopoly
profit (5) is independent of the surplus-disutility ratio σ under the assumption that σ exceeds a thresh-
old level so that all consumers buy the good from one firm in equilibrium (6). The intuitive reason is
that Bertrand price competition dissipates the rent.
       If total duopoly profit exceeds the total profit from merger, to be derived below, then the two firms
can agree on side payments that will make entry preferable to merger for both firms.
   7
     Condition (7) is a sufficient condition. It is also the necessary condition for the plausible case when λI , λE > 1/4
(a country’s incumbent monopolist caters to the middle consumer so λI is closer to 1/2 than to 0, see Section 3). In this
case, consumers between the two firms buy the good whenever consumers at both extremes buy (11(1 − Λ) − 10λI ≥ 3
and 10λI + (1 − Λ) ≥ 3 are satisfied for λI , λE > 1/4). In general, the necessary condition for all consumers buying in
equilibrium is weaker than the stated sufficient condition.



                                                           10
3 Cross-border Merger
After a merger, the monopolist’s price choice in the linear city model is complicated by the fact
that demand drops discontinuously when price surpasses a certain threshold level because then some
consumers choose not to buy at all.
    Consider a monopoly with product characteristics λM . A consumer k chooses to buy from the
monopolist if s̄ − pM − (λM − xk )2 t ≥ 0. Given a monopoly price pM , the left-most consumer who
is indifferent between buying or not is located at
                                             [            √             ]
                                                              s̄ − pM
                                   x = max 0, λM −
                                                                  t

in product space and the right-most consumer who is indifferent between buying or not is at
                                            [         √             ]
                                                          s̄ − pM
                                   x̄ = min λM +                  ,1 .
                                                              t

For a uniform distribution of consumers over the unit line, the monopolist will attract a total demand
XM of                         [       √              ]     [        √         ]
                                          s̄ − pM                     s̄ − pM
                  XM = min λM +                   , 1 − max 0, λM −             .                   (8)
                                              t                           t

As a consequence, revenues and profit are not continuously differentiable in monopoly price.
    For sufficiently low prices, the monopolist will attract all consumers on the unit line (XM = 1).
For an intermediate range of prices, the monopolist will lose consumers on one side of the unit interval
but not on the other side (e.g. in the upper half of the interval if λM < .5 so that XM = λM +
√
  (s̄ − pM )/t). For a range of high prices, the monopolist will lose consumers on both sides of the
                        √
unit interval (XM = 2 (s̄ − pM )/t). Only if the monopolist is located at the midpoint of the unit
interval (λM = .5) will the monopolist lose an equal mass of consumers on both sides of the unit
interval.
    Without loss of generality, suppose that the monopolist is located at λM ≤ .5 for the following
derivations. The monopolist sets price pM to maximize profit


                                    πM (pM ) = max (pM − c)XM .
                                                 pM



                                                     11
    In the highest price range (C) some consumers in both the upper and lower half of the unit interval
                                                                                        √
are not buying the good. In this case, a monopolist with λM ≤ .5 faces demand XM = 2 (s̄ − pM )/t
and maximizes profit πM (pM ). This demand is independent of the firm’s location in product space
because some consumers at both ends of the unit interval do not buy, and the “radius” of consumers
              √
that do buy is (s̄ − pM )/t. Taking the first derivative of profit in this price range, setting it zero,
and solving out for price yields the optimal monopoly price in this range8

                                                                       σ
                                                       p∗C
                                                        M = s̄ −         t                                          (9)
                                                                       3

with associated profit
                                                               ( σ ) 32
                                                   ∗C
                                                  πM  =4                     t.                                    (10)
                                                                   3
If consumers in the lower half of the unit interval are not buying, then consumers in the upper half
of the unit interval are also not buying because λM ≤ .5. A sufficient condition on parameters that
ensures that consumers on both sides of the unit interval are not buying is therefore that consumers
in the lower half of the unit interval are not buying: s̄ − pM − (λM )2 t < 0 or equivalently pM >
s̄ − (λM )2 t. Therefore p∗C
                          M in the highest range (C) satisfies the constraint that consumers in the lower

half of the unit interval are not buying if and only if


                                  p∗C
                                   M > s̄ − (λM ) t
                                                 2
                                                                   ⇔              σ < 3(λM )2 .


In other words, a monopolist only chooses prices in the highest range (C) when facing a tough market
with a low surplus-disutility ratio, where rents are hard to extract.
       In the intermediate price range (B), where some consumers in the upper half of the unit interval
do not buy the good but all consumers in the lower half do buy, a monopolist with λM < .5 faces
                     √
demand XM = λM + (s̄ − pM )/t and maximizes profit πM (pM ). In the intermediate price range,
consumers in the lower half of the unit interval must buy the good: s̄−pM −(λM )2 t ≥ 0 or equivalently
pM ≤ s̄−(λM )2 t. This latter constraint on price may or may not be binding, so there are two subcases
to consider in the intermediate price range (B). If the constraint is binding, then price at the constraint
                                                      √            /
   8
       The second-order condition −3(s̄ + σt − pM )    (s̄ − pM )/t [4(s̄ − pM )3 ] < 0 is satisfied if pM < s¯.




                                                              12
is simply
                                                  p∗B2
                                                   M = s̄ − (λM ) t
                                                                 2
                                                                                                                    (11)

with associated profit
                                             ∗B2
                                            πM   = 2λM [σ − (λM )2 ]t.                                              (12)

If the constraint, by which consumers in the lower half of the unit interval do buy, is not binding, then
the optimal unconstrained price in intermediate price range (B) is9
                                             [                       )]
                               ∗B1          σ 2λM (     √
                              pM     = s̄ −   +     λM + 3σ + (λM )2    t                                           (13)
                                            3   9

with associated profit

           2 (                √            )(      √                 √
                                                                                  )
  ∗B1
 πM      =     3σ − (λM ) − λM 3σ + (λM )
                         2               2                     2                2
                                              3λM + 3σ + 2(λM ) + 2λM 3σ + (λM ) t.
           27
                                                                                  (14)
In this intermediate price range (B), the constrained price (11) exceeds the unconstrained price (13),
and therefore the constrained profit (12) exceeds the unconstrained profit (14), if and only if10


                                     p∗B2  ∗B1
                                      M > pM               ⇔         σ < 5(λM )2 .


As the market becomes friendlier, with an increasing surplus-disutility ratio so that rents are easier to
extract, a monopolist chooses prices in lower ranges.
       In the lowest price range (A), when all consumers on the unit line buy the good, a monopolist with
λM ≤ .5 satisfies the condition that all consumers in the upper half of the unit interval buy the good
(and therefore also all consumers in the lower half) if s̄ − pM − (1 − λM )2 t ≥ 0 or, equivalently, if
pM ≤ s̄ − (1 − λM )2 t. For demand XM = 1 profit strictly increases in price, so the monopolist will
pick the maximum permissible price in this range


                                                 p∗A
                                                  M = s̄ − (1 − λM ) t
                                                                    2
                                                                                                                    (15)
                                                          √            /
   9
      The second-order condition −3(s̄ + σt/3 − pM ) (s̄ − pM )/t [4(s̄ − pM )2 ] < 0 is satisfied if pM < s¯.
The solution to the monopolist’s first-order condition has two roots. The root reported in equation (13) is the only
root that satisfies p∗B1
                      M     < p∗CM . A derivation of the two roots is available as a Mathematica 9 notebook file at
http://econ.ucsd.edu/muendler/papers/abs/enter.html.
   10
      The derivation is available in a Mathematica 9 notebook file at http://econ.ucsd.edu/muendler/papers/abs/enter.html.


                                                           13
with associated profit
                                                ∗A
                                               πM  = [σ − (1 − λM )2 ]t.                                              (16)

The price p∗A                                     ∗B1
           M in (15) is strictly below the price pM from the next higher range (13) if and only if
                                                                                                   11




                                 p∗B1  ∗A
                                  M > pM             ⇔         σ < (1 − λM )(3 − λM ).


       Table 1 summarizes these results. As the market becomes friendlier with an increasing surplus-
disutility ratio σ, the monopolist switches from high-price to low-price regimes in steps. In the tough-
est market in the upper-most row of Table 1 (C), the monopolist accepts the loss of a mass of con-
sumers at both sides of the unit interval. As the market becomes friendlier in the next two rows (B2
and B1), the monopolist sets a less extreme price so that consumers only at the more distant side of
the unit interval do not buy the product. In the friendliest market (row A), the monopolist sets a price
just low enough so that every consumer on the unit interval buys the good.
       All results in Table 1 are based on a given monopoly location λM in product space. A merger is
made up of two companies which, at the merger time, need to decide the merger’s location in product
space. In the lowest range of σ, where the market is toughest, the monopolist loses consumers on
both sides of the unit interval irrespective of location, so profit does not depend on λM . In range B
                             √
of σ, demand XM = λM + (s̄ − pM )/t strictly increases in λM . More consumers in the upper half
of the unit interval buy the good as the monopoly locates closer to them. In range A of σ, optimal
               ∗
merger profit πM (λM ; σ) also strictly increases in λM (as differentiation of profit in the third column
of Table 1 with respect to λM shows). A central location allows the monopoly to extract additional
consumer rent because fewer consumers suffer a disutility from the distance in product space. As a
consequence, merger profit is maximal when the monopoly is located at the center of the unit interval
with λM = .5.
       Suppose a merger has three choices: to pick the incumbent’s location λI in product space, to select
a linear combination of the incumbent’s and the entrant’s location αλI +(1−α)λE for some α ∈ (0, 1),
or to pick the entrant’s location λE . Since profit strictly increases with the location, the merger will
pick an extreme and select either λI or λE . The optimal location choice for the merger can therefore
  11
       The derivation is available in a Mathematica 9 notebook file at http://econ.ucsd.edu/muendler/papers/abs/enter.html.




                                                             14
                                                  Table 1: Price Choice and Optimal Profit of a Merger


      Range        σ∈                            Price pM                                       ∗ (λ; σ)
                                                                                        Profit πM                                               ∗ (λ; σ) ∈
                                                                                                                                        Profit πM


                   (            ]                       σ                                   (σ )3
                                                                                                 2                                      (              ]
      C                0, 3λ2                    s̄ −     t                             4            t                                      0, 4λ3 t
                                                        3                                    3

                   (                ]                                                                                                   (               ]
      B2               3λ2 , 5λ2                 s̄ − λ2 t                              2λ(σ − λ2 )t                                        4λ3 t, 8λ3 t




15
                   (                   ]                [σ       2λ
                                                                      (   √       )]    2
                                                                                             (           √           )                  (           2
      B1               5λ2 , (1−λ)(3−λ)          s̄ −    3   +    9    λ + 3σ + λ2 t    27    3σ
                                                                                               ( − λ(λ +   3σ + λ 2)
                                                                                                                        )                   8λ3 t, 27 (3−λ)
                                                                                                     √                √                                     ]
                                                                                             × 3λ + 3σ + 2λ(λ + 3σ + λ2 t                    ×(3+ 2λ)(3−4λ)t

                   (                    )                                                                                                                   )
      A                (1−λ)(3−λ), ∞             s̄ − (1 − λ)2 t                        [σ − (1 − λ)2 ]t                                (2(1−λ)t, ∞

                                                                                              B1
     Notes: The monopoly’s product characteristic is ℓM = λ ≤ .5. Profit at the upper bound
                                                                                          ] σ̄ = (1−λ)(3−λ)   of range B1 is strictly less than profit at the lower
             A                              ∗        B1                                                 ∗
     bound σ = (1−λ)(3−λ) of range A: πM (λ; σ̄ ) = (2/27)(3−λ)(3+ 2λ)(3−4λ)t < 2(1−λ)t = πM              (λ; σ A ) for λ > 0.
be written as
                                          λ∗M = max[λI , (1 − Λ) − λI ],

after replacing λE = (1 − Λ) − λI . As a result, the merger profit is independent of the degree of
differentiation Λ if λI ≥ λE , whereas λ∗M strictly decreases in Λ otherwise; then merger profit strictly
                                                     ∗
declines in Λ. This establishes the value of profit πM (λ∗M ; σ) of the merged firm.
       These results allow us to state the following proposition.

                             ∗
Lemma 2 Total merger profit πM (λ∗M ; σ)

       • strictly increases in the surplus-disutility ratio σ;

       • is independent of the degree of differentiation Λ if 2λI ≥ (1 − Λ) or σ ≤ 3(λ∗M )2 ,

       • and strictly falls in the degree of differentiation Λ otherwise.

Proof. See Appendix A.




4 Proximity-Concentration Trade-off in Product Space
Whenever total duopoly profit, that is the sum of the incumbent’s and the entrant’s profit after entry,
exceeds the total profit from a merger, then the two firms can agree on side payments that will make
entry preferable to merger for both firms. Entry, and not a merger, will therefore occur if and only if


                                     πI∗ (λI , Λ) + πE∗ (λI , Λ) ≥ πM
                                                                    ∗
                                                                      (λ∗M ; σ),


where total duopoly profit is given by (5) and the merger profit depends on the four relevant ranges of
the surplus-disutility ratio σ as given by (10), (12), (14) and (16) above (see also the third column of
Table 1).12
       There are two relevant cases to consider. First, the incumbent may be closer to the midpoint of the
unit interval and λI ≥ λE . Then we can substitute λI for λ∗M and restate the condition for entry to be
  12
     The question arises whether the parameter restrictions on the foreign entry game (6), by which all consumers buy in
equilibrium, may preclude ranges of the possible monopoly outcomes from A to C in Table 1. Online Supplement II at
http://econ.ucsd.edu/muendler/papers/abs/enter.html presents numerical checks at the extremes of the permissible param-
eter range to document that the analysis can proceed considering the full range of possibilities in Table 1.


                                                          16
more profitable than merger as         [   (            )2 ]
                                             2λI −(1−Λ)
                                      Λ 1+        3
                                                             t
                                               ∗
                                                                 ≥ 1.
                                              πM (λI ; σ)
The numerator strictly increases in the degree of differentiation Λ (Lemma 1), whereas the denomi-
nator is constant. Therefore, if λI ≥ λE the incentive for entry, rather than merger, becomes stronger
as the degree of differentiation between entrant and incumbent increases. The denominator strictly
increases in the surplus-disutility ratio σ (Lemma 2), while the denominator does not depend on σ
if condition (7) holds (Lemma 1). Therefore, if λI ≥ λE the incentive for merger, rather than entry,
becomes stronger as globalization homogenizes consumer tastes and product differentiation becomes
less relevant (lower t) from a consumer perspective.
   Second, the incumbent may be farther from the midpoint of the unit interval and λI < λE . Then
we must substitute (1 − Λ) − λI for λ∗M and restate the condition for entry to be more profitable than
merger as                              [   (            )2 ]
                                             2λI −(1−Λ)
                                      Λ 1+        3
                                                             t
                                         ∗
                                                                 ≥ 1.
                                        πM ((1 − Λ) − λI ; σ)
The numerator strictly increases in the degree of differentiation Λ (Lemma 1), and the denominator
strictly falls in Λ if σ > 3(λ∗M )2 . Therefore, if λI < λE the incentive for entry, rather than merger,
becomes stronger as the degree of differentiation between entrant and incumbent increases (and at
an even faster rate than in the case with λI ≥ λE before because now the denominator also drops).
As before, the denominator strictly increases in the surplus-disutility ratio σ (Lemma 2), while the
denominator does not depend on σ if condition (7) holds (Lemma 1). Therefore, also if λI < λE ,
the incentive for merger, rather than entry, becomes stronger as the market becomes friendlier for
undifferentiated firms.

Proposition 1 The ratio of total profit after entry and the profit after a merger is [πI∗ (λI , Λ) +
πE∗ (λI , Λ)]/πM
               ∗
                 (λ∗M ; σ). The ratio strictly falls in the surplus-disutility ratio σ and strictly increases
in the degree of differentiation between entrant and incumbent Λ.

   This proposition summarizes the proximity-concentration tradeoff in product space under the
premise that globalization homogenizes consumer tastes and reduces the disutility from virtual dis-
tance. When the surplus-disutility ratio σ is low because consumers suffer a high disutility t from

                                                     17
virtual distance to their preferred variety, then entry is relatively more attractive. In other words, a
duopoly’s proximity to individual consumers is relatively more profitable when consumers are highly
sensitive to matching their preferred variety. Conversely, when the surplus-disutility ratio σ is high
because consumers do not value strongly closeness to their preferred variety, then merger is relatively
more attractive. In other words, a merger’s concentration of product offerings at a single point in
product space is relatively more profitable when globalization makes consumers insensitive to virtual
distance from their preferred variety so that they perceive an additional entrant’s variety differentiation
as little relevant.



5         Physical Trade Costs
Globalization can also be thought of as a process of falling physical trade costs.13
         Physical trade costs have non-trivial implications in differentiated product space. On the one hand,
a drop of variable trade costs makes export entry more profitable, and more likely, simply because
cross-border shipping becomes less expensive. On the other hand, a high unit cost per good can serve
as a commitment device in differentiated product space and make price competition less fierce. As a
result of heightening price competition, a drop in variable trade costs may therefore erode equilibrium
profits, rather than raise them, and thus render export entry less likely than a cross-border merger.
         To model physical shipping costs, suppose both firms continue to face the same constant unit
production cost c, but the foreign entrant also incurs a trade cost τ for shipping across a country
border. Given a conjectured incumbent price pI the entrant now maximizes profit


                                    πE (pI ) = max (pE − c − τ ) · [1 − X ∗ ],
                                                pE


while the incumbent’s profit maximization problem is unchanged. The two firms’ first-order condi-
tions for profit maximizing prices are then equivalent to

                 1[        (                ) ]                       1[            (                ) ]
         p∗I =     pE + c + (1 − λE )2 − λ2I t       and      p∗E =     pI + c + τ + (1 − λI )2 − λ2E t .
                 2                                                    2
    13
    The case of falling fixed entry costs can be accommodated readily and with unsurprising results. The findings are
reported in Online Supplement I. Falling fixed costs of mergers trivially make mergers more likely.




                                                         18
   In equilibrium, the two first-order conditions are jointly satisfied and result in prices

                         τ  Λ                                              2τ  Λ
             p∗I = c +     + [3 + (λI − λE )] t and           p∗E = c +       + [3 − (λI − λE )] t,        (17)
                         3  3                                               3  3

assuming again that all consumers purchase one of the two firms’ products in equilibrium. As before,
a more central location in product space (a higher λI for the incumbent or a higher λE for the entrant)
awards a firm with more pricing power. In equilibrium, a higher trade cost leads to a higher price for
both firms, because the trade cost allows the entrant to commit to less fierce price competition (raising
both pE and pI by τ /3), and to a higher price of the entrant who passes through a part of the trade
cost to consumers (raising pE by another τ /3).
   The associated profits are

                      Λ [                  τ ]2                                    Λ [                  τ ]2
 πI∗ (λI , Λ, τ )   =     3 + (λI − λE ) −      t and         πE∗ (λI , Λ, τ )   =     3 − (λI − λE ) −      t.
                      18                   Λt                                      18                   Λt
                                                                                                           (18)
In Bertrand equilibrium, incumbent and entrant bear the incidence of the foreign entrant’s trade cost
symmetrically by (18) even though only the entrant incurs the trade cost. Importantly, a higher trade
cost may raise profits in Bertrand equilibrium because a high τ serves as a commitment device for
the entrant to maintain a higher price. The foreign entrant’s equilibrium profit πE∗ (λI , Λ, τ ) strictly
increases in the cross-border trade cost (that is ∂πE∗ (λI , Λ, τ )/∂τ > 0) if and only if


                                           τ > Λ(4 − 2λI − Λ)t > 0.


For an initially high level of the trade cost, the entrant’s profit therefore drops as cross-border shipping
costs come down with globalization. The reason is that a lower trade cost makes Bertrand price
competition between entrant and incumbent fiercer in this parameter range, and the entrant’s profit
initially declines as the commitment role of trade cost erodes.
   The incentives for a merger, however, depend on the two firms’ total profit. Adding the two firms’
profits yields total duopoly profit:
                                       [        (                   )2 ]
                                                    2λI − (1 − Λ)                τ [                 τ ]
  πI∗ (λI , Λ, τ ) + πE∗ (λI , Λ, τ ) = Λ 1 +                              t+       2λI − (1 − Λ) +      (19)
                                                          3                      18                 2Λt



                                                         19
after replacing λE = (1 − Λ) − λI . Total duopoly profit πI∗ (λI , Λ, τ ) + πE∗ (λI , Λ, τ ) strictly increases
in the cross-border trade cost (that is ∂[πI∗ (λI , Λ, τ ) + πE∗ (λI , Λ, τ )]/∂τ > 0) if and only if


                                          τ > Λ[2λI − (1 − Λ)]t.


The term on the right-hand side of the inequality is strictly negative if and only if λI < λE . This means
that, if the entrant’s product location is closer to the center than the incumbent’s, then a reduction in
trade costs strictly reduces duopoly profits (the eroding commitment role of trade costs for price
competition outweighs the shipping cost savings). If the incumbent’s product location is closer to the
center than the entrant’s, then there is a range of sufficiently high trade cost τ so that a reduction of
the trade cost strictly reduces duopoly profits.
    Similar to the case with no trade cost before, total duopoly profit does not depend on the surplus-
disutility ratio σ under the assumption that all consumers on the unit interval buy the good in equilib-
rium. The necessary and sufficient condition that every consumer in the lower half of the unit intervals
buys in equilibrium is that s̄ − p∗I − (λI )2 t ≥ 0, and the necessary and sufficient condition that every
consumer in the upper half of the unit intervals buys in equilibrium is that s̄ − p∗E − (λE )2 t ≥ 0. The
incumbent prices one-third of the entrant’s trade cost into its price p∗I by (17), whereas the entrant
passes two-thirds of the trade cost onto the consumers in its price p∗E . We can therefore infer that, if
λI ≥ λE then, whenever the consumer at ℓk = 0 buys the good from the incumbent in the lower half
of the unit interval for a price that hypothetically includes 2τ /3, then the consumer at ℓk = 1 also
buys the good from the entrant in the upper half of the unit interval.
    As a consequence, we can augment condition (6) and state a sufficient condition for all consumers
to buy the good at the extremes of the unit interval as
                     
                       2τ    Λ(                     )
                          +     3 + [2λI − (1 − Λ)] + (λI )2       if λI ≥ λE
               σ≥        3    3
                   2τ + Λ (3 − [2λI − (1 − Λ)] ) + [λI − (1 − Λ)]2 if λI < λE
                  
                     3   3

after replacing λE = (1 − Λ) − λI .
    In addition, we need a sufficient condition so that all consumers between the two firms’ locations
λI and (1 − λE ) buy the good in equilibrium. Suppose λI ≥ λE and the above condition holds so
that all consumers with a location ℓk ≤ λI buy the good. Then, just as in the symmetric case with no


                                                      20
physical trade costs, all consumers in the interval ℓk ∈ [λI , X ∗ ] also buy the good if λI ≥ X ∗ − λI ,
and all consumers in the interval [X ∗ , (1 − λE )] buy the good if λE ≥ (1 − λE ) − X ∗ . The latter
restriction is equivalent to 2λE ≥ 1 − X ∗ and implies the former restriction for λI ≥ λE . Conversely,
consumers between the two firms’ locations buy the good when λI < λE under the former restriction,
which is equivalent to 2λI ≥ X ∗ . Plugging (2) in for X ∗ and simplifying those restrictions yields the
following combined condition. All consumers on the unit interval buy the good in equilibrium if
   
     2τ    Λ(                     )
        +     3 + [2λI − (1 − Λ)] + (λI )2        ∧ 11(1 − Λ) − 10λI ≥ 3 if λI ≥ λE
σ≥     3    3
    Λ (3 − [2λI − (1 − Λ)] ) 2τ + + [λI − (1 − Λ)]2 ∧ 10λI + (1 − Λ) ≥ 3 if λI < λE .
   
     3                         3
                                                                                   (20)
   The following lemma summarizes the duopoly results in the presence of a cross-border trade cost.

Lemma 3 If condition (20) is satisfied so that all consumers on the unit interval buy the good in
duopoly equilibrium, then total duopoly profit (19) is independent of the surplus-disutility ratio σ and
strictly increases with trade cost τ if and only if


                                         τ > Λ[2λI − (1 − Λ)]t.                                     (21)


   Under condition (21) a falling physical trade cost erodes duopoly profit because the resulting
fiercer Bertrand price competition outweighs the benefits from lower shipping costs. Entry, and not a
merger, will occur if and only if

                                    πI∗ (λI , Λ, τ ) + πE∗ (λI , Λ, τ )
                                                 ∗
                                                                        ≥ 1,
                                               πM  (λ∗M ; σ)

where total duopoly profit is now given by (19) and the merger profit depends on the four relevant
ranges of the surplus-disutility ratio σ (Table 1). Merger profit does not depend on the physical
transportation cost τ because a merger serves consumers from its local production site. To analyze a
decline in physical transportation cost we therefore only need to consider the numerator. Conversely,
it is only the denominator that depends on the virtual distance cost t in product space because t is
inversely related to the surplus-disutility ratio σ.
   To investigate the effect of physical trade cost on the relative incentives for entry and merger, we
need to discern two cases. If the entrant’s location in product space is closer to the center than the

                                                       21
incumbent’s so that λI < λE , then condition (21) is always satisfied (because the right-hand side is
negative) and the ratio of total duopoly profit to merger profit strictly falls in τ so that, after τ has fallen
enough, merger profit strictly exceeds total duopoly profit. If the entrant’s location in product space
is further away from the center than the incumbent’s so that λI ≥ λE , then condition (21) is satisfied
as long as the ratio of physical and virtual trade cost τ /t is sufficiently large. Consequently, for any
level of physical trade costs τ , we can always find a level of virtual trade costs t low enough so that
condition (21) is satisfied also when the incumbent is closer to the center in product space. In other
words, if the incumbent’s location is better geared to capture many consumers in the local market, then
eroding physical transportation costs keep driving total duopoly profit down and ultimately below the
monopoly profit if globalization keeps reducing t as well as τ so that condition (21) remains satisfied.
We know from Lemma 2 that merger profit itself strictly increases as the virtual distance cost t falls
(and σ rises). Progressing globalization therefore implies again that the two firms cannot agree on
side payments that would make entry preferable to a merger for both firms, and globalization will
propel horizontal FDI. We summarize this set of results in a proposition.

Proposition 2 The ratio of total profit after entry and the profit after a merger is [πI∗ (λI , Λ, τ ) +
πE∗ (λI , Λ, τ )]/πM
                   ∗
                     (λ∗M ; σ). If the entrant is closer to the center of product space, λI < λE , then the
ratio strictly falls in physical transportation cost τ . If the incumbent is closer to the center of product
space, λI ≥ λE , then, for any physical transportation cost level τ , there is a level of virtual distance
cost t low enough so that the ratio strictly falls in τ .

    In summary, as globalization diminishes virtual distance costs by homogenizing tastes in product
space and reduces physical transportation costs, it also erodes the incentives for export entry and
favors horizontal FDI.



6    Evidence
An implication of the proximity-concentration tradeoff in product space is that falling virtual distance
cost and falling physical trade costs should propel cross-border mergers and acquisitions faster than
exports in industries that manufacture differentiated (or reference-priced) goods. The reason is that
only in industries with differentiated (or reference-priced) goods can the consumers’ perception of


                                                      22
                                                   Number of Transactions                                                                                      Total Acquisition Value




                                                                                                                                               40000
                                     800




                                                                                                              Cross−border M&A Acquisition Value
       Cross−border M&A Transactions




                                                                                                                                    30000
                           600




                                                                                                                            20000
                   400




                                                                                                                  10000
          200           0




                                                                                                                                  0
                                           1980    1985        1990           1995   2000        2005                                                  1980    1985        1990           1995   2000        2005
                                                                       Year                                                                                                        Year

                                                  Homogeneous, exchange−traded        Reference priced                                                        Homogeneous, exchange−traded        Reference priced
                                                  Differentiated                                                                                              Differentiated



Source: Thomson SDC Platinum, global M&A activity 1980-2006 by country pair and SIC 1987 industry pair (courtesy
of Spearot 2007).
Notes: Data are restricted to M&A transactions with acquiring and target firms in the same SIC 1987 4-digit industry but
in different countries. Classification of industries into those with goods traded on organized exchanges (homogeneous
goods), reference priced goods and differentiated products following Rauch (1999, conservative classification, revised
2007), based on a crosswalk from SIC 1987 4-digit industries to SITC (rev. 2) 4-digit sectors using concordances by
the U.S. Census and the United Nations from SIC to ISIC (rev. 3.1) and from SITC to ISIC by Arkolakis and Muendler
(2011).

                                                   Figure 1: Cross-border Horizontal M&A Activity by Industry Type



varieties in product space change over time and especially in industries with differentiated goods
will the reduction in physical transportation cost alter price competition, so that merger becomes
preferable. In industries that manufacture homogeneous goods, in contrast, perfect competition is
akin to an unchanged perception of variety differentiation in product space and does not alter the
fierceness of competition.
       Figure 1 is based on data from Thomson SDC Platinum, a comprehensive global data set that
records national and international M&A activity for the period 1980-2006 by country and industry
(courtesy of Spearot 2007).14 Industries are classified into product types following Rauch (1999). So
as to restrict the data to horizontal foreign direct investments, the graphs use only those transaction
records where the acquiring firm is in the same industry as the target firm. The left panel of the figure
depicts the number of cross-border M&A transactions by industry and shows that this number rose by
far the fastest in differentiated product industries, where consumers arguably become less sensitive to
variety differentiation as globalization progresses, and the slowest in homogeneous goods industries.
  14
     The M&A sample in the Thomson SDC Platinum data likely over-represents mergers and acquisitions between pub-
licly traded companies, with private firm activity harder to observe. Di Giovanni (2005) and Dı́ez and Spearot (2013)
discuss data properties and present in-depth empirical analysis.



                                                                                                         23
          Table 2: Cross-border Horizontal M&A Activity and Trade Flows by Industry Type

                                                  Gross Change between 1985-1994 and 1995-2004
Industry Type                   # Transactions         Acquisition Value       Target Firm Sales              Exports
Differentiated goods                 2.64                    3.06                     8.27                     3.05
Reference priced goods               3.51                    6.35                     4.01                     3.08
Homogeneous goods                    2.02                    2.18                     .90                      3.30

Sources: Thomson SDC Platinum, global M&A activity 1985-2005 by home-host country pair and SIC 1987 industry pair
(courtesy of Spearot 2007); World Trade Flows by coinciding source-destination country pair from Hanson et al. (2013),
based on Feenstra et al. (2005, revision 2).
Notes: M&A data are restricted to transactions with acquiring and target firms in the same SIC 1987 4-digit industry but
in different countries. Classification of industries in M&A data into conservative Rauch (1999, revised 2007) categories
based on a crosswalk from SIC 1987 4-digit industries to SITC (rev. 2) 4-digit sectors using concordances by the U.S.
Census and the United Nations from SIC to ISIC (rev. 3.1) and from SITC to ISIC by Arkolakis and Muendler (2011).
Classification of industries in World Trade Flow data into conservative Rauch (1999, revised 2007) categories based on
the mode within time consistent SITC 3-digit or 2-digit sectors from Hanson et al. (2013).


Reference-priced goods industries exhibit an intermediate evolution between the two extremes in
terms of transaction numbers.
    The right panel depicts the FDI transaction value in current U.S. dollars. Similar to the evidence
on transaction counts in the left panel, the total acquisition values rose the fastest in differentiated
product industries and the slowest in homogeneous goods industries. In terms of acquisition values,
FDI in industries with reference-priced goods changes in similar ways as FDI in differentiated goods
industries. In short, consistent with the implications of the model, FDI in differentiated goods indus-
tries grew faster than FDI on average. Figure 1 documents the growth differential of FDI between
differentiated and homogeneous goods industries.
    For a comparison to a similar growth differential of trade, I use time consistent global trade flow
data from Hanson, Lind and Muendler (2013) for the years 1985 through 2005, which are in turn based
on world trade flow data by Feenstra, Lipsey, Deng, Ma and Mo (2005, revision 2). I restrict both
the M&A and trade data to country pairs for which the M&A data record a home-host country pair
and the trade data the same source-destination pair. To smooth out sketchy reporting of transactions
and transaction values, I pool the data into an early decade from 1985 to 1994 and a late decade from
1995 to 2004.
    Table 2 shows the gross change between the early decade 1985-1994 and the late decade 1995-
2004 in the number of horizontal M&A transactions between countries, the average acquisition value
of the target firm, the average sales of the target firm as well as the total exports flowing from the



                                                          24
acquiring firm’s home country to the target firm’s host country in the same period. Exports in the
source-destination country pairs grow fastest in homogeneous goods industries (by a factor of 3.3) and
slowest in differentiated goods industries (a factor of 3.1) between the two periods. In contrast, M&A
transactions, acquisition values and target firm sales all grow faster in differentiated goods industries
(with factors between 2.6 and 8.3) than in homogeneous goods industries (factors between .9 and 2.2).
Interestingly, transactions and acquisition values grow even faster in industries with reference-priced
goods. But in terms of target firm sales, which are arguably most closely comparable to export sales,
the ranking is monotonic: horizontal FDI in homogeneous goods industries is associated with the
lowest target firm sales (a reduction factor of .9), in reference-priced goods industries it is associated
with an intermediate growth factor (of 4.0) and in differentiated goods industries with the largest
growth factor (8.3).
    Given the reverse growth factor ranking in exports, this evidence supports the idea that horizontal
FDI increasingly substitutes exports in differentiated goods industries, where consumers view addi-
tional differentiation in product space as less relevant when exports grow.



7    Conclusion
This paper has formalized a conjecture: Given their product characteristics, firms will choose to
enter and compete whenever their products are strongly differentiated, and to merge whenever con-
sumers are insensitive to variety differentiation. The paper has presented two alternative underlying
rationales. The common tenet for both underlying rationales is that a merger unifies the product char-
acteristics in some respect as it exploits synergies in production, sales or R&D. A merger’s resulting
concentration of product characteristics in product space matches some consumers’ preferences less
closely than an entrant with a differentiated product would match those tastes. The difference between
the two underlying rationales is that one rationale considers the consumers’ disutility from virtual
distance to their preferred variety in product space and the other rationale considers the producers’
shipping cost from physical distance to the destination market. First, as globalization homogenizes
tastes and diminishes virtual distance costs, a merger becomes relatively more profitable than entry
because consumers are relatively insensitive to the foregone benefits from a close match to their prod-
uct preferences. Entry with a differentiated product offers proximity to consumers in product space.


                                                   25
Concentration under horizontal foreign direct investment is therefore relatively more profitable than
the taste proximity from a differentiated product if consumers are not sensitive to product charac-
teristics, in a market that is highly globalized. Second, as globalization erodes barriers to trade and
reduces physical trade costs, a merger becomes relatively more profitable than entry because entrants
gradually lose the commitment device of transportation cost to keep prices high. Concentration under
horizontal foreign direct investment is therefore relatively more profitable than the duopoly, whose
products’ proximity in product space makes price competition fierce, in a market that is highly glob-
alized.
   An implication of this double hypothesis is that cross-border mergers become more frequent
over time as globalization progresses. Evidence from two decades of cross-border M&A transaction
records confirms that horizontal FDI increasingly substitutes exports in differentiated goods indus-
tries, compared to homogeneous-goods industries. Another testable implication of this hypothesis is
that entry would occur in young markets where product space is still relatively uncovered, so that
consumers value variety differentiation highly and price competition is less fierce, whereas merg-
ers would occur in older markets with consumers who are relatively insensitive to differentiation in
product space.




                                                  26
Appendix

A     Proof of Proposition 1
                                   ∗
Consider the relationship between πM (λ∗M ; σ) and σ. Inspection of (10), (12) and (16) (also see the
                                            ∗
third column of Table 1) shows that profit πM (λ; σ) strictly increases in the surplus-disutility ratio σ
in ranges C, B2, and A. In range B1, the first derivative of profit (14) with respect to σ is
                                                                                                   
         ∗B1                                                      √        3σ
                                                                                 √             −λ
       ∂πM   (λ; σ)              σ             λ                                     3σ+λ2 )
                                              + 2 +                                                 > 0.
                                                                      3σ+2λ(λ+
                      =√           √                                     √
             ∂σ                                3                             3σ + λ2
                        3σ + 2λ(λ + 3σ + λ2 )

                                             √
The derivative is strictly positive because 2 3σ + λ2 > λ so that the last term is strictly positive.
This establishes the first statement of the proposition.
                                                                                       ∗
    Duopoly profit (4) strictly increases in Λ. Now consider the relationship between πM (λ∗M ; σ) and
λ∗M . In range C where σ ∈ (0, 3(λ∗M )2 ] merger profit (10) is independent of λ∗M . If 2λI ≥ (1 − Λ)
so that λI ≥ λE , then the merger locates at λ∗M = λI , independent of Λ. This establishes the second
statement.
    Otherwise, the merger locates at λ∗M = (1 − Λ) − λI . Note that λ∗M strictly decreases in Λ in
that case. Profit, in turn, strictly increases in λM in range A by (16) and in ranges B1 and B2 because
                           √
demand XM = λM + (s̄ − pM )/t strictly increases in λM . Therefore monopoly profit strictly
decreases in Λ, establishing the third statement.




                                                    27
References
Alfaro, Laura and Andrew Charlton, “Intra-Industry Foreign Direct Investment,” American Economic Re-
  view, December 2009, 99 (5), 2096–2119.

Andrade, Gregor, Mark Mitchell, and Erik Stafford, “New Evidence and Perspectives on Mergers,” Journal
  of Economic Perspectives, Spring 2001, 15 (2), 103–20.

Antràs, Pol, “Firms, Contracts, and Trade Structure,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 2003, 118
  (4), 1375–1418.

   and Elhanan Helpman, “Global Sourcing,” Journal of Political Economy, June 2004, 112 (3), 552–580.

Arkolakis, Costas and Marc-Andreas Muendler, “The Extensive Margin of Exporting Products: A Firm-
  level Analysis,” August 2011. University of California, San Diego, unpublished manuscript.

Barba Navaretti, Giorgio and Anthony J. Venables, Multinational firms in the world economy With Frank
  G. Barry et al., Princeton and Oxford: Princeton University Press, 2004.

Bernile, Gennaro, Evgeny Lyandres, and Alexei Zhdanov, “A Theory of Strategic Mergers,” Review of
  Finance, April 2012, 16 (2), 517–75.

Bloch, Francis, “Endogenous Structures of Association in Oligopolies,” Rand Journal of Economics, Autumn
  1995, 26 (3), 537–56.

Brainard, S. Lael, “An Empirical Assessment of the Proximity-Concentration Trade-off between Multinational
  Sales and Trade,” American Economic Review, September 1997, 87 (4), 520–544.

Carr, David L., James R. Markusen, and Keith E. Maskus, “Estimating the Knowledge-Capital Model of
  the Multinational Enterprise,” American Economic Review, June 2001, 91 (3), 693–708.

d’Aspremont, Claude and Jean-Jaskold Gabszewicz, “On the Stability of Collusion,” in Joseph E. Stiglitz
  and G. Frank Mathewson, eds., New Developments in the Analysis of Market Structure, Cambridge, Mas-
  sachusetts: MIT Press, 1986, pp. 243–61. Proceedings of a conference held by the International Economic
  Association in Ottawa, Canada.

Davidson, Carl and Ben Ferrett, “Mergers in Multidimensional Competition,” Economica, November 2007,
  74 (296), 695–712.

Di Giovanni, Julian, “What Drives Capital Flows? The Case of Cross-Border M,” Journal of International
  Economics, January 2005, 65 (1), 127–49.

Dı́ez, Federico J. and Alan C. Spearot, “Core Competencies, Matching, and the Structure of Foreign Direct
   Investment,” August 2013. University of California, Santa Cruz, unpublished manuscript.

Ekholm, Karolina, Rikard Forslid, and James R. Markusen, “Export-Platform Foreign Direct Investment,”
  Journal of the European Economic Association, June 2007, 5 (4), 776–795.

Farrell, Joseph and Carl Shapiro, “Scale Economies and Synergies in Horizontal Merger Analysis,” Antitrust
  Law Journal, 2001, 68 (3), 685–710.



                                                   28
Feenstra, Robert C., Robert E. Lipsey, Haiyan Deng, Alyson C. Ma, and Hengyong Mo, “World Trade
  Flows: 1962-2000,” NBER Working Paper, January 2005, 11040.

Feinberg, Susan E. and Michael P. Keane, “Accounting for the Growth of MNC-Based Trade Using a Struc-
  tural Model of US MNCs,” American Economic Review, December 2006, 96 (5), 1515–1558.

Gowrisankaran, Gautam, “A Dynamic Model of Endogenous Horizontal Mergers,” Rand Journal of Eco-
  nomics, Spring 1999, 30 (1), 56–83.

Hackbarth, Dirk and Jianjun Miao, “The Dynamics of Mergers and Acquisitions in Oligopolistic Industries,”
  Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, April 2012, 36 (4), 585–609.

Hadjinicola, George C., Christakis Charalambous, and Eitan Muller, “Product Positioning Using a Self-
  Organizing Map and the Rings of Influence,” Decision Sciences, June 2013, 44 (3), 431–461.

Hanson, Gordon, Nelson Lind, and Marc-Andreas Muendler, “The Empirical Dynamics of Comparative
  Advantage,” October 2013. UC San Diego, unpublished manuscript.

Helpman, Elhanan, “International Trade in the Presence of Product Differentiation, Economies of Scale
  and Monopolistic Competition: A Chamberlin-Heckscher-Ohlin Approach,” Journal of International Eco-
  nomics, August 1981, 11 (3), 305–40.

  , “A Simple Theory of International Trade with Multinational Corporations,” Journal of Political Economy,
  June 1984, 92 (3), 451–471.

  , Marc J. Melitz, and Stephen R. Yeaple, “Export versus FDI with Heterogeneous Firms,” American Eco-
  nomic Review, March 2004, 94 (1), 300–316.

Hotelling, Harold, “Stability in Competition,” Economic Journal, 1929, 39, 41–57.

Hummels, David, “Transportation Costs and International Trade in the Second Era of Globalization,” Journal
  of Economic Perspectives, Summer 2007, 21 (3), 131–54.

Irmen, Andreas and Jacques-François Thisse, “Competition in Multi-characteristics Spaces: Hotelling was
  Almost Right,” Journal of Economic Theory, 1998, 78, 76–102.

Kamien, Morton I. and Israel Zang, “The Limits of Monopolization through Acquisition,” Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 1990, 105, 465–99.

Kim, Hyunho and Konstantinos Serfes, “A Location Model with Preference for Variety,” Journal of Industrial
  Economics, December 2006, 54 (4), 569–95.

Markusen, James R. and Keith E. Maskus, “Discriminating among Alternative Theories of the Multinational
 Enterprise,” Review of International Economics, November 2002, 10 (4), 694–707.

Mitchell, Mark L. and J. Harold Mulherin, “The Impact of Industry Shocks on Takeover and Restructuring
 Activity,” Journal of Financial Economics, June 1996, 41 (2), 193–229.

Raith, Michael, “A General Model of Information Sharing in Oligopoly,” Journal of Economic Theory, October
  1996, 71 (1), 260–88.



                                                    29
Rauch, James E., “Networks versus Markets in International Trade,” Journal of International Economics, June
  1999, 48 (1), 7–35.

Sajeesh, S. and Jagmohan S. Raju, “Positioning and Pricing in a Variety Seeking Market,” Management
  Science, June 2010, 56 (6), 949–961.

Salop, Steven C., “Monopolistic Competition with Outside Goods,” Bell Journal of Economics, September
  1979, 10 (1), 141–56.

Spearot, Alan C., “Domestic and Foreign Mergers and Acquisitions: Theory and Evidence.” PhD dissertation,
  University of Wisconsin–Madison, Madison, Wisconsin 2007.

Teece, David J., “Economics of Scope and the Scope of the Enterprise,” Journal of Economic Behavior and
  Organization, 1980, 1, 223–47.

Toxvaerd, Flavio, “Strategic Merger Waves: A Theory of Musical Chairs,” Journal of Economic Theory, May
  2008, 140 (1), 1–26.

United Nations Center on Transnational Corporations, World Investment Report 1991, New York: United
  Nations, 1991.

United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, World Investment Report 2013, New York and
  Geneva: United Nations, 2013.

Zhou, Wen, “Large Is Beautiful: Horizontal Mergers for Better Exploitation of Production Shocks,” Journal
  of Industrial Economics, March 2008, 56 (1), 68–93.




                                                    30
