                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         THE TRADABILITY OF SERVICES:
                   GEOGRAPHIC CONCENTRATION AND TRADE COSTS

                                           Antoine Gervais
                                          J. Bradford Jensen

                                        Working Paper 19759
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19759


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2013




Jensen thanks the Sloan Foundation, the MacArthur Foundation, and the National Science Foundation
(SES-0552029) for research support. Gervais thanks the Institute for Scholarship in the Liberal Arts
for research support. We thank James Anderson, Andrew Bernard, Lorenzo Caliendo, Robert Feenstra,
Joseph Kaboski, Dennis Quinn, Stephen Redding, David Richardson, Peter Schott, Jeff Thurk, and
Stephen Yeaple, as well as participants at various seminars and conferences for their comments. Special
thanks to Jim Davis for timely help when it counted. All remaining errors are our own. The research
in this paper was conducted while the authors were Special Sworn Status researchers of the U.S. Census
Bureau at the Center for Economic Studies. Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau. All results have
been reviewed to ensure that no confidential information is disclosed. Previous versions of this paper
were circulated under the title "Are Services Tradable? Evidence from US Microdata." The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Antoine Gervais and J. Bradford Jensen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Tradability of Services: Geographic Concentration and Trade Costs
Antoine Gervais and J. Bradford Jensen
NBER Working Paper No. 19759
December 2013, Revised June 2015
JEL No. F1

                                                ABSTRACT

In this paper, we use a unique dataset on the distribution of output and demand across regions of the
United States to estimate trade costs for 969 service and manufacturing industries. Our estimation
method is a natural extension of the gravity model of trade and identifies trade costs in the absence
of trade data. The estimated trade costs are higher on average for service industries, but there is considerable
variation across industries within sectors. Using the trade cost estimates, we classify industries into
tradable and non-tradable categories. We find that accounting for tradable service industries nearly
doubles the international exposure of the US economy, tradable services value added is unevenly distributed
across geographical regions, labor productivity and wages are higher on average for tradable industries,
and potential welfare gains from trade liberalization in the service sector are sizable.


Antoine Gervais
University of Notre Dame
agervais@nd.edu

J. Bradford Jensen
McDonough School of Business
Georgetown University
Washington, DC 20057
and Peterson Institute for International Economics
and also NBER
jbj24@georgetown.edu
1      Introduction

In this paper, we use a unique dataset on the distribution of producers and
consumers across regions of the United States to estimate the share of economic
activity exposed to international competition, a critical input for evaluating the
impact of a broad range of domestic and external shocks.1 To date, empirical
studies have focused almost exclusively on the exposure of the manufacturing
sector, implicitly assuming that services are not tradable. However, because
service trade has grown over time and now accounts for about 20 percent of
global international transactions (and 30 percent of US exports), the traditional
assumption that goods are tradable and services are non-tradable is increasingly
inadequate.2 Our results suggest that accounting for tradable services nearly
doubles the international trade exposure of the American economy.
    An important impediment to incorporating service trade into economic
models is the lack of information on the scope and characteristics of tradable
service industries. Data on international trade in services is far less detailed
and comprehensive than that for merchandise trade, so current empirical
studies are limited to using bilateral trade data for only a small number of
broad service categories (e.g., Anderson et al. (2014); Egger et al. (2012);


     1. A number of recent studies depend on estimates of the size of the tradable sector. For
example, quantifying the labor market impact of offshoring (Liu and Trefler (2008) and Crino
(2010)), the effect of local demand shocks on the labor market (Moretti (2010)), the“jobs
multiplier” of fiscal stimulus spending (Wilson (2012)), and the link between real exchange
rates and sectoral total factor productivity measures (Berka et al. (2014)). As described in
Young (2014), assessing the impact of structural transformation on aggregate productivity
will require similar estimates.
     2. See Francois and Hoekman (2010) for a review of the growing literature on trade in
services.

                                              1
Francois and Hoekman (2010)).3 Instead, we use a novel dataset derived from
the 2007 Economic Census to present a more comprehensive and detailed
picture of service trade. Our empirical analysis demonstrates aggregated data
mask important variation within service categories and may provide inaccurate
measures of the exposure of regions to international trade.
   Our dataset collects region-level information on output, demand, and pro-
duction costs for about one thousand manufacturing and service industries.
However, it does not contain information on trade flows between regions.
This prevents the implementation of standard estimation procedures, so-called
gravity equations, which relate the volume of trade between regions to their
economic size and the trade resistance between them. Instead, we develop a
method that estimates the effect of trade costs from region-level information
on industry output and demand. Our theoretical framework, which is a natural
extension of the Anderson and Van Wincoop (2003) gravity model, formalizes
the intuition of Jensen and Kletzer (2006) and Jensen (2011) that the disparity
between local supply and local demand is an indicator of the extent of trade
in an industry. In our model, as trade costs increase, consumers spend an
increasing fraction of their income on output produced by local firms, such
that regional demand and supply converge. Our estimation method relies on
this insight and uses the structure of the theoretical model to infer measures of
trade costs from the observed distribution of industry output and demand.



    3. As described in Feenstra et al. (2010), the US Census Bureau publishes information
on US imports and exports of goods for more than 10,000 product categories, whereas the
Bureau of Economic Analysis publishes US services trade data for about 30 categories (up
from 17 categories in 2005).

                                           2
    For the estimation, we focus on trade costs associated with distance between
producers and consumers. Services can be delivered at a distance through a
variety of modes: shipping (e.g., software publishing); movement of produc-
ers (e.g., consultants); or movement of consumers (e.g., amusement parks).4
However, independent of the mode of delivery, service trade implies movement
across space such that, as in manufacturing, distance between producers and
consumers matters. In addition to trade costs, our theoretical framework fea-
tures other factors that influence the extent of trade between regions, such
as differences in production costs across regions, and differences in product
differentiation and returns to scale across industries. Because we control for
these differences in our estimation and because our estimates are derived from
US data (where interregional policy barriers to trade tend to be low), our
empirical measures of trade costs represent fundamental product or service
characteristics associated with the cost of distance and, as a result, provide
useful information on the potential scope for international trade in services.5
    In our theoretical model, trade flows between regions depend on the “phi-
ness” of trade; a function of the trade costs and price elasticity of demand
parameters (e.g., Baldwin et al. (2003)). Conditional on trade costs, trade
will be lower in high elasticity industries because demand is more sensitive
to changes in price. Disentangling trade costs from elasticity of demand is


     4. These methods of delivery are equivalent to the “modes” of service trade defined
in the General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS). In this paper, we define trade as
modes 1 , 2, and 4 (shipping, and movement of consumers or producers, respectively) and
think of mode 3 (local presence) as analogous to foreign direct investment.
     5. Similar to goods trade, culture, language, and other measures of “distance” are likely
to affect international trade in services. Because we use US data in our estimation, the
influence of these factors in our estimates is reduced.

                                              3
therefore crucial to obtain accurate measures of the impact of distance on
trade flows. An important measurement challenge we face is that measures
of price elasticity are not readily available for service industries. Using the
theoretical model as a guide, we construct measures of elasticity from data on
profit margins collected by the Bureau of Economic Analysis. Our estimates
take reasonable values. The average elasticity across all industries in our sample
is 7.1. For manufacturing industries, the average is 8.1; a value in line with
available estimates (e.g., Broda and Weinstein (2006)).
   Our estimation method generates plausible values for trade costs. Consis-
tent with the theoretical model, estimated trade costs are lower in industries
characterized by large disparities in supply and demand within regions. We
further validate our estimates by comparing them to other indices of tradability
that have been used in the literature. As expected, our trade costs measures are
negatively correlated with industry-level estimates of trade share and average
distance shipped derived from the US Census Commodity Flow Survey (e.g.,
Head and Mayer (2010); and Holmes and Stevens (2012)). In contrast to our
estimates, these measures are outcome variables that reflect variation in multi-
ple fundamentals, only one of which is the impact of distance on trade costs.
Our estimates are also negatively correlated with an indicator that captures
the extent to which the average task in an industry can be offshored (e.g.,
Amiti and Wei (2005); Crino (2010); Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg (2008);
and Jensen and Kletzer (2010)).
   Our empirical results challenge the conventional treatment of services as
non-tradable. Our analysis confirms trade costs are higher on average in the


                                        4
service sector, but also reveals that many service industries have estimated
trade costs comparable to manufacturing industries where we observe trade.
We use our measures of trade costs to classify industries into tradable and
non-tradable categories. As expected, a smaller share of service industries are
tradable. However, because the service sector is relatively large (accounting
for about 65 percent of value added in the United States, compared to about
20 percent for manufacturing), we find that about half of the value added in
tradable industries comes from the service sector.
   Our analysis highlights systematic variation in industry characteristics
across tradable and non-tradable industries. On average, tradable industries
have higher wages and labor productivity compared to non-tradable industries.
These differences persist even when comparing industries within the same
sector. We interpret these patterns as evidence of differences in factor-intensity
across industries. Assuming wages and labor productivity reflect unmeasured
differences in workers’ ability and physical or intangible assets, respectively,
our results suggest tradable industries are skill- and capital-intensive compared
to non-tradable ones. These results are a first step to understanding how
the location of services production might respond to changes in international
economic policy for services.
   The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. In the next section, we motivate
the intuition for our empirical strategy by documenting geographical patterns of
production for several industries. In section 3, we develop a theoretical model of
trade between regions to obtain an analytical expression that relates trade costs
to the share of excess supply, a measure of disparity between local production


                                        5
and demand. In section 4, we present descriptive statistics on the share of excess
supply. In section 5, we discuss the empirical implementation of our model and
obtain estimated trade costs for 969 service and manufacturing industries. In
section 6, we use our estimates to characterize the international trade exposure
of the US, examine the regional distribution of tradable services, compare
the characteristics of tradable and non-tradable industries, and explore the
potential welfare gains from trade liberalization in services. Section 7 concludes.



2     Geographic Concentration

To motivate our empirical approach, we present examples that illustrate the
variation across industries in the geographic concentration of production. Figure
1 depicts the distribution of employment across US counties for two manu-
facturing industries, “Aircraft” and “Ready-mix concrete,” and two service
industries, “Software publishing” and “Tax preparation.” The underlying data
comes from the 2007 County Business Patterns (CBP) program.6 Counties in
white report zero employment in the industry, while counties in grey report
positive employment.7
    Figure 1 shows there are important differences across industries in the
geographic distribution of employment across regions, even within sector. As

     6. CBP is publicly available data, so we can provide a more detailed view of the
distribution of employment. Census would not allow disclosure of microdata statistics at the
county by industry level. See http://www.census.gov/econ/cbp/ for more information on the
CBP program.
     7. There are over 3,000 counties in the US, so the geographic area of individual counties
tends to be small (particularly in the eastern US). We represent county borders in white to
help distinguish between producing and non-producing regions; state borders are outlined in
black.

                                              6
seen in panel (a), aircraft production is concentrated in small number of
counties; the four counties that contain Seattle, WA, Fort Worth, TX, and
Wichita, KS account for almost half of aircraft manufacturing employment in
the US.8 In contrast to the geographic concentration of aircraft production,
panel (c) shows employment in the Ready-mix concrete industry is distributed
throughout the US. The right hand side of Figure 1 reveals similar patterns in
the spatial distribution of production in the service sector. As seen in panel
(b), employment in the software publishing industry is concentrated in a small
number of counties. Together, the 3 counties that contain Seattle, WA and the
Silicon Valley region account for almost a quarter of software employment in
the US. In contrast, panel (d) shows that employment in the tax preparation
industry, which includes firms like H & R Block, is ubiquitously distributed
throughout the US.
    Relative to aircraft, ready-mix concrete is characterized by higher transport-
cost-to-value ratios, while tax preparation is more intensive in face-to-face
meetings with clients than software publishing. These differences suggest firms
in the concrete and tax preparation industries face higher trade costs compared
to firms in the aircraft and software industries. When trade costs are high,
interregional sales are low and local production more closely matches local
demand. The impact of differences in trade costs across industries is apparent
in Figure 1. Consistent with high trade costs, concrete production and tax
preparation services are widespread. Conversely, the spatial concentration of

     8. In CBP data, some counties’ employment is suppressed for disclosure avoidance reasons.
In these cases, an employment size class is assigned to the county. For the employment share
information reported in this section, we take the mid-point of the size class as the county’s
employment.

                                              7
employment in the aircraft and software industries is far greater than local
demand would support, which suggests trade costs are low in those industries.
In the next section, we formalize this intuition by developing a model of
interregional trade that relates differences in trade costs across industries to
differences in the geographic concentration of industry output unexplained by
the concentration of demand and other factors.



3     Theoretical Framework

In this section, we extend the Anderson and Van Wincoop (2003) model of
trade to include multiple industries and increasing returns in production. In
our theoretical framework, products are distinguished by their kind and by
their place of production, such that regions can produce a differentiated variety
in each of the s = 1, 2, . . . , S industries. We assume production entails both
fixed and marginal production costs. The cost function allows us to define
(unobservable) prices as a function of (observable) region characteristics. We
use our extension of the gravity model to derive an analytical expression that
relates region-level production costs and bilateral trade costs to the industry’s
share of excess supply, an index of the disparity between the distributions of
output and demand across regions. In the following sections of the paper, we
use this result to develop a novel estimation strategy that identifies trade costs
in the absence of trade data.9

     9. In contrast, a series of recent papers use the standard gravity model and bilateral
trade data to estimate trade costs for service sectors (e.g., Anderson et al. (2014); Egger
et al. (2012); van der Marel and Shepherd (2013); and Gervais (2014)). These studies face
the limitation that only highly aggregated bilateral trade data is available.

                                            8
3.1    Demand

We begin by characterizing the behavior of consumers. The economy consists of
J regions each inhabited by a mass of identical consumers. Preferences of the
representative consumer in any region i ∈ J are defined over the consumption
of differentiated varieties of goods and services in each industry

          S                                J
                                                               ! σ σ−1
                                                                    s
                                                                             S
          Y                                X         σs −1        s          X
   Ui =         Qαiss , with Qis =                    σs
                                                    qijs                 ,         αs = 1, and αs > 0,    (1)
          s=1                              j=1                               s=1



where qijs is the quantity of region-j, industry-s variety consumed in region i,
and σs > 1 is the price elasticity of demand in industry s.
   The representative consumer maximizes her utility subject to her budget
constraint. The consumer’s problem can be solved in two steps. First, because
the outer tier of preferences are Cobb-Douglas, the optimal expenditure on each
industry is given by Eis = αs Ei , where Ei is region i’s total expenditure. Second,
within each industry s, the consumption of varieties is chosen to minimize the
cost of the aggregate bundle Qis . Region i’s optimal expenditure on an industry
s variety produced in region j is

                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                  ! 1−σ
                                       1−σs                                      J                  s
                                 pijs                                              X
                rijs = Eis                      ,     with Pis =                         p1−σ
                                                                                          ijs
                                                                                              s
                                                                                                          (2)
                                 Pis                                               j=1


where pijs is the price of a unit of differentiated output and Pis is the price of
a unit of the aggregate bundle Qis , so that Eis = Pis Qis .




                                                           9
3.2    Supply

We now characterize the supply side of the economy. Production entails both
fixed and marginal production costs and requires only one input, labor. The
total cost function for each region-industry is given by
                                                          !
                                            1 X
                       Cjs = wj       Fs +       τijs qijs .                  (3)
                                           zjs i

Production costs vary across regions and industries because of changes in wage
rates and labor requirements. The wage rate wj is region-specific, reflecting
differences across regions in labor costs, whereas labor efficiency zjs is region-
industry specific, reflecting productivity differences across industries within
regions. Output can be traded across regions at some cost. As is customary,
we assume these costs take the iceberg form such that when τijs ≥ 1 units of
product s is shipped from region j to region i, only one unit arrives. There
are no intra-regional trade costs, i.e., τjjs = 1 ∀ j, s. The presence of fixed
production costs, Fs , implies that each region will produce a unique variety.
   We assume there is monopolistic competition in final output markets and
that regions are segmented markets. In that case, profit maximization implies
the following pricing rule

                                                  
                                            σs         wj τijs
                             pijs =                            .              (4)
                                          σs − 1        zjs

Equation (4) makes clear that prices are increasing in wages and bilateral
trade costs, and decreasing in technical efficiency. The constant elasticity of


                                            10
substitution across varieties implies a constant markup, σs /(σs − 1), above
marginal costs. This markup depends only on the price elasticity of demand
and varies across industries, but not across regions within-industries. When
industry output is highly differentiated, the price elasticity of demand is low
and markups are high. The variation across industries in profit margins will
play a key role in our measurement strategy. Because of fixed production costs,
average price may be lower than average cost if the region does not sell enough
units.10 Profit maximizing regions produce if and only if it makes positive
profits in that industry, such that our model is consistent with non-producing
regions.


3.3     Interregional Trade

We now combine the supply- and demand-side of the economy to characterize
trade flows between regions. Substituting the pricing rule (4) into the optimal
expenditure (2), we can express interregional sales from region j to i in industry
s as                      "                         #
                             (wj τijs /zjs )1−σs
                 rijs   = P                     1−σs Eis ,   ∀ j ∈ Js ,            (5)
                            l∈JS (wl τils /zls )

where Js denotes the set of regions producing output in industry s. Equation
(5) is a typical gravity equation. It shows that interregional sales are increasing
in destination-region total expenditure (Eis ) and decreasing in producer-region
production costs (wj /zjs ), and the trade costs between regions (τijs ). The term



   10. From equations (3) P
                          and (4), the minimum quantity such that regions make positive
                     min
profits is given by qjs  ≡ i τijs qijs = (σs − 1)Fs zjs .

                                           11
in square brackets shows that region expenditures is allocated across varieties
according to their contributions to the price index.
   In our data, we do not have information on interregional sales, rijs . Therefore,
we cannot use gravity equation (5) to estimate trade costs, τijs . Instead, we
derive information on the extent of interregional trade from the excess supply
(ES), defined as the region-industry level difference between local supply and
local demand. The ES is, in essence, a region-industry level measure of current
account. For example, when supply in a region-industry is greater than demand,
the ES is positive and the region is a net exporter. In the model, revenue
in each region-industry is obtained by taking the sum across all destinations
of interregional sales, defined in (5). Because there are no fixed trade costs,
regions will sell their output in all regions such that
                      
                                              1−σs
                      P (wj τijs /zjs )
                                                    Eis
                                                      1−σs − Ejs , if j ∈ Js ,
                      
                       iP
   ESjs ≡ Rjs − Ejs =         l∈J S
                                    (w l τ ils /zls )                            (6)
                      
                      
                      −Ejs ,
                                                                  otherwise.


Equation (6) shows that, all else equal, low-cost regions that face low barriers to
trade will generate greater revenue and have larger excess supply. It also makes
clear the variation we exploit to identify the trade cost parameters. On the one
hand, when trade costs are null (i.e., τijs = 1), firms face the same aggregate
demand independent of their location such that production is distributed across
regions in proportion to production costs only (i.e., ESjs 6= 0). On the other
hand, production will equal consumption in each region when trade costs are
prohibitive (i.e., ESjs = 0).


                                        12
    Equation (6) makes clear that because the ES is a function of the region-level
expenditures, it is positively correlated with industry size. To obtain measures
that are comparable across industries, we define the share of excess supply
(SES) for each industry s as follows

                                             P
                                                  j    ESjs
                                  SESs =                    ,                            (7)
                                                      2Rs

              P
where Rs =       j   Rjs denotes total revenue in the industry. We use the absolute
value because, by construction, the sum across regions of Ejs is equal to
zero. The SESs ranges between 0 and 1. A high SESs signals that some
regions produce a significantly higher share of the industry’s output, and
others significantly lower, than is consumed in the region. For example, when
SESs = 0 production equals consumption in all regions, and when SESs = 1
production is located in a subset of regions disjoint from the set of regions
where consumption takes place. Because there is intra-industry trade in our
model, the SESs provides a lower bound estimate for the share of interregional
sales in the industry.
    Together, equations (6) and (7) provide a theoretical expression for the SES
and play a central role in the empirical analysis below. Equation (6) shows that
the SES depends on the distributions of supply, demand, production costs, and
trade costs across regions.11 As explained in detail in the following sections,
it is possible to use information on revenue, expenditure, wages, and labor

    11. Fixed production costs do not appear directly in those equations, but the effect of
changes in fixed production costs are captured indirectly through variation in the number of
regions that produce output (i.e., differences in Js across industries). All else equal, high
fixed costs industries will be characterized by a smaller number of producing regions.

                                             13
productivity to infer measures of trade costs from these equations, i.e., without
bilateral trade data. We note that while our model accounts for a large number
of factors that affect the extent of trade between regions, it remains tractable
and provides a flexible framework to evaluate the impact of trade costs on
interregional trade.



4     Share of Excess Supply

In this section, we provide information on the SESs defined in equation (7);
the key statistics of the data we use to estimate industry-level measures
of trade costs. We begin with a discussion of the dataset we use for our
empirical analysis. We then explain how we measure the two components of the
SES, region-industry revenue and expenditure. Finally, we present descriptive
statistics for SESs , defined in (7).
    For the empirical analysis, we use data from the US Census Bureau’s 2007
Economic Census. The Economic Census collects information on revenue, pay-
roll, employment, location and principal industry for almost all establishments
located in the US. We use this information to construct a region-industry
level dataset. We define an industry as a six-digit North American Industrial
Classification System (NAICS) category, the most disaggregated level available.
We partition the US into regions using the Bureau of Economic Analysis’ Eco-
nomic Areas (EA) as our unit of geography. As described in Johnson and Kort
(2004), EA group together cities and adjacent counties based on commuting
patterns and other indicators of interaction. In contrast with other available



                                        14
measures of geography, such as state, county, or zip code, EAs are consistent
with the notion of a “geographic market.” The 183 EAs are mutually exclusive
and exhaustive of the land area of the United States. The Data Appendix at
the end of the paper provides more details on the Economic Census and the
construction of our sample.
   Following our model, we measure region-industry revenue, Rjs , using infor-
mation on total sales in industry s reported by producers located in region
j. As described in the Data Appendix at the end of the paper, we adjust our
measures of revenue to account for international transactions. To construct
region-industry expenditure, Eis , we use information from the Bureau of Eco-
nomic Analysis’ 2007 Input-Output Use table to identify how demand for
industry s’s output is distributed across consuming industries, investment,
government, and final demand. We combine the input-output information with
data on the location of demand from the Economic Census and the American
Community Survey (for final demand and industries not in scope for the Eco-
nomic Census). As explained in the Data Appendix, we adjust the demand
measures to account for imports using information from Bureau of Economic
Analysis’ supplemental import matrix.
   Using our industry-region measures of expenditure and revenue, we compute
SESs as defined in equation (7) for each of the 969 service and manufacturing
industries in our sample. Table 1 lists the most and least concentrated man-
ufacturing and service industries as measured by SESs . Recall that a high
SES indicates that production is concentrated in some regions beyond what
can be explained by the concentration of demand in those regions. The results


                                     15
reported in Table 1 show there is considerable variation in the measured SESs
across industries. The highest SESs measure is 0.94 for Sheer Hosiery Mills
and the lowest SESs measure is 0.06 for Offices of Dentists.

                              [ TABLE 1: HERE ]

   As reported in Table 1, there is substantial variation in measured SESs
within the manufacturing sector. Manufacturing industries characterized by high
transport-cost-to-value ratios, such as ready-mix concrete and quick printing,
have low estimated SESs measures. Conversely, manufacturing industries with
lower transport-cost-to-value ratios such as Tobacco, Sugar, and Batteries all
have high SESs measures. Consistent with the model, these results suggest
the SESs reflects variation in trade costs across industries. Table 1 also show
considerable variation in estimated SESs across service industries. Geophysical
Surveying and Mapping Services, Electronic Auctions, and Credit Card Issuing,
all have SESs measures of about 0.80, while Office Supply Stores, Supermarkets,
Restaurants and Dentists all have SESs measures below 0.10. While measures
of SESs for service industries are not quite as high as in manufacturing, there
is still a considerable amount of services consumed outside the region where
they are produced. For instance, by definition of the SESs , (at least) 80 percent
of revenue in the electronic auction industry is generated from interregional
sales.
   To provide a more comprehensive description of the SESs measures, we
presents the mean and standard deviation across all industries and by broad
industry groups in Table 2. The simple average of SESs across all industries
implies that (at least) 45 percent of revenue in the average industry is associated

                                        16
with transactions in which the buyer and the seller are located in different
geographical regions. The standard deviation across industries is large at 0.21
and indicates substantial variation in measured SESs . The results also show
that manufacturing industries are the most concentrated on average, with an
SESs of 0.59, retail industries are the least concentrated, with an SESs of 0.21.
Within services, the broad industry groups Transportation, Information, and
Finance and Insurance group all have relatively high average SESs of about
0.45.

                             [ TABLE 2: HERE ]

    The results reported in Table 2 reveal considerable variation in estimated
SESs across industries within broad groups. For instance, the mean and
standard deviation across Information industries are 0.45 and 0.17, respectively.
By comparison, the mean and standard deviation across all industries in the
sample are 0.45 and 0.21, respectively. This implies there is as much variation
across industries within the Information group as across all industries in the
sample. Therefore, classifying all industries within a broad group as either
tradable or non-tradable is equivalent to assuming that all industries in our
sample are either tradable or non-tradable.



5       Estimating Trade Costs

In this section, we use our theoretical model and data to obtain industry-level
estimates of trade costs from our measures of SESs . We first describe the
empirical implementation of the model. We then discuss measurement issues

                                       17
we face and how we address them. Finally, we present the estimation results
and compare our estimates with alternative measures of tradability that have
been used in the literature. In section 6, we use our estimates of trade costs to
evaluate the scope for trade in services.


5.1    Empirical Approach

Taking the sum across regions of interregional sales defined in equation (5), we
can express region-industry revenue as

          J                                                1−σs
         X    λ φ E                                   wj
   Rjs =     P js ijs is       with λjs =                                         1−σs
                                                                    , and φijs = τijs  .   (8)
         i=1   l∈Js λls φils                          zjs


This equation shows that region-industry revenue depends (only) on the distri-
butions of industry expenditure across regions, and two sets of parameters. The
first parameter, λjs , is a function of production costs. The second parameter,
φijs , is known as the “phi-ness” of trade and captures the impact of trade costs
on revenue (e.g. Baldwin et al. (2003)). Substituting (8) into the share of excess
supply (7) yields

                                          P
                                              j   Rjs (λs , φs , Es ) − Ejs
              SES(λs , φs , Es , Rs ) =                                     ,              (9)
                                                          2Rs

where λs , φs , and Es denote J × 1 vectors. Using our data, we can construct
measures of revenue, expenditure, and obtain controls for the vector of λjs .
Therefore, for any given vector of trade costs, φs , we can use equation (9) to
obtain a “simulated” SES.



                                          18
    In our data, we have only 183 observations for each industry (one per
region). Therefore, we cannot identify the bilateral trade cost parameters, φijs ,
without making additional assumptions. Trade in services implies movement
across space of either the output, the consumer, or the producer so that, as
in manufacturing, distance between producers and consumers is an important
determinant of trade costs. Therefore, we follow the gravity equation literature
and assume bilateral trade costs are proportional to distance between regions.12
We assume that trade costs are related to distance as follows
                                     
                                     (1 + ts dij )1−σs
                                     
                                                         if i 6= j,
                            φijs =                                                       (10)
                                     
                                     1,
                                                         otherwise.


where dij is a measure of distance between the largest counties of each EA.
Using the J × J matrix of bilateral distance D and information on measures
of elasticity, we can construct the vector φs (ts , σs , D) using equation (10) for
any given value of the trade cost parameter ts .
    Combining (9) and (10) implies the SESs depends on data and one parame-
ter, ts . Our estimation strategy is to calibrate our model by choosing the value
of ts which minimizes the difference between the simulated and the measured
SES. In other words, we define


           ts ≡ argmin µ(ts ) = (SES(ts |λs , σs , D, Es , Rs ) − SESs )2 ,
           b                                                                             (11)
                       ts




   12. Because policy restrictions to trade between regions within the US are relatively small
compared to international trade, we ignore border effects and focus on distance as the main
impediment to trade.

                                                19
where SESs denotes the share of excess supply measured from the data. In
the estimation, we take the distribution of demand and expenditure across
regions as exogenous and simply ask which value of the trade cost parameter
is consistent with these observed distributions.


5.2     Measurement

Before we present the estimation results, we discuss two additional measurement
issues we face. Estimating equation (11) requires data on revenue, expenditure,
and production costs for each region-industry, as well as information on the
elasticity of substitution for each industry. We use the same measures of
revenue, R, and expenditure, E, as in section 3 above, so we only discuss the
construction of the elasticity of demand, σs , and the production cost parameters,
λjs . Additional details on the construction of these variables are provided in
the Data Appendix.


5.2.1   Elasticity of Demand

Industry-level measures of the elasticity of demand are not readily available
for the service sector, so we need to construct our own. We use a relationship
identified in the theoretical model to construct σs for each industry. From the
pricing rule (2) and the optimal demand (4), it follows that

                                           Rs
                                    σ
                                    bs =      ,                              (12)
                                           Gs




                                       20
                     P P
where Gs ≡ (1/σs )    i    j∈Js   (rijs − Fs ) denotes gross operating surplus in the
industry. Equation (12) shows that the price elasticity of demand is equal to
the inverse of an industry-level measure of gross profit margins.
   We estimate the elasticity of demand using equation (12) and information
on value added and gross operating surplus from the Bureau of Economic
Analysis’ Gross-Domestic-Product-by-Industry data. Our estimates take rea-
sonable values. The average elasticity for manufacturing industries is 8.1. Using
trade data, Broda and Weinstein (2006) obtain averages across manufacturing
industries of 4.0 or 17.3 depending on the period and level of aggregation. An
advantage of our approach and data set is that we can obtain estimates for
the elasticity of demand using the same methodology and data for manufac-
turing and service industries. The average elasticity for services is 6.2. The
lower elasticity indicates services are less differentiated on average compared
to manufacturing goods.


5.2.2   Production Costs

To construct the region-industry measures of production costs, λjs , we need
information on wages and technical efficiency. We measure the wage rate by
dividing total payroll by total employment in each region. The data does not
contain information on physical output and, for many industries, the only
input on which we have information is labor. As a result, we cannot compute
measures of technical efficiency such as physical total factor productivity or
quantity produced per worker, or even value added per worker. Therefore, we
measure region-industry’s technical efficiency using labor productivity defined


                                           21
as sales per worker. Our estimate of λjs is defined as follows


                               bjs = Salesjs / Workersjs .
                               λ                                                                  (13)
                                     Payrollj / Workersj

The Data Appendix at the end of the paper provides more information on the
construction of this measure.
   As shown in the Data Appendix, the ratio of output per worker to wages
for region j industry s in our theoretical model is given by
                                                                                            
                                    
     bjs ≡ rjs /ljs =         σs                                   1
                                                                                            
     λ                                   1 −                    σs                      ,   (14)
             wj             σs − 1                      σs − 1           wj Ajs             
                                                1+                                     λjs
                                                           σs              Fs

                    Eis Pisσs −1 τins
                                  1−σs
              P
where Ajs =     i                      is the region-industry market access term. This
expression makes clear that our proxy is positively correlated to the model
parameter λjs . As in Foster et al. (2008), equation (14) shows that our revenue-
based cost measure λ
                   bjs is positively correlated with region-industry technical

efficiency, but also reflects differences in demand (Ajs ). In addition, in our model
differences in fixed production costs and elasticity of demand across industries
lead to variation in estimated production costs. Because we implement our
estimation procedure separately for each industry, these differences will not
drive any of the results.




                                                22
5.3     Results

In this section, we present the calibration results for our model. For each
industry, we find the value for the trade cost parameter ts consistent with our
measure SESs . Because the relationship between the excess supply and trade
costs is non-linear, we use numerical methods to search over values of ts > 0.
For each guess t̃s , we use our data on expenditure (Es ) and distance (D), and
                                            σ ) and production costs (λ
our measures of price elasticity of demand (b                         bjs ) to

construct the simulated SES(t̃s ) defined in (9). As shown in equation (11),
we define our estimated trade costs, b
                                     ts , as the parameter that minimizes the
distance between the simulated and actual SES.
   We report the estimation results in Table 3. Overall, our model performs
                                                              
well.13 As indicated in the table, the objective function µ b
                                                            ts , defined as the
square of the difference between actual and simulated share of excess supply, is
close to zero on average. As seen in the table, the manufacturing sector has the
lowest average estimated trade costs while retail trade has the highest. The
empirical results also show there is considerable variation within sectors in the
estimated trade costs. In all cases, the standard deviation in estimated trade
costs across industries within broad industry groups is large relative to the
average.

   13. For 60 industries, our estimates of trade costs do not conform with our priors. These
industries typically have an SES above 0.5 and an estimated trade cost above 5. Rather than
exclude these outliers from the analysis, we impute a value for b
                                                                ts to these industries using the
simple empirical relationship between SESs , σs , and b ts observed in other industries. Most
outliers are in the manufacturing sector (54 of 60), so our imputation reduces the average
trade cost in manufacturing (which works against finding tradable services in our analysis
below). Our results are robust to excluding these industries, which together account for only
about 1.6 percent of value added.

                                              23
                                 [ TABLE 3: HERE ]


    Figure 2 provides a detailed view of the within industry group dispersion
in estimated trade costs. Each panel plots our estimates, b
                                                          ts , against the share
of excess supply for one of twelve groups. Each dot represents a six-digits
NAICS industry. Panel (a) shows manufacturing industries have relatively low
trade costs compared to services industries represented in the other panels.
Comparing across panels reveals the substantial variation in estimated trade
costs across industries within each sector and the considerable overlap between
the estimated trade costs of manufacturing and service industries. As expected,
there is a negative correlation between estimated trade costs and SESs . Across
all industries, the correlation is equal to -0.61. Figure 2 makes clear the negative
correlation between estimated trade costs and SES is very robust. It holds
within each major industry group and is not due to the influence of a few
individual industries.14


                                 [ FIGURE 2: HERE]


5.4     Validation

To further confirm our trade cost measures capture useful variation in trade
costs across industries, we compute correlations between our estimates and
several measures that are used as proxies for international trade intensity.
Our first measure is an industry-level estimate of trade share derived from

   14. We note that we restricted ts ∈ [0, 25] for the estimation. While many industries in
the Real estate broad industry group attain that upper bound, this restriction has no impact
on the empirical analysis we present below.

                                            24
Bureau of Economic Analysis’ input-output tables. Our second measure uses
information from the Commodity Flow Survey (CFS) to estimate the average
distance shipped for each industry (e.g., Head and Mayer (2010); Holmes and
Stevens (2012); and Yilmazkuday (2012)). Our third measure is an indicator
derived from occupation characteristics that captures the extent to which the
average task in an industry can be offshored (e.g., Amiti and Wei (2005); Crino
(2010); Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg (2008); and Jensen and Kletzer (2010)).
Additional information on these measures is available in the Data Appendix.
    We report the correlations between the trade indices and our estimated
trade costs in Table 4. In all cases, the correlation is negative as expected;
Industries with higher estimated trade costs are observed to have lower trade
barriers. At the same time, the magnitude of the estimated correlations imply
there are important differences between those measures. Our estimates have
several advantages over the other indices. First, the BEA trade share and the
CFS average distance shipped measures have similar limitations to using SESs
as a proxy for trade costs. Each is an outcome variable that reflects variation
in multiple fundamentals, one of which is the impact of distance on trade costs.
Second, because the CFS collects information on output shipments, the vast
majority of service industries are out of scope. Therefore, the CFS index cannot
be used to construct measures of trade costs for service industries. Third, the
occupation-based measure captures the extent to which tasks can be traded or
not, not the impact of distance on interregional sales.15 For these reasons, we

   15. In addition, tradability indices that use occupation characteristics to determine
tradability often focus on whether the worker in the occupation needs to be physically
present with co-workers to do their job. This results in many production jobs (and as a result
many manufacturing industries) being classified as “non-tradable.”

                                             25
believe our estimated trade costs have advantages over these other measures
to address questions related to the exposure of the economy to international
shocks.


                                [ TABLE 4 HERE ]



6     Tradable Services

In this section, we explore the empirical implications of our trade cost estimates.
First, we compute the share of service production in the US that could be traded
internationally and examine the geographic distribution of trade exposure. We
then compare average wages and labor productivity in tradable and non-
tradable industries. Last, we use the model to quantify the potential welfare
gains from trade liberalization in the service sector.


6.1       Value Added

To identify how much economic activity is in tradable service industries, we
classify industries as “tradable” or “non-tradable” based on a threshold trade
cost. Because we have priors on the tradability of output in the manufacturing
sector, we use our trade cost estimates for manufacturing industries to define
this threshold. For each y ∈ [0, 100], we find the threshold trade cost ty that
results in y percent of manufacturing sector value added being classified as
tradable. We use these thresholds to group services industries into tradable
       ts ≤ ty ) and non-tradable categories (i.e., b
(i.e., b                                            ts > ty ).



                                          26
   Table 5 presents the distribution of value added across broad industry
groups and tradability assuming that 75 percent of manufacturing value added
is in tradable industries (i.e., using t75 as our threshold). While the average
service industry has higher trade costs than the average manufacturing industry,
because the service sector is larger than the manufacturing sector, there is
significant value added in tradable service industries. We find that about 20
percent of aggregate value added is produced in industries classified as tradable
and that the service sector accounts for almost half of tradable value added.
These results imply that accounting for services almost doubles the estimated
size of the tradable sector in the US and calls into question the common
assumption that services are not tradable.


                              [ TABLE 5 HERE ]


   The results in Table 3 and Table 5 highlight the advantage of using detailed,
industry level data to estimate trade costs for the service sector. Currently
available international trade data for the service sector is highly aggregated,
nearly as aggregated as the 11 service industry categories reported in Table 3.
So, any estimate of trade costs derived from international trade data would
aggregate a range of industries with different trade costs. If we compare the
average trade cost for the sectors reported in Table 3 to the 75 percent threshold,
t75 = 1.45, no service sector would be classified as tradable, biasing downward
the estimate of the trade exposure of the US economy. These results suggest
that highly aggregated data hides important variation in the tradability of
service activities.


                                        27
   The results in Table 5 are based on the hypothesis that 75 percent of man-
ufacturing employment is in tradable industries. To evaluate the sensitivity of
this result to changes in the threshold, we compute ty for each y ∈ {5, 10, ..., 95}
and reclassify industries according to each threshold. Figure 3 shows the share
of total value added in industries classified as tradable separately for manufac-
turing and services. By construction, the share of tradable manufacturing sector
value added is a 45 degree line. Two important findings emerge from Figure
3. First, the share of value added in tradable industries is evenly distributed
across manufacturing and services for tradability thresholds, ty < 0.8. Second,
for ty > 0.8 the value added in tradable services is larger than in manufacturing.
Therefore, the finding that accounting for services doubles the estimated size
of the tradable sector is robust to our choice of threshold and, for reasonable
assumptions regarding the tradability of manufacturing industries, services
account for a larger share of tradable industry value-added.


                              [ FIGURE 3 HERE ]


6.2    Geographic Distribution of Trade Exposure

The results in the previous section suggest that the trade exposure of the US
economy is significantly higher due to tradable services. However, because of
geographical concentration in production of tradable services (e.g., securities and
commodities trading, motion pictures, computer systems design and support
industries, or casinos), it may be the case that not all regions are affected
equally. In this section, we present information on the geographical distribution



                                        28
of tradable service industries to explore how services trade liberalization may
impact regions differently.


                              [ FIGURE 4 HERE ]


   Figure 4 reports the share of value added in tradable service industries for
each EAs. As seen in the figure, every EA produces some tradable services, but
the relative importance of these industries vary significantly across regions. EAs
in black, (e.g., Austin, Las Vegas, New York, San Francisco, and Washington) all
have more than 15 percent of region value added in tradable service industries,
while EAs in dark grey (e.g., Boston, Chicago, Denver, and Los Angeles) all
have more than 10 percent of region value added in tradable service industries.
Most of these regions have relatively small manufacturing sectors, so tradable
services represent a significant increase in these regions’ trade exposure. In
contrast, many other EAs have less than 5 percent of region value added in
tradable services.
   Figure 4 shows that the uneven concentration of production of tradable
service industries implies the international trade exposure of regions varies
significantly and highlights an advantage of using disaggregated data to esti-
mate trade costs. For example, this distinction could also be important when
comparing the trade exposure of different countries.


6.3    Characteristics of Tradable Industries

We use our estimated trade costs to compare tradable and non-tradable industry
characteristics. In our model, production requires only one input, labor. In

                                       29
the data, variation in average wages across industries may reflect changes
in the skill composition of the labor force. At the same time, measures of
labor productivity will capture variation in unmeasured input across industries
(e.g., capital intensity, possibly either physical or knowledge). We compare the
characteristics of tradable and non-tradable industries using OLS regressions
of the form
                             lnYs = β0 + βt ID75 + µs                            (15)

where Ys denotes, in turn, log co-worker average wage and log labor productivity
and ID75 is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the industry is classified as tradable
         ts < t75 ), and 0 otherwise. We report the results in panel A of Table 6. The
(i.e. if b
estimation results shows there are important differences between tradable and
non-tradable industries. On average, workers in tradable industries are about
30 percent more productive and receive 30 percent higher wages compared to
workers in non-tradable industries.


                                    [ TABLE 6 ]


    The estimated differences between tradable and non-tradable industry
characteristics could be driven by the sectoral composition of each group. For
instance, we know from previous results that a larger share of manufacturing
industries are classified as tradable. To account for this possibility, we replace
the constant β0 in equation (15) with a set broad industry group dummies.
We present the results in panel B of Table 6. The point estimates are smaller
but the systematic differences between tradable and non-tradable remain even
within broad industry groups. Tradable industries have 16 percent higher labor

                                         30
productivity compared to non-tradable industries in the same group, and
24 percent higher average wages. In panel C, we re-estimate the regressions
restricting the sample to services industries only. The results show that workers’
wages and productivity in tradable services industries are almost 30 percent
higher than in non-tradable industries
   Overall, the results reported in Table 6 suggest there are significant differ-
ences between tradable and non-tradable industries even within the same sector.
We interpret the average wage differences as suggestive evidence that trad-
able industries use more skill-intensive technologies compared to non-tradable
industries, and the labor productivity differences as suggestive evidence that
tradable industries are more intensive in other inputs like physical capital or
intellectual property capital. These results suggest that simplifying assumptions
regarding the tradability of sectors or groups of industries based on highly
aggregated data hide important variation in tradability, average wages, and
labor productivity that may mask differential factor demands.


6.4    Potential Gains from Trade

Last, we consider the potential welfare gains from trade liberalization in the
service sector. For simplicity, we assume that changes in trade costs have no
general equilibrium impact on wages, and focus on the first order impact on




                                       31
prices.16 From equations (2) and (4), the price index is:

                                   "                              1
                                                              # 1−σ
                                       X  wj τijs 1−σs           s

                           Pis =                                                      (16)
                                       j∈Js
                                              zijs

                                                          1       0
Therefore, a symmetric change in trade costs of the form τijs = δτijs for some
δ > 0, leads to an equivalent change in the price index, Pis1 = δPis0 . From
equation (1), log welfare is defined as the weighted sum of the log price indices,
where the weights are given by the share of expenditure in each industry. Then,
if Ωy represents the set of industries that are tradable (i.e. ts < ty ), a symmetric
change in trade costs leads to the following change in welfare

                                                     X
                                %∆W = ln δ ·                αs .                      (17)
                                                     s∈Ωy



The model shows that the gains from trade are equal to the product of the
percentage change in trade costs and the share of demand affected by the
change in trade costs.
    Table 7 presents the distribution of welfare gains associated with a symmetric
liberalization assuming the threshold for tradability is τ75 . As expected, given
the share of value added in tradable service industries, the potential welfare
gains in the service sector are of a similar magnitude to welfare gains in the
manufacturing sector. This simple exercise shows that, for similar reductions
in trade barriers, gains from liberalization in services trade are of the same

    16. This would be the case if we included a homogenous good produced under constant
returns to scale and traded at no cost in our model. Changes in wages across regions would
then reflect variation in worker productivity in the homogenous good industry and variation
in trade costs in the differentiated sector would have no impact on equilibrium wages.

                                              32
order of magnitude as the gains in manufacturing. However, existing evidence
suggests that policy restrictions in the service sector are significantly higher
than in manufacturing. (e.g. Hufbauer et al. (2010)). Therefore, welfare gains
from trade liberalization in the service sector could potentially be much larger
than those in manufacturing.


                              [ TABLE 7 HERE ]



7     Conclusion

Because of data limitations, current empirical studies of international trade in
services are limited to a small number of relatively aggregated service categories.
In this paper, we develop an estimation methodology that exploits information
on the spatial distribution of producers and consumers across US regions
to obtain measures of trade costs for almost one thousand manufacturing
and service industries. Overall, our empirical results suggest that aggregating
industries into broad sectors and characterizing these sectors as either tradable
or non-tradable hides important differences across industries within sectors in
trade costs and industry characteristics.
    Estimated trade costs are higher on average in the service sector than in
manufacturing, but many service industries have estimated trade costs compa-
rable to manufacturing industries. Using our measures, we classify industries
into tradable and non-tradable categories and find that accounting for tradable
services almost doubles the international trade exposure of the US economy.
This suggests that potential welfare gains from trade liberalization in the ser-


                                        33
vice sector are large. We also find that tradable industries have higher average
wages and labor productivity, differences that persist even when we compare
industries within the same sector. We interpret these differences as evidence of
differential factor demands in tradable and non-tradable industries.
    Our results have caveats. First, we abstract from non-homotheticity. It is
well-known that services share of expenditure is increasing in income per capita.
While variation across regions of the US may not be as large as across countries,
and final demand is only a fraction of total demand in each industry, it is possible
that non-homotheticity plays a role in explaining production patterns. Second,
our model does not include firm heterogeneity and selection into exporting,
both of which feature prominently in recent trade literature (e.g., Melitz (2003)
and Bernard et al. (2003)).17 Third, our theoretical framework ignores the
location decision of firms, which prevents us from doing counterfactual analysis.
These are important topics for future research.
    However, because our approach is easy to implement and requires only
information on the geographic distribution of production, it is potentially
widely applicable. For instance, Europe, where data is increasingly collected
on a consistent basis across national borders, could provide a rich empirical
context to apply this framework. Comparing our estimates, derived from US
data where interregional barriers to trade are relatively low, with estimates
from European data could provide useful insight into trade barriers to services


    17. There is a growing literature using firm-level micro data to analyze service firms
that trade with findings similar to studies of manufacturing firms (e.g. Bernard and Jensen
(1999)). See for example Jensen (2011) for the US, Breinlich and Criscuolo (2011) for the UK,
Ariu et al. (2012) for Belgium, Guillaume et al. (2011) for the EU, and Kelle et al. (2013)
for Germany.

                                             34
within Europe. Our procedure is flexible and could be used to estimate the
impact of national borders and policy impediments on trade in services in
other contexts as well. More generally, distinguishing between tradable and
non-tradable activities at a detailed industry level is likely to improve empirical
estimates of the impact of a broad range of economic shocks, from the gains
to trade liberalization to the labor market effects of offshoring to accurately
appraising the empirical impact of fiscal policy or other domestic shocks.




                                        35
References

Amiti, M. and S.-J. Wei (2005). Fear of service outsourcing: is it justified?
  Economic policy 20 (42), 308–347.

Anderson, J. E., C. Milot, and Y. Yotov (2014). How much does geography
  deflect services trade? International Economic Review (forthcoming).

Anderson, J. E. and E. Van Wincoop (2003). Gravity with gravitas: A solution
  to the border puzzle. American Economic Review 93 (1), 170–192.

Ariu, A. et al. (2012). Services versus goods trade: Are they the same? Centre
  for Economic Policy Research.

Baldwin, R., R. Forslid, P. Martin, G. Ottaviano, and F. Robert-Nicoud (2003).
  The core-periphery model: Key features and effects. The Monopolistic
  Competition Revolution in Retrospect, 213–235.

Berka, M., M. B. Devereux, and C. Engel (2014). Real exchange rates and
  sectoral productivity in the eurozone. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bernard, A. B., J. Eaton, J. B. Jensen, and S. Kortum (2003). Plants and
  productivity in international trade. American Economic Review 93 (4),
  1268–1290.

Bernard, A. B. and B. J. Jensen (1999). Exceptional exporter performance:
  cause, effect, or both? Journal of international economics 47 (1), 1–25.




                                      36
Breinlich, H. and C. Criscuolo (2011). International trade in services: A portrait
  of importers and exporters. Journal of International Economics 84 (2), 188–
  206.

Broda, C. and D. E. Weinstein (2006). Globalization and the gains from variety.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics 121 (2), 541–585.

Crino, R. (2010). Service offshoring and white-collar employment. The Review
  of Economic Studies 77 (2), 595–632.

Egger, P., M. Larch, and K. E. Staub (2012). Trade preferences and bilateral
  trade in goods and services: A structural approach.

Feenstra, R. C., R. E. Lipsey, L. G. Branstetter, C. F. Foley, J. Harrigan, J. B.
  Jensen, L. Kletzer, C. Mann, P. K. Schott, and G. C. Wright (2010). Report
  on the state of available data for the study of international trade and foreign
  direct investment. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Foster, L., J. Haltiwanger, and C. Syverson (2008). Reallocation, firm turnover,
  and efficiency: Selection on productivity or profitability? American Economic
  Review 98 (1), 394–425.

Francois, J. and B. Hoekman (2010). Services trade and policy. Journal of
  Economic Literature, 642–692.

Gervais, A. (2014). The impact of policy restrictions on services trade. Mimeo,
  University of Notre Dame.




                                       37
Grossman, G. M. and E. Rossi-Hansberg (2008). Trading tasks: A simple
  theory of offshoring. American Economic Review , 1978–1997.

Guillaume, G., E. Milet, and D. Mirza (2011). Les firmes francaises dans le
  commerce de services. Economie et Statistique, 125–147.

Head, K. and T. Mayer (2010). Illusory border effects: distance mismeasurement
  inflates estimates of home bias in trade. In S. Brakman and P. van Bergeijk
  (Eds.), The Gravity Model in International Trade: Advances and Applications.
  Cambridge University Press.

Holmes, T. J. and J. J. Stevens (2012). Exports, borders, distance, and plant
  size. Journal of International Economics 88 (1), 91–103.

Hufbauer, G. C., J. J. Schott, and W. F. Wong (2010). Figuring out the Doha
  round, Volume 91. Peterson Institute.

Jensen, J. (2011). Global Trade in Services: Fear, Facts, and Offshoring.
  Peterson Institute for International Economics.

Jensen, J. and L. Kletzer (2006). Tradable Services: Understanding the Scope
  and Impact of Services Offshoring. In L. Brainard and S. M. Collins (Eds.),
  Offshoring White-Collar Work, Issues and Implications, Brookings Trade
  Forum 2005. Brookings Institution Press.

Jensen, J. and L. Kletzer (2010). Measuring Tradable Services and the Task
  Content of Offshorable Services Jobs. In M. H. Katharine Abraham and
  J. Spletzer (Eds.), Labor in the New Economy. University of Chicago Press.


                                     38
Johnson, K. P. and J. R. Kort (2004). 2004 redefinition of the bea economic
  areas. Survey of Current Business 84 (11), 68–75.

Kelle, M., J. Kleinert, H. Raff, and F. Toubal (2013). Cross-border and foreign
  affiliate sales of services: Evidence from german microdata. The World
  Economy 36 (11), 1373–1392.

Liu, R. and D. Trefler (2008). Much ado about nothing: American jobs and
  the rise of service outsourcing to China and India. NBER Working Paper .

Melitz, M. J. (2003). The impact of trade on intra-industry reallocations and
  aggregate industry productivity. Econometrica 71 (6), 1695–1725.

Moretti, E. (2010). Local multipliers. American Economic Review , 373–377.

van der Marel, E. and B. Shepherd (2013). Services trade, regulation and
  regional integration: evidence from sectoral data. The World Economy 36 (11),
  1393–1405.

Wilson, D. J. (2012). Fiscal spending jobs multipliers: Evidence from the
  2009 american recovery and reinvestment act. American Economic Journal:
  Economic Policy 4 (3), 251–282.

Yilmazkuday, H. (2012). Understanding interstate trade patterns. Journal of
  International Economics 86 (1), 158–166.

Young, A. (2014). Structural transformation, the mismeasurement of pro-
  ductivity growth, and the cost disease of services. American Economic
  Review 104 (11), 3635–3667.


                                      39
                           TABLE 1
Most and least concentrated manufacturing and services industries

NAICS      Sector           Industry description                                SES
Panel A:   Most concentrated industries
315111     Manufacturing Sheer Hosiery Mills                                    0.94
312210     Manufacturing Tobacco Stemming and Redrying                          0.93
311311     Manufacturing Sugarcane Mills                                        0.92
335912     Manufacturing Primary Battery Manufacturing                          0.91
325182     Manufacturing Carbon Black Manufacturing                             0.91
541360     Services         Geophysical Surveying and Mapping Services          0.82
483211     Services         Inland Water Freight Transportation                 0.82
454112     Services         Electronic Auctions                                 0.82
487990     Services         Scenic and Sightseeing Transportation, Other        0.80
522210     Services         Credit Card Issuing                                 0.78
Panel B:   Least concentrated industries
322211     Manufacturing Corrugated and Solid Fiber Box Manufacturing           0.22
327390     Manufacturing Other Concrete Product Manufacturing                   0.22
332710     Manufacturing Machine Shops                                          0.22
323114     Manufacturing Quick Printing                                         0.19
327320     Manufacturing Ready-Mix Concrete Manufacturing                       0.15
453210     Services          Office Supplies and Stationery Stores              0.07
445110     Services          Supermarkets and Other Grocery Stores              0.07
443112     Services          Radio, Television, and Other Electronics Stores    0.07
722110     Services          Full-Service Restaurants                           0.06
621210     Services          Offices of Dentists                                0.06

Notes: This table presents the six-digit NAICS code, sector, description and measured
share of excess supply (SESs defined in equation (7)) for the top 5 most concen-
trated and least concentrated manufacturing and services industries. The SES ranges
from 0 (production equal consumption in all regions) to 1 (production is located in
a subset of regions disjoint from the set of regions where consumption takes place).




                                         40
                              TABLE 2
                Summary data of share of excess supply

                                           Share of excess supply    Number of
NAICS      Sector description
                                           Mean          S.D.        Industries
31-33      Manufacturing                    0.59         0.16            463
42         Wholesale trade                  0.39         0.13             71
44-45      Retail trade                     0.21         0.14             72
48-49      Transportation                   0.45         0.19            48
51         Information                      0.43         0.17             30
52         Finance and insurance            0.44         0.19             33
53         Real Estate and leasing          0.29         0.15            24
54         Professional services            0.32         0.14            47
56         Administrative services          0.28         0.12             43
61-62      Education and health care        0.23         0.12             53
71-72      Recreation and Food Service      0.35         0.18             40
81         Other personal services          0.25         0.11             45
           Overall                          0.45         0.21            969

Notes: For each broad industry group, the table presents the mean and standard
deviation across six-digits NAICS industries for the share of excess supply (the
measure of disparity between local output and expenditure defined in equation
(7)), and the number of six-digits NAICS industry.




                                      41
                       TABLE 3
     Summary statistics for estimated trade costs
                                                                 
NAICS      Description                        ts
                                              b           µ b
                                                            ts
31-33      Manufacturing                     0.769        0.010
                                            (1.533)      (0.020)
42         Wholesale trade                   3.041        0.002
                                            (2.516)      (0.006)
44-45      Retail trade                      6.020        0.001
                                            (2.836)      (0.005)
48-49      Transportation                    3.224        0.002
                                            (3.087)      (0.006)
51         Information                       7.774        0.005
                                           (10.200)      (0.009)
52         Finance and insurance             5.669        0.003
                                            (6.881)      (0.010)
53         Real Estate and leasing          22.050        0.049
                                            (7.982)      (0.032)
54         Professional services             4.887        0.001
                                            (3.392)      (0.006)
56         Administrative services           4.657        0.000
                                            (2.309)      (0.000)
61-62      Education and health care         3.058        0.000
                                            (2.224)      (0.000)
71-72      Recreation and food services      3.727        0.000
                                            (2.360)      (0.002)
81         Other Personal Services           4.830        0.000
                                            (2.488)      (0.001)
           Overall                           3.166        0.006
                                            (4.881)      (0.017)

Notes: This table presents results from estimating trade costs
separately for each of the 969 six-digits NAICS industries in our
sample. For each broad industry group, the table presents the
mean and standard deviation across industries for the estimated
trade costs and objective function, defined as the square of the
difference between the actual and simulated share of excess sup-
ply.




                               42
                     TABLE 4
Estimated trade costs and indicators of tradability

                              Correlation with trade costs
Trade share                               -0.31
Average distance shipped                  -0.24
Occupation index                          -0.13

Notes: This table presents correlations between the estimated
trade costs and indicators of tradability. See Appendix for vari-
able definitions and construction. The sample contains the 969
industries included in our sample except for “Average distance
shipped” which is available only for 545 (predominantly manu-
facturing) industries covered in the US Census Bureau’s Com-
modity Flow Survey.




                               43
                             TABLE 5
Distribution of value added across industry-group and tradability

NAICS      Sector description                   Total    Non-tradable       Tradable
31-33      Manufacturing                        17.3           4.6            12.7
42         Wholesale trade                       8.1           5.5             2.6
44-45      Retail trade                          8.2           8.1             0.1
48-49      Transportation                        3.5           2.7             0.9
51         Information                           6.6           5.0             1.6
52         Finance and insurance                 9.4           7.4             2.0
53         Real estate and leasing              17.2          17.2             0.0
54         Professional services                 9.1           7.9             1.2
56         Administrative services               4.0           3.9             0.1
61-62      Education and health care             9.0           8.5             0.5
71-72      Recreation and food Services          4.9           4.4             0.6
81         Other personal services               2.7           2.4             0.3
           Total                               100.0          77.6            22.4

Notes: This table presents the distribution of value added across broad industry
group and tradability. We classify an industry as tradable if the estimated trade
costs for that industry is lower than t75 , where t75 is the trade costs threshold such
that 75 percent of manufacturing employment is classified in tradable industries.




                                          44
                       TABLE 6
  Tradable vs. non-tradable industry characteristics

                                   Wage                Productivity
Panel A: Across industries
Tradable indicator                  0.28                   0.32
                                   (0.03)                 (0.04)
R2                                  0.10                   0.06
Observations                        969                    969
Panel B: Across industries within broad group
Tradable indicator                0.16                     0.24
                                 (0.03)                   (0.04)
R2                                0.38                     0.46
Observations                      969                      969
Panel C: Across industries within broad group, service sector only
Tradable indicator                0.28                   0.26
                                 (0.05)                 (0.06)
R2                                0.44                   0.65
Observations                      506                    506

Notes: This table presents results from OLS regressions of industry-
level measures of average wages and labor productivity on a variable
indicator equal to 1 if the industry is tradable and 0 otherwise. We
classify an industry as tradable if the estimated trade costs for that
industry is lower than t75 , where t75 is the trade costs threshold
such that 75 percent of manufacturing employment is classified in
tradable industries.




                                 45
                        TABLE 7
Distribution of gains from trade across Industry-group

NAICS        Sector description                          Share
31-33        Manufacturing                               0.565
42           Wholesale trade                             0.116
44-45        Retail trade                                0.005
48-49        Transportation                              0.039
51           Information                                 0.070
52           Finance and insurance                       0.089
53           Real Estate and leasing                     0.001
54           Professional services                       0.051
56           Administrative services                     0.004
61-62        Education and health care                   0.024
71-72        Recreation and Food Service                 0.025
81           Other personal services                     0.012

Notes: This table presents the distribution of gains from trade across
broad industry group associated with a symmetric liberalization.




                                  46
             a. Aircraft Manufacturing               b. Software Publishing
                  (NAICS 336411)                         (NAICS 511210)




        c. Ready Mix Concrete Manufacturing        d. Tax Preparation Services
                  (NAICS 327320)                         (NAICS 541213)




Figure 1: Geographical distribution of industry employment




                                              47
Figure 2: Share of excess supply and estimated trade costs




                           48
Figure 3: Sectors’ share of US value-added in tradable industries




                               49
Figure 4: Tradable service industries’ share of regional value added




                                50
A      Data Appendix – For Online Publication

In this appendix, we provide additional details on the data, sample and mea-
surement.


A.1     Economic Census

The Economic Census (EC) is conducted by the US Census Bureau, and firms
are required by law to complete the questionnaires they receive. Respondents are
asked to provide a range of operational and performance data. The Economic
Census is primarily conducted on an establishment basis – a single physical
location at which business is conducted, or services or industrial operations
are performed. An establishment is not necessarily identical with a firm (or
enterprise), which may consist of one or more establishments. A company
operating at more than one location is required to file a separate report for each
location or establishment. Companies engaged in distinctly different lines of
activity at one location are requested to submit separate reports, if the business
records permit such a separation, and if the activities are substantial in size.
When these conditions are not met, activities at the same location are generally
grouped together as a single establishment and the entire establishment is
classified on the basis of its primary activity. Business establishments in the EC
are grouped into industries based on the similarity of their production processes
and classified according to the North American Industry Classification System
(NAICS).




                                       51
    The EC covers the vast majority of the private economy but does not pro-
vide information on self-employed individuals, employees of private households,
railroads, agricultural production, or most government activities. Specifically,
the following NAICS codes are not covered in the economic census: 11 Agri-
culture, Forestry, Fishing and Hunting; 482 Rail Transportation; 491 Postal
Service; 525 Funds, Trusts, and Other Financial Vehicles; 6111 Elementary
and Secondary Schools; 6112 Junior Colleges; 6113 Colleges, Universities, and
Professional Schools; 8131 Religious Organizations; 81393 Labor Unions and
Similar Labor Organizations; 81394 Political Organizations; 814 Private House-
holds; 92 Public Administration. In addition, the economic census does not
generally include government-owned establishments, even when their primary
activity would be classified in industries covered by the economic census.18
    We make use of the detailed, county-level geographical information on the
EC records, industrial classification information, revenue, and employment data
to construct region-industry measures of supply and demand. Establishments
are assigned to regions that are the Economic Areas (EA) defined by the
Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) as described in Johnson and Kort (2004).
Industries are defined at the six-digit NAICS level.


Revenue
For each region-industry, we measure total revenue (supply) by taking the sum
                                                                       PNj
of revenue over all plants in an industry s in a region j so that Rjs = k=1 rjsk



    18. See http://www.census.gov/econ/census/help/naics other classification systems/codes not covered.html
for more information.

                                           52
where rjk is the revenue of the k th plant in region j. In the estimation, we use
the region’s share of industry supply as the measure of revenue.
   The data do not contain information on region-level exports for all industries
that can be used to adjust supply to account for international trade. Instead,
we assume that exports are distributed across regions according to production.
In other words, a region that produces 10 percent of output in an industry
is assumed to also account for 10 percent of US exports in that industry. To
examine the implications of this assumption, we produced the revenue share
for each region-industry in the manufacturing sector, where direct export in-
formation is available, adjusting for direct exports and compared this to the
region-industry measure constructed using the proportional adjustment. The
correlation between direct export adjustment and the proportional adjustment
of industry revenue is 0.98 in the manufacturing sector. This suggests that the
measurement error associated with assuming international trade is distributed
proportionally with output is generally small.


Expenditure
For each region-industry, we measure total expenditure (demand) using in-
formation on the industrial composition of the region from the EC and the
2007 American Community Survey for industries out of scope for the EC and
information on each industry’s use of all inputs from the BEA’s Detailed Input-
Output Use table for 2007. Specifically, our measure of industry s’s demand in
region i is defined as:                              !
                                    X
                           Esi =         sIO    D
                                          st · sit       Rs
                                     t


                                         53
where sIO
       st represents the share of industry s output demanded by each industry

t, for all t = 1, ..., T (T includes all industries in the private sector, investment,
government, and final demand), sD
                                it represents the share of industry demand

measures by the share of employment or, in the case of final demand, share of
total income from the 2007 American Community Survey in region i, and Rs
is aggregate revenue in industry s.19 Because we do not know the distribution
of investment demand across industries, we use final demand to represent
the geographical distribution of investment demand. The term in parentheses
gives the adjusted share of demand for industry s in region i. Multiplying this
term by total revenue in the industry gives expenditure in regions i. In the
estimation, we use the region’s share of total industry demand as the measure
of expenditure.
    A measurement issue we face is that some region-industry demand is served
by imports, so region-industry demand would be overstated without adjusting
for imports. The EC data do not have direct information on imports of interme-
diate products. Instead, we use information from BEA’s supplemental Import
Matrix to adjust demand for imported inputs. The Import Matrix provides
estimates of imports by industry by commodity using the import comparability
assumption.20 We match the Import Matrix to the Input-Output table and
adjust demand by imports.



   19. We use the location of employment instead of revenue because we include demand
from sectors where revenue information are not reliable (Management of Companies and
Enterprises (NAICS 55)) or industries outside the scope of the EC (e.g. federal, state, and
local government, Postal Service, Education, Agriculture (NAICS 1)).
   20. See Feenstra and Jensen (2012) for a discussion of the import comparability assump-
tion.

                                           54
Production costs
The revenue-based labor productivity for region j industry s equals its revenue
in the industry per unit of labor employed

                                                               rjs
                                                    θjs ≡          .                                           (18)
                                                               ljs

Regional revenue in an industry can be computed from equation (5) by taking
the sum of bilateral sales across all destinations

                                                              1−σs              1−σs
                               X                      σs                     wj
                      rjs =          rijs =                                                Ajs ,               (19)
                                i
                                                    σs − 1                   zjs


                          Eis Pisσs −1 τins
                                        1−σs
                 P
where Ajs =           i                      is the region-industry market access term, a
measure of aggregate demand. From the total cost function (3), labor per region
is

                                                                                   −σs          −σs
                qjs                         X                                σs              wj
     ljs = Fs +           with qjs =                τijs qijs =                                           Ajs . (20)
                zjs                             i
                                                                           σs − 1            zjs


Substituting equations (19) and (20) into (18) yields

                                                                
                                                  σs           Fs
                                    θjs =                   1−       wj                                        (21)
                                                σs − 1         ljs

where we have used qjs = (ljs − Fs )zjs .
      Using qjs , defined in (20), in the definition of labor per firm, we get

                                                                 σs            σs −1
                                                                           Ajs zjs
                                                    
                                                        σs − 1
                                ljs = Fs +                                                                     (22)
                                                          σs                 wjσs


                                                          55
Substituting this result into equation (21), we get

                                                                                  
                                   
                             σs                                 1
               θjs =                    1 −                                        wj   (23)
                                                                                  
                                                                σs        σs −1
                           σs − 1
                                                                     Ajs zjs
                                                        σs −1
                                               1+        σs            Fs wjσs



Our measure of λ is defined as the ratio of revenue-based labor productivity
to wage (i.e., θjs /wj ). Equation (23) shows that this measure is positively
correlated with region-industry technical efficiency (zjs ) but also captures vari-
ation in the elasticity of demand across industry as well as variation in fixed
production costs across industry-region.


Summary Statistics
Table A1 reports descriptive statistics for the measures used in our estimation.
Because we use shares of R and E in the estimation, we do not report the simple
mean and standard deviation. Instead, we calculate the standard deviation
across regions within an industry and present the mean and standard deviation
across industries of the industry-level measures of standard deviation for R, E,
and λ. Table A1 shows that there is significantly more concentration in supply
than demand across regions. The mean standard deviation of R across regions
within industries is 1.80, while the measure for E is 0.94. The higher level of
variation in R suggests that identification of trade costs is coming primarily
through R. This is reassuring as R is well measured.


                                [ TABLE A1 HERE ]




                                               56
Value Added
The EC data contain sales, but not value added measures. We compute the
share of value added in each industry using value added (GDP) information
from BEA’s IO Tables 2007. For BEA commodities for which there are multiple
six-digit NAICS codes, we allocate value added based on the share of payroll in
each six-digit NAICS industry within the commodity category. We use the share
of payroll rather than sales because the BEA commodity codes are particularly
aggregated in wholesale and retail trade, where payroll is likely to be more
correlated with value added than sales.


Sample construction
There are about one thousand six-digit NAICS industry classifications.21 We
retain all industries from the EC while developing the supply and demand
measures. However, we do not report analytical results for all industries. We
exclude Mining (NAICS 21) and Utilities (NAICS 22) because many of the
industries in these sectors have small numbers of producers and, as a result,
do not meet the disclosure release protocols of the US Census Bureau. We
exclude Construction (NAICS 23) because the unit of analysis is not consistent
with the other EC data. We exclude Management of Companies (NAICS
55) because there is no reliable revenue data and we cannot produce the
productivity estimates required for estimating trade costs. We lose an additional
21 industries across the Manufacturing (NAICS 30), Retail (NAICS 44-45),
Transportation and Warehousing (NAICS 48-49), Information (NAICS 51),


  21. See http://www.census.gov/eos/www/naics/ for more information.

                                        57
Finance and Insurance (NAICS 52), and Administrative Support and Waste
Remediation (NAICS 56) sectors due to disclosure prevention protocols. Our
final analytical sample includes 969 six-digit NAICS industries.


A.2     Measuring the elasticity of demand

Estimates of the elasticity of demand for services industries are not readily
available, so we construct elasticity of demand measures for all industries. From
our theoretical model, the price elasticity of demand is defined as σ
                                                                    bs = Rs /Gs ),
where Gs denotes gross operating surplus (see equation (12). We use this results
and BEA data on gross operating surplus and value added to estimate the
price elasticity of demand for each of the roughly 70 industries (approximately
three-digit NAICS) for which information is available.22 We divide value added
GDP (our measure of Rs ) by gross operating surplus (a proxy for Gs ) for each
industry for years 1998 - 2012. Gross operating surplus is a residual for most
industries constructed by subtracting total intermediate inputs, compensation
of employees, and taxes on production and imports less subsidies from total
industry output. However, it includes consumption of fixed capital, proprietors’
income, and corporate profits and therefore provides a reasonable approximation
to Gs . We take the median across year for each industry to obtain a measure
of central tendency robust to outliers.
   Table A2 report the mean and standard deviation across industry for each
broad industry group. The results for manufacturing are in line with estimates
provided in the literature. For instance, Broda and Weinstein (2006) uses trade

  22. See www.bea.gov/industry/gdpbyind data.htm for more information on these data.

                                        58
flows to estimate the price elasticity of demand and report means ranging
from 4.0 to 17.3 depending on the time period and level of aggregation used
in the estimation. An advantage of our approach is that we obtain estimates
comparable across all sectors of the economy. Expect for “Education and
health care”, the mean and median estimated elasticity of demand is lower on
average in services industries than in manufacturing industries. This indicates
that consumers are less sensitive to variation in prices in services industry
which, according to our model, indicates output is less differentiated in those
industries.


                             [ TABLE A2 HERE ]


   Our estimates vary at subsector-level. We experimented with the most
disaggregated data available, input-output commodity level data (approximately
six-digit NAICS). The estimates of σ derived from the more detailed commodity-
level data had much higher variance than those at the 3-digit level. In particular,
we obtain estimates smaller than 1 and some negative values. Because our
model does not accommodate σs below 1, we could not estimate trade costs
for these industries. However, the main empirical results (presented in section
6) are robust to using the more detailed σ estimates.


A.3     Measures of Tradability

In this section, we describe the construction of measures of tradability to which
we compare our trade costs measures.



                                        59
Trade Share
We use data from BEA’s Detailed Input-Output Use Table to construct a
measure of trade exposure at the BEA commodity level. The measure of trade
exposure we construct to compare to our estimates of trade costs is:

                                      IMP         EXP
                Trade Exposure =              +                            (24)
                                    Absorbtion Production

where Absorbtion = Output + IMP - EXP, IMP denotes imports, and EXP
is exports. We note that BEA produces import estimates for approximately
100 service sector commodities (industries), even though the underlying data
collection instrument contains only between 17 and 30 categories of services
trade. In addition, as described above, these estimates are developed using
the ”import comparability” assumption. BEA uses estimation and imputation
methods to allocate the services trade measured in their survey programs across
the detailed commodity categories in the input-output tables. For the service
sector, because of the allocation from around 20 service trade categories across
100 service industries, these estimates might differ substantially from actual
trade. In addition, there are more service industries in our sample (approxi-
mately 400) than in the BEA input-output tables (approximately 100). This
might also introduce noise in the correlations.


Distance Shipped
The Commodity Flow Survey (CFS) produces data on the movement of goods
in the United States. It provides information on commodities shipped, their



                                      60
value, weight, and mode of transportation, as well as the origin and destination
of shipments of commodities from manufacturing, mining, wholesale, and select
retail and services establishments – namely, electronic shopping and mail-order
houses, fuel dealers, and publishers (including newspaper, periodical, book,
directory, and music publishers). Additionally, the survey covers auxiliary
establishments (i.e., warehouses and managing offices) of multi-establishment
companies. The survey does not cover establishments classified in transportation,
construction, and most retail and services industries. Farms, fisheries, foreign
establishments, and most government-owned establishments are also excluded.
   We use confidential, respondent-level data from the CFS to construct
weighted average distance shipped measures (using the same methodology as
those published by the CFS program at the three-digit NAICS level) for each
six-digit NAICS industry for which data are collected.


Occupation-Based index
For each of hundreds of occupations, the O*Net database contains detailed
qualitative information on job tasks, work activities (interacting with computers,
processing information), and work context (face-to-face discussions, work with
others, work outdoors). We use this information to construct an index to
compare to our estimated trade costs. To obtain comparable measures across
all industries, we use the tradability index developed by Jensen and Kletzer
(2010) and then weight each occupation’s index by that occupation’s share
of total employment in an industry to obtain a 4-digit NAICS level industry




                                       61
measure of tradability

                                            X
               O*NET TRADABILITYi =              INDEXo · sEmp
                                                           io
                                             o


where IN DEXo is the occupation tradability index developed by Jensen and
Kletzer (2010) and sEmp
                    io  is the share of industry i employment in occupation o.
In comparison, Crino (2010) constructs tradability measures for “white-collars”
occupations only.




                                     62
                   TABLE A1
Summary statistics for region-industry variables

          Expenditure (E)         Revenue (R)      Costs (λ)
Mean            0.94                 1.80             0.22
S.D.            0.14                 0.90             0.51
                        Correlations
E               1.00
R               0.54                 1.00
λ               0.04                 0.12             1.00

Notes: This table presents the mean and standard deviation
across industries of the standard deviation across regions for
expenditure, revenue and our measure of λ. The table also
presents the correlations between the region-industry mea-
sures. The sample contains 177,327 industry-regions across
969 industries.




                             63
                          TABLE A2
            Estimates for the elasticity of demand

NAICS      Sector description                Mean      Median      S.D.
31-33      Manufacturing                     8.14        7.52      2.87
42         Wholesale trade                   5.17        5.17        –
44-45      Retail trade                      6.31        6.31        –
48-49      Transportation                    6.35        6.18      2.18
51         Information                       3.02        3.12      0.18
52         Finance and insurance             5.91        4.31      3.41
53         Real estate and leasing           1.90        2.06      0.22
54         Professional services             5.60        5.24      1.92
56         Administrative services           5.98        6.16      0.34
61-62      Education and health care        12.17        9.46      5.57
71-72      Recreation and food Services      6.09        5.27      1.84
81         Other personal services           6.23        6.23        –
           All industries                    7.14        6.31      3.20

Notes: This table presents the mean, median and standard deviation across
industries within broad groups for the estimated elasticity of demand.




                                   64
