                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               MITIGATING LONG-RUN HEALTH EFFECTS OF DROUGHT:
                         EVIDENCE FROM SOUTH AFRICA

                                         Taryn Dinkelman

                                       Working Paper 19756
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w19756


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2013




The paper benefited greatly from discussions with Douglas Almond, Patricia M. Anderson, Eric Edmonds
and Erzo Luttmer as well as seminar participants at Columbia University, the Minneapolis and St.
Louis Federal Reserve Banks, University of Cape Town, Washington University in St. Louis, the April
2012 BREAD Pre-Conference, the junior faculty lunch seminar at Dartmouth College and the NBER
Summer Institute 2013. Support for this research was provided by the U.S. National Institute of Child
Health and Human Development (Grant R03HD069060-01). All views expressed in the paper are
my own and do not necessarily reflect the opinion or policy of the federal government, nor the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Taryn Dinkelman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Mitigating Long-run Health Effects of Drought: Evidence from South Africa
Taryn Dinkelman
NBER Working Paper No. 19756
December 2013
JEL No. I15,J61,N37,O15

                                              ABSTRACT

Drought is Africa’s primary natural disaster and a pervasive source of income risk for poor households.
This paper documents the long-run health effects of early life exposure to drought and investigates
an important source of heterogeneity in these effects. Combining birth cohort variation in South African
Census data with cross-sectional and temporal drought variation, I estimate long-run health impacts
of drought exposure among Africans confined to homelands during apartheid. Drought exposure in
early childhood significantly raises later life male disability rates by 4% and reduces cohort size. Among
a subset of homelands – the TBVC areas – disability effects are double and negative cohort effects
are significantly larger. I show that differences in spatial mobility restrictions that influence the extent
of migrant networks across TBVC and non-TBVC areas contribute to this heterogeneity. Placebo checks
show no differential disability impacts of drought exposure across TBVC and non-TBVC areas after
the repeal of migration restrictions. The results show that although drought has significant long-run
effects on health human capital, migrant networks in poor economies provide one channel through
which families mitigate these negative impacts of local environmental shock.


Taryn Dinkelman
Department of Economics
H. Box 6106
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
taryn.l.dinkelman@dartmouth.edu




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w19756
Local environmental shocks are a pervasive source of income risk for many households in
developing countries, and may have important short and long-term impacts on household
welfare. Families typically rely on a variety of strategies to cope with such environmental risks,
and a large development literature has focused on how insurance, savings and credit, or
occupational and spatial mobility help households weather the immediate effects of local income
shocks.2 In this paper, I turn attention to the long-run effects of coping with environmental
income risk. I ask whether permanent labor migration of a family member – an important
strategy for smoothing consumption in the face of local shocks – can help families mitigate the
long-run health consequences of early life exposure to these shocks.

Specifically, I document the negative long-run health effects of childhood exposure to Africa’s
most prevalent natural disaster (Benson and Clay 2000): Drought. My analysis takes place in a
context where some individuals face external restrictions on migration and cannot easily move
away from localities experiencing drought. I investigate an important source of spatial
heterogeneity in these long-run health effects, showing that drought had worse impacts in areas
where spatial mobility was most restricted. I provide evidence that differences in exogenous
migration restrictions influence the extent of migrant networks in different communities, and that
these restrictions contribute to the heterogeneous health effects of early-life drought exposure.

My empirical analysis focuses on South Africa during the apartheid period, when a host of
policies restricted African rights of movement, residence and employment in the modern sectors
of the economy. Between 1948 and 1986 the South African government consigned the majority
of Africans to live in predominantly rural and spatially isolated pockets of land called
homelands. My analysis focuses on how individuals from these homelands experienced the long-
run effects of drought exposure, both on average and differentially across subsets of homelands.

To estimate the main effects of childhood drought exposure in these homelands, I create and
match measures of exogenous local drought in homeland districts to Census data on self-reported
disabilities and district-level cohort size. I compare long-run health outcomes for cohorts born in



2
 See Besley (1995) and Townsend (1995) for reviews of some of this literature, and Rosenzweig and Stark (1989)
for an important example of spatial mobility as insurance.
                                                       1
drought years to those born in non-drought years, controlling for district and birth year fixed
effects. The strength of this difference-in-differences research design is that I exploit many
separate natural experiments for economic shocks identified by multiple local drought events
across years and across districts. This minimizes concerns that results are driven by confounding
shocks to health which are correlated with a drought event.

Establishing that childhood drought exposure has negative effects on later life health for the
entire homeland sample is an important first step in the analysis. To better understand the
channels through which families cope with this source of local income risk, I investigate
heterogeneity in the health results exploiting legal differences in how spatial apartheid was
applied in South Africa. Although no-one assigned to a homeland was ever entirely free to move
about the country to look for work, some homeland areas faced greater mobility restrictions than
others, and for more years. This meant that some families could more easily send out labor
migrants to distant (often urban) locations not subject to the same sorts of local environmental
risks. Section 1 provides an historical account of these mobility restrictions, describing how the
oldest rural homelands – the TBVC states (Transkei, Boputhatswana, Venda and the Ciskei) –
faced the highest externally imposed barriers to permanent labor migration for the longest time.
Indeed, the data show that TBVC and non-TBVC areas differ in cumulative outmigration flows
in the years in which legal barriers to mobility were in place, but not after these laws were
repealed.

Motivated by the history of differences in spatial mobility restrictions across homeland areas, I
investigate heterogeneity in the long-run health effects of drought by adding a third difference to
the regression analysis. Controlling for observed and unobservable differences between areas in
non-drought years and for year fixed effects, I compare the health effects of local drought
exposure in childhood across rural TBVC and non-TBVC homelands. The validity of this
research design relies on the assumption of no contemporaneous health shocks coincident with
drought that differ by TBVC and non-TBVC areas. Exploiting multiple drought events for
identification again helps to shore up this assumption.

My main findings point towards large negative health effects of early childhood drought
exposure. Cumulative drought exposure from the in utero period up to age four raises disability
                                                 2
rates for Africans in all homelands by 0.1 percentage points (2.2%). These effects are
significantly larger, and more precisely estimated for males. Cumulative drought exposure raises
disability rates among African males by about 0.2 percentage points or 4.5% and reduces male
cohort size by 1.1 percentage points on average. These main effects of drought exposure in the
entire homeland sample, as well as the larger effects estimated for males, are in line with
estimates from the fetal and childhood origins of health literature.3 For most of the heterogeneity
analysis, I restrict attention to the male sample.

In comparing the effects of drought exposure in TBVC relative to non-TBVC areas, I find that
the negative effects of drought in early life are twice as large for males from TBVC areas.
Cumulative drought exposure before age five in TBVC areas raises the probability of serious
male disability by 0.2 percentage points, increasing overall disability prevalence by 8.8%.
Drought exposure in the birth year raises disability prevalence by 0.9 percentage points relative
to males from non-TBVC areas: a 20% increase compared with mean disability rates. Drought
exposure also reduces male cohort size in TBVC areas by 2.6 percent, with some of this
reduction driven by a negative fertility response among women with no education. These large,
precisely estimated male disability and cohort size impacts of drought exposure among TBVC
cohorts are particularly striking given the relative youthfulness of the sample (ages 10 to 48).

To interpret this heterogeneity in the male disability impacts of childhood drought exposure, I
provide several checks to rule out confounding explanations as well as some additional evidence
that differences in migration limitations across TBVC and non-TBVC areas contribute to this
heterogeneity. First, my identification strategy controls for constant differences between TBVC
and non-TBVC districts using district fixed effects. I also control for interactions of drought with



3
 See Almond and Currie (2011a, 2011b) for reviews of this literature. Martorell et al (1994) and Martorell (1999)
provide a general discussion of the link between nutrition, disease and adult health. Recent empirical studies in the
early-life health shocks literature include: Almond (2006) on exposure to the flu epidemic, Chen and Zhou (2007),
Meng and Qian (2009), Lindeboom et al (2010) and van den Berg (2011) for analyses of early-life famine exposure,
and Maccini and Yang (2009) and Aguilar and Vicarelli (2012) for exposure to floods, Banerjee, Duflo, Postel-
Vinay and Watts (2010) for exposure to agricultural income shocks. Jensen (2000), Hoddinott and Kinsey (2001)
and Alderman, Hoogeevan and Rossi (2009) analyze immediate and medium-term negative impacts of drought on
child nutrition and schooling outcomes but do not consider how households may mitigate these effects. Almond and
Mazumdar (2011) use data from several countries to estimate the negative effect on male disability rates of
nutritional deprivation during Ramadan fasting.
                                                          3
baseline district variables (historical population density, the suitability of land for maize
production, and district remoteness) that may affect drought responses across areas. Results are
robust and in some cases, strengthened, when controlling for these interaction terms.

Second, I estimate placebo regressions among male cohorts born since the repeal of legal
migration restrictions in 1986 and before the end of apartheid in 1994. I show that the effects of
being exposed to drought in early life are no longer different across TBVC and non-TBVC areas
once legal restrictions on mobility fall away. This supports the idea that spatial mobility is an
important channel through which households cope with drought.

Finally, I use Census data from the post-apartheid period to illustrate the mechanism through
which labor migration helps families to cope with drought. Controlling for historical drought
prevalence in each district and cross-sectional variation in the presence of any labor migrant
attached to the household, I estimate that households in former homeland districts are between
13% and 16% more likely to receive remittances in 1995 if there was a drought in their district in
1995. Importantly, remittance flows into households with migrant workers drive this effect.
These remittance results provide direct evidence on why differential adult outmigration from
homelands during apartheid was important for helping families cope with local income risk.

Although my research design is robust to a range of potential threats to validity, the data do not
allow me to completely rule out every other potential channel through which households in
TBVC areas were less able to cope with drought. The final section of the paper discusses other
possible mechanisms through which TBVC and non-TBVC areas may have experienced drought
differently. This discussion draws on prior research to highlight that migrant networks in former
homeland areas are far more prevalent than other formal and informal risk coping strategies these
areas. While I cannot estimate the marginal impact of labor migration on long-run health
outcomes, the different pieces of evidence in this paper together suggest that spatial mobility is
more than just a short-run risk-coping strategy. Labor migration provides additional benefits to
households by mitigating the long-run health effects of local shocks to income.

My paper makes three main contributions. First, I add to the early-life health shocks literature by
providing new evidence on the negative health impacts of a highly prevalent local environmental
shock. I also provide some of the first empirical evidence that households may act to mitigate
                                                  4
some of the negative effects of early-life health shocks.5 My analysis of spatial heterogeneity in
these health effects of drought exposure suggests that migration is a specific mechanism through
which families, responding to local shocks, can at least partially mitigate the impact of negative
economic shocks on children.

Second, I extend the development literature on migration as insurance by showing that
differential limits on spatial mobility contribute to heterogeneous effects of drought on disability
and cohort size. By showing that remittances respond strongly to local drought and that these
remittance flows occur primarily through existing migrant networks, I provide specific evidence
on the mechanisms through which spatial mobility helps families mitigate the negative impacts
of local drought. In contrast to other studies (Rosenzweig and Stark 1989, Jayachandran 2006,
Yang and Choi 2007) that focus on the immediate and short-run consumption smoothing benefits
of spatial mobility, my paper emphasizes how migration can insure against negative long-term
effects of these economic shocks and protect human resources for economic growth.6 These
results motivate an even larger insurance role for spatial mobility than the literature has
previously emphasized.

Third, I exploit multiple sources of exogenous variation in local economic shocks and exogenous
variation in mobility restrictions across areas to establish the long-term health effects of drought
exposure and shed light on the migration channel. The South African case allows me to focus on
mobility restrictions that are exogenous to the individual, thereby getting around some of the
more difficult selection issues associated with comparing migration rates and remittance flows
across space. This context presents a unique opportunity to investigate one specific channel
through which barriers to spatial mobility impose long-run economic costs.



5
  Currie and Vogl (2013) suggest that how parents respond to early life health shocks is an important new area of
research in the fetal and childhood origins of health literature.
6
  In one of the first studies of migration as insurance, Rosenzweig and Stark (1989) structurally model how marriage
migration in rural India (which is another kind of permanent migration linking families across space) implicitly
insures households against agricultural income risk and find evidence for their model in the six ICRISAT villages.
Taking a different angle on migration, Jayachandran (2006) shows that limited access to outside labor markets
exaggerates negative wage effects of local productivity shocks by swelling the ranks of local labor supply. Morten
(2013) addresses how different types of coping strategies like temporary labor migration and informal insurance
interact in rural India. Yang (2011) provides an overview on the remittance literature in economics.

                                                         5
The main results have implications for policy. While apartheid-era restrictions on labor
migration represent one example of spatial segregation, similar legal restrictions have controlled
internal migration in China, Israel, Malaysia, Russia, and the Ukraine in the past. Most countries
restrict travel and employment for foreigners using external passport and visa controls. In other
settings, the nature of the physical terrain or inadequate transport infrastructure spatially
segregates labor markets. The empirical evidence in this paper suggests we can expect local
environmental shocks to have larger, long-lasting effects on health human capital in parts of the
world where geographic, legal or political barriers constrain migration.7

The paper begins by setting out the historical background on labor mobility restrictions in TBVC
and non-TBVC homelands in South Africa and provides initial empirical evidence on how these
areas are alike, and how they differ in access to migrant networks during apartheid. Section 2
describes the research design, Section 3 the data and key variables and Section 4 the main results
for disability, cohort size and fertility. Section 5 interprets these results in light of the differences
in migration restrictions across homelands and provides additional evidence on how these
restrictions may have contributed to the long run health impacts. It also discusses other potential
explanations for the results. Section 6 concludes.

1. Mobility restrictions in South Africa during apartheid

Throughout formal apartheid (1948-1994), Africans were never entirely free to move around the
country for work or other reasons.8 The white government implemented highly organized system
of documentation and control to allocate African labor to firms, farms and households. For
example, Africans were legally required to carry pass books with up-to-date work and travel
permissions and to produce them on demand or face imprisonment. Rather than searching freely
for work, job seekers had to register at local labor bureaux for work permits.




7
  The long-term health gains from reducing barriers to migration in such contexts would form part of the welfare
gains from migration discussed in Clemens (2011) and modeled in Desmet and Rossi-Hansberg (2012).
8
  Wolpe (1988), Simkins (1983), Lemon (1984), Savage (1986) and Maylam (1990) discuss the main policies of
population control under apartheid. Lemon (1984) writes “Probably no avowedly capitalist country controls its
labor market to the same degree as South Africa….State restrictions on freedom of movement continue to hinder
Africans in particular from selling their labor freely.”
                                                         6
A crucial component of the strategy to control African mobility to the urban areas involved the
creation of ten homeland “states” or Bantustans during the 1950s, 1960s and 1970s. These
homeland areas were established largely on pre-existing Native Reserve areas and confined
excess labor and non-labor resources (women, children and the aged) far from urban centers, in
rural parts of the country where land quality was generally poor.9 Several million Africans were
resettled in these homelands by the 1960s (Simkins, 1983). My empirical analysis focuses on
how residents of these different homelands were differentially able to respond to local drought.

The four earliest homelands – the Transkei, Boputhatswana, Venda and Ciskei, or TBVC areas –
were formalized in prior Native Reserve areas between 1959 and 1962. The remaining non-
TBVC homelands – QwaQwa, KwaZulu, Gazankulu, Lebowa, Kangwane and KwaNdebele –
were established much later in the period, between 1969 and 1977.10 Reasons for this staggered
formalization were primarily political. To ensure continued control of homeland administrations,
the apartheid government needed time to establish appropriate bureaucratic structures in these
rural areas and ensure that local chiefs would be sufficiently compliant (Evans 1997).

Once assigned to an established homeland, a person had extremely limited rights to live and look
for work outside of this area. He was prohibited from migrating freely between homelands, as
well as between homelands and urban areas. Children could not move at all, and requests for
labor migration permits for adults (first men, and then women too) were made through labor
bureaux located within the assigned district (Greenberg and Giliomee 1983). These offices
registered jobseekers, posted job requisitions from South African companies, and certified job
contracts. Signing up at the local labor office was a necessary step for all migrant workers,




9
  Native Reserve Areas were demarcated as early as 1913 and expanded in 1936. Evans (1997) describes how fear of
massive demographic shifts in white urban areas was the primary motivation for the establishment of these reserves
to house the majority black population.
10
   Transkei, Boputhatswana, Venda and the Ciskei were established in 1959, 1961, 1962 and 1961 respectively and
legally granted independent status in (order) October 1976, December 1977, September 1979 and 1981. The
remaining homelands were established: QwaQwa (1969), KwaZulu (1970), Lebowa and Gazankulu (1971),
KaNgwane (1976) and KwaNdebele (1977).
                                                        7
making these labor offices the official gatekeepers for legal African labor migration out of the
homelands.11

The apartheid bureaucracy that authorized legal migration also restricted what the state viewed
as illegal, or uncontrolled, migration. Between 1916 and 1984, nearly 18 million “Pass Law”
arrests were made for illegal movement (Maylam 1990). Although legal mobility restrictions
could not prevent all unauthorized African movement (Reed 2012), these restrictions
substantially raised the costs of free internal migration for Africans living in homelands.

During the time that legal migration restrictions were in force, between 1948 and1986, the costs
of migration were highest for residents of a subset of the homeland areas: the TBVC states.
These were the earliest established homelands, and hence the first areas to be subject to all of the
apartheid bureaucracy supporting the population migration policies. The TBVC areas were also
the only homelands to gain political independence from South Africa in the late 1970s (Savage
1986). This meant that everyone in these four homelands required a formal passport to enter
South Africa. The basic empirical strategy for the heterogeneity analysis compares outcomes for
cohorts from these early versus late homelands, born in drought and non-drought periods.

Figure 1 shows the ten homelands scattered across the country. I use maps like Figure 1 and
ArcGIS software to spatially identify which modern district boundaries cover a “majority
homeland or TBVC area” and assign each district d a value of TBVCd=1 or 0 based on this
spatial match. The Data Appendix describes this assignment in more detail. Note that the
homelands are spread out across the country, and so capture a range of different climate
conditions and variation in drought events.

Legal barriers to spatial mobility could contribute to how drought affects long-run health
outcomes of drought across TBVC and non-TBVC areas in two ways. First, contemporaneous
migration in response to a drought was more feasible from non-TBVC areas where migration



11
  In Secretary for Bantu Administration and Development General Circular No. 25 (1967), “1. It is accepted
Government policy that the Bantu are only temporarily resident in the European areas of the Republic, for as long as
they offer their labour there. As soon as they become, for some reason or other, no longer fit for work or superfluous
in the labour market, they are expected to return to their country of origin or the territory of the national unit where
they fit in ethnically if they were not born and bred in the homeland.”
                                                           8
costs were lower, meaning that families could send out new migrants and access new remittances
more easily during a drought. Second, and more importantly, differences in access to migrant
networks – the cumulative result of differences in mobility restrictions across the entire period –
likely enabled families to tap remittance flows to mitigate the negative effects of drought.
Historical accounts of the South African economy suggest that these cumulative migrant
networks were an important part of how families coped with local environmental shocks, as
Nattrass and Seekings (2011) illustrate:

      “the consequences of natural disasters were mitigated by the integration of rural
      societies into a cash economy through labo(u)r (sic) migration…. the factors that
      propelled as many as one in three adult men of working age to migrate routinely to
      the mines or other employment served to ensure that a cash income flowed into rural
      areas even when drought or pestilence reduced production”.
In Section 3, I present descriptive statistics highlighting differences in access to migrant
networks observed across TBVC and non-TBVC areas as a result of differences in the
externally-imposed migration limitations. I also show that access to migrant networks looks
more similar across these homelands after 1986, when legal restrictions on mobility were
repealed and the homelands were reincorporated into South Africa.

2. Empirical strategy

To begin, I identify the main effect of early life drought exposure on long-term health outcomes
for all homeland residents using a difference-in-differences research design. I use multiple
drought events to compare health outcomes across drought and non-drought cohorts, controlling
for average differences in these health outcomes across years and across districts. Census data
provide two important categories of health measurement: self-reported disability and cohort size.

Using individual-level observations on disability and drought exposure and controlling for birth
district d and birth year t fixed effects, I estimate the following regression for disability
outcomes Y of person j born in district d in year t:

                          Yjdt=0+1DROUGHTdt+d+t+jdt                  (1)

where DROUGHTdt is a measure of drought exposure in early life. I estimate this specification
using the full sample as well as separately for men and women, following prior research that
                                                   9
documents the particular sensitivity of males to early-life nutritional insults (Almond and
Mazumdar 2011, Almond 2006; Almond and Currie 2011a). Robust standard errors are clustered
on year of birth to adjust for within-year spatial correlations between health outcomes and
drought (Bertrand, Duflo and Mullainathan 2004).12

Since the Census only asks current and previous district of residence, I define birth district as a
person’s prior district of residence for someone who has ever moved, and current district of
residence for someone who has never moved. This means that for some fraction of individuals –
people who have moved more than once, for whom district of prior residence is not district of
birth – drought exposure in early life is mis-measured, leading to downwards bias in estimates of
1 (Bound, Brown and Mathiowetz 2001).

As an additional population health outcome, I measure the impact of drought exposure on log
cohort size at the district level (Ydt) and estimate district-year level regressions with the same set
of controls as in (1). Since drought may be severe enough to affect total population through
adjustments in total mortality and total fertility (Almond and Mazumdar 2011, Martorell 1994), I
investigate fertility impacts by estimating the effects of drought exposure during childbearing
years spent in TBVC and non-TBVC areas on total completed fertility of women aged 40 to 60
in 1996.

The main effect of drought exposure in early life in all homelands is captured by 1. Within-
district variation in birth timing relative to drought identifies this coefficient. Birth year fixed
effects in equation (1) account for age effects in health outcomes and for contemporaneous
national shocks affecting these outcomes. District fixed effects control for constant unobservable
differences between districts that may affect health, for example: some districts may be drought-
prone, have different access to public health facilities, or different approaches to child health
investments.




12
  Drought conditions within a district are uncorrelated over time. After controlling for year and district fixed effects
there is no first order serial correlation in errors for the drought indicator. The coefficient from the lagged residual
regressions for drought is .025 (p value = .36).
                                                          10
The key identification assumption for this difference in differences design is that there are no
contemporaneous shocks to health in drought years. This assumption rules out (for example)
changes in national government assistance affecting all homelands in a drought year. An
attractive feature of my research design is that because there are multiple drought events in
different districts across many different years, I exploit many separate natural experiments to
identify the effects of drought rather than relying on a single drought event. So, for example,
fluctuations in government policy towards the homelands (e.g. Pass Laws were more heavily
enforced in later years of the analysis period) are highly unlikely to be correlated with each and
every drought event in the data.

To investigate heterogeneity in the long-run health effects of drought, I leverage a third source of
variation and compare the long-run health effects of drought exposure across two subsets of
homelands, the TBVC and the non-TBVC areas, while controlling for district and year fixed
effects. I modify (1) to estimate the following regression:

         Yjdt=0+1DROUGHTdt+2DROUGHTdt*TBVCd+d+t+jdt                                               (2)

where TBVCd indicates whether the birth district falls within the boundaries of a TBVC state or
not, and all other variables are measured as before.13 The main parameter of interest in this
regression is 2, the differential effect of drought in early childhood in TBVC relative to non-
TBVC areas. As before, within-district variation in birth timing relative to drought events
identifies 1 and 2. If drought negatively affects health in both areas, disability rates will be
higher for cohorts with greater early-life drought exposure (1>0 and 2≥0) and cohort size will
be smaller (1<0 and 2≤0). If families in TBVC areas are less able to respond to drought, then
2 will be strictly greater than zero for disability outcomes and strictly less than zero for cohort
size outcomes.

Motivated by the historical context in Section 1, this paper argues that differential access to
migrant networks, created by differences in externally-imposed migration restrictions,



13
   One interpretation of this approach is as a triple difference regression, although perhaps a more natural way to
think about this regression is as a difference-in-differences regression that also controls for year of birth and district
fixed effects.
                                                            11
contributes to the size and sign of 2. Descriptive statistics in Section 3 illustrate this differential
access to migrant networks before 1986. However, there could be other differences between
TBVC and non-TBVC areas that are not differenced out by the district fixed effects in equation
(2), and which influence how well households in TBVC and non-TBVC areas cope with drought.
For example, differences between TBVC and non-TBVC districts in mean levels of access to
credit or savings facilities, access to public health and other social services, access to jobs and
markets, and agricultural potential may enable households to differentially cope with drought,
thereby confounding the interpretation of 2.

I pursue three strategies to account for many of these other differences between areas. First, I
estimate equation (2) controlling for drought interacted with district-level population density in
1946 (a proxy for access to social services, credit and jobs), agricultural potential of the land
(specifically, an index of suitability for maize production), and a measure of geographic
remoteness (also a proxy for access to social services, credit markets and jobs). If results are
robust to these controls of baseline district characteristics, we can be more confident that such
fundamental differences between TBVC and non-TBVC districts do not explain differences in
the long-term health effects of drought exposure.

Second, I use the Census data to implement a placebo test. Using the same regression
specification as in equation (2), I estimate effects of drought on children born in ex-homelands
since the repeal of mobility regulations. That is, the sample includes children born between 1987
and 1993 in districts that were formerly part of TBVC and non-TBVC areas. This allows me to
check whether differential health effects of drought across TBVC and non-TBVC areas are
evident even after legal limits on migration are repealed. If the spatial mobility channel is an
important factor contributing to 2, they should not be.

Finally, I present direct evidence on how access to migrant networks affects the ability of
families to mitigate the impacts of drought. I cannot show that remittances respond to drought
contemporaneously for the 1948 to 1986 period since there are no spatially disaggregated data on
remittance flows during apartheid. Instead, to provide evidence of mechanism, I estimate how
remittances respond to unexpected drought using data from more recent years and the following
regression:
                                                   12
     Remit95hd =0+1Drought95d+2HHMighd+3Drought95d*HHMighd+h+d+hd                                    (3)

where Remit95hd is an indicator for whether household h in district d received any remittance in
1995. This regression asks whether remittances respond to drought even in current periods, and
whether these flows are facilitated through existing migrant networks (pre-existing household
migrants). To this end, the regression controls for differences in average remittance receipts
between households in districts that did not experience drought in 1995 (1), for differences in
average remittance receipts across households with any migrant worker versus no migrant
worker (2), and for historical drought prevalence to soak up any district-level unobservables
affecting average remittance receipts (d).

Under the assumption that historical drought prevalence adequately controls for unobservable
differences between districts that affect mean remittances, I treat drought in 1995 as uncorrelated
with remaining unobservable factors, that is, conditional on controls, any drought in the year
before the survey was a surprise. I estimate (3) for all households in the former homeland areas
and separately within TBVC and non-TBVC areas and show that in both areas, remittances are
the key link between adult outmigration and sending households. Remittances increase resources
for those left behind during drought, but only in those households connected to a migrant
network.

3. Data and key variables

         i.      Measuring drought

I use rainfall data from over 1,000 local weather station locations to construct a district-year
specific drought measure using the Standardized Precipitation Index (SPI) (McKee, Doesken and
Kleist 1993).14 The SPI measures the probability of observing a recent rainfall event based on the
distribution of all rainfall events for a given time scale and place, and characterizes South
African droughts well (Roualt and Richard 2003). Following the climatological literature, I




14
  There is no consensus on how the onset, duration or completion of a drought should be marked (Wilhite, 2001;
World Meteorological Organization 2006), however, the climatological literature has shown the robustness of the
SPI in capturing precipitation deficiencies that extend over time (Roualt and Richard 2003).
                                                       13
define DROUGHTdt in each district d and year t to be 1 for values of the SPI below -1.5 and 0
otherwise (McKee et al 1993). The spatial specificity of this measure is important because the
same quantitative rainfall deficit may indicate inadequate precipitation in historically wetter
districts but not in historically drier districts.

Drought events are important for agricultural output in South Africa. The country’s staple crop
(maize) is rain-fed and limited water availability reduces maize output by interrupting growth at
several points in the growing season (Le Roux 2009). Insufficient rainfall over an extended
period has particularly negative consequences for yields. Data Appendix 1 shows that maize
yields appear more sensitive to rainfall deficiencies than to rainfall excesses. Drought is therefore
the relevant measure of an important local environmental shock in South Africa.

Figure 2 shows the distribution of these droughts during apartheid. This is the main source of
variation used to identify the long-term effects on disability rates and cohort size in all
homelands, and across TBVC and non-TBVC areas. Each bar represents the fraction of TBVC
and non-TBVC districts experiencing a local drought in a given year. The figure shows
substantial variation over time: some years are entirely drought-free (e.g. 1975) while in other
years (the early 1980s) over 30% of districts experience drought. In most years, a smaller,
positive fraction of districts experience drought.

I measure drought exposure (DROUGHTdt) in two ways, both of which vary at the birth district
and birth year level. The simplest measure is an indicator for whether district d experienced a
drought in year t (the year of birth of the individual) or not. The second measure captures the
fraction of years from in utero to four years of age that a person was exposed to drought in their
birth district.15 By exploiting the fact that some individuals were exposed to multiple drought



15
  Although the economics literature has recently provided much evidence for the fetal origins of disease, or, the
long-term health effects of nutritional deprivation and exposure to environmental toxins in utero (see Almond and
Mazumdar (2011) for a discussion of biological mechanisms in utero), infants and children continue to be
vulnerable to malnutrition and infection after birth, with potential long-run consequences. Martorell (1999) indicates
that until 3 years of age, the physical and mental development of a child remains in the critical period because
growth rates are higher during this time than in any other period of life and because infant immunological systems
are still developing. For example, the critical period for the development of binocular vision is between 3 and 8
months, while neuronal development of the vestibular system (which affects motor skill development) has a critical
period in the first three weeks of life (Rice 2000). Even mild malnutrition and associated micronutrient deficiencies
                                                         14
events in early childhood, depending on their year of birth and place of birth, this second
measure captures the intensity of drought exposure at a range of critical ages when nutritional
deficiencies can affect later health outcomes.16

         ii.      Measuring disability and population composition using Census data

I use the 10% individual record data from the 1996 South African Census to construct the sample
for the disability and cohort size analysis. I also use these data to investigate the fertility response
to drought exposure. The main sample consists of African individuals born between 1948 and
1986 (age 10-48) whose current district (for never movers) or prior district (for movers) is in a
rural TBVC or non-TBVC homeland.17 Individuals report whether they have any serious
disability and the type of disability: vision, hearing or speech, mental or physical disability (e.g.
paralysis). I construct an indicator for “Any serious disability?” and a “Number of serious
disabilities” variable for the main analysis.18




(vitamin A, folic acid, zinc, iodine, and iron) during this period can contribute to a syndrome of “developmental
impairment” that includes growth failure (stunting and wasting), delays in cognitive, motor and behavioural
development, lower levels of resistance to disease, and increased morbidity and mortality (Martorell 1999). In the
well-known INCAP study in Guatemala, a randomized nutritional intervention for pregnant women and infants led
to taller, heavier adults with greater strength and work capacity, and higher wages (Martorell 1999, Hoddinott et al
2008). Schroeder et al (1995) show that nutritional intervention before three years of age had the largest impacts on
health outcomes for children. Case and Paxson (2010) use data from numerous surveys to show that height
deficiencies in childhood (an outcome of nutritional deprivation) are strongly correlated with significantly higher
rates of disabilities and poorer health in later life.
16
   The Census asked for month of birth information but these variables are not reported in the public data. Annual
drought exposure is a reasonable measure of early life exposure since precipitation deficits measured over a longer
period of time more accurately reflect conditions of drought than acute rainfall shocks over shorter periods. To
interpret the fractional measure of drought exposure, it is important to note that permits were never granted for
children to move outside of homelands with any parent. Hence, district at birth is likely to be the same district
throughout early childhood for this sample. An alternative way of capturing drought exposure in early childhood
would be to include multiple indicators for drought in each year of life (rather than the fractional measure).
Estimates of health results using this specification are broadly similar, but point estimates on each year of exposure
variable are noisy, likely because the year of birth data are noisy. Since this paper focuses on how families cope with
drought rather than on identifying the exact timing of when drought exposure in infancy matters the most, I do not
present estimates from these alternate specifications.
17
   Sample selection is discussed in detail in the Data Appendix.
18
   Self-reported disability variables capture meaningful variation in health status across individuals. For a similarly
aged sample in the South African National Income Dynamics Study (2008), each additional self-reported disability
raises a person’s score on an index of difficulties with activities of daily living (ADLs) by 0.75 of a standard
deviation. This highly significant correlation is conditional on age, gender and age-gender interactions.
                                                          15
Table 1 shows that TBVC and non-TBVC areas are similar on a range of observable
characteristics: the adult sample is balanced on age (23 years), education, and individual-level
exposure to drought in birth year and throughout early childhood. Differences in the fraction of
women in TBVC and non-TBVC areas are significant at the 5% level, but small.

TBVC areas are more remote than non-TBVC areas, and less suited to maize production than
non-TBVC areas, although these differences are not statistically significant. They have lower
population density than non-TBVC areas (also not significant). These three variables are the
main district-level controls used in the robustness check regressions.

Table 1 Panel A shows disability prevalence in the sample. 5.2% of individuals report a serious
disability, with vision being the most prevalent disability (2.3%). 1.1% of the sample has a
hearing/speech disability and 1.4% have a physical disability; mental disability is reported at
much lower rates (0.7%).19 These disability rates do not merely reflect diseases of old age since
the sample includes people aged 10 to 48.

Differences in mean disability rates across TBVC and non-TBVC areas in Table 1 foreshadow
the main health results. For all outcomes, disability rates are higher, sometimes substantially so,
for the TBVC sample than for the non-TBVC sample. Constant differences in disability rates
across areas are controlled for by district fixed effects. The regression specification in (2) seeks
to estimate the differential differences in disability rates in drought versus non-drought periods.

The table also presents information on total fertility rates for women in TBVC and non-TBVC
areas. Among cohorts of women who have completed childbearing by 1996 (aged 40 to 60), total
fertility rates are about 4.7 children per woman. Women from TBVC areas have significantly
higher total fertility rates than women in non-TBVC areas. For each woman in the fertility
sample, I compute the fraction of her childbearing years (1951-1996) exposed to drought.20
Table 1 Panel A shows that drought exposure in this sample of women is slightly higher in
TBVC than non-TBVC areas. This suggests that endogenous fertility responses may contribute
to some of the health effects, and I investigate this channel after presenting cohort size results.


19
     These rates are comparable with disability rates for Uganda reported in Almond and Mazumdar (2011).
20
     I use the prior district designation as the relevant location for each woman’s drought exposure.
                                                         16
         iii. Measuring differences in migrant networks across TBVC and non-TBVC homelands

The distinction between TBVC and non-TBVC homelands captures meaningful variation in
spatial mobility and differential access to migrant networks between 1948 and 1986. Figure 3
shows the percent of adults living in a given district in a given year that permanently migrate
away from that district, by TBVC and non-TBVC homelands (Variables are constructed from
last-move data in the 1996 Census, details in the Data Appendix).21 Maximum annual
outmigration is low in level terms. Only 0.6% of the district-level adult population migrates
away in later years. Importantly, Figure 3 shows that permanent outmigration from non-TBVC
areas is higher than outmigration from TBVC areas in almost all years; consistent with the idea
that spatial mobility was more restricted in TBVC districts under apartheid.

It is important to note that in the South African context, permanent migration does not imply that
a migrant worker has no further attachment to a household. It is common for permanent migrants
to continue to be associated with their rural homes and be listed on the household roster as absent
household members for long periods of time (Posel, 2011), even if they do not intend to
permanently return to those households. Differences in annual permanent outmigration rates
therefore contribute to differences in access to migrant networks across TBVC and non-TBVC
areas.

Table 2 presents summary statistics for a larger range of migration indicators by TBVC area. The
average annual district outmigration rate between 1948 and 1986 is 0.2% in TBVC areas, and
0.3% in non-TBVC areas. These annual rates are low, but they cumulate to larger differences in
access to migrant networks over this period. By 1986 the share of adults who have migrated
away from non-TBVC areas is a statistically significant 2.1 percentage points higher in non-
TBVC areas relative to TBVC areas.22




21
   There are no Census data on circular, seasonal or temporary migration. Such migration may also play an
important role in helping families cope with local income risk, as in Bryan, Chowdhury and Mobarak (2012). If
permanent migration rates are correlated with more temporary migration, this will be captured as part of our
reduced-form estimates for health.
22
   Simple simulations in Appendix Table 1 shows how small differences in the annual probability of outmigration
cumulate to larger differences in the fraction of adults who have ever migrated and the fraction of households with a
migrant.
                                                         17
Some of these differences disappear in the years after mobility restrictions are repealed and
before the transition to democracy (1987-1993). The cumulative share of adults that outmigrates
between 1987 and 1993 rises to 14% in both TBVC and non-TBVC areas and the difference is
no longer statistically significant. However, the legacy of differential access to migrant networks
is reflected in continued large differences in the fraction of households receiving any remittances
in 1993, the closest year to 1986 in which there are data on remittance receipts for a nationally
representative sample.23 39% of TBVC households receive remittances in 1993 while 49% of
households in non-TBVC homelands do.

The statistics in Table 2 also indicate the central role of remittances in supporting households in
all ex-homeland areas in 1993. Not only are remittances prevalent, but remittance contributions
to household income are quantitatively large. Mean monthly remittance income in households
listing a migrant worker on the roster are just over ZAR200, or around $65 per month. This
accounts for just over one quarter of monthly household income.24

These summary statistics support the idea that differences in externally imposed mobility
restrictions across the two types of homelands resulted in real differences in access to migrant
networks.

4. Main Results

     i.   Main effects of early childhood drought exposure on disability and cohort size

Table 3 presents the main effects from estimating the regression in equation (1). For each of the
outcomes “Any serious disability”, “Number of serious disabilities” and “Log cohort size”, I
present results for the two measures of drought exposure using the full sample in columns (1)
and (2) and results for male and female samples separately in columns (3) through (6).




23
   See Casale and Posel (2006) for more on the link between permanent outmigration and remittance flows across
households in South Africa.
24
   De Beer (1984: 57) describes migrants as “the most privileged people in the reserves”. He estimated that an
average worker from the Ciskei, working illegally in a large city for three quarters of the year and spending the
remaining months in jail for pass law violations would still increase their standard of living by 700%.
                                                        18
Coefficients on variables for fraction of early childhood in drought are evaluated at the mean
fraction of early life exposed to drought.

Greater exposure to drought in early childhood significantly raises the chance of having a serious
disability. For a mean level of drought exposure, disability rates are 0.1 percentage points higher
(Panel A), and the average number of disabilities is about 2.1% higher (Panel B, not significant).
Cohort size is about 0.7% lower (Panel C, not significant). Splitting the sample by gender, we
see that while drought in early life negatively affects health of both men and women, the size of
these negative effects is uniformly larger for the male sample. These negative effects of drought
are also much more precisely estimated for men than for women. At the mean level of drought
exposure, the male disability rate is 0.2 percentage points higher (4.7% relative to mean rates),
males have 4.3% more disabilities and male cohort size is 1.1% smaller.

 ii.   Heterogeneous effects of early childhood drought exposure on disability

The next set of results focuses on estimating the heterogeneous effects of drought exposure in
early life on disability outcomes by TBVC and non-TBVC status of the birth district. Table 4
presents results from estimating equation (2) first for the pooled sample and then separately for
males and females. Using the fraction of the period from in utero to age 4 as the main drought
exposure measure, we see that mean levels of exposure raise disability rates across the board in
non-TBVC areas. Effect size ranges from 0.1 to 0.2 percentage points for disability prevalence,
and these are fairly precise estimates. The results using drought in the birth year as our exposure
measure point in a similar direction in the non-TBVC areas, although effects are less precisely
estimated. This is likely because exact year of birth information, as well as district of birth
information, are measured with some error.

Table 4 shows clearly that the effect of drought exposure in early life is significantly larger for
individuals born into TBVC areas. At the mean drought exposure rate, TBVC individuals in the
pooled sample are twice as likely to have a serious disability as non-TBVC cohorts and have
1.7% more disabilities than non-TBVC cohorts, relative to the mean number of disabilities.
Adding the main and interaction effects together, we see that mean drought exposure in early
childhood raises disability rates among TBVC cohorts by 4%.

                                                  19
Results using drought exposure in birth year (columns (2) and (4)) are similar. Drought exposure
at birth raises disability rates in both TBVC and non-TBVC areas, with the negative health
impacts being three times larger in the TBVC areas. Although neither main nor interaction
effects are precisely estimated in these two columns, drought parameters are jointly significant at
the 5 and 10% level respectively. Moreover, in this pooled sample, the effect of drought on
disability rates in TBVC areas (the sum of 1 and 2) is significantly different from zero at the
5% level.

Columns (5) through (12) show that the male sample drives these differences in the disability
effects of drought across TBVC and non-TBVC areas. Mean drought exposure in early
childhood raises male disability rates by about 0.2 percentage points and the number of serious
male disabilities by 0.002 (3.5%). In TBVC areas, drought exposure effectively doubles these
effect sizes. Using mean drought exposure before age 5, males born in TBVC areas are 0.2
percentage points more likely to have a disability. Using the drought in birth year indicator,
males born into TBVC areas report 0.9 percentage points higher disability rates. These male
results are precisely estimated and represent economically meaningful magnitudes. Relative to
the average level of disability in the male sample, drought in the birth year in a TBVC area raises
male disability rates by almost 20%, while mean drought exposure over the first four years of life
raises disability rates by about 4%.25 I reject the hypothesis that mean drought exposure has no
effect on the chances of disability and the number of disabilities for males later in life at the 1%
level (p-values of the joint tests are 0.009 and 0.008 respectively).26

In contrast, mean drought exposure in childhood and drought in the birth year has no differential
impacts on disability rates among females from TBVC relative to non-TBVC areas. While
drought exposure raises disability rates among females in all areas (the main effect), I cannot
reject the joint hypotheses that drought in the birth year has no differential impact on female




25
   The differences in these numbers arises because the fraction of early childhood in drought measure averages over
all individuals who may be exposed to drought in any of their first 4 years of life and during the in utero period.
26
   Appendix Table 2 explores which components of male disability are most sensitive to drought exposure around
birth. Results indicate that drought exposure around birth and mean drought exposure in early childhood raises
prevalence of all types of disabilities by more in TBVC areas. Heterogeneous effects are strongest for vision and
physical disabilities, and are robust to controlling for baseline district controls interacted with drought measures.
                                                         20
disability rates in TBVC areas (p-value of the joint null is 0.16 and 0.22 for any disability and
number of disabilities respectively). And, although the mean drought exposure variables are
jointly significantly different in the female regressions of columns (9) and (11), the point
estimates are far smaller than in the male regressions, and almost zero on the TBVC interaction
terms. These sex differences in the disability effects of drought are consistent with theories that
male infants are more fragile than female infants (Barker, 1995; Kraemer 2000).

Both because the literature had shown evidence that male babies are more susceptible to negative
effects of early life health shocks (e.g. see Almond and Mazumdar 2011) and for more practical
purposes – the male sample estimates are larger and much more precisely estimated than for
females, providing more power for testing mechanisms – I restrict the remainder of the disability
analysis to the male sample.

Table 5 provides robustness checks for these male health impacts. Columns (1), (2), (5) and (6)
reproduce the male results from Table 4. The remaining columns present results for the same
outcomes from regressions that control for interactions of baseline district-level variables
(population density in 1946, remoteness and agricultural potential) with drought measures.

Almost all the coefficients on drought variables increase in size after controlling for these
district-level variables and are more precisely estimated. Rather than explaining the differential
effects of drought in TBVC areas, adding in these district variables amplifies the impact of
drought in TBVC areas and absorbs residual variation in the outcomes. Estimates of 1 and 2 are
not apparently driven by district-level differences in remoteness, population density or
agricultural suitability across TBVC and non-TBVC areas that could condition the effect of
drought on health outcomes differentially by area.

 iii.   Heterogeneous effects of early childhood drought exposure on cohort size and fertility

Table 6 presents results for cohort size regressions. Cohorts exposed to the mean rate of drought
up to age 4 are smaller in all areas but this difference is not significant. In TBVC areas, drought
cohorts are significantly smaller – on the order of 2 percentage points. Results are similar,
although much more noisily estimated, using drought exposure in the cohort’s birth year. The
TBVC interaction terms are about 60% larger for the male sample, relative to the female sample.
                                                 21
This larger effect of drought on male cohort size indicates that drought exposure may
differentially raise male infant mortality or reduce the number of male fetuses conceived.

To assess whether drought directly affects total fertility (there are no historical data on infant
mortality rates), I estimate regressions for total completed fertility among women ages 40 to 60
in TBVC and non-TBVC areas. I assume each woman bears her children in the same district
reported as her first district.27 I regress total completed fertility on the fraction of a woman’s
childbearing years (ages 15-40) during which she experienced drought and the interaction of this
exposure measure with the TBVC status of the district, controlling for first district fixed effects
and birth year to capture mother age effects.

Table 7 presents results for the full sample of women (column (1)) and for subsamples of women
with different levels of education. Total fertility rates are significantly lower (0.22 fewer births,
or about 4.7% relative to the mean) when women are exposed to the mean years of drought
during their childbearing years. This effect is driven by women in TBVC areas and in particular,
by mothers without education. This negative effect of drought exposure on total fertility is
consistent with negative cohort size effects in drought years in TBVC areas (Table 6).

Results in Tables 6 and 7 have three implications. First, the long-run impact of drought on
population is sizeably negative, and especially so in TBVC areas. One of the ways this appears to
occur is through reduced fertility. Women exposed to more drought during their childbearing
years have significantly fewer children. Second, because of this perhaps, the disability results
may capture a “scarring” effect of exposure to drought in early childhood as in Bozzoli, Deaton
and Quintana-Domeque (2009). Alternatively, if survivors are positively selected rather than
scarred (as might be the case since mothers with less education cut back on fertility even more in
TBVC areas) then the disability results for males in Tables 4 and 5 may underestimate the long-
run health impacts of drought in TBVC areas.

5. Mechanisms: Interpreting larger negative impacts of drought among TBVC cohorts




27
 This assumption generates a noisy assignment of first district for the (likely small) fraction of women who moved
multiple times during apartheid.
                                                        22
Consistent with prior evidence on the impact of childhood exposure to shocks on later life health,
the results of the analysis in Tables 3 through 6 show that early-life drought exposure has
significant negative impacts on the prevalence of disabilities and on cohort size of Africans from
former homeland areas, with larger and more precise estimates in the sample of males. Drought
exposure accounts for an even higher fraction of total disability for African males born into
TBVC areas.

Section 1 argued that a key difference between TBVC and non-TBVC rural homelands was the
intensity of external mobility restrictions facing each group. Figure 3 and Table 2 showed that
TBVC areas had lower outmigration rates than non-TBVC areas during 1948-1986, and that
lower levels of remittance receipts across these areas persist until as late as 1993. In this section,
I provide additional evidence that differences in migration restrictions contributed to these
differences in disability and population effects of drought across TBVC and non-TBVC areas. I
also explore the mechanism through which migration matters, by estimating the responsiveness
of migrant remittances to drought in more recent data. Finally, I discuss other possible
explanations for the heterogeneous long-run effects of drought on health outcomes

     i.    Testing migrant networks as a key channel: Placebo regressions

If migration restrictions are an important part of the explanation for differences in disability
effects of drought across TBVC and non-TBVC areas, these health effects of drought exposure
in early life should attenuate for among cohorts born since the lifting of these restrictions. Legal
restrictions on migration – most notoriously, the Group Areas Act – fell away in 1986, at which
time all homelands were also reintegrated into South Africa. Table 8 presents estimates from a
set of placebo regressions of equation (2) for the sample of males born between 1987 and 1993
(the last year of formal apartheid).28

For this sample of individuals aged 3 to 10 living in former homelands in 1996, we see that on
average, drought exposure in early life still has negative consequences. Mean exposure to
drought in early life raises disability rates by 1 percentage point, with drought in the birth year



28
     Summary statistics for this sample are in Appendix Table 3.
                                                          23
raising disability rates by 1.8 percentage points. If anything, the negative effects of drought
exposure are even worse after the homelands are reintegrated into South Africa (although it is
important to remember that we are measuring the short-run and medium-run effects of drought
on this younger sample; the magnitude of these effects is not strictly comparable with the older
sample).

Notably, differential effects of drought across TBVC and non-TBVC areas are no longer
observable in this younger sample. Disability rates are not differentially higher in TBVC areas
than in non-TBVC areas, and if anything, they look slightly lower, although not significantly so
in most cases. Results for the cohort size regressions are similar, and there no longer seems to be
a negative effect of drought exposure in early life on cohort size for post-1986 cohorts. Table 8
results suggest that drought cohorts are larger in approximately the same way across TBVC and
non-TBVC areas since the repeal of mobility restrictions. If the TBVC designation of homelands
was really picking up other differences across areas that explain why drought has heterogeneous
impacts across space, we should have expected the results of Table 8 to be similar to those in
Tables 4, 5 and 6. The fact that we do not gives more weight to the interpretation that migration
and spatial mobility contributed to the heterogeneous effects of drought for cohorts born before
1986.

 ii.    Testing migrant networks as a key channel: Do remittances respond to drought?

Remittances are a key variable linking permanent outmigrants with health outcomes of family
members who are left behind. Table 9 presents results from household-level regressions of
remittance receipts (“Any remittances”) in 1995 on district-level drought in 1995, an indicator
for whether a migrant worker is attached to the household, and the interaction of these two
variables. Because households with and without migrant workers could differ on a number of
unobservables it is important to control for the presence of a migrant worker attached to the
household. I also control directly for the fraction of drought years experienced by each district
between 1948 and 1995 to account for differences in average remittance behavior induced by the
“drought-proneness” of an area. Columns (1) and (2) present results for the entire sample, while
columns (3) to (6) break this out for former non-TBVC and TBVC districts.


                                                 24
Even though this evidence on remittances comes from the post-apartheid period when legal
barriers to labor migration are no longer in place, the legacy of historical mobility restrictions
persists. In 1996, almost 40% of all households in rural TBVC districts and almost 50% of
households in rural non-TBVC districts reported at least one migrant worker and one in five
received some type of remittance the year before the Census. Conditional on having any migrant
worker attached to the household, the chances of a household receiving any remittance were one
in two.

The estimates in Table 9 show that drought exposure in 1995 has no significant impact on
remittance receipts in households without a migrant worker. In contrast, migrant worker
households in drought-exposed districts were a significant 2.7 percentage points more likely to
receive any remittances in 1995 (column (1)) and this is robust to including baseline district
controls interacted with historical drought prevalence. Drought raises the probability of receiving
any remittances by 13% relative to the mean rate of remittances.

Splitting the sample into TBVC and non-TBVC areas, it is clear that having a migrant worker in
the household facilitates remittances after drought in both areas. This relationship is somewhat
more precisely estimate and a bit larger in non-TBVC areas, perhaps reflecting the stronger
historical migrant links between these areas and the rest of the economy (although the sample
size is also larger for the non-TBVC areas). For non-TBVC areas, drought exposure raises the
chances of receiving remittances by over 16%. The difference across TBVC and non-TBVC
areas is not significant (results not shown), which makes sense since 1995 is almost 10 years
after the repeal of the spatial mobility laws in homelands.

These remittance results show clearly how migrant networks are likely to matter for health
outcomes of the left-behind in former homeland areas: migrants facilitate remittances overall,
and remittance flows respond positively to local economic shocks. Differences in the probability
of having access to such a migrant network generated by differences in apartheid restrictions on
migration contributed to families being able to more effectively smooth income across space and
cope with prevalent local environmental shocks.

 iii.     Alternative interpretations of heterogeneous impacts of drought exposure

                                                 25
This paper has argued that differences in spatial mobility restrictions, in access to migrant
networks and the remittances these entail contribute to differential long-run health effects of
drought across TBVC and non-TBVC areas. Empirical specifications controlling for district
fixed effects and district baseline variables interacted with drought control for many other
observable and unobservable differences between areas that condition the health effects of
drought. However, there could be other reasons that explain why the disability and cohort size
results are so much more negative in TBVC areas. Three important channels are worth
considering.

First, crops may be more sensitive to drought conditions in TBVC areas. If this is the case, then
drought implies a different intensity of shock to health human capital in each area, regardless of
differences in mobility restrictions. The robustness of the main disability and cohort size results
to controls for drought interacted with underlying agricultural potential of each district gives us
some assurance that such differential physical responses to drought do not explain the health
results. Appendix Table 4 shows directly that maize, grain, and general crop output yields are not
differentially responsive to drought in the last year across TBVC and non-TBVC ex-homeland
areas.29

Perhaps the strongest argument against this channel is that subsistence agricultural production
was negligible in all homeland areas (Dinkelman 2011; Nattrass and Seekings 2011).30 Data
from the end of apartheid suggests that the value of agricultural production in rural areas
contributed far less to household income than remittances and other sources of income from kin
(Nattrass and Seekings 2011). Differential sensitivity of agricultural production to drought across
TBVC and non-TBVC areas does not provide a ready explanation for the differential long-run
health effects of drought exposure.




29
   Unfortunately, the data available for this exercise are very noisy. This is because there is a very low level of
subsistence farming in these areas. Nonetheless, there is no strong evidence to support the case that crops grown in
former TBVC homelands are more sensitive to drought conditions in 1992.
30
   Excluding commercial farming, agricultural production is estimated to have made up only 1 % of total income in
South Africa in 1993 (Nattrass and Seekings 2011).
                                                         26
A second channel that may differentiate TBVC from non-TBVC areas in their ability to cope
with drought (regardless of spatial mobility differences) is through differential access to private,
formal insurance mechanisms, public insurance, social safety nets and social services. Showing
that results were robust to including controls for drought interacted with baseline population
density and district-level measures of remoteness was one way to address this concern
quantitatively.

In fact, prior research documents very low access to private and public safety nets in the former
homeland areas. Private savings and insurance mechanisms (e.g. banks) were virtually non-
existent in rural homelands during apartheid and public services for homelands were uniformly
underprovided (Brown 1987). As some examples: over three quarters of Africans (across the
entire country) were unbanked in 2001, with a much higher fraction of unbanked in rural areas;
only 8% of households in the lowest income quintile had a bank account (Ardington et al
2011).31 Health services in the homelands absorbed only 0.23% of South African GDP by the
mid-1970s, even though these areas housed 32% of the population (Price 1986).32 Chronic
underfunding of public health services undoubtedly contributed to high baseline levels of
malnutrition in all homelands and a high prevalence of kwashiorkor and marasmus, respiratory
infractions, gastroenteritis, and measles among children (De Beer 1984) which might have made
homeland populations more susceptible to drought shocks overall. But there is no reason to
expect that baseline health was worse in TBVC states than in non-TBVC states. If anything,
TBVC states had marginally more per capita resources for health care than the non-TBVC states,
since the government used spending promises to promote the adoption of political independence
(De Beer 1984).

A third difference between the two areas that could explain differential disability responses to
drought even in the absence of migration is differential access to informal insurance
mechanisms. Households might be able to borrow or lend informally amongst themselves, or
self-insure using buffer stocks or grain storage, or rely on resources from group savings and



31
   Ardington (1999) surveys financial facilities in one rural area of South Africa and finds whole districts without
any banks or post offices in the mid-1990s.
32
   The average doctor: patient ratio across homelands during this time was 1:15 000 (Coovadia et al 2009).
                                                          27
insurance mechanisms. Although these informal insurance mechanisms certainly exist in South
Africa, they are less useful when drought hits an entire district, which is the measure of drought
used in this analysis. Furthermore, researchers have documented that in South Africa, access to
formal and informal risk-sharing mechanisms is complementary: people who have bank accounts
are also more likely to participate in (for example) informal burial societies. Even among the
poorest households, only 7% of adults participated in informal group insurance (stokvels) in 2002
(Ardington 2011).

Households undoubtedly combine different types of risk-sharing mechanisms to cope with local
environmental shocks. The data do not allow me to conclusively rule out that these other
differences in TBVC areas are part of the explanation for differences in the long-run health
effects of drought. However, compared with the high prevalence of migrants attached to rural
households (39 to 49% of households had at least one migrant in 1996, Table 2), the alternative
channels of informal insurance represent a far less prevalent “safety net” than access to migrant
remittance income. Given the importance of remittance income in overall household budgets,
and the larger responsiveness of remittances to drought in households with migrants, it is clear
that access to migrant networks established during apartheid were an important part of how
families were differentially able to cope with local droughts. Future work using micro-data on
migrant outflows and remittance inflows to households during drought coupled with data on
later-life health outcomes for the youngest members of these households may make it feasible to
quantify how much access to migrant networks contributes to differences in long-run health
effects of drought.

6. Conclusions

This paper provides new evidence on the long-term health consequences of early-life drought
exposure in a context of highly prevalent local environmental shocks and restricted labor
mobility. I estimate that early childhood drought exposure raises disability rates by about 4% for
African males born into TBVC areas and lowers male cohort size by 2.6 percent. This is over
and above the average negative impact of drought on disability and cohort size for exposed
cohorts across all homelands.


                                                28
I describe how South Africa’s apartheid policies erected higher barriers to spatial mobility out of
the TBVC areas and show that access to migrant networks was worse in these areas during
apartheid but improved after the repeal of legal restrictions on migration. I document the
mechanism through which migrant networks helped families during drought by showing recent
evidence that remittances respond to drought in households with migrant workers. While I
cannot rule out other ways in which households in non-TBVC areas were able to differentially
cope with drought during apartheid, the magnitude of differential exposure to migrant networks
in TBVC and non-TBVC areas suggests an important role for spatial mobility in helping
households to mitigate the long-run effects of local shocks. Mitigating long-run health effects of
early-life shocks to the nutritional or disease environment is an important new avenue of research
in the early-life health shocks literature.

While the policies of apartheid are unique to South Africa, restrictions on internal mobility occur
throughout the world. Some barriers are institutional, as in China and the former Soviet Union.
Others, particularly in Africa, are geographic in nature or related to inadequate transportation
infrastructure. The development literature has noted the direct and immediate effects of limited
spatial mobility on income volatility and has viewed spatial mobility as a form of insurance
against economic shocks. My results highlight a new implication of migration barriers for health
human capital accumulation over the long run. In environments prone to frequent local
environmental shocks like drought, enhancing spatial mobility could generate large welfare gains
through the health-protective effects of labor migration and related remittance behaviors.




                                                 29
References
Alderman, Harold, Hans Hoogeven, and Mariacristina Rossi. 2009 “Preschool Nutrition and
Subsequent School Attainment: Longitudinal Evidence from Tanzania.” Economic Development
and Cultural Change Vol 57
Almond, Douglas. 2006 “Is the 1918 Influenza pandemic over? Long-term effects of in utero
influenza exposure in the post-1940s US population”, Journal of Political Economy Vol. 114: 4
Almond, Douglas and Janet Currie. 2011a. “Human capital development before age 5”, in
Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 4b. pp. 1315-1486. Elsevier
Almond, Douglas and Janet Currie. 2011b. “Killing me softly: The fetal origins hypothesis”,
Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol 25. No. 3, Summer pp. 153-172
Almond, Douglas and Bhashkar Mazumdar. 2011. “Health capital and the prenatal environment:
The effect of Ramadan observance during pregnancy”, American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics, Vol. 3. No. 4. pp.56-85.
Aguilar, Arturo and Marta Vicarelli. 2012. “El Niño and Mexican children: Medium-term effects
of early-life weather shocks on cognitive and health outcomes”, Working paper.

Ardington, Cally, David Lam, Murray Leibbrandt and James Levinsohn. 2011. “Savings,
insurance and debt over the post-apartheid period: A review of recent research”, South African
Journal of Economics, Vol. 72: 3

Ardington. E. M. 1999. “Demand or Support: What counts in rural finance? A case-study based
on Mbongolwana KwaZulu Natal”, Research Report No 26, School of Development Studies,
University of Natal-Durban

Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duflo, Gilles Postel-Vinay and Tim Watts. 2010. “Long-run health
impacts of income shocks: Wine and Phylloxera in Nineteenth-Century France”, Review of
Economics and Statistics, November. Vol. 94(2): 714-728
Barker, D. J. P. 1995. “Fetal Origins of Coronary Heart Disease”, British Medical Journal Vol.
311: 171-174
Benson, Charlotte and Edward Clay. 2000. Drought: A Global Assessment, Vol. I, Routledge
Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo and Sendhil Mullainathan, 2004. “How Much Should We
Trust Differences-in-Differences Estimates?” The Quarterly Journal of Economics Vol. 119: 1
pp. 249-275
Besley, Timothy. 1995 “Savings, credit and insurance” in Handbook of Development
Economics, Vol. 3. Jere Behrman and T.N. Srinivasan (eds). Chapter 36.
Bound, John, Charles Brown and Nancy Mathieowitz. 2001. “Measurement error in survey data”
in Handbook of Econometrics. (ed) E.E. Learner and J.J. Heckman. Pp. 3705-3843, North
Holland
                                               30
Bozzoli, Carlos, Angus Deaton and Climent Quintana-Domeque. 2009. “Adult height and
childhood disease” Demography Vol. 46: 4, November, pp. 647-669

Brown, Barbara. 1987. “Facing the ‘Black Peril’: The politics of population control in South
Africa”, Journal of Southern African Studies, Vol 13: 3

Bryan, Gharad, Shyamal Chowdhury and A. Mushfiq Mobarak, 2012 “Risk aversion and
seasonal migration”, Mimeo, Yale University

Case, Anne and Christina Paxson, 2008. “Stature and status: height, ability, and labor market
outcomes”, Journal of Political Economy Vol. 116 (3) pp. 499–532

Casale, Daniela and Dorrit Posel. 2006 “Migration and remittances in South Africa”, Mimeo,
University of KwaZulu-Natal

Chen, Yuyu and Li-An Zhou. 2007. “The long-term health and economic consequences of the
1959-1961 famine in China”, Journal of Health Economics, Vol. 26 No. 4. pp. 659-681.

Clemens, Michael A. 2011. “Economics and Emigration: Trillion-Dollar Bills on the Sidewalk?”
Journal of Economic Perspectives Vol. 25: 3 pp. 83–106

Coovadia, H., R. Jewkes, P. Barron, D. Sanders and D. McIntyre. 2009 “The health and health
system of South Africa: historical roots of public health challenges”, The Lancet, September 5

Currie, Janet and Tom Vogl. 2013 “Early-Life Health and Adult Circumstance in Developing
Countries”, Annual Review of Economics, Volume 5

De Beer, Cedric. 1984. The South African disease: Apartheid health and health services. Africa
World Press: Trenton, New Jersey.
Desmet, Klaus and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. 2012. “On the spatial economic impact of global
warming”, NBER Working Paper 18546
Evans, Ivan. 1997. Bureaucracy and Race: Native Administration in South Africa. University
Berkeley: University of California Press, http://ark.cdlib.org/ark:/13030/ft2n39n7f2/

Greenberg, Stanley and Hermann Giliomee. 1983. “Labour Bureaux and the African Reserves”,
South African Labour Bulletin, 8(4): 37-50

Hoddinott, John, and Bill Kinsey. 2001. “Child Growth in the Time of Drought.” 2001. Oxford
Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 63(4): 409-36
Jayachandran, Seema. 2006 “Selling labor low: Wage responses to productivity shocks in
developing countries” Journal of Political Economy Vol 114: 3. Pp. 538-575
Jensen, Robert. 2000. “Agricultural Volatility and Investments in Children.” American Economic
Review, Papers and Proceedings, 90(2): 399-404

                                               31
Kraemer, S. 2000. “The fragile male”, British Medical Journal Vol. 321: 7276. Pp. 1609–12
Le Roux, Noelien. 2009. “Seasonal maize yield simulations for South Africa using a multi-model
ensemble system”, Unpublished thesis manuscript, University of Pretoria, April
Lemon, Anthony. 1984 “State control over the labor market in South Africa” International
Political Science Review, Vol. 5, No. 2: 189-208
Lindeboom, Maarten, France Portrait and Gerard J. van den Berg. 2010 “Long-Run Longevity
Effects of a Nutritional Shock Early in Life: The Dutch Potato Famine of 1846–1847” Journal of
Health Economics, Vol 29, No. 5 pp 617-629
Maccini, Sharon and Dean Yang. 2009 “Under the weather: health, schooling and socio-
economic consequences of early-life rainfall”, American Economic Review 99(3): 1006–26
Mariotti, Martine. 2011 “Living standards in South Africa’s former homelands”, Working Paper,
Department of Economics, Australian National University.
Martorell, R., L. Kettel Khan, and D.G. Schroeder. 1994 “Reversibility of stunting:
Epidemiological findings in children from developing countries”, European Journal of Clinical
Nutrition 48, S45{S57}
Martorell, Reynaldo. 1999. “The Nature of Child Malnutrition and its Long-Term Implications.”
Food and Nutrition Bulletin 20(3): 288-92.
Maylam, P. 1990. “The rise and decline of urban apartheid in South Africa”, African Affairs, 89:
57-84
McKee, T. B., N. Doesken and J. Kleist 1993 “The relationship of drought frequency and
duration to time scales”, Preprints, 8th Conference on Applied Climatology, pp. 179–184.
January 17–22, Anaheim, California
Meng, X. and Nancy Qian. 2009 “The long run health and economic consequences of famine on
survivors: Evidence from China's great famine”, IZA Discussion Paper No. 2471.

Morten, Melanie. 2013 “Temporary migration and endogenous risk sharing in village India”,
Mimeo, Yale University

Nattrass, Nicoli and Jeremy Seekings. 2011. “The economy and poverty in the twentieth
century”, The Cambridge History of South Africa.Volume 2: 1885–1994. 1st ed. Robert Ross,
Anne Kelk Mager, Bill Nasson (editors). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Histories Online: 518-572. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CHOL9780521869836.012 Accessed 01
October 2013

Posel, Dorrit. 2011. “Households and labour migration in post-apartheid South Africa”, Studies
in Economics and Econometrics, Vol. 34: 3


                                               32
Price, Max. 1986. “Health care as an instrument of apartheid policy in South Africa”, Health
Policy and Planning, 1(2): 158-170

Reed, Holly. 2012. “Moving across boundaries: Migration in South Africa, 1950-2000”,
Demography, 50: 70-96
Rosenzweig, Mark and Oded Stark. 1989. “Consumption Smoothing, migration and marriage:
Evidence from Rural India” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 97: 4.
Rouault, M. and Y. Richard. 2005. “Spatial extent and intensity of droughts in Southern Africa”
Geophysical Research Letters, Vol. 32: L15702, 4
Secretary for Bantu Administration and Development. 1967 “General Circular No. 25 – Settling
of non-productive Bantu resident in European areas, in the homelands” in Maré, G. 1980
Population Relocation in South Africa, Appendix 5. South African Institute of Race Relations:
Johannesburg
Savage, Michael. 1986 “The imposition of pass laws on the African population in South Africa
1916-1984”, African Affairs, Vol. 85: 339
Schroeder, Dirk, Martorell, Reynaldo, Rivera, Juan A., Ruela, Marie T. and Habicht, Jean-Pierre.
1995. “Age differences in the impact of nutritional supplementation on growth”, The Journal of
Nutrition, 125 (4 Supplement): 1051S-1059S

Simkins, Charles. 2011. “The evolution of the South African Population in the Twentieth
Century”, The Cambridge History of South Africa.Volume 2: 1885–1994. 1st ed. Robert Ross,
Anne Kelk Mager, Bill Nasson (editors). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Histories Online: 492-517. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CHOL9780521869836.012 1 October 2013

Simkins, Charles. 1983. Four essays on the past, present & possible future of the distribution of
the black population of South Africa, SALDRU, University of Cape Town

Townsend, Robert M. 1995 “Consumption insurance: An evaluation of risk-bearing systems in
low-income countries”, Journal of Economic Perspectives Vol. 9: 3, Summer
Van den Berg, Gerard, Pia Pinger and Johannes Schoch. 2011 “Instrumental variable estimation
of the causal effect of hunger early in life on health later in life”, IZA Discussion Paper No. 6110
Wilhite, D. 2001 Drought: A global assessment, vol. I, ch. “Drought as a natural hazard:
Concepts and definitions”, Routledge
Wolpe, Harold. 1988 Race, class and the apartheid state. James Currey Press, London
Yang, Dean, and HwaJung Choi. 2007. “Are Remittances Insurance? Evidence from Rainfall
Shocks in the Philippines.” World Bank Economic Review, 21(2): 219–48

Yang, Dean. 2011. “Migrant Remittances”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 25: 3 pp.
129–52
                                                33
                                         FIGURE 1




                                                                   3

                                                          5            8

                                             2            10
                                                               9


                                                                           6
                                                      7



                                                               1


                                                          4




Source: Political map of South Africa 1986, Perry-Castañeda Library Map Collection,
http://www.lib.utexas.edu/maps/south_africa.html, accessed July 2011. Homelands are (in order
of establishment dates): TBVC areas: Transkei (1), Boputhatswana (2), Venda (3), Ciskei (4) and
non-TBVC areas: Lebowa (5), KwaZulu (6), Qwaqwa (7), Gazankulu (8), Kangwane (9),
KwaNdebele (10)




                                                 34
                                                                                                          FIGURE 2

                                                                                     non-TBVC areas                                 TBVC areas




                                                                    .7
                      fraction of districts experiencing drought
                                                                    .6
                                                                    .5
                                                                    .4
                                                                    .3
                                                                    .2
                                                                    .1
                                                                    0




                                                                         1945   1955      1965         1975   1985   1945    1955    1965     1975   1985
                                                                   Graphs by TBVC status of district




Figure 2 shows the fraction of South African homeland districts experiencing a drought annually
between 1948 and 1986. The left hand panel shows drought in non-TBVC (less restricted) areas,
the right hand panel for TBVC (more restricted) areas. The drought indicator is based on the
Standardized Precipitation Index (SPI) as described in Data Appendix 1.
                                                                                                          FIGURE 3

                                                                                Annual outmigration from TBVC and non-TBVC areas: 1948-1986
                                                                    .6
                                             % of adults outmigrating
                                                .2           .4     0




                                                                            1950                  1960                1970             1980                 1990
                                                                                                                     year

                                                                                                       TBVC areas             non-TBVC areas




Figure 3 presents lowess-smoothed outmigration rates from TBVC and non-TBVC areas over
time using Census data from 1948-1986. The y axis shows the average percent of adults who
outmigrate from a district in a given year, across all districts. Kernel is Epanechnikov, bandwidth
is 0.3.

                                                                                                                35
For Online Publication

Appendix 1: Data

1. Rainfall Data and Drought

The South African Weather Service http://www.weathersa.co.za/web/ provided the raw historical
rainfall data. These data contain monthly rainfall measures at the weather station level for over
1,600 weather stations across South Africa from 1920 to 2009. I spatially match the GIS
locations of rainfall stations to corresponding district boundaries and aggregate rainfall totals to
the district-year level.

To create a measure of drought, I construct the Standardized Precipitation Index (SPI) at the
district and year level (McKee, Doesken and Kleist 1993). The SPI measures the probability of
observing a recent rainfall event based on the distribution of all rainfall events for a given time
scale and place. Since rainfall is not normally distributed, the SPI procedure calls for a gamma
distribution to be fit to the empirical data distributions. I fit a gamma distribution to the annual
total rainfall of each district. and generate estimates of the scale and location parameters for
district-specific rainfall patterns. For each year in the data, and the district-specific gamma
distribution, I compute the probability of observing the total rainfall that was measured in each
year and translate this into a normally distributed random variable using the normal CDF. This
number is the district-year-specific SPI, where positive numbers reflect above-average rainfall
and negative values reflect below-average rainfall. The positive relationship between log rainfall
and the SPI measure across all districts is shown in Appendix Figure 1.

Following the climatological literature (e.g. McKee et al 1993) I define an indicator
DROUGHTdt for each district (d) and year (t) that takes a value of 1 when the SPI is less than -
1.5, and 0 otherwise. Appendix Figure 2 shows lowess-smoothed graphs of the district level
mean SPI values across TBVC and non-TBVC areas for the years 1948 to 1986.

There is a tight link between the SPI measure and South African maize production. Using
province-level data from the South African Maize Board for the period 1964 to 1984 and for the
commercial maize-growing provinces (Transvaal and the Orange Free State), I estimate the
relationship between the SPI measure and maize yields. Appendix Figure 3 shows the lowess-
smoothed relationship between the log of South Africa’s annual maize output (in tons) against
the Spatial Precipitation Index using an Epanechnikov kernel with a 0.5 bandwidth. This positive
relationship is asymmetric. Output appears more sensitive to low values of the SPI than it is to
higher, positive values of the SPI. Figure 3 suggests that drought in particular captures an
important negative productivity shock in agriculture.
                                                                      Appendix Figure 1

                                                      SPI and log annual rainfall for sample districts in sample years




                             4.5
         log annual rainfall
         3.5             4   3




                                          -4                             -2                     0                  2                        4
                                                                              value of spatial precipitation index
                                          Rainfall data are from South African National Weather Bureau stations.




                                                                      Appendix Figure 2

                                                                        Mean SPI over time and by TBVC area
                                     1
value of spatial precipitation index
     -.5         0  -1      .5




                                            1950                         1960                        1970                    1980       1990
                                                                                                   years

                                                                            TBVC areas                                 non-TBVC areas
                                         Rainfall data are from South African National Weather Bureau stations.




                                                                      Appendix Figure 3

                                                  Maize production and SPI in South Africa's maize-growing regions
                        16
    Ln Maize Production in tons
               15       14




                                         -2                      -1                       0                        1            2       3
                                                                                                      SPI
                                         bandwidth = .5
2. Homeland Boundary Data and the TBVC assignment

GIS data on sub-national boundaries for the 1996 and 2001 Census were obtained from Statistics
South Africa (www.statssa.gov.za). I use the 2001 district council Census boundaries as the main
geographic unit of observation since these areas are large enough to treat as distinct local labor
markets and contain sufficient population in each year to make aggregation feasible.1

To define which of these districts belong to former homeland areas, I obtained online maps of
the ten homelands with the predominant map dated 1986 (see Figure 1 in the main text). I
overlaid these homeland maps onto Census boundaries and, where there was overlap, assigned
districts to homelands. I created an indicator TBVCd that takes a value of 1 if a district
overlapped with any of the TBVC homelands, and is 0 for those districts overlapping the
remaining six homelands. 2 Of the 53 district councils in South Africa, 16 of them (30%) fall
into prior rural homeland areas. Of these 16 areas, six fall in the former TBVC areas and the
remaining 10 fall in the non-TBVC areas.

3. 1996 Census Data

The 10% sample of individual records from the 1996 South African Census was obtained from
Statistics South Africa (www.statssa.gov.za).

       i.       Migration variables

Migration is difficult to measure well using household survey data. The benefit of using Census
data is that it provides comprehensive coverage of migrant groups across the country, unlike
general household surveys that draw from a subset of districts. The coverage of the Census also
allows aggregation of migration data to broader geographic units (for our purposes, the district
level).

I use information from Census questions: “Where do you live now? Where did you live before
this? What year did you move here?” to construct migration variables. Specifically, I define:

           The district of current residence
           The district of former residence: this is the same as district of current residence for
            individuals who report never having moved, for individuals who have moved since the
            end of apartheid (1994-1996), for individuals who reported moving during childhood to
            their current residence, and for those who report moving within a district
            An indicator for whether a person moved before 1994 (the end of apartheid) and during
            their adult lives. This indicator is 1 if a person’s former residence differs from their
            current residence and if they report the year they moved to their current residence.


1
    Magisterial districts are too small to contain sufficient population and rainfall measurements for my analysis.
2
    TBVC stands for Transkei, Boputhatswana, Venda and the Ciskei.
The sample is restricted to African adults aged 18 and older in 1996 who report a current (for
never movers) or prior residence (for movers) in South Africa that is predominantly rural and
located in one of the former homeland areas. I eliminate individuals reporting a current residence
(for never movers) or a prior residence (for movers) in a district outside of any of the homelands,
and those who report living in (for never movers) or formerly living in (for movers) districts
outside of South Africa. Less than 1% of the sample has a usual residence outside South Africa
and less than 5% have a prior residence outside of South Africa. Of the remaining sample of
adults who report a former residence (for movers) or current residence (for never movers)
located in rural South Africa, 97% have complete information on current and former district of
residence and the year of moving to current residence. For the 3% who report a current residence
and no information about year of moving, I assign them to be non-movers.

Using the migration variables, I construct a pseudo-panel dataset of individual-year observations
capturing where each person lived in each year. This dataset indicates whether a person moved
out of a given district in any given year, based on their “last move” information and allows me to
observe the total number of adults (ages 18 and over) in each district in each year between 1948
and 1986 and the number who move away from each district in each year. I collapse the data to
district-year level and generate the percent of adults living in each district that migrated away in
each year. I use this district-year level dataset to describe historical outmigration from each
district in each year in Tables 1, 2 and Figure 2.

    ii.      Health, fertility and population outcomes

For the disability analysis, and for the analysis of cohort size and sex composition, I use the
sample of African adults who lived in any of the former homeland areas between 1948 and 1986.
I match the cross-sectional data on outcomes at the individual level to the drought data on year of
birth and prior district.

Note that the Census does not capture place of birth information, so I assume that a person’s
prior residence is their birth district. This means that birth district is potentially misclassified for
people who move multiple times.3

For the analysis of fertility and child mortality outcomes, I restrict the sample to African women
aged 40 to 60 in 1996 who have completed childbearing. I create a variable that represents the
fraction of their childbearing years (ages 15-40) that they experienced drought. I assign drought
exposure at the district level using the prior district reported by these women.
3
  Data from the 2007 South African Community Survey and the 2007 Cape Area Panel Study indicate that the
fraction of Africans who move more than once in the past five years is between 0.01 and 0.13 respectively. The
2007 Community Survey collects data on more than 300,000 African adults including their province of current and
prior residences. The 2007 Cape Area Panel Survey is a sample of young adults (ages 24-33) drawn from a province
with a highly mobile population, hence the higher rates of misclassification. Older data from the 1997 October
Household Survey corroborates these numbers: among African adults aged 15 and older in 1986, only about 4% of
them report moving at all across magisterial districts in any year prior to 1986. And, under 1% report multiple cross-
district moves during the apartheid period.
4. Baseline District-level control variables

To control for key district level variables that could contribute to differential responses of
disability rates to drought events, I create:

      District-level population density recorded in the 1946 South African Census. These data
       were digitized from hardcopies of Census aggregate reports and matched to later district
       boundaries
      The straight-line distance (in kilometers) from the midpoint of each district polygon to
       the nearest large city. Distances were calculated using 1996 Census maps in ArcGIS
       version 10
      A district’s median score on the FAO’s maize suitability index. This index captures how
       suitability land is for maize production at a fine grid level. I use these values to create the
       median value of the suitability index across all points in given district in ArcGIS. Low
       values of this number represent greater suitability of the soil for maize production



References

McKee, T. B., N. Doesken and J. Kleist 1993 “The relationship of drought frequency and
duration to time scales”, Preprints, 8th Conference on Applied Climatology, pp. 179–184.
January 17–22, Anaheim, California
                                                      Table 1: Summary Statistics for TBVC and Non-TBVC Areas
                                                             Sample means
                                                                           TBVC sample Non-TBVC         p -value of
                                                                 for all                                                                   N              Min.             Max.
                                                                               means      sample means difference
                                                               homelands
                                                                  Panel A: Individual-level Census data
Cohorts born 1948-1986
Drought in year of birth                                           0.067            0.073            0.062             0.720           655,532             0                 1
Fraction of infancy (in utero to age 4) in drought                 0.074            0.081            0.069             0.214           655,532             0                0.4
Age                                                                23.742           23.775           23.714            0.285           655,532             10               48
Female                                                             0.545            0.543            0.546             0.006           655,532             0                 1
Years of education                                                 6.356            6.426            6.295             0.202           641,575             0                15
Any serious disability                                             0.052            0.054            0.051             0.012           655,532             0                 1
Number of serious disabilities                                     0.057            0.059            0.054             0.000           655,532             0                 4
Sight disability                                                   0.023            0.024            0.022             0.003           655,532             0                 1
Speech/hearing disability                                          0.011            0.012            0.011             0.006           655,532             0                 1
Physical disability                                                0.014            0.015            0.014             0.148           655,532             0                 1
Mental disability                                                  0.007            0.008            0.007             0.000           655,532             0                 1
Female cohorts age 40-60 in 1996
Number of children ever born                                       4.793         4.909            4.688                0.000            79,532              0               23
Fraction of child-bearing years in drought                         0.071         0.076            0.067                0.023            79,532              0               0.4
                                                                          Panel B: District level data
Population density in 1946 (per km2)                               48.237        38.207           54.255                0.43              16               15               137
Remoteness: Distance to nearest large city (kms)                   33.247        36.466           31.316                0.62              16                7                77
Agricultural potential: maize suitability index (median)           6.563          7.000           6.300                 0.17              16               5                 9
Number of districts                                                  16              6              10
Number of birth years                                                39             39              39
Individual and district-level means for African respondents in the 1996 Census, 10% sample. TBVC stands for Transkei, Boputhatswana, Venda and Ciskei, the four earliest
homeland states. Non-TBVC indicates observations from districts in the remaining six homeland areas. Individual-level data includes people born 1948-1986 (age 10-48 in 1996)
who are currently or previously living in any districts formerly part of a homeland. Fertility data is reported for females who have completed childbearing in 1996, i.e. cohorts born
1936-1956. District controls include: population density measured in the 1946 national Census, distance to the nearest large city calculated using 1996 Census maps, and the
median value of the maize suitability index calculated from FAO data (higher values imply lower suitability). p -values from regressions of each variable on a TBVC indicator,
clustered on year of birth (Panel A) or not at all (Panel B).
                                    Table 2: Access to Migrant Networks in TBVC and Non-TBVC Areas
                                                                         All        TBVC      Non-TBVC
                                                                                                                                        Difference       p value
                                                                     homelands    homelands   homelands
During mobility restrictions 1948-1986
Annual adult outmigration rate                                          0.002       0.002       0.003                                    -0.0004          0.001
Cumulative outmigrants/Adult population in 1996                         0.101       0.090       0.111                                     -0.021          0.002

After repeal of mobility restrictions 1987-1993
Cumulative outmigrants/Adult population in 1996^                                    0.142             0.144             0.141             0.003           0.718
Share of households with any remittances~                                           0.452             0.390             0.499             -0.109          0.000
Mean monthly remittances in households with migrants (ZAR)~                        220.188           207.224           228.003           -20.779          0.141
Share of monthly household income from remittances~                                 0.261             0.265             0.256             0.009           0.276

Notes: Means are from 1996 Census data or from the 1993 SALDRU household survey data (~). Samples are restricted to African households in ex-homeland
areas. Census variables measured at district level between 1948-1986, or 1987-1993. SALDRU variables measured at household level in 1993 and weighted using
population weights. p -values for differences in means are shown with robust standard errors. Cumulative outmigrants/Adult population is the number of total adult
migrations recorded using last move data for relevant time period, divided by the total adult population in the district in 1996.
           Table 3: Main Effects of Drought Exposure in Early Childhood on Disabilities Later in Life and Cohort Size, 1948-1986
                                                   Full sample                     Male sample                     Female sample
                                               (1)               (2)           (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)
                                                                             Panel A: Any disability
Fraction early childhood in drought         0.002**                        0.003***                          0.001***
                                           (0.0004)                         (0.001)                          (0.0004)
Drought in birth year                                         0.003*                           0.004                             0.002
                                                              (0.002)                        (0.003)                           (0.002)
Birth year, district FE                         Y                 Y             Y                Y                Y                Y
District controls*Drought                       N                 Y             N                Y                N                Y
Mean of outcome                               0.053             0.053        0.051             0.051            0.053            0.053
N                                          655,532           655,532       298,475          298,475          357,057          357,057
                                                                        Panel B: Number of disabilities
Fraction early childhood in drought        0.002***                        0.003**                           0.002**
                                            (0.001)                         (0.001)                           (0.001)
Drought in birth year                                        0.004**                          0.006*                            0.003
                                                              (0.002)                        (0.003)                           (0.002)
Birth year, district FE                         Y                 Y             Y                Y                Y                Y
District controls*Drought?                      N                 Y             N                Y                N                Y
Mean of outcome                              0.057             0.057         0.055             0.055           0.058            0.058
N                                           655,532          655,532       298,475           298,475         357,057          357,057
                                                                            Panel C: Log cohort size
Fraction early childhood in drought          -0.007                         -0.011*                            -0.004
                                            (0.005)                         (0.006)                           (0.005)
Drought in birth year                                          -0.011                         -0.020                            -0.004
                                                              (0.038)                        (0.049)                           (0.032)
Birth year, district FE                         Y                 Y             Y                Y                Y                Y
District controls*Drought?                      N                 Y             N                Y                N                Y
Mean of outcome                               6.77              6.77         5.94              5.94             6.18             6.18
N                                              624               624          624               624              624              624

Robust standard errors clustered on the year of birth. Levels of significance: p<0.01***, p<0.05**, p<0.1*. Drought exposure is a binary variable constructed using
values of the Spatial Precipitation Index; fraction of infancy in drought is the fraction of years from in utero period to age 4 that the drought indicator equals one.
Sample restricted to 1996 Census data on individuals born between 1948 and 1986. Coefficient on fraction early childhood in drought evaluated at the mean of the
drought exposure variable (0.074 in Panels A and B; 0.06 in Panel C). All regressions contain a full set of birth year and district fixed effects.
           Table 4: Heterogeneous Effects of Drought Exposure in Early Childhood on Prevalence and Number of Disabilities Later in Life, 1948-1986
                                                    Full sample [N=655,532]            Male sample [N=298,475]             Female sample [N=357,057]
Dependent variable:                                      Any disability       Num. disabilities      Any disability       Num. disabilities      Any disability       Num. disabilities
                                                         (1)       (2)         (3)       (4)         (5)       (6)         (7)       (8)         (9)      (10)         (11)     (12)

Fraction early childhood in drought                    0.001**               0.002**               0.002**               0.002**                0.001*                0.001*
                                                       (0.000)               (0.001)                (0.001)              (0.001)                (0.001)               (0.001)
Fraction early childhood in drought*TBVC               0.001*                0.001**               0.002***              0.002**                0.0000                0.0006
                                                       (0.000)               (0.000)                (0.001)              (0.001)                (0.001)               (0.001)
Drought in birth year                                               0.001                 0.002                -0.001               0.0003                0.0029*               0.0028*
                                                                   (0.002)               (0.002)               (0.003)              (0.004)               (0.002)               (0.002)
Drought in birth year*TBVC                                          0.004                 0.005               0.0099**              0.0098*                -0.001               0.0001
                                                                   (0.002)               (0.003)               (0.004)              (0.005)               (0.002)               (0.002)

Birth year, district FE                                    Y          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y
p-values for F-tests
All drought parameters jointly =0                        0.00       0.02       0.00       0.06       0.02       0.01       0.03       0.12       0.02       0.16       0.01       0.22
Sum of Drought and Drought*TBVC=0                        0.00       0.01       0.00       0.02       0.01       0.10       0.01       0.15       0.01       0.50       0.00       0.25

Mean of outcome                                         0.052      0.052      0.056      0.056       0.051      0.051     0.055      0.055       0.053      0.053      0.057      0.057
Robust standard errors clustered on the year of birth. Levels of significance: p<0.01***, p<0.05**, p<0.1*. Drought exposure is a binary variable constructed using values of the Spatial
Precipitation Index; fraction of infancy in drought is the fraction of years from in utero period to age 4 that the drought indicator equals one ; TBVC indicates whether an individual
reports a prior district is TBVC or not. Sample restricted to 1996 Census data on individuals born between 1948 and 1986. Coefficient on fraction early childhood in drought evaluated
at the mean of this variable (0.074).
 Table 5: Heterogeneous Effects of Drought Exposure in Early Childhood on Prevalence and Number of Male Disabilities Later in Life - Robustness
                                                                    Checks
Dependent variable:                                                               Any disability                      Num. Disabilities
                                                                         (1)        (2)       (3)   (4)      (5)        (6)       (7)      (8)

Fraction early childhood in drought                                                       0.002**                 0.004**               0.002**                0.005**
                                                                                          (0.001)                 (0.002)               (0.001)                (0.002)
Fraction early childhood in drought*TBVC                                                  0.002**                 0.003**               0.002**                0.003**
                                                                                          (0.001)                 (0.001)               (0.001)                (0.001)
Drought in birth year                                                                                   -0.001                -0.008                 0.000                  -0.011
                                                                                                       (0.003)               (0.009)                (0.004)                (0.011)
Drought in birth year*TBVC                                                                            0.0099**               0.009**                0.0098*                0.009*
                                                                                                       (0.004)               (0.004)                (0.005)                (0.005)

Birth district, year fixed effects                                                           Y            Y          Y           Y          Y          Y          Y           Y
District controls interacted with drought measures                                           N            N          Y           Y          N          N          Y           Y
p-values for F-tests
All drought parameters jointly =0                                                          0.02          0.01       0.00       0.07        0.03       0.12       0.00       0.18
Sum of Drought and Drought*TBVC=0                                                          0.01          0.10       0.00       0.92        0.01       0.15       0.00       0.89
All district interactions with Drought=0                                                                            0.00       0.11                              0.00       0.04

Mean of outcome                                                                            0.051        0.051      0.051       0.051      0.055      0.055      0.055       0.055

Robust standard errors clustered on the year of birth. Levels of significance: p<0.01***, p<0.05**, p<0.1*. Drought exposure is a binary variable constructed using values of the
Spatial Precipitation Index; fraction of infancy in drought is the fraction of years from in utero period to age 4 that the drought indicator equals one; TBVC indicates whether an
individual reports their prior district is TBVC or not. District variables (population density in 1946, distance to the nearest city in kilometers, and the maize suitability index
where higher numbers indicate lower suitability) are each interacted with the relevant drought measure. Sample restricted to 1996 Census data on males born between 1948 and
1986 (N=298,475). Coefficient on fraction early childhood in drought evaluated at the mean of this variable (0.074).
          Table 6: Heterogeneous Effects of Drought Exposure in Early Childhood on Cohort Size, 1948-1986
Dependent variable                                        Ln cohort size           Ln males             Ln females
                                                          (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)       (5)        (6)
Fraction early childhood in drought                     -0.024                -0.040                -0.011
                                                       (0.023)               (0.031)               (0.020)
Fraction early childhood in drought*TBVC              -0.02***             -0.026***             -0.016***
                                                       (0.007)               (0.010)               (0.006)
Drought in birth year                                              -0.009                 -0.062                0.036
                                                                  (0.159)                (0.201)              (0.133)
Drought in birth year*TBVC                                         -0.048                 -0.079               -0.027
                                                                  (0.062)                (0.081)              (0.053)

Birth year, district FE                                                Y            Y            Y            Y            Y            Y
District variables*Drought controls                                    Y            Y            Y            Y            Y            Y
p-values for F-tests
All Drought, Drought*TBVC parameters jointly=0                        0.02        0.485         0.03        0.459         0.03        0.617

N                                                                     624          624          624          624          624          624
Robust standard errors clustered on the year of birth. p<0.01***, p<0.05**, p<0.1*. District controls described in summary statistics table.
Regressions are estimated using observations aggregated to the year of birth-first district level. Sample is restricted to cohorts born 1948-
1986 (ages 10-48) in 1996. Coefficients in 1, 3 and 5 are weighted by average fraction of early childhood years in drought (0.06).
Table 7: Heterogeneous Effects of Drought Exposure During Childbearing Years on Fertility
         Outcomes of African Women Who Have Completed Childbearing by 1996
Dependent variable                                   Number of children ever born

                                                             All                        Some
                                                                      No                           Some high
                                                         education                    primary
                                                                   education                         school
                                                           levels                      school
                                                             (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)
Fraction years in drought (ages 15-40)                      0.001     0.109             -0.138     -0.273***
                                                           (0.061)   (0.092)           (0.100)       (0.083)
Fraction years in drought (ages 15-40)*TBVC              -0.228*** -0.283***            -0.149        0.096
                                                           (0.084)   (0.107)           (0.188)       (0.100)
Birth year, district FE                                       Y         Y                 Y             Y

N                                                          70,836        33,312        15,852        19,952
Mean of outcome                                             4.79          4.96          5.11          4.35
Robust standard errors clustered on the year of mother's birth. p<0.01***, p<0.05**, p<0.1*. Sample
restricted to women who have completed childbearing in 1996 (ages 40-60). The fraction of years exposed to
drought during childbearing years is constructed using drought prevalence in the first district during the years
in which the woman is between age 15 and 40 inclusive (1951-1996). Sample is restricted to women who have
completed childbearing in the 1996 Census and who have at least one birth. Coefficients are evaluated at the
mean fraction of years in drought: 0.071.
  Table 8: Heterogeneous Effects of Drought Exposure in Early Childhood on Male Health Outcomes After Repeal of Legal
                                             Migration Barriers, 1987-1993
                                                            Sample [N=111,553]                    Sample [N=112]
Dependent variable:                               Any disability          Num. disabilities         Log cohort size
                                                (1)            (2)        (3)           (4)        (5)           (6)

Fraction early childhood in drought                        0.01***                         0.011***                          0.054
                                                           (0.004)                          (0.004)                         (0.052)
Fraction early childhood in drought*TBVC                    -0.001                           0.000                          0.016*
                                                           (0.002)                          (0.002)                         (0.007)
Drought in birth year                                                      0.018**                          0.024**                          0.106*
                                                                           (0.007)                          (0.007)                          (0.048)
Drought in birth year*TBVC                                                  -0.004                          -0.004*                           -0.001
                                                                           (0.002)                          (0.002)                          (0.006)

District controls*Drought measures                            Y                Y               Y               Y                Y               Y
Birth year, district FE                                       Y                Y               Y               Y                Y               Y
p-values for F-tests
All drought parameters jointly =0                            0.09            0.01            0.09            0.01             0.14            0.00
Sum of Drought and Drought*TBVC=0                            0.07            0.12            0.08            0.06             0.25            0.74

Mean of outcome                                              0.03            0.03            0.032           0.032            6.83            6.83
Robust standard errors clustered on the year of birth. Levels of significance: p<0.01***, p<0.05**, p<0.1*. Drought exposure is a binary variable
constructed using values of the Spatial Precipitation Index; fraction of infancy in drought is the fraction of years from in utero period to age 4 that
the drought indicator equals one ; TBVC indicates whether an individual reports a prior district is an historical TBVC area or not. Sample restricted
to 1996 Census data on males born between 1987 and 1993 (ages 3-9). Coefficient on fraction early childhood in drought evaluated at the mean of
this variable (.168 ).
                                Table 9: Effect of Drought in 1995 on Remittance Inflows to All Former Homelands in 1995
Dependent variable                                                              Any remittances received in 1995? [Mean=0.20]
                                                                                                    Households in former non-           Households in former TBVC
                                                               All households [N=222,355]
                                                                                                    TBVC areas [N=115,126]                  areas [N=107,229]
                                                                    (1)               (2)                (3)               (4)                (5)                (6)

Drought last year                                                 0.002              0.026             0.009              -0.003            -0.006             0.023
                                                                 (0.005)            (0.016)           (0.006)            (0.030)           (0.005)            (0.018)
Any migrant worker in HH?                                       0.413***           0.406***          0.391***           0.389***          0.436***           0.424***
                                                                 (0.021)            (0.023)           (0.024)            (0.025)           (0.036)            (0.042)
Drought last year*Any migrant worker from HH?                    0.027**           0.028***           0.033**            0.032**            0.021              0.022
                                                                 (0.009)            (0.009)           (0.011)            (0.011)           (0.015)            (0.015)
Fraction of 1948-1996 period in drought                          0.036**           0.048***            0.029              0.037*            0.049            0.062***
                                                                 (0.014)            (0.013)           (0.020)            (0.017)           (0.024)            (0.011)

District variables*Drought last year controls                        N                 Y                  N                 Y                  N                 Y
p-value for F-test
Sum of Drought and Drought*Migrant=0                               0.00               0.01              0.00               0.41              0.31               0.14
Robust standard errors clustered at the district level. p<0.01***, p<0.05**, p<0.1*. Sample restricted to 1996 Census data on households residing in one of the TBVC or non-
TBVC districts in 1996. Unit of observation is the household in 1996. Coefficient on fraction of 1948-1986 period in drought is multiplied by sample mean time in drought
(0.067). District control variables described in Summary Statistics table.
                                       Appendix Table 1: Simulating stocks of migrant networks
                                                        Panel A: Assumptions
Variable                                                    Value          Source     Details
Adult population in a representative homeland district      12,000     Census 1996    Own calculations
1+Annual adult African population growth rate               1.0225     Simkins 2011 Population growth 1904-1996
Average African household size                                 5       Simkins 2011 Calculated in the mid-1960s
Mean adults/household                                         2.5      Simkins 2011 Estimate from household structure
Annual adult outmigration rate, non-TBVC areas              0.25%      Census 1996    Own calculations, Table 1
Annual adult outmigration rate, TBVC areas                  0.21%      Census 1996    Own calculations, Table 1
                                                        Panel B: Simulations

           Adult Popt = (Popt-1*Growth
                                               N. Householdst = Adultst/Mean          Adult Outmigrantst=Annual
Period            Rate) - (Adult                                                                                         Cumulative Adult Outmigrants
                                                      Household Size                   Outmigration Rate*Popt
              Outmigrantst*Popt-1)

Area        Non-TBVC         TBVC           Non-TBVC           TBVC          Non-TBVC          TBVC                        Non-TBVC             TBVC
t=1          12,000.0       12,000.0           4,800.0         4,800.0          30.6             25.8                         30.6                25.8
2            12,239.4       12,244.2           4,895.8         4,897.7          31.2             26.3                         61.7                52.0
3            12,483.7       12,493.5           4,993.5         4,997.4          31.8             26.8                         93.5                78.8
4            12,732.8       12,747.8           5,093.1         5,099.1          32.4             27.4                        125.9               106.2
5            12,986.8       13,007.2           5,194.7         5,202.9          33.1             27.9                        159.0               134.1
6.…              ..             ..                ..              ..              ..              ..                           ..                  ..
T=39         25,423.7       25,805.7          10,169.5        10,322.3          64.7            55.4                        1,777.8             1,510.9
                                   Panel C: Stock of migrants associated with households at end of period
                                                                             Non-TBVC          TBVC
Cumulative number of outmigrants per adult population                           0.070           0.059
Share of households with a migrant: Assm 1 migrant per household                0.175           0.146
Share of households with a migrant: Assm 1.5 migrants per household             0.117           0.098
Notes: This table presents results of a simulation exercise that shows how low initial levels of annual adult outmigration, and small differences in these
levels across areas, can cumulate to much larger differences in share of households with migrants over a 39 year period. Panel B shows estimated number
of outmigrants per year in a representative ex-homeland district using the set of assumptions set out in Panel A. Panel C reports cumulative total migrants
for this district and by number of households in the district.
                    Appendix Table 2: Heterogeneous Effects of Drought Exposure in Early Childhood on Components of Male Disabilities
Dependent variable:                                      Sight disability [Mean=0.02]                        Physical disability [Mean=0.01]
                                                  (1)           (2)            (3)        (4)           (5)         (6)              (7)                                  (8)
Fraction early childhood in drought            0.001*                       0.002*                   0.001*                       0.002**
                                               (0.000)                      (0.001)                  (0.000)                      (0.001)
Fraction early childhood in drought*TBVC        0.000                        0.001                  0.001***                     0.002***
                                               (0.000)                      (0.000)                  (0.000)                      (0.000)
Drought in birth year                                         0.001                     0.006                     -0.001                                                 -0.007
                                                             (0.002)                   (0.005)                   (0.002)                                                (0.004)
Drought in birth year*TBVC                                   0.0042*                   0.005**                   0.0032*                                                 0.002
                                                             (0.002)                   (0.002)                   (0.002)                                                (0.002)
p-values for F-tests
All drought parameters jointly =0                0.05          0.04           0.24       0.08          0.00        0.11            0.00                                  0.04
Sum of Drought and Drought*TBVC=0                0.02          0.01           0.13       0.08          0.00        0.10            0.00                                  0.49

Birth year, district FE                                  Y              Y              Y            Y                     Y              Y               Y                 Y
District variables*Drought controls                      N              N              Y            Y                     N              N               Y                 Y
Dependent variable:                                          Hearing/speech disability [Mean=0.01]                                 Mental disability [Mean=0.01]
                                                         (1)           (2)            (3)          (4)                    (5)           (6)             (7)               (8)

Fraction early childhood in drought                   0.0004                           0.0004                          0.0003                           0.0013
                                                      (0.000)                          (0.001)                         (0.000)                          (0.001)
Fraction early childhood in drought*TBVC              0.0002                           0.0004                          0.0001                           0.0004
                                                      (0.000)                          (0.000)                         (0.000)                          (0.000)
Drought in birth year                                                   0.000                           -0.006                           0.000                           -0.004
                                                                       (0.001)                         (0.006)                          (0.001)                         (0.007)
Drought in birth year*TBVC                                              0.001                           0.000                            0.001                           0.001
                                                                       (0.001)                         (0.002)                          (0.002)                         (0.002)
p-values for F-tests
All drought parameters jointly =0                       0.02            0.56            0.38            0.24             0.10            0.68            0.39            0.75
Sum of Drought and Drought*TBVC=0                       0.01            0.29            0.39            0.45             0.05            0.38            0.18            0.75

Birth year, district FE                                  Y                Y               Y               Y               Y               Y                Y               Y
District variables*Drought controls                      N                N               Y               Y               N               N                Y               Y
Robust standard errors clustered on the year of birth. Levels of significance: p<0.01***, p<0.05**, p<0.1*. Drought exposure is a binary variable constructed using values of the
Spatial Precipitation Index; fraction of infancy in drought is the fraction of years from in utero period to age 4 that the drought indicator equals one; TBVC indicates whether an
individual reports a prior district is TBVC or not. District*Drought controls are: drought measure*population density in 1946, drought measure*distance to nearest city, and drought
measure*median value on maize suitability index. Sample restricted to 1996 Census data on males born between 1948 and 1986 (N=298,475). Coefficient on fraction early childhood
in drought evaluated at the mean of this variable (0.074).
                                     Appendix Table 3: Summary Statistics for TBVC and Non-TBVC Areas for Placebo sample
                                                             Sample means       TBVC
                                                                                          Non-TBVC             p -value of
                                                                 for all        sample                diff                                          N         Min.       Max.
                                                                                        sample means           difference
                                                               homelands        means
                                                                Panel A: Individual-level data
Cohorts born 1987-1993
Drought in birth year                                                    0.116           0.132         0.099          0.032         0.351        225,515        0          1
Fraction of infancy (in utero to age 4) in drought                       0.167           0.187         0.145          0.043         0.001        225,515        0         0.4
Age                                                                      5.990           5.986         5.995         -0.009         0.198        225,515        3          9
Female                                                                   0.502           0.503         0.500         0.002          0.246        225,515        0          1
Any serious disability                                                   0.029           0.030         0.027         0.004          0.006        223,829        0          1
Number of serious disabilities                                           0.030           0.032         0.029         0.003          0.012        223,829        0          4
Sight disability                                                         0.012           0.013         0.011         0.002          0.029        223,829        0          1
Speech/hearing disability                                                0.011           0.011         0.010         0.002          0.043        223,829        0          1
Physical disability                                                      0.006           0.006         0.006         0.0001         0.665        223,829        0          1
Mental disability                                                        0.002           0.002         0.002        -0.0001         0.619        223,829        0          1

Number of districts                                                        16              6             10
Number of birth years                                                      6               6             6
Individual and district-level means for African respondents in the 1996 Census, 10% sample. TBVC stands for Transkei, Boputhatswana, Venda and Ciskei, the four earliest
homeland states. Non-TBVC indicates observations from districts in the remaining six homeland areas. Individual-level data includes people born 1987-1993 (age 3-9 in 1996) who
are currently or previously living in any districts formerly part of a homeland. p -values from regressions of each variable on a TBVC indicator, clustered on year of birth.
               Appendix Table 4: Response of Crop Yields to Drought in TBVC and Non-TBVC Areas
                                 Ln maize yields in 1992   Ln all grain yields in 1992 Ln all crop yields in 1992
                                         (1)               (2)             (3)             (4)               (5)            (6)
Drought in 1992*TBVC                    0.104            -0.217          -0.028           -0.08            -0.419          1.103
                                       (0.484)          (0.454)         (0.513)          (0.490)          (0.466)         (0.986)
Drought in 1992                         0.235                             0.471                             0.471
                                       (0.453)                          (0.468)                           (0.403)
TBVC                                    0.608            0.366            0.535           0.248           0.752*           0.423
                                       (0.392)          (0.437)         (0.441)          (0.476)          (0.403)         (0.411)
Land size avail. for crops              0.001            0.002           0.001            0.002          0.012***        0.013***
                                       (0.001)          (0.002)         (0.001)          (0.002)          (0.001)         (0.002)
District fixed effects?                   N                Y                N               Y                 N              Y

Mean of outcome                          5.01            5.01             5.11             5.11            5.33             5.33
N                                        392             392              434              434             486              486
R2                                       0.04            0.14             0.03             0.11            0.04             0.10
Unit of observation is the household. Outcome is the natural log of the physical quantity (kilograms) of output of maize alone, all
grains combined (maize, sorghum and wheat) and all crops combined. Sample includes African households in ex-homeland districts
from 1993 Project on Standards of Living in South Africa who report doing any agriculture in the year before the survey. Results are
weighted using census weights. p<0.01***, p<0.05*, p<0.1*
