                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                  REVENUE TARIFF REFORM

                                         James E. Anderson
                                           J. Peter Neary

                                        Working Paper 19752
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19752


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2013




We are grateful to Richard Blundell, Ian Crawford, Rod Falvey, Udo Kreickemeier, Will Martin, and
participants at various seminars and conferences for helpful comments. Peter Neary thanks the European
Research Council for funding under the European Union's Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/
2007-2013), ERC grant agreement no. 295669. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19752.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by James E. Anderson and J. Peter Neary. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Revenue Tariff Reform
James E. Anderson and J. Peter Neary
NBER Working Paper No. 19752
December 2013
JEL No. F1,F13,H21

                                              ABSTRACT

What kind of tariff reform is likely to raise welfare in situations where tariff revenue is important?
Uncertainty about specification and risk from imprecise parameter estimates of any particular specification
reduce the credibility of simulation estimates. A promising alternative is to develop rules which are
robust with respect to such uncertainty. We present sufficient conditions for a class of linear rules
that guarantee welfare-improving tariff reform. The rules span cones of welfare-improving tariff reforms
consisting of convex combinations of (i) trade-weighted-average-tariff-preserving dispersion cuts;
and (ii) uniform tariff cuts that preserve domestic relative prices among tariff-ridden goods.


James E. Anderson
Department of Economics
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
james.anderson.1@bc.edu

J. Peter Neary
Department of Economics
University of Oxford
Manor Road Building
Oxford OX1 3UQ
United Kingdom
and CEPR
peter.neary@economics.ox.ac.uk
    What kind of tariff reform is likely to raise welfare in situations where tariff revenue is
important? We propose new operational guidelines for beneficial reform that are robust to
policy makers’ two sources of uncertainty about the economy: the proper specification of the
model economy and imprecision of estimates of supply and demand response parameters of
any particular specification. The guidelines provide a theoretical foundation for the standard
World Bank advice to developing country clients that they should reduce dispersion of tariffs
while maintaining average tariffs to preserve revenue.1 In plausible special cases the rules
involve only observable data and a small number of credibly knowable aggregate elasticities.
    Recent research (Anderson and Neary, 2007) provides guidelines for welfare-improving
tariff reform when government revenue is not a concern, as when the government hypo-
thetically has lump-sum tax/transfer power. The linear reform rules contained in a cone
of welfare-improving reforms were derived as implications of reform that reduced either or
both of two sufficient statistics, the generalized mean and generalized variance of the tariff
structure. We apply and extend the methods of Anderson and Neary to the case where the
government revenue constraint is active due to relaxing the lump-sum assumption.2 All gov-
ernment tax changes become costly at the margin because they involve distortions. The same
sufficient statistics prove useful in the case of an active revenue constraint, supplemented by
plausibly knowable aggregate elasticity conditions. In a big step toward applicability with
very limited information, Anderson and Neary also showed that in a special CES case, the
generalized mean and variance reduced to the readily observable trade-weighted version of
these statistics. The second contribution of the present paper is to demonstrate that ob-
servability of generalized moments obtains with weak separability, nesting not only the CES
but most other widely-used preference/technology demand systems. A group of goods such
as clothing under separability can contain pairs that are complements (shirts and trousers)
   1
     Baunsgaard and Keen (2010) review the empirical evidence on the revenue effects of trade liberalization,
and examine whether countries have managed to offset reductions in trade tax revenues by increasing their
domestic tax revenues in recent decades. They conclude that middle-income countries have succeeded in
doing so, but that many low-income countries have not.
   2
     Other studies of the interplay of revenue and efficiency considerations in trade policy reform include
Falvey (1994), Emran and Stiglitz (2005), and Hatta and Ogawa (2007).
and other pairs that are substitutes (cotton and silk shirts). The separable setting permits
another realistic extension to replace the representative agent with heterogeneous agents
while maintaining feasible observable rules that yield Pareto improvement.
        Replacing border taxes with domestic consumption taxation is often advocated.3 Ander-
son (1999) shows that gradual reform of this type need not improve welfare when uniform
radial reductions are used to lower tariffs. The present paper admits a much broader class
of trade reforms when domestic consumption taxation is the alternative revenue source and
provides more optimistic prospects for tariff reform which reduces dispersion. Section 1 sets
up the model. Section 2 analyzes trade reform and derives the main results of the paper.
Section 3 extends the results to the case of many households. Section 4 concludes.



1         Equilibrium and the Effects of Tariffs and Taxes

A small open economy raises its revenue with a set of tariffs and with a wage tax. The wage
tax is distortionary because labor supply is variable (due to household choice in an economy
where immigration is shut down) and leisure cannot be taxed. Tariffs and the wage tax are
initially set suboptimally. The objective of the reform is to move the taxes gradually toward
their optimal (Ramsey) values. This section first describes the economy and then shows how
tariff changes affects welfare and tariff revenue. These results are the key building blocks for
our results on tariff reform in Section 2.
        The representative consumer’s net expenditure function is given by e(π, w, u): u is the
real income of the representative consumer, π is the vector of the prices of traded goods
subject to tariffs, and w is the net-of-tax wage rate. Implicit in the list of arguments is the
price of a composite export good, which we take as numéraire so its price can be set equal to
one. By Shephard’s Lemma, −ew gives labor supply while eπ gives the vector of final demand
    3
    See for example, Hatzipanayotou, Michael, and Miller (1994), Keen and Ligthart (2002), and Kreicke-
meier and Raimondos-Møller (2008). The intuitive argument that the base is broader can be supplemented
with optimality considerations. Diamond and Mirrlees (1971) demonstrated that it is inefficient to distort
productive efficiency when raising revenue with distortionary taxation. Trade taxes, by subsidizing produc-
tion, drive a wedge between domestic and international marginal rates of transformation.

                                                    3
for traded goods. The GDP function is given by g(π, w + t), where t is the tax on labor
income. By Hotelling’s Lemma, the vector of supply of traded goods (or where appropriate,
minus the demand for traded inputs) is given by gπ while −gw gives labor demand.
      The trade expenditure function for this economy is defined as the excess of domestic
expenditure over GDP, with the added constraint that the labor market clears in the back-
ground:4
                           E(π, t, u) = max [e(π, w, u) − g(π, w + t)] .                            (1)
                                           w


E gives the net transfer to the private sector needed to support utility u when domestic prices
of traded goods are set at π and the wage tax is set at t. Shephard’s and Hotelling’s Lemmas
imply that the labor market clears (ew = gw ), so Et = −gw is equilibrium employment, and
that Eπ is the vector of excess demand for traded goods. Since e − g is concave in (π, w, t),
E is concave in (π, t): compensated net import demand functions are downward-sloping.
      The private-sector budget constraint is:


                                         E(π, t, u) − s = 0.                                        (2)


Here, s is the transfer from the government to the private sector. If s is an active policy
instrument, the government has lump-sum power. Otherwise, it is simply an exogenous
transfer, which also serves as a useful analytic link between the private-sector and government
budget constraints.
      The government budget constraint expresses the requirement that a given amount of
revenue must be raised net of subsidies. Taxes are collected on tradable goods at rates
π − π ∗ and on labor at the rate t, where π ∗ denotes the fixed vector of world prices of the
taxed tradable goods. The government budget constraint is given by:


                           R(π, t, u, s) ≡ (π − π ∗ )0 Eπ + tEt − s ≥ R0 .                          (3)
  4
    See Anderson and Neary (2007) for the trade expenditure function when labor supply is fixed, and for
further references.


                                                   4
Here, R0 represents the government’s revenue requirement, to fund public goods, repay
foreign loans, or for some other purpose which does not directly affect private-sector decisions.
      To clarify the implications of this setup, contrast it with the standard setting in the theory
of piecemeal trade policy reform, where it is implicitly assumed that any revenue change is
actively lump-sum transferred between private-sector and government budgets. Then the
government budget constraint (3) can be solved for the active transfer s. The result is
substituted into the private-sector constraint (2) to form the social budget constraint, or
balance of trade constraint with the rest of the world: net expenditure by the private sector
must be matched by tax revenue less government spending:5


                               E(π, t, u) = s = (π − π ∗ )0 Eπ + tEt − R0 .                     (4)


Here the government’s revenue requirement is not an independent constraint on policy-
making because the transfer s adjusts endogenously. This makes a crucial difference for
evaluation of tariff reform: equation (4) leads to the standard results of piecemeal trade
policy reform, augmented to allow for an exogenous wage tax. (Details are sketched in
Appendix A.)
      In our setting, by contrast, lump-sum transfers are infeasible, so the gradual reform
problem is to determine welfare-improving directions of change in the set of reformable
tariffs, equivalent to changes in π, while at the same time not decreasing revenue. One class
of reforms takes the wage tax as given and examines tariff reform that raises both welfare and
revenue. A more ambitious class of tariff reforms permits the wage tax to vary endogenously
in order to maintain government revenue. To maintain revenue exactly, t must change to
offset the movement in π. Assuming the government budget constraint is strictly binding,
this implies the endogenous wage tax function:


                                t(π, u, s, R0 ) = t : R(π, t, u, s) = R0 .
                                                 
                                                                                                (5)
  5
      All vectors are column vectors and a prime denotes a transpose.


                                                     5
1.1       Tariff Changes Only

Differentiating the private budget constraint (2) with t and s fixed shows that real income
measured in expenditure units is directly reduced by increases in import prices:


                                           Eu du = −Eπ0 dπ.                                          (6)


Similarly differentiating the government budget constraint (3) and using (6) to eliminate
Eu du yields:


                 dR = Rπ dπ + Ru du = (1 − RI )Eπ0 dπ + [(π − π ∗ )0 Eππ + tEtπ ] dπ.                (7)


The coefficient of real income in the first term depends on RI ≡ Ru /Eu = (π − π ∗ )0 Eπu /Eu +
tEtu /Eu , which denotes the derivative of revenue with respect to nominal income given the
tax structure. We will assume, as is natural, that this is positive and less then one. A host
of arguments has been raised in the literature on piecemeal policy reform to defend this
presumption; the term 1 − RI is the “Hatta (1977) normality term” or the inverse of the
“shadow price of foreign exchange.” Normality suffices, as does homotheticity or a standard
stability condition.6 Violation of the presumption would be perverse indeed, since it would
imply that a gift of foreign exchange to the private sector, enabling a rise in real income,
would at constant prices π either reduce government revenue or raise it by more than the
value of the gift. In the presence of lump-sum redistribution, moreover, a negative value of
RI would imply that gifts make the economy worse off.
       Comparing the first term on the right-hand side of (7) with (6) reveals the tension between
private and public spending: more for the government means less for the private sector. The
second term can, however, be positive by enough to offset the first term, permitting a rise in
both real income and revenue. This possibility arises from reforms that remove inefficiency
                                                         0
   6
   In the homothetic case, RI = Ru /Eu reduces to T a π eπ /e − T w (w + t)gw /e, the average tax rate on
goods and employment as a share of total expenditure.



                                                   6
in the tariff structure. Below, we characterize such possibilities in terms of tariff moments.


1.2    The Marginal Cost of Funds

When we turn to consider choices between different forms of taxation, it is useful to express
our results in terms of the Marginal Cost of Funds of different instruments. Consider the cost
to the government of supporting the representative agent’s real income u with a hypothetical
subsidy ds when the wage tax t changes to raise revenue R by one dollar. From the private-
sector budget constraint (2), the hypothetical compensating subsidy is ds = Et dt; while from
                                                                                          1
the public-sector budget constraint (3), the required change in the wage tax is dt =      Rt
                                                                                             dR.
Combining gives ds/dR = Et /Rt which we define as µt , the Marginal Cost of raising a dollar
of public Funds using instrument t. Similar operations define the marginal cost of funds for
every other instrument such as πi . That is, one at a time, raise a marginal dollar of public
funds with typical instrument πi , implicitly requiring a tax change 1/Rπi , with compensating
hypothetical subsidy ds to the representative agent of µπi , equal to Eπi /Rπi .
   What is the likely magnitude of the marginal cost of funds? We assume that µt is positive,
since otherwise the problem of how to cut tariffs without reducing revenue is trivial; the
numerator Et is the tax base, while the denominator Rt is positive provided the economy
lies below the maximum of the Laffer Curve. From (3), the full expression for Rt is:


                                Rt = Et + (π − π ∗ )0 Eπt + tEtt .                           (8)


Recalling that E is concave in t, the direct substitution effect of a wage tax on labor supply
Ett tends to reduce Rt below Et , and so encourages a value for the social cost of funds greater
than one. This could be offset by the cross effect: if leisure is a complement for imports, so
Eπt is positive, a rise in t increases tariff revenue, encouraging a value for the social cost of
funds less than one. However, values greater than one are typically found in applied studied
and must be considered the norm. Similar considerations, mutatis mutandis, apply to the


                                                7
magnitude of the marginal cost of funds of any other tax instrument.


1.3     Tariff Changes Compensated by Wage Tax Changes

Our second approach to tariff reform ensures revenue neutrality because tariff changes are
compensated by wage tax changes. Thus we analyze reform of tariffs compensated by changes
in t that solve the government budget constraint for given R0 . This implies a reduced-form
social budget constraint, which results from substituting the endogenous wage tax function
(5) into the private-sector budget constraint (2):


                                     E π, t(π, u, s, R0 ), u − s = 0
                                                           
                                                                                                         (9)


The differential of this can be rewritten by replacing tπ with −Rπ /Rt and tu with −Ru /Rt
and using µt :
                            1 − µt RI Eu du = −µt dR0 − Eπ0 − µt Rπ0 dπ.
                                                                   
                                                                                                        (10)

Including a change in the revenue requirement R0 shows that the term 1−µt RI is the shadow
price of foreign exchange modified for the endogeneity of the wage tax. As in Section 1.1, we
assume this is positive: a negative value would imply that a gift to the economy, permitting
a cut in the revenue requirement R0 , would lower real income.7 Factoring out the scalar
elements of Eπ , and using µπi ≡ Eπi /Rπi , (10), with dR0 = 0, becomes:

                                                X
                            1 − µt RI Eu du = −   1 − µt /µπi Eπi dπi .
                                                            
                                                                                                        (11)
                                                         i


The intuitive implication of (11) is that reducing all elements πi associated with µπi > µt
and increasing all elements for which the inequality is reversed will produce a surplus. This
in turn causes an increase in real income, provided the shadow price of foreign exchange is
   7
    Empirically, requiring 1 − µt RI to be positive is more demanding than before, given that µt is likely to
be greater than one. On the other hand, empirical studies typically find relatively low values of the labor
supply elasticity, hence low µt is plausible.



                                                     8
positive.
    Equation (10), with dR0 = 0, can alternatively be written as follows:


                1 − µt RI Eu du = µt − 1 Eπ0 + µt (π − π ∗ )Eππ + µt tEtπ dπ.
                                                                      
                                                                                           (12)


This provides an insightful contrast with the usual results in the theory of piecemeal tariff
reform when lump-sum taxes are available (see, for example, equation (32) in Appendix A),
and it clearly reduces to them when labor supply is fixed so a wage tax is effectively lump-
sum (µt = 1 and Etπ = 0). However, saying more about the tariff reform problem using
(12) as it stands is challenging. Instead, we turn in the next section to extend the tools of
Anderson and Neary (2007) to the present context.



2     Tariff Moments and Tariff Reform

The tariff reform problem is to advise on directions of change of tariffs from initial values.
Full optimization is not feasible by assumption.
    Assume, plausibly, that the analyst has at least some information about the economy.
We seek to characterize cones of welfare-improving tariff reform that are sufficient under
limited information. The information set assumed here includes the knowledge that the
economy has a price-taking representative agent with convex technology and preferences,
and that there are no distortions other than those of taxes. The information set includes
some additional knowledge about the specification of technology and preferences and about
the structure of taxes and their implications that is spelled out below. This knowledge may
include whether tariffs are on average over or under-utilized, in the sense that a uniform
absolute tariff change (one that preserves domestic relative prices) has a marginal cost µT
which is greater or less than the alternative source of funds µt .
    A diagram illustrating the case of two goods subject to tariffs aids intuition. In Figure 1,
initial tariffs are such that domestic prices equal π A . Optimal revenue tariffs imply Ramsey-

                                               9
                      1




                                                   .R         .A
                                    F.                              dTa = 0




                       O
                                                                                  2


                               Figure 1: The Tariff Reform Problem
                  A is the initial point, F is free trade, R is the Ramsey optimum


optimal prices π R . These are associated with points A and R respectively. The locus drawn
through point A is an iso-welfare contour, implicitly defined by the social budget constraint
(9) for given (u0 , s, R0 ). As drawn, the locus encloses a convex set of π’s and is upward-
sloping at A, but these properties are neither necessary to the analysis nor particularly to
be expected. The tariff reform problem is to devise rules which will improve welfare under
limited information; directions of change for π that bring the economy closer to R in the
sense of attaining a higher iso-welfare contour.8


2.1     Tariff Moments

The key intermediate step in the analysis of trade reform is a decomposition of the effect of
tariff changes into their effect on various moments of the distribution of tariffs. Anderson and
Neary (2007) examine welfare-improving directions of tariff reform in the case where revenue
considerations are unimportant, so µt = 1. Here we extend their moments decomposition
technique to the revenue tariff problem. Table 1 summarizes the notation.
   8
     Atkinson and Stern (1974) show in a similar setting that, as the permitted level of lump-sum taxation
rises, there exists a path from R to the first-best optimum F along which welfare increases steadily. Here
we are interested in characterizing the desired direction from an arbitrary initial point A towards R.



                                                   10
 Name                                  Symbol                     Structure
                                                              0
 Government Revenue Function R(π, t, s, u)  (π − π ∗ ) Eπ (π, t, u) + tEt (·) − s
 Substitution Effects Matrix    Eππ                  Negative definite
                                             πEππ π                       0
 Substitution Weights Matrix     S         − π0 E π positive definite, ι Sι = 1
                                                 ππ
                                                             0
 Generalized Mean Tariff         T̄                         ι ST
 Trade-weighted Average Tariff  Ta                      Eπ0 πT /Eπ0 π
 Cross-weighted Average Tariff  Tθ                   Etπ (π − π ∗ )/Etπ π
                                                          0         0
 Own Elasticity                   η                   −π Eππ π/π Eπ
 Cross Elasticity                 θ                       Etπ π/Et
 Employment Elasticity           ω                  −d ln Et /d ln(w + t)
                                   t
                                                                            −1
 MCF for wage tax                µ            Et /Rt = 1 − T w ω + T θ θ
                                                                             −1
 MCF for scalar T reform        µT           Eπ0 π/Rπ0 π = 1 − ηT + λt θ

                                        Table 1: Notation



   We begin by defining “tariff factors,” tariffs measured as a proportion of domestic prices:
Ti ≡ (πi −πi∗ )/πi . These can be written in matrix form as: T = π −1 (π −π ∗ ), where π denotes
a diagonal matrix formed from the vector π. The analog for the wage tax is T w ≡ t/(w + t).
Following Anderson and Neary (2007), we define the generalized mean tariff T and the
generalized variance of tariffs V as a weighted average and variance respectively of the tariff
factors T :


              T ≡ ι0 ST = π 0 Eππ (π − π ∗ )/π 0 Eππ π,   V ≡ (T − ιT )0 S(T − ιT )        (13)


The weights are normalized elements of the substitution effects matrix Eππ : the positive
definite weighting matrix S is defined by S ≡ −s−1 πEππ π, where s ≡ −π 0 Eππ π > 0 is
the normalization coefficient for the substitution effects matrix, and ι is a vector of ones.
The normalization implies that ι0 Sι = 1. The focus in the present paper on the revenue
constraint and endogenous labor supply requires that we define two further average tariffs:
the trade-weighted average tariff and the cross-weighted average tariff, where the weights




                                                 11
are the cross-elasticities between leisure and each good:


                            T a ≡ Eπ0 πT /Eπ0 π,    T θ ≡ Etπ (π − π ∗ )/Etπ π                          (14)


As for changes in trade policy, we define the changes in tariff moments as Laspeyres-type
approximations, using initial trade shares and responses as weights:


  dT ≡ ι0 SdT ,      dV ≡ 2T 0 SdT − 2T dT ,       dT a ≡ Eπ0 πdT /Eπ0 π,     dT θ ≡ Etπ dπ/Etπ π, (15)


where dT ≡ π −1 dπ. Except for the trade-weighted average tariff, all these generalized
moments and their changes are complicated functions of consumer and producer behavior.
Nonetheless, they summarize the implications of the full matrices of aggregate demand and
supply responses in an intuitive and parsimonious way. They are analogous to the shadow
price of foreign exchange: typically it was thought necessary to make strong assumptions
about income effects, such as requiring all goods to be normal, before Hatta (1977) showed
how they could be summarized in a convenient way.9 In the same way, the generalized tariff
moments provide a set of sufficient statistics for the substitution effects in the economy.
As we will show, analytic expressions in changes in generalized means and variances help
formulate linear tariff change rules that guarantee welfare improvement even in the absence
of detailed information about substitution effects.
       Notice that whereas T a > 0 so long as imports are not heavily subsidized, the generalized
mean tariff need not necessarily be positive even with all positive tariffs. Being able to assume
a positive generalized mean turns out to be important for our approach to the assessment of
the welfare implications of tariff changes when information is limited. Fortunately, a negative
generalized mean is an unlikely perverse case.10 In the remainder of this paper we assume
   9
     Foster and Sonnenschein (1970) assumed that all goods were normal, which we now know is far stronger
than needed to obtain results about piecemeal policy reform. Bruno (1972) seems to have been the first to
appreciate that income effects could be summarized in a single parameter.
  10
     Anderson and Neary (2007) show that T̄ is positive if all tariff rates are equal or if all goods subject
to tariffs are general-equilibrium substitutes for the numéraire (which, with variable labor supply, must be


                                                     12
that the generalized mean tariff is positive.
    An important special case of preferences and technology provides a very illuminating
and convenient illustration of the generalized moments and their relationship to the trade-
weighted moments. Suppose that the group of goods with price vector π enters preferences
and technology separably:11

Definition 1. The trade expenditure function is implicitly separable in goods and leisure
when: E(π, t, u) = F [φ(π, u), t, u], where the function φ(π, u) is concave and homogeneous
of degree one in π.

Separability is a very common assumption in applied work with both econometric and sim-
ulation modeling. Appendix B shows that all our present argument can be applied to any
separable group while more general substitution possibilities continue to govern relationships
between groups. The payoff to assuming separability is that it implies that both generalized
average tariffs equal the observable trade-weighted average tariff:

Proposition 1. Under separable preferences or technology as defined above, both the general-
ized mean tariff and the cross-weighted average tariff are equal to the trade-weighted average
tariff: T = T θ = T a . The second result also holds if either one of preferences or technology
is separable in goods and leisure.

Proof From the definition of T :


                                       T = −s−1 π 0 Eππ (π − π ∗ ).                                     (16)


For the separable case, using the homogeneity of φ, π 0 Eππ = Fφ π 0 φππ + Fφφ π 0 φπ φ0π = Fφφ φφ0π ,
extended to general-equilibrium substitutes for the composite commodity made up of the numéraire and
leisure). With a zero wage tax, negative T̄ implies µT < 1, hence welfare increases with a rise in the tariff
because marginal dead weight loss is actually negative. Replacing lump-sum taxes with a uniform absolute
rise in tariffs would be welfare-increasing. If exports or imports are heavily subsidized, the perverse case
becomes more likely, but this perversity is also likely to show up in a negative value for T a .
   11
      See Anderson and Neary (1992) for further discussion.




                                                     13
s = −π 0 Eππ π = −Fφφ φ2 , and therefore:


                                        T = φ0π (π − π ∗ )/φ = T a .                                     (17)


A similar though slightly more elaborate proof shows that T θ = Etπ (π − π ∗ )/Etπ
                                                                                0
                                                                                   π = T a.
Under separability, the group of goods aggregated in the price index φ enter either preferences
or technology. In general, Etπ = −gwπ − gww wπ and wπ = −(ewπ − gwπ )(eww − gww ). With
separability, either ewφ = 0 or gwφ = 0, but in either case Etπ is proportional to φπ . Then
like terms cancel in forming T θ and the unlike terms give the trade weights.

This proposition is a significant generalization of Anderson and Neary (2007), who showed
that T equals T a in a special case where tariffed imports were final goods imperfectly substi-
tutable with domestic production, and preferences were CES. Separability is a considerably
weaker sufficient condition.12


2.2     Tariff Changes Only

With tariff reform restricted to tariff changes only, the task is to find directions of im-
provement that raise welfare and/or revenue without lowering either one. We reexpress the
differentials of the private and government budget constraints (6) and (7) in terms of the
generalized moments of the tariff structure:13


                                           Eu du/Eπ π = −dT a                                            (18)

                                                                          
                                                              1
                      dR/Eπ π = (1 − RI ) dT a − η            2
                                                                dV   + T dT + λt θdT θ .                 (19)
  12
     The CES case also yields a simple observable expression for the generalized variance of tariffs. No such
simplification is possible for the much wider class of weakly separable preferences or technology, but none is
needed for our purposes.
     To derive (19), we use: (π − π ∗ )0 Eππ dπ = T 0 πEππ πdT = −sT 0 SdT = −s 12 dV + T dT =
  13
                                                                                                         

−η 12 dV + T dT Eπ0 π.
                  




                                                     14
Here we introduce two new elasticities, which summarize the effects of a uniform change in
goods prices: η ≡ −π 0 Eππ π/Eπ0 π = s/Eπ0 π is the own-elasticity of the π group with respect to
an equiproportionate change in π; while θ ≡ Etπ π/Et is the cross-elasticity of employment
with respect to an equiproportionate change in π. We also use λt ≡ tEt /Eπ0 π to denote
wage-tax revenue relative to the value of imports.
   Equations (18) and (19) show how the informational requirements are reduced relative
to only five parameters (not counting the easily observable T a and λt ): still substantial,
but a major economy of information relative to the full matrices needed to understand and
calibrate equations (6) and (7). Equation (18) implies that the change in money metric utility
as a percent of trade expenditure is equal to minus the change in the trade-weighted average
tariff. Equation (19) reveals that revenue must fall with a fall in T a , unless compensated by
changes in the other tariff moments. What type of tariff structure changes can induce both
welfare and revenue to rise?14
   Reductions in the generalized variance must always increase revenue, all else equal. Mean-
preserving reductions in dispersion are thus attractive if it is feasible to preserve all three
means (T a , T , T θ ). When the group of tariff-ridden goods being reformed enters preferences
or technology separably, the three first moments are all equal, from Proposition 1. Then,
under separability, cuts in tariff dispersion that preserve the trade-weighted average tariff
will raise revenue.
   Anderson and Neary (2007) show that a uniform absolute tariff cut is attractive because it
raises both welfare and market access (the value of imports at world prices). Unfortunately, it
ordinarily must reduce revenue. The uniform absolute reduction reform, dT = −ιdα, brings
about a uniform proportional reduction in domestic prices, dπ = −πdα, so imported goods
constitute a Hicksian composite commodity. Such a reform leaves dispersion unchanged
(dV = 0) and reduces all three average tariffs by the same proportion: dT a = dT = dT θ =
 14
    In contrast, Anderson and Neary (2007) show that welfare and “market access” (trade volume) are
moved in the same direction by changes in T but in opposite directions by changes in variance V .




                                                15
−dα. Revenue changes by:


                    dR/Eπ0 π = − 1 − RI − ηT + λt θ dα = − 1/µT − RI dα.
                                                                   
                                                                                                   (20)


Here we use µT to denote the marginal cost of funds of the group of tariff-ridden goods,
which, by the composite commodity theorem, can be treated as if it were a single good when
prices move equiproportionately:

                                                                      −1
                                   µT ≡ Eπ0 π/Rπ0 π = 1 − ηT + λt θ                                (21)


As discussed in Section 1.2, there is a presumption that the marginal cost of funds is greater
than one for each individual good, so it must be considered highly unlikely that this marginal
cost of funds of a composite group could be less then one. We also expect RI , the effect
of a unit gift of foreign exchange on government revenue, to lie between zero and one, as
discussed in Section 1.1. Given this, the sign of the right-hand side of (20) is ambiguous,
although there is a presumption that the direct price effect 1/µT outweighs the income effect
RI : uniform absolute reductions ordinarily imply that revenue falls.15
       Pulling together results:

Proposition 2. (i) Under separability, trade-weighted average preserving cuts in tariff dis-
persion raise revenue while not harming welfare.
(ii) Uniform absolute reductions in T raise both welfare and market access but have an am-
biguous effect on revenue.

Considering that very large dispersion is common in tariff structures, even in countries
that raise a substantial portion of government revenue from tariffs, the proposition implies
considerable scope for efficiency improvement from dispersion cuts. Absolute tariff cuts with
dispersion constant decrease revenue and this creates a presumption against average tariff
  15
     In the neighbourhood of zero taxation, µt = 1 and RI = 0, implying that quite substantial levels of
tariffs and taxes are necessary for revenue to rise.


                                                   16
reductions as part of a reform package when tariff revenue is important (i.e., when tariffs are
the only instrument).


2.3    Tariff Reform with Compensating Wage Tax Changes

Tariff reform advice has more scope for efficiency gains when the wage tax t can be changed
so as to hold revenue constant. Advice remains problematic because information about the
expected values and standard errors of MCF’s of the various tariffs and taxes is limited.
What rules can be derived which are robust to the analyst’s restricted information about
the MCF’s of individual tariffs?
   The method of this paper advances beneficial revenue tariff reform guidelines by applying
the tariff moment definitions. Reexpressing equation (10) with dR0 = 0 in terms of tariff
moments gives:

               1 − µt RI             t        a     t
                                                                       + µt λt θdT θ .
                                                                     
                         E u du = (µ   − 1)dT   − µ   η dV /2 + T dT                       (22)
                 Eπ0 π

The first term on the right-hand side of (22) is increasing in the trade-weighted average tariff
provided that µt > 1. This term gives the revenue effect of the tariff change at constant
quantities demanded, without substitution effects. The second term gives the effect of tariff
changes acting through within-group substitution effects, all multiplied by the own-price
elasticity of the composite imported good, η. It is decreasing in the generalized variance
and, provided T > 0, in the generalized mean. The third term gives the cross effect on
revenue due to the change in the cross-weighted average tariff T θ multiplied by the leisure-
goods cross-elasticity θ.
   What combinations of assumed information and rules for tariff changes are likely to
improve welfare in this case? The general expression (22) provides useful clues. First,
variance reduction is useful, all else equal. Second, the uniform absolute reduction reform
is once again an important benchmark. Proposition 2 (ii) shows that it usually reduces


                                                 17
revenue. Can a wage-tax increase compensate and still permit a real income gain? In this
case equation (22) reduces to:

                             1 − µt RI Eu du
                                             = 1 − µt /µT                                             (23)
                               Eπ0 π    dα
                                                = 1 − µt (1 − ηT + λt θ).                             (24)


As discussed in the last section, µT , the composite marginal cost of funds of the group of
tariff-ridden goods, is presumptively positive. What of µt , the marginal cost of funds of the
employment tax? Using (8), we can write it in terms of generalized moments as:

                                                                    −1
                                 µt ≡ Et /Rt = 1 − T w ω + T θ θ          ,                           (25)


where ω ≡ −d ln Et /d ln(w + t) is the general-equilibrium elasticity of employment with
respect to the tax t.16 As the detail on ω illustrates, general results on the sign of 1−µt /µT are
not possible and empirical evidence is sparse.17 However, it seems plausible that µt /µT < 1,
a tariff is less efficient than the alternative distortionary tax. For example, this is the finding
of Erbil (2004) in a simulation exercise comparing the MCF of trade taxes with consumption
taxes for a number of countries. From equation (23), this is all we need to assume to be
confident that combining reductions in dispersion with scalar cuts in tariffs offers room for
welfare- and revenue-improving reforms that are robust to our very substantial uncertainty
about economic structure.
       For more general results that can cover more of the complexity of actual tariff changes,
it is very helpful to consider a more general radial tariff reform rule introduced by Anderson
  16
      In general equilibrium, the wage tax affects employment both directly and by changing the wage. Ap-
plying the implicit function theorem to the labor-market clearing condition ew (π, w, u) = gw (π, w + t, v)
yields dw/dt = gww /(eww − gww ). A rise in the wage tax alters employment Et = −gw by dEt /dt =
−gww (1 + dw/dt). Then −d ln Et /d ln(w + t) = (w + t)(gww eww )/[gw (eww − gww )] > 0 by the concavity of
e, convexity of g, and gw = −Et < 0.
   17
      An important benchmark is optimality, the solution to the Ramsey problem. This requires that the
MCF be equal for all π, and equal to the MCF for the alternative source of tax revenue, in this case the
wage tax.



                                                    18
and Neary (2007), dT = −(T − βι)dα. This implies an equiproportionate change in the gap
between all tariff rates and an arbitrary uniform tariff rate, denoted by β. A rise in α always
lowers variance and will lower any average tariff provided it is greater than β.18 This general
linear path is a combination of uniform absolute and uniform proportional changes in tariffs.
It is also a convex combination of uniform absolute tariff changes and trade-weighted mean
preserving variance changes.19 Along the linear path:

       1 − µt RI Eu du
                       = (1 − µt )(T a − β) + µt ηV + µt ηT (T − β) − λt θ(T θ − β) .
                                                                                  
           0
                                                                                                (26)
         Eπ π     dα

Then using µT > 1 (so ηT > λt θ) and additionally supposing that T ≥ T θ ≥ β, the
expression in square brackets must be positive. In particular, setting the tariff change rule
such that β = T a , welfare rises with α whenever T ≥ T θ ≥ T a = β. Summarizing:

Proposition 3. (i) Trade-weighted mean-preserving reductions in tariff variance are welfare-
improving when T ≥ T θ ≥ T a and µT > 1;
(ii) Uniform absolute tariff reductions are welfare-improving when 1 < µt < µT ;
(iii) Convex combinations of uniform absolute tariff cuts and trade-weighted mean-preserving
dispersion cuts, β ≤ T a , are welfare-improving under the conditions of (i) and (ii).

Proof : (i) and (ii) have already been proved. To prove (iii), rearrange the right-hand side
of (26), dividing by T a − β > 0 as

                                             θ
                                                
                          t      T −β      wT −β            V
                     1 − µ 1 − ηT a   + θT   a
                                                   + µt η a      .                              (27)
                                 T −β       T −β         (T − β)

The square bracket term is smaller than the inverse of µT under the conditions of (i) and
hence the entire expression is positive under the condition of (ii).

The condition T ≥ T θ ≥ T a is problematic, depending on two unobservable average tariffs.
  18
   dT a = −(T a − β)dα, and similarly for dT and dT θ ; while dV = −2V dα.
  19
   (T − βι)dα = [ω(T − T a ι) − (1 − ω)δι] dγ where dγ = dα/ω and β = T a + δ(1 − ω)/ω for 1 ≥ ω ≥ 0.
The scalar δ can be positive or negative.


                                                 19
However, it is guaranteed if separability holds, from Proposition 1. It follows that Proposition
3 holds with separability and 1 < µt < µT . In the future, more insight into the behavior of
the unobservables will be generated by examining simulations with a variety of models and
data for different countries.
   The separable case shows that mere substitutability is not important in ranking T and T θ
relative to T a . Substitution effects within classes of tariff-ridden goods are irrelevant, comple-
mentarities are admissible along with highly asymmetric substitution effects. For example, it
is natural to think of an aggregate like clothing as a goods class, entering preferences separa-
bly but having complex substitution effects within class: shirts and trousers may be comple-
ments while silk and chambray shirts may be substitutes. What does matter for the ranking
is that nonseparability admits varying substitution effects between tariff-ridden goods and
the numeraire. Using the standard algebra of covariance, T − T a = Cov(ω, T ) − Cov(ω a , T ),
where the covariance uses arithmetic (equal) weights. The generalized weights ω differ from
the trade share weights ω a only if the goods are non-separable and T < T a with non-
separability if numeraire substitution effect shares ω are more sensitive to high tariffs than
are trade shares ω a .
   Proposition 3 can readily be extended to many classes of separable tariff-ridden goods.
Let T ka denote the trade-weighted average tariff in separable goods class k, while T a continues
to denote the overall trade-weighted average tariff and T continues to denote the overall
generalized mean tariff.

Proposition 4. Welfare improves with:
(i) trade-weighted mean preserving dispersion cuts within separable goods classes;
(ii) any convex combination of such dispersion cuts and a uniform absolute tariff change
across as well as within classes that decreases tariffs when they are over-utilized or increases
them when they are under-utilized .

Proposition 4 is proved in the Appendix. The key element is that, from Proposition 1, the
condition of Proposition 3 is met under separability. The proposition is quite useful because

                                                20
separability is a ubiquitous assumption in applied work. Faced with some ten thousand tariff
lines, aggregation is inevitable for any econometric or simulation work. The proposition
assures the analyst that trade-weighted average preserving dispersion cuts within classes
are welfare-improving without detailed knowledge of substitution effects (either parameter
values or specification) within goods classes. National tariff schedules are full of dispersion
in detailed product classes, so there is a lot of room in practice for beneficial cuts. It is
worth noting that under separability, a trade-weighted mean-preserving tariff dispersion cut
improves welfare strictly by raising government revenue; trade expenditure remains constant
under this reform.
       Note finally that, from (21) and (25), the separable case where T = T θ = T a yields
directly useful expressions for µT and µt that can be used to calculate the relative under- or
over-utilization of tariffs:

                                                    −1
                           µT = 1 − ηT a + λt θ           , µt = (1 − T w ω + T a θ)−1    (28)


T a , λt and T w are observable, so it is relatively easy to test the sensitivity of µt /µT to
alternative values of the elasticities η, θ and ω which are not known with certainty.


2.4        How Over-Sufficient Are the Conditions?

Clearly the conditions derived so far are only sufficient, and additional restrictions on ei-
ther the structure of the economy or the type of trade reform permitted would allow some
strengthening of them. Specialization to the CES case with zero cross-effects between goods
and leisure (θ = 0) is insightful since in this simple but canonical setting the marginal cost
of funds for each individual tariff can be derived independently of all others:20


                                       µπi = [1 − ηT a − σ(Ti − T a )]−1 .                (29)
  20
       In the CES case, φij = σ(−δij + wj )wi πiφπj .




                                                          21
The CES expression (29) for the marginal cost of funds reveals that the focus of Propositions
3 and 4 on convex combinations of mean-preserving tariff cuts and dispersion-preserving
mean cuts does indeed capture all the relevant characteristics of welfare-improving revenue
tariff reform which can be guaranteed without full knowledge of substitution effects. If exact
values of η and σ are assumed to be known, it is of course possible to improve welfare with
tariff reforms outside the cones based on (29).21 As substitution possibilities range more
widely beyond the CES, more welfare-improving revenue tariff reforms can be found which
are not within the cones of Propositions 2 and 3. But again, showing that these reforms
raise welfare depends on information that this paper assumes, realistically, that the analyst
is unlikely ever to have with any certainty.
       Note that the CES expression sheds light on the esoteric possibility that some tariffs may
actually have a marginal cost of funds less than one. From (29), the necessary and sufficient
condition for µπi < 1 is (1 − η/σ)T a > Ti . The sufficient condition requires either that
η/σ < 1, substitution elasticities within the separable group exceed substitution elasticities
between that group and all other goods, or that good i is subject to an import subsidy, so
Ti < 0. Normally neither condition would be met.


2.5       The Desirability of Dispersion Cuts

Further analysis of the desirability of trade-weighted mean-preserving dispersion cuts is
useful, since it seems to argue for uniformity in contrast to the intuition of the Ramsey
principle. The sufficiency condition T ≥ T a appears to be puzzlingly powerful.
       Returning to Figure 1, the ray OR through the Ramsey optimal tariff point R divides
the domestic price space into half spaces. Starting at point R, draw a mean-preserving
line to the uniform tariff ray OF . For points on this line between the uniform tariff ray
  21
    In the CES case the half space of welfare-improving reforms is defined by tariffs such that {ι − [µt (1 −
ηT )ι − µt σ(T − T a ι)]}0 dπ < 0. The condition that µt /µT > 1 is equivalent to µt (1 − ηT a ) < 1. Mean-
  a

preserving dispersion cuts reduce government costs, dispersion-preserving mean cuts (uniform absolute cuts)
reduce government costs, convex combinations of these also reduce costs. But many other cuts lie in the half
space below the constraint.



                                                     22
OF and the optimal tariff ray OR, trade-weighted mean preserving dispersion increases are
welfare-improving. For points in the space below ray OR, dispersion increases are welfare
decreasing. If the cone F OR is small, the World Bank intuition about the desirability of
dispersion reduction holds in some sense for most of the tariff space.
       Next, consider the initial tariffs A, lying on an iso-utility locus as shown. The line labeled
dT a = 0 gives the mean-preserving tariff change path. As drawn, decreases in dispersion
raise welfare, implying T > T a . A line tangent to the iso-utility locus at point A represents
the situation where V + T (T − T a ) = 0. If the locus dT a = 0 is steeper than the tangent line
to GA at A, dispersion reductions lower welfare.
       With separability, T = T a , hence welfare rises for mean-preserving changes in dispersion.
This implies that the Ramsey-optimal tariff is uniform in the separable case (Guesnerie
(1995)); i.e., point R lies on OF . Extending separability to multiple classes as in Propo-
sition 4, uniformity of tariffs within classes is optimal. This benchmark case suggests that
optimal departures from uniformity may be small for a fairly wide class of reasonable general
equilibrium structures.
       The desirability of dispersion cuts becomes less mysterious when we recall that the lin-
ear reform rule restricts outcomes relative to the starting point. The full optimum is not
attainable. The optimal tariff structure implied by the linear reform rule dT = (T − βι)dα
is, for mean-preserving dispersion changes β = T a , consistent with V = −T (T − T a ). Figure
2 illustrates a case where the mean-preserving dispersion cut line AU is associated with
increases in welfare relative to uA for each point on the path to the uniform tariff ray OF .
Nevertheless, the full optimal tariff point R is non-uniform and yields still higher welfare.22
Moreover, there is a best tariff subject to the linear rule and the initial condition T A which
lies somewhere on the path from A to U , and this tariff is non-uniform unless it lies at U .
T < T a is necessary for a movement from A to U not to raise welfare relative to uA for each
point on the path.
  22                                                     µt −1 −1
    The Ramsey-optimal tariff vector is given by T 0 =    µt s S  πEπ ,   where all variables are evaluated at
the Ramsey optimum.


                                                  23
                    1



                                          .
                                          U


                                                .R       .A
                                 F.                             dTa = 0




                     O
                                                                             2


                         Figure 2: Welfare-Improving Dispersion Cuts
             On path AU, trade-weighted-mean-preserving tariff cuts raise welfare

            On path AO, uniform absolute tariff cuts first raise welfare, then lower it


3     Many Households

The preceding expressions extend with appropriate modification to the case of many house-
holds. For simplicity, assume that zero cross effects obtain, θ = 0. The government budget
constraint continues to hold using E for the aggregate trade expenditure function and its
derivatives while E h denotes the individual household h trade expenditure function.
    To economize on notation, we express the change in welfare in terms of the hypothetical
subsidy that must be made to each agent h to maintain their real income. By definition
ds = h dsh , the aggregate subsidy is the sum of subsidies needed to maintain each agent’s
     P

real income. The budget constraint for agent (household) h yields:


                              dsh = Eπh · πdT a,h + Eth (w + t)dT w ,                     (30)


where T a,h is the trade-weighted average tariff using the trade weights of agent h. dT w
is endogenously generated from the government revenue constraint to compensate for the
exogenous tariff changes. Solving that aggregate constraint as before, substituting into the


                                                24
equation above and rearranging yields:

                                     Eth
                                                      h       
    h                                                   Et
  ds =   Eπh   · πdT   a,h
                             −                   t  a
                                         Eπ · π µ dT −     Eπ · π µt [ηdV /2 + T̄ dT̄ − T w θdT θ ]. (31)
                                     Et                 Et

Summing over households h, the first two terms cancel out. The condition that reform be
beneficial in the aggregate (representative agent) case is that the third term be negative.
Propositions 3 and 4 apply.
   The potential for individual loss is confined to the deviation due to the balance of the first
two terms. Agents can differ in their tastes for work vs. consumption, generating differences
in the aggregate weights attached to the average tariff differentials, and they can differ in
their consumption patterns within the tariffed goods bundle when faced with the same price
vectors. The latter results in dT a,h 6= dT a while the former results in Eπh · π 6= (Eth /Et )Eπ · π.
   What minimal information is needed to specify welfare-improving rules for each house-
hold (Pareto superior rules)? Tariffs are widely levied on intermediate goods. In this case
there is no household-specific weighting, T ai = T a , so dispersion cuts are Pareto-superior.
As for final goods, assume that imported goods in a separable goods class have no domestic
perfect substitute, and that household expenditure patterns Eπh are observable. The former
is a widely used empirical assumption because the perfect substitutes assumption yields im-
plications wildly at variance with the trade data. The observability of household expenditure
patterns is a more problematic assumption but it is satisfied for a number of countries.
   Under these assumptions, the β h parameters can be set equal to the household level
trade-weighted average tariff T a,h to implement the mean preserving dispersion cut: dT h =
(T − T a,h )dα. The mechanism is a uniform deviation from the common tariff cut rule for
each household: dT h − dT = (T a,h − T a )ιdα. All tariffs are changed according to dT =
(T − T a ι)dα. Implementation of the household specific deviations could presumably take
place at the retail level (as with food stamps or senior citizen discounts), supplemented by
some governmental identification system. Doing so, for example, all clothing tariffs change



                                                         25
according to the common rule, then each household receives or pays its household specific
deviation (T a,h − T a )dα. Alternatively, the implementation could be done through income
tax credits. To avoid shirking, the common rule could be set around the highest T a,h , so
that all households with lower average tariffs receive a rebate.
   In this scheme of tariffs, the real income of each household is maintained, the individual
variation of β h is revenue neutral since h (T a,h − T a )π 0 Eπh = 0, and the government revenue
                                         P

will rise due to the revenue-increasing cut in dispersion. Thus dispersion cuts are a Pareto-
superior reform. As for uniform absolute cuts in tariffs, the requirement of Propositions 2
and 3 that ‘tariffs are over (under) utilized’ becomes extremely stringent because it requires
that the marginal cost of funds of the alternative revenue source be less (more) than each
individual agent’s marginal cost of funds of tariffs. This is seldom likely to appear plausible
to analysts evaluating potential reforms.
    The implication is that the Pareto-superiority of dispersion cuts holds in the many house-
hold case under the separability assumption and zero cross effects, understanding that trade-
weighted average tariffs must be calculated and applied at the household level. The separa-
bility assumption is plausible for some goods classes and not for others. Still, this discussion
suggests the surprisingly wide desirability of dispersion cuts.



4     Conclusion

This paper has set out cones of welfare-improving trade reform that permit confident policy
advice despite the (assumed partial) ignorance of analysts about the ‘true’ structure of
the economy. Dispersion reducing trade reform is surprisingly widely beneficial: whenever
households have implicitly separable preferences with respect to the same partitions of goods,
dispersion of tariffs within separable groups is inefficient. Cuts in average tariffs are efficient
when the marginal cost of funds of such tariffs is greater than the marginal cost of funds
of alternative revenue sources. Convex combinations of uniform absolute cuts and mean-



                                                26
preserving dispersion cuts are beneficial under these conditions.




                                             27
Appendices

A      Piecemeal Policy Reform with Lump-Sum Transfers

Differentiating the balance of trade constraint, equation (4), yields:


        (1 − RI )Eu du = −dR0 + [(π − π ∗ )0 Eππ + tEtπ ] dπ + [(π − π ∗ )0 Eπt + tEtt ] dt   (32)


where RI , the income responsiveness of revenue, is defined in Section 1.1. The coefficient
of the change in real income, 1 − RI , is the shadow price of foreign exchange discussed
there. Assuming it is positive, the right-hand-side terms in (32) lead to the standard results
of piecemeal tariff reform, as extended by Anderson and Neary (2007), and allowing in
addition for a labor tax.



B      Proof of Proposition 4

The separable case gives rise to useful simplifications of the model. Here the logic is extended
to many separable classes.
    Suppose that the tariff-ridden group of goods forms an implicitly separable class in the
trade expenditure function: E(π, p, π0 , u) = F [φ(π, u), p, π0 , u], where φ is concave and ho-
mogeneous of degree one in π. When imported goods form separable classes indexed by k,
                                                 k
such as η k (π k ), the logic of the text yields T = T ak with the natural extension of nota-
tion. Mean-preserving dispersion reduction is desirable within classes. When combined with
overall uniform tariff change, the tariff change policy rule is given by


                                   dT k = (T k − β k ιk )dα, ∀k                               (33)


where ι is understood to be the vector of ones with dimension appropriate to goods class


                                                28
k and β k is a scalar for goods class k. The combination of trade-weighted mean preserving
change with uniform absolute change overall requires β k = T ak + β. As for overall mean
tariffs, we define T a =
                         P a ak
                          ωk T where ωka = Eηk η k / Eηk η k , the trade weights for the
                                                      P

                                                                            ωk T ak where
                                                                          P
classes of imports. The generalized mean overall tariff is defined by T =
the generalized weights are defined as in the text, but using the price aggregators η k as the
individual prices.
   Define the row vector b0 ≡ {β 1 ι1 , ..., β K ιK }. The trade-weighted average of b is ba = T a +β,
while the generalized average of b is b = T + β. Applying the rule (33) to evaluate its effect
on the cost of supporting real income yields:

               dG
                  = (1 − µt )(T a − ba )Eπ0 π + µt s{V + T (T − b) − Cov(T, b)}.
               dα

Here, Cov denotes the generalized covariance (T − T )0 S(b − b). In the separable case with b
constructed as given, the covariance is equal to zero. Covariation within class is obviously
equal to zero because the elements of b within class do not vary. Between classes, the
class-mean-preserving element of β k implies no change in price aggregates while the mean
shift element of β k implies a uniform shift which gives no variation. Applying the other
implications of the structure of b yields

                     dG
                        = −β(1 − µt )Eπ0 π + µt sT {V /T − β}
                     dα
                        = −Eπ0 π µt /µT − µt V /T + β 1 − µt /µT .
                                                              



The substitutions from the first to the second line also uses sT /π 0 Eπ = 1 − 1/µT and
then simplifies. When λ/µT < 1, dG/dα > 0 when β < 0. This is the case of uniform
tariff increases combined with trade-weighted mean-preserving dispersion increases, so such
reductions improve welfare. Thus we have proved Proposition 4.




                                                 29
References

Anderson, J. E. (1999): “Trade Reform with a Government Budget Constraint,” in J.
  Piggott and A. Woodland (eds.): International Trade Policy and the Pacific Rim, London:
  Macmillan for the International Economic Association.

Anderson, J. E., and J. P. Neary (1992): “Trade Reform with Quotas, Partial Rent
  Retention, and Tariffs,” Econometrica, 63(1), 57–76.

Anderson, J. E., and J. P. Neary (2007): “Welfare versus Market Access: The Impli-
  cations of Tariff Structure for Tariff Reform,” Journal of International Economics, 89(1),
  187–205.

Atkinson, A. B., and N. H. Stern (1974): “Pigou, Taxation and Public Goods,” Review
  of Economic Studies, 41(1), 119–128.

Baunsgaard, T., and M. Keen (2010): “Tax Revenue and (or?) Trade Liberalization,”
  Journal of Public Economics, 94(9–10), 563–577.

Bruno, M. (1972): “Market Distortions and Gradual Reform,” Review of Economic Studies,
  39(3), 373–383.

Diamond, P. A., and J. A. Mirrlees (1971): “Optimal Taxation and Public Production
  I and II,” American Economic Review, 61(1–2), 8–27, 261–278.

Emran, M. S., and J. E. Stiglitz (2005): “On Selective Indirect Tax Reform in Devel-
  oping Countries,” Journal of Public Economics, 89(4), 599–623.

Erbil, C. (2004): “Trade Taxes Are Expensive,” mimeo., Brandeis University.

Falvey, R. (1994): “Revenue Enhancing Tariff Reform,” Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv,
  130(1), 175–190.




                                            30
Foster, E., and H. Sonnenschein (1970): “Price Distortion and Economic Welfare,”
  Econometrica, 38(2), 281–297.

Guesnerie, R. (1995): A Contribution to the Pure Theory of Taxation. Cambridge Uni-
  versity Press.

Hatta, T. (1977): “A Theory of Piecemeal Policy Recommendations,” Review of Economic
  Studies, 44(1), 1–21.

Hatta, T., and Y. Ogawa (2007): “Optimal Tariffs under a Revenue Constraint,” Review
  of International Economics, 15(3), 560–573.

Hatzipanayotou, P., M. S. Michael, and S. M. Miller (1994): “Win-Win Indirect
  Tax Reform: A Modest Proposal,” Economics Letters, 44(1), 147–151.

Keen, M., and J. E. Ligthart (2002): “Coordinating Tariff Reduction and Domestic
  Tax Reform,” Journal of International Economics, 56(2), 489–507.

Kreickemeier, U., and P. Raimondos-Møller (2008): “Tariff–Tax Reforms and Mar-
  ket Access,” Journal of Development Economics, 87(1), 85–91.




                                           31
