NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BUY, KEEP OR SELL:
ECONOMIC GROWTH AND THE MARKET FOR IDEAS
Ufuk Akcigit
Murat Alp Celik
Jeremy Greenwood
Working Paper 19763
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19763
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2013

We thank Marios Angeletos, Jess Benhabib, Bjoern Bruegemann, Steven Davis, Bob Hall, Doug Hanley,
Chang-Tai Hsieh, Erik Hurst, Chad Jones, Pete Klenow, Yunan Li, Carlos Serrano, Randy Wright,
Laura Yu, Fabrizio Zilibotti especially our discussants Sam Kortum and Ezra Oberfield and the seminar
and conference participants at Barcelona GSE Summer Forum, Chicago Booth, IIES, NBER Summer
Institute 2013 Economic Growth Group and Macro Perspectives Group, New York FED Real Side
Macroeconomics Conference, Norwegian Business School, Stanford University, Tinbergen Institute,
University of Notre Dame, University of Pennsylvania, University of Washington at St. Louis, University
of Wisconsin, and University of Zurich for very helpful comments and discussions. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Ufuk Akcigit, Murat Alp Celik, and Jeremy Greenwood. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Buy, Keep or Sell: Economic Growth and the Market for Ideas
Ufuk Akcigit, Murat Alp Celik, and Jeremy Greenwood
NBER Working Paper No. 19763
December 2013
JEL No. O31,O41
ABSTRACT
An endogenous growth model is developed where each period firms invest in researching and developing
new ideas. An idea increases a firm's productivity. By how much depends on how central the idea
is to a firm's activity. Ideas can be bought and sold on a market for patents. A firm can sell an idea
that is not relevant to its business or buy one if it fails to innovate. The developed model is matched
up with stylized facts about the market for patents in the U.S. The analysis attempts to gauge how
efficiency in the patent market affects growth.
Ufuk Akcigit
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk, #445
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
uakcigit@econ.upenn.edu
Murat Alp Celik
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk
McNeil Building, Rm 160
Philadelphia, PA, 19104
celik@sas.upenn.edu

Jeremy Greenwood
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk
McNeil Building, Rm 160
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6297
and NBER

Buy, Keep or Sell: Economic Growth and the Market for Ideas

1

Introduction

New ideas are the seeds for economic growth. The rise in living standards depends on the eﬀectiveness of transforming new ideas into consumer products or production processes. Incarnating
an idea into a product or a production process is by no means immediate. Someone must have a
vision or application for the idea and the know-how to implement it. These are often people who
work in areas related to the end-use of an idea.
For example, in 1849 Walter Hunt was granted a patent for the safety pin. In the abstract
for the patent, Walter Hunt wrote “(t)he distinguishing feature of the invention consist in the
construction of a pin made of a piece of wire or metal combining a spring, and a clasp or catch, in
which catch the point of the said pin is forced and by its own spring securely retained”–see Figure
1 for the description and Figure 2 for the drawings included with his patent application.1 Hunt was
a mechanic by trade and ﬁled patents for various things, such as ice boats, machines for cutting
nails, repeating guns. What is more interesting about this innovation is that Hunt sold his patent
to W. R. Grace and Company for about $10,000 (in today’s dollars). W. R. Grace and Company
massed produced the safety pin and made millions.

Figure 1: Description of USPTO Patent Figure 2: Drawings from USPTO Patent
#6281
#6281

Walter Hunt by no means was an exception. Recently released data on the U.S. secondary
markets for patents indicate that a large fraction of patents are sold by ﬁrms who developed the
ideas to other ﬁrms. Speciﬁcally, among all the patents registered between 1976 and 2006 in the
1

Patents are publicly disclosed and ﬁled at the United States Patent and Trademark Oﬃce. Each patent application has a full description of the invention and drawings to illustrate the embodiments.

1

Akcigit, Celik, and Greenwood

United States Patent and Trademark Oﬃce (USPTO), 16% are traded and this number goes up
to 20% among domestic patents; see Figure 3.2 For economic progress, not only the possibility of
exchange, but also the speed of that process is important. USPTO data shows that new patents
are sold among ﬁrms on average within 5.48 years (with a standard deviation of 4.58 years); Figure
4 shows the frequency distribution over the duration for a sale. So, it takes time to sell a patent.

Figure 3: Fraction of Patents Sold

Figure 4: Distribution of Patent Sale
Durations

Notes: In Figure 3 each observation corresponds to the fraction of patents that are ever sold
out of all the patents granted in the same year. In Figure 4 sale duration is defined as the lag
between the grant date and the first sale date of the patent. Appendix C details how the data is
constructed.

Firms often develop patents that are not close to their primary business activity. Think about
a patent as lying within some technological class. Call this technology class X. Empirically this
can be represented by the ﬁrst two digits of its International Patent Classiﬁcation (IPC) code.3
Now, one can measure how close two patents classes, X and Y , are to each other. To do this, let
#(X ∩ Y ) denote the number of all patents that cite patents from technology classes X and Y
simultaneously. Let #(X ∪ Y ) denote the number of all patents that cite either technology class X
or Y or both. Then the following symmetric distance metric can be constructed:
d(X, Y ) ≡ 1 −

#(X ∩ Y )
,
#(X ∪ Y )

with 0 ≤ d(X, Y ) ≤ 1. This distance metric is intuitive. If each patent that cites X also cites Y , this
metric delivers a distance of d (X, Y ) = 0. [Also note that d(X, X) = 0.] If there is no patent that
2

Figures 3 and 4 do not include patent transfers due to M&A and licensing. They include only ﬁrm-to-ﬁrm patent
transfers and exclude within-ﬁrm patent transfers as well as patents sold by individuals. See Appendix C for data
construction.
3
Patents cite the prior work that they are related to. Patents are classiﬁed into technology classes.

2

Buy, Keep or Sell: Economic Growth and the Market for Ideas

cites both classes, then the distance becomes d (X, Y ) = 1. The distance between two technology
classes increases, as the fraction of patents that cite both decreases. Given this metric between
technology classes, a distance measure between a patent and a ﬁrm can now be constructed.
In order to measure how close a patent is to a ﬁrm in the technology spectrum, a metric needs
to be devised. For this purpose, a ﬁrm’s past patent portfolio is used to identify the ﬁrm’s existing
location in the technology space. In particular, the distance of a particular patent p to a ﬁrm f
is computed by calculating the average distance of p to each patent in ﬁrm f ’s patent portfolio as
follows:4

⎡

⎤1/ι
 
ι
1
dι (p, f ) ≡ ⎣
d X p , Yp  ⎦ ,
Pf  

(1)

p ∈Pf

with 0 < ι ≤ 1, and where 0 ≤ dι (p, f ) ≤ 1. In this expression, Pf denotes the set of all patents


that were ever invented by ﬁrm f prior to patent p, Pf  stands for its cardinality, and d Xp , Yp


measures the distance between the technology classes of patents p and p . Note that d Xp , Yp = 0
when the ﬁrm has other patents in the same class as p. Therefore, this metric is deﬁned only for
ι > 0. Finally, when ι = 1 the above metric returns the average distance of p to each patent in ﬁrm


f ’s patent portfolio: d1 (p, f ) ≡ Pf −1 p ∈Pf d Xp , Yp , with 0 ≤ d1 (p, f ) ≤ 1.
The empirical distribution for this notion of distance is displayed in Figure 5, for three values
of ι. As can be seen, patents have heterogeneous technological distances to the inventing ﬁrms. An
analysis of the patent data in Section 3 uncovers some additional important facts about the nature
of these exchanges. In particular:
1. A patent contributes more to a ﬁrm’s sales and stock market value if it is closer to the ﬁrm
in terms of technological distance.
2. A patent is more likely to be sold the more distant it is to the inventing ﬁrm.
3. A patent is technologically closer to the buying ﬁrm than to the selling ﬁrm.
These listed facts, in conjunction with those displayed in Figures 3, 4, and 5, raise important
questions that have been left unanswered by the existing literature: How sizeable is the misallocation of ideas? How does the secondary market for ideas aﬀect economic growth? Do frictions in
the secondary market lead to more in-house R&D or do they discourage innovations overall? This
paper is an attempt to answer these questions.

1.1

The Analysis

To analyze the impact that a market for patents has on the macroeconomy, a search-theoretic model
of the market for patents is built here. Each period ﬁrms invest in research and development.
Sometimes this process generates an idea, other times it doesn’t. Each ﬁrm operates within a
4
The ﬁrm’s patent portfolio is allowed to evolve over time; i.e., to measure the distance of a year-t patent to a
ﬁrm, its distance to all patents that were ever invented by the same ﬁrm before year t is considered.

3

Akcigit, Celik, and Greenwood

Figure 5: Empirical distance distributions.
Notes: The figure plots, for three values of ι, the empirical density function for the distance,
dι (p, f ), between a new patent, p, and a firm f ’s patent portfolio, Pf .

particular technology class. An idea increases a ﬁrm’s productivity. The extent to which it does
depends on the proximity of the idea to the ﬁrm’s technology class. A ﬁrm may wish to sell an idea
that isn’t close to its own class. It can do so using a patent agent. Analogously, the ﬁrm might
want to purchase an idea through a patent agent if it fails to innovate. Due to search frictions it
may take time for a patent agent to ﬁnd a buyer for a patent. Also, a patent may not be the perfect
match for a buyer. Due to R&D by ﬁrms there is growth in the model. A balanced growth path
for the model is explicitly characterized. A unique invariant ﬁrm-size distribution exists despite
the fact that the distribution for productivity across ﬁrms is continually fanning out.
The model is calibrated so that it matches certain features of the U.S. economy, such as the
average rate of growth, the share of R&D in GDP, the share of patents that are sold, the empirical
duration distribution, etc. Clearly, a market for patents aﬀects the incentive to do R&D. On the
one hand, the fact that an idea, which is not so useful for the innovator’s own production, can be
sold raises the return from engaging in R&D. On the other hand, the fact that a ﬁrm can buy an
idea reduces the reward from doing R&D. A goal of the analysis is to examine how a patent market
aﬀects R&D and, hence, growth.
To gauge the importance of the patent resale market for economic growth and welfare, a sequence of structured thought experiments is undertaken. First,the rate of contact between buyers
and sellers in the secondary market is reduced to zero, which is equivalent to shutting down the
secondary market. In the absence of the secondary market, the equilibrium steady-state growth
rate goes from its benchmark value of 2.0% down to 1.8% resulting in a welfare reduction of 5% in
4

Buy, Keep or Sell: Economic Growth and the Market for Ideas

consumption equivalent terms. Next, the eﬃciency of the patent market is successively increased.
It is shown that a faster rate of contact between buyers and sellers, where meetings happen without
any delay, increases the growth rate up to 2.5% and leads to a welfare gain of 10% relative to the
benchmark economy (measured in terms of consumption). In addition, if a seller’s patent could be
perfectly matched with a buyer’s ideal idea then the growth rate increases to 3.1% and a further
welfare improvement of 18% materializes. Last, if the ideas that ﬁrms produce are perfectly suited
for their own production process (this corresponds to a situation where there is no mismatch between a ﬁrm and the idea that it generates) then growth would be 3.4% and welfare would be 35%
higher than in the baseline model. So, it seems that eﬃciency in the resale market for patents does
matter.
The market for patents is often thought of as being ineﬃcient and illiquid. Buying and selling
intellectual property is a diﬃcult activity. Each patent is unique. It may not be readily apparent
who the potential buyers and competing sellers even are, especially in situations where enterprises
desire to keep their business strategies secret. Buyers and sellers may have very diﬀerent valuations
about the worth of a patent. Patents are often sold through intermediaries. This motivates the
search-theoretic framework presented here.
Historically patent agents were often lawyers. Dealing with patent buyers and sellers they
understood both sides of the market. Inventors used them to ﬁle patent applications. So, the
lawyers became acquainted with the new technologies that were around. Buyers used them to vet
the merits of new technologies. Hence, the lawyers were familiar with the types of patents that
were likely to be marketable. This led naturally to the lawyers acting as intermediaries in patent
sales. Edward Van Winkle typiﬁes the business. He was a patent agent at the beginning of the
20th century. Van Winkle was a mechanical engineer who acquired a law degree by correspondence
course. He was well suited to provide advice on the legal and technical merits of inventions for his
clients on both sides of the market. Van Winkle cultivated a network of businessmen, inventors,
and other lawyers. Lamoreaux and Sokoloﬀ (2002) detail how he brokered various types of deals
with the buyers and sellers of patents. They also document for the period 1870 to 1910 an increased
tendency for inventors (especially the more productive ones) to use specialized registered patent
agents to handle transactions associated with their patents.
Even today the market for patents is thin, according to Gans and Stern (2010) and Hagiu and
Yoﬃe (2011). The patent market is highly specialized. Gans and Stern (2010) and Hagiu and Yoﬃe
(2011) discuss the failure of online intellectual property platforms to arbitrage the market. According to them, the sensitivity of intellectual property makes potential buyers and sellers reluctant to
reveal information online; they prefer face-to-face dealings with the other party. Also, some buyers
may perceive a lemon’s problem: if the patents were truly valuable then the seller should be able
to proﬁt by developing the idea themselves or by selling it directly to interested parties.
5

Akcigit, Celik, and Greenwood

1.2

Relationship to the Literature

The paper contributes to a few strands in the literature. The research builds and extends models of
endogenous growth with quality improvements. [See Aghion, Akcigit, and Howitt (2013), and the
references therein, for a recent survey of Schumpeterian growth models]. Recently attention has
been directed to how new ideas spread in an economy. Some work stresses technology diﬀusion via
innovation and imitation [e.g., Acemoglu, Aghion, and Zilibotti (2006), Jovanovic and MacDonald
(1994), and König, Lorenz, and Zilibotti (2012)]. Other work emphasizes matching and other
frictions in the transfer of ideas. [See for instance, Benhabib, Perla, and Tonetti (2013), Chatterjee
and Rossi-Hansberg (2012), Chiu, Meh, and Wright (2011), Lucas and Moll (2013), and Perla and
Tonetti (2013)].
The work here emphasizes matching frictions. It diﬀers from the above papers in a number of
signiﬁcant ways: First, the focus is on an economy where growth is driven by heterogenous ideas
that are invented by ﬁrms. A ﬁrm may not be able to make the best use of the idea it discovers.
Second, ﬁrms can trade their ideas in a secondary market subject to matching frictions. Third,
while the literature has mainly been theoretical, the current research uses micro data on patent
reassignments to motivate and discipline the analysis. The data employed here was ﬁrst used by
Serrano (2010, 2011). He uses the fraction of self-citations as a proxy for the ﬁt of an idea to an
inventing ﬁrm and documents that patents that are not a good ﬁt are more likely to be sold on
the secondary market by the inventing ﬁrm. A new metric for measuring the distance between
ideas and ﬁrms is proposed here. Serrano (2010, 2011)’s ﬁndings are conﬁrmed. Additionally, new
facts on the relationship between various ﬁrm moments (sales and value) and its distance-adjusted
patent portfolios are presented. Also, it is shown how the distance between an idea and its owner
changes upon resale. The facts that are obtained from the U.S. data are then used here to discipline
a search-based endogenous growth model. The model is employed to quantify the misallocation of
ideas in the U.S. economy and the contribution of the secondary market to economic growth.
The focus on mismatch in ideas connects with recent work on misallocation [see for instance,
Acemoglu, Akcigit, Bloom, and Kerr (2013), Guner, Ventura, and Xu (2008), Hsieh and Klenow
(2009), Hsieh, Hurst, Jones, and Klenow (2013), Jones (2013), and Restuccia and Rogerson (2008)].
Ideas are not necessarily born to their best users. The existence of a secondary market for ideas and
its eﬃciency can have a major impact on mitigating any initial misallocation. Thus, the presence of
a secondary market may contribute signiﬁcantly to productivity growth. Addressing this question
is the focus of the current paper.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the theoretical model, Section 3
presents the reduced form facts, Section 4 describes the calibration of the model, Section 5 provides
the quantitative results, Section 6 discusses the robustness analysis, and Section 7 concludes. The
proofs for the theoretical results are provided in Appendix A and robustness checks for the empirical
and quantitative results are presented in Appendix B. Further data and variable descriptions are
provided in Appendices C and D, respectively.
6

Buy, Keep or Sell: Economic Growth and the Market for Ideas

2

Model

In this section, the theoretical model with perfectly competitive ﬁrms is introduced. The goal is to
focus on the potential misallocation of ideas and its consequences for growth and welfare; therefore,
the model abstracts from monopoly distortions. Another interesting feature of this setting is that
patents serve a new role in this economy: the possibility for trading ideas.

2.1

Environment

Consider an economy, where time ﬂows discretely, with a continuum of ﬁrms of unit measure.
The ﬁrms produce a homogeneous ﬁnal good using capital and labor. Each ﬁrm belongs to some
technology class j that resides on a circle with radius 1/π. At each point on the technology circle
there are ﬁrms of mass 1/2. A ﬁrm enters the period with a level of productivity z. At the
beginning of a period each ﬁrm develops an innovation with probability i. The innovation will be
patented and belongs to some technology class k on the circle. The distance between the ﬁrm’s
own technology class, j, and the innovation, k, is denoted by d(j, k). This represents the length of
the shortest arc between j and k. Transform this distance measure into a measure of technological
proximity, x = 1 − d(j, k), deﬁned on [0, 1]. A high value for x indicates that the innovation is
close to the ﬁrm’s technology class. The value of x is drawn from the distribution function X(x).
The technology circle is illustrated in Figure 6. The analysis will focus on symmetric equilibrium
around this circle.
Firms produce output, o, at the end of a period according to the production process
o = (z  )ζ k κ lλ , with ζ + κ + λ = 1,

(2)

where k and l are the amounts of capital and labor used in production and z  is its end-of-period
productivity.5 Labor is hired at the wage rate w. There is one unit of labor available in the
economy. Capital is hired at the rental rate r.
Now, at the beginning of a period ﬁrms pick the probability of a successful innovation, i. They
do this according to the convex cost function
C(i; s) = χzζ/(ζ+λ) i1+ρ /(1 + ρ).

(3)

where z is the mean of the productivity distribution in the economy at the beginning of the period.
Cost rises in lock-step fashion with average productivity, z, in the economy. It will be established
later that wages, w, are proportional to z and grow along a balanced growth path at the same
rate as zζ/(ζ+λ) . Aggregate productivity will be a function of the aggregate state of the world
represented by s. A precise deﬁnition for the aggregate state of the world will be provided later. A
5
Note that the decreasing returns production function in (2) allows the ﬁrm to accrue rents from its productivity
z which generates incentives for innovation in this model, despite the lack of monopoly rents.

7

Akcigit, Celik, and Greenwood

ﬁrm that successfully innovates can either keep or sell its idea to a patent agent. A ﬁrm that does
not innovate can try to buy a patent from an agent. A patent on the market survives over time with
probability σ. After it expires it cannot be used, an assumption made for technical convenience.
Incorporating a patent of proximity x increases a ﬁrm’s end-of-period productivity, z  , according
to the law of motion
z  = L(z, x; s) = z + γxz,

(4)

where z is the ﬁrm’s initial productivity level and x is the technological proximity of the patent to
the ﬁrm. There are two things to note about this law of motion. First, the closer is an innovation
to a ﬁrm’s own technology class, as represented by x, the bigger will be the increase in productivity,
z  − z. Second, the higher is the economy-wide baseline level of productivity, z, the more valuable a
patent will be for increasing productivity. Note that z introduces the usual intertemporal spillovers
in this economy and in equilibrium, z will be a function of the aggregate state of the world, s.
A ﬁrm that fails to innovate can try to buy a patent from a patent agent. Likewise, a ﬁrm
that draws an innovation may sell the associated patent to a patent agent at the price q. This
price is determined on a competitive market. Once a patent is sold to an agent the seller cannot
use it in the future. A patent agent can only handle one patent at a time. The introduction of
patent agents simpliﬁes the analysis. Without this construct the analysis would have to keep track
of the portfolio of patents that each ﬁrm has for sale. This technical construct is imposed without
apology, as in the real world many patents are sold through agents, as was discussed. Additionally,
buying or selling a patent can be thought of as being equivalent to buying or selling an exclusive
licensing arrangement for the idea. Licensing arrangements are inferior to patents in some respects.
A detailed discussion of licensing is provided in Section 2.6.
Let na and nb represent the numbers of agents and buyers in a market. The total number of
matches in the market is given by the matching function
.
M (na , nb ) = ηnμa n1−μ
b
The matches are completely random. Thus, the odds that an agent will ﬁnd a buyer are given by
ma (

na
M (na , nb )
nb
)=
= η( )1−μ ,
nb
na
na

and similarly that a buyer will ﬁnd an agent by
mb (

na
M (na , nb )
na
)=
= η( )μ .
nb
nb
nb

The ratio of potential buyers to sellers, na /nb , reﬂects the slackness of the market. Since agents and
buyers are matched randomly, the proximity between the buyer’s technology class and the class of
the patent being sold is a random variable. A buyer will incorporate a patent that he purchases
8

Buy, Keep or Sell: Economic Growth and the Market for Ideas

into his production process in accordance with the above law of motion for z. The price of the
patent is determined by Nash bargaining between the agent and buyer.6 Represent this price by
p = P (z, x; s). The negotiated price will depend on the proximity of the patent, x, and the state of
the buyer’s technology, z. The bargaining power of the agent is given by ω. In contrast, the price
at which a ﬁrm sells its patent to an agent is ﬁxed at q, because the agent doesn’t know who he
will sell the patent to in the future. The timing of events is portrayed in Figure 7.

Figure 6: Technology circle.

2.2

Figure 7: Timing of events.

The Representative Consumer/Worker

In the background of analysis is a representative consumer/worker. This individual supplies one
unit of labor inelastically. The person owns all of the ﬁrms in the economy. He also rents out
the capital used by ﬁrms. Thus, he will earn income from wages, proﬁts and rentals. Capital
depreciates at the rate δ . The real return earned by renting capital is 1/r. ( I.e., r is the reciprocal
of the gross interest rate. It will play the role of the discount factor in the Bellman equations
formulated below.) The individual is assumed to have a momentary utility function of the form
U (c) = c1−ε /(1 − ε), where c is his consumption in the current period and ε is the coeﬃcient of
relative risk aversion. He discounts the future at rate β. Last, the representative consumer/worker’s
goal in life is to maximize his discounted lifetime utility. Since this problem is entirely standard it
is not presented.
6

In the current analysis, buyers know the quality of the match of the patent that they are purchasing. Chatterjee
and Rossi-Hansberg (2012) examine the situation where the quality of an idea is private information. In such a
setting there is a lemons problem in the market for ideas. It may pay for developers to start up new companies to
implement good ideas because they cannot be sold at a favorable price. Such considerations are absent here.

9

Akcigit, Celik, and Greenwood

2.3

Firms

A ﬁrm hires labor, l, at the wage rate w, and capital, k, at the rental rate, r ≡ 1/r − 1 + δ, to
maximize proﬁts. Thus, its decision problem is
Π(z  ; s) = max[(z  )ζ k κ lλ − rk − wl],
k,l

where Π(z  ; s) is the proﬁt function associated with the maximization problem. The ﬁrst-order
conditions to this maximization problem imply that
o
r

(5)

o
l=λ .
w

(6)

k=κ
and

Using (2), (5) and (6), it follows that proﬁts are given by
κ
λ
Π(z  ; s) = (1 − κ − λ)o = z  (1 − κ − λ)[( )κ ( )λ ]1/ζ .
r
w

(7)

Again, in equilibrium the rental and wage rates, r and w, will be functions of the aggregate state
of the world.
Let V (z; s) represent the expected present-value of a ﬁrm that has a technology level of z and
is about to learn whether or not it has successfully innovated. Due to the focus on symmetric
equilibrium there is no need ever record the ﬁrm’s location on the technology circle. Now, suppose
that the ﬁrm does not innovate. Then, it will try to buy a patent. With probability 1 − mb (na /nb )
it will fail to ﬁnd a patent agent. In that circumstance, the ﬁrm’s productivity will remain at z.
The value of the ﬁrm will be Π(z; s) + rV (z; s ). With probability mb (na /nb ) it will meet an agent
selling a patent with proximity x. Two things can happen here: either the ﬁrm buys a patent
from the agent or it doesn’t. The patent sells at the price p = P (z, x; s), which is a function of the
buyer’s type, z, as well proximity of the patent to the ﬁrm’s technology class, x. The determination
of the patent price is discussed below. The ﬁrm will only buy the patent if it yields a higher payoﬀ
than what it will obtain if it doesn’t buy it. If the ﬁrm buys a patent its productivity will rise to
L(z, x; s). The ﬁrm’s value will then move up to Π(L(z, x; s); s) − P (z, x; s) + rV (L(z, x; s); s ). If
it doesn’t buy a patent then its productivity will remain at z. The value of the ﬁrm will then be
Π(z; s) + rV (z; s ). Denote the distribution, over proximity, for the patent agents by D(x).
The expected discounted present value of the buyer, B(z; s), is easily seen to be
B(z; s) = mb


na
nb

+ 1 − mb



na
nb

Ia (z, x; s)[Π(L(z, x; s); s) − P (z, x; s) + rV (L(z, x; s); s )]
+[1 − Ia (z, x; s)][Π(z; s) + rV (z; s )]



Π(z; s) + rV (z; s ) ,
10


dD(x)
(8)

Buy, Keep or Sell: Economic Growth and the Market for Ideas



where
Ia (z, x; s) =

1, if the buyer purchases a patent,

(9)

0, otherwise.

The indicator function Ia (z, x; s) is deﬁned above; its determination is discussed below. In the
model developed here, there is no uncertainty at the aggregate level. Thus, next-period’s aggregate
state of the world, s , is just some deterministic function of this period’s aggregate state of the
world, s. The law of motion governing this dependence is omitted for convenience.
Turn now to the situation where the ﬁrm successfully innovates. If it decides to keep the patent
then the ﬁrm’s productivity will be L(z, x; s) as in (4). It will have the value K(L(z, x; s); s), as
given by
K(L(z, x; s); s) = Π(L(z, x; s); s) + rV (L(z, x; s); s ).

(10)

Alternatively, it can sell the patent to an agent. Then, its productivity will remain at z. The value
of a seller, S(z; s), is
S(z; s) = Π(z; s) + σq + rV (z; s ).

(11)

Once the seller puts a patent up for sale at the beginning of the period it expires with probability
1 − σ. A ﬁrm that innovates will either keep or sell its patent depending on which option yields
the highest value. Given this, it is easy to see that

Ik (z, x; s) =

2.3.1

1, if K(L(z, x; s); s) > S(z; s),

(12)

0, otherwise.

The Decision to Innovate

The ﬁrm’s decision to innovate is now cast. With probability i the ﬁrm innovates and with probability 1 − i it doesn’t. The ﬁrm chooses the probability of innovation subject to the convex cost
function C(i; s). Hence, write the innovation decision as
V (z; s) = max
i


 
i {Ik (z, x; s)K(L(z, x; s); s) + [1 − Ik (z, x; s)]S(z; s)}dX(x)
+(1 − i)B(z; s) − C(i; s)

.

(13)

The ﬁrst-order condition associated with this problem is
{Ik (z, x; s)K(L(z, x; s); s) + [1 − Ik (z, x; s)]S(z; s)}dX(x) − B(z; s) = C1 (i; s),
so that
i = R(z; s)
= C1−1

{Ik (z, x; s)K(L(z, x; s); s) + [1 − Ik (z, x; s)]S(z; s)}dX(x) − B(z; s); s . (14)

11

Akcigit, Celik, and Greenwood

2.4

Patent Agents

Turn now to the problem of a patent agent. It buys a patent at the competitively determined price
q. With probability ma (na /nb ) it will meet a potential buyer on the market and with probability
1 − ma (na /nb ) it won’t. Denote the distribution of buyers by G(z). The value for an agent, A,
with a patent is thus given by
⎧
⎫
  
 )] dG(z)dD(x) ⎬
⎨ ma n a
[I
(z,
x;
s)P
(z,
x;
s)
+
[1
−
I
(z,
x;
s)]rσA(s
a
a
nb

 
A(s) =
⎩
⎭
+ 1 − ma nnab rσA(s ),

(15)

where Ia (z, x; s) is speciﬁed by (9) and is deﬁned formally shortly below. The price of a patent is
determined via Nash bargaining. Speciﬁcally, p is determined in accordance with
max{[Π(L(z, x; s); s) − p + rV (L(z, x; s); s ) − Π(z; s) − rV (z; s )]1−ω × [p − rσA(s )]ω }.
p

The ﬁrst term in brackets gives the buyer’s surplus. This gives the diﬀerence between the value
of the ﬁrm when it secures a patent and the value when it does not. The second term details the
seller’s surplus. In standard fashion,

p = P (z, x; s) =

ω[Π(L(z, x; s); s) + rV (L(z, x; s); s ) − Π(z; s) − rV (z; s )]
+(1 − ω)rσA(s )


,

(16)

whenever both the buyer’s and seller’s surpluses are positive. The price lies between rσA(s ) and
Π(L(z, x; s); s) + rV (L(z, x; s); s ) − Π(z; s) − rV (z; s ); if the former is above the latter then no
solution exists.
Now, deﬁne Ia (z, x; s) in the following manner:

Ia (z, x; s) =

2.5

1, rσA(s ) ≤ p ≤ Π(L(z, x; s); s) + rV (L(z, x; s); s ) − Π(z; s) − rV (z; s )
0, otherwise.

(17)

Symmetric Equilibrium Along a Balanced Growth Path

The focus of the analysis is solely on symmetric equilibrium along a balanced growth path. In
equilibrium the demand for labor must equal the supply of labor. Recall that there is one unit of
labor in the economy. Let Z  (z  ) represent the end-of-period distribution of z  across ﬁrms. Now,
using (2), (5) and (6) it is easy to deduce that the labor, l, demanded by a ﬁrm is given by
l=

 κ κ/ζ
r

λ
w
12

(ζ+λ)/ζ

z.

(18)

Buy, Keep or Sell: Economic Growth and the Market for Ideas

Equilibrium in the labor market then implies that
 κ κ/ζ
r

λ
w

(ζ+λ)/ζ

z  dZ  (z  ) = 1,

so that the aggregate wage rate, w, is given by
w=λ

 κ κ/(ζ+λ) 
r

z  dZ  (z  )

ζ/(ζ+λ)
.

(19)

The wage rate, w, depends on the mean of the end-of-period productivity distribution across ﬁrms,
   
z dZ (z ).
Next, suppose that there is free entry by agents into the market to buy patents from ﬁrms. This
dictates that the price q will be determined by
q = A(s).

(20)

To complete the description of an equilibrium, the evolution of the distributions for D, G and
Z must be described. First, the distribution for D must be uniform in a symmetric equilibrium.
Recall that a ﬁrm’s location in the technology space is represented by a point on the circle. Think
about a buyer located at the top of the circle. Suppose that a set of ﬁrms on some tiny arc jk to
the left of top are selling patents of mass λ that are of distance between 0 and ε away from the
top. Now take any other arc lm of equal length even further to the left of top. The start of this
second arc has distance d(j, l) from the start of the ﬁrst one. In a symmetric equilibrium there will
be on the second arc, for all practical purposes, an identical set of ﬁrms selling patents of mass λ
that are of distance between d(j, l) and d(j, l) + ε away from the top.
Second, the distribution function Z evolves over time (from Z to Z  ) according to
Z  = TZ Z,

(21)

where the transition operator TZ is speciﬁed later. Third, the distribution for patent buyers is
described simply by

z
[1 − R(y; s)]dZ(y)

G(z) = ∞
;
[1 − R(y; s)]dZ(y)

(22)

recall that R(y; s) gives the probability that a ﬁrm with productivity y will successfully innovate.
Any ﬁrm that fails to innovate will enter the market for patents.
Last, it is obvious that the aggregate level of productivity, z, its gross rate of growth, g, and
the aggregate level of innovation, i, are given by
z=

   
z dZ (z )
zdZ(z), g = 
, and i =
zdZ(z)
13

R(z; s)dZ(z).

(23)

Akcigit, Celik, and Greenwood

By now it should be clear, that the aggregate state of the economy is speciﬁed by s = Z. From
this it is easy to calculate wages, w, using (19) and (21).
To summarize:
Deﬁnition 1 An equilibrium is described by a set of buying/selling rules, Ik (z, x; s) and Ia (z, x; s),
value functions for ﬁrms, B(z; s), K(L(z, x; s); s), S(z; s), and V (z; s), a rate of innovation for
ﬁrms, R(z; s), a value function for the patent agent, A(s), a set of selling and buying prices, q and
P (z, x; s), and distribution functions for sellers, D(x), buyers, G(z), and ﬁrm productivities, Z(z),
such that:
1. The indicator function Ik (z, x; s) speciﬁes, in line with (12), whether or not an innovator will
keep his patent, given the value functions K(L(z, x; s); s) and S(z; s).
2. The indicator function Ia (z, x; s) describes, as determined by (17), whether a sale between a
buyer and a patent agent will occur, given the value functions V (z; s) and A(s).
3. The value functions for ﬁrms, B(z; s), K(L(z, x; s); s), S(z; s), and V (z; s), are given by (8),
(10), (11) and (13), given the buying/selling rules, Ik (z, x; s) and Ia (z, x; s), prices, q and
P (z, x; s), and the distribution functions for sellers, D(x), and ﬁrm productivities, Z(z).
4. The rate of innovation for a ﬁrm, i = R(z; s), is speciﬁed by (14), given the value functions
B(z; s), K(L(z, x; s); s) and S(z; s), and the decision rule for selling Ik (z, x; s).
5. The value function for patent agents, A(s), is given by (15), given the buying/selling rule,
Ia (z, x; s), the selling price for a patent, P (z, x; s), and the distribution of buyers, G(z).
6. The prices for selling and buying patents, q and P (z, x; s), are determined in line with (20)
and (16), given the value functions V (z; s) and A(s).
7. The distribution function Z(z) evolves over time according to (21). The mean level, z, and
growth, g, of ﬁrm productivity and the aggregate rate of innovation, i, are speciﬁed by (23).
The distribution function for buyers, G(z), is given by equation (22), given the rate of innovation for a ﬁrm, R(z; s), and Z(z). The distribution function, D(x), for patent agents is
uniform.
The analysis is restricted to studying balanced growth paths. The solution to the above economy
along a balanced growth path will now be characterized. Suppose that mean level of productivity
for ﬁrms, z, grows at the constant gross rate g. Specify the variables z and z in transformed form
so that z = zζ/(ζ+λ) and z = z/zλ/(ζ+λ) . Thus, z grows at rate gζ/(ζ+λ) and, on average, so will
z. It turns out that z (or equivalently z) is suﬃcient to characterize the aggregate state of the
economy along a balanced growth path.
Proposition 1 (Balanced Growth) There exists a symmetric balanced growth path of the following
form:
14

Buy, Keep or Sell: Economic Growth and the Market for Ideas

1. The interest factor and rental rate on capital are given by
r = β/gεζ/(ζ+λ) ,

(24)

r = gεζ/(ζ+λ) /β − 1 + δ.

(25)

and
Here gζ/(ζ+λ) is the common rate of growth in consumption, capital, output and wages.
2. The value functions for buying, keeping and selling ﬁrms have linear forms in the state
variables z and z. Speciﬁcally, B(z; s) = b1 z + b2 z, K(L(z, x; s); s) = k1 z + k2 (x)z, and
S(z; s) = s1 z + s2 z.
3. The indicator function for an innovator speciﬁes a threshold rule such that Ik (z, x; s) = 1,
whenever x > xk , and is zero otherwise. I.e., an innovating ﬁrm keeps its idea when x > xk
and sells otherwise.
4. The indicator function for a sale between a buyer and the patent agent speciﬁes a threshold
rule such that Ia (z, x; s) = 1, whenever x > xa , and is zero otherwise. I.e., a sale between a
buyer and a patent agents occurs if and only if x > xa .
5. The value function for a patent agent has the linear form A(s) = az.
6. The beginning-of-period value function for a ﬁrm has the linear form V (z; s) = v1 z + v2 z.
The constant rate of innovation for a ﬁrm is

i=i=


1
X(xk )s2 +
χ


xk

k2 (x)dX(x) − b2

1/ρ

.

(26)

7. The constant net rate of growth for aggregate productivity is implicitly given by

g−1=γ i

xk

xdX(x) + (1 − i)mb (

na
)
nb


xdx .

(27)

xa

8. The prices for selling and buying patents are
q = az,
and



P (z, x; s) = (1 − ω)σrgζ/(ζ+λ) a + (ωπ + rv1 /gλ/(ζ+λ) )γx z,

where π is a constant.
9. The matching probabilities for sellers and buyers of patents are constant and implicitly deﬁned
15

Akcigit, Celik, and Greenwood

by
na
ma ( ) = η
nb



and
na
mb ( ) = η
nb

{1 − σ[1 − ma ( nnab )(1 − xa )]}(1 − i)

1−μ
,

σiX(xk )


σiX(xk )
{1 − σ[1 − ma ( nnab )(1 − xa )]}(1 − i)

(28)

μ
.

(29)

10. The constants a, b1 , b2 , k1 , k2 , π,s1 , s2 , v1 , v2 , xa and xk are determined by a nonlinear
equation system, in conjunction with the 5 equations (24), (26), (27), (28) and (29) that determine the 5 variables g, i, r, ma (na /nb ), and mb (na /nb ). This system of nonlinear equations
does not involve either z or z.
Proof. See Appendix A.1.
Along a balanced growth path, wages grow at the constant gross rate gζ/(ζ+λ) , a fact evident
from equation (19). So will aggregate output and proﬁts, as can be seen from (7). The gross
interest rate, 1/r, will remain constant along balanced growth. Point (2) implies that on average
the values of the ﬁrm at the buying, selling, and keeping stages also grow at the rate of growth of
output. So, the relative values of a ﬁrm at these stages remain constant along a balanced growth
path. Thus, it is not surprising then that the decisions to buy, sell or keep patents in terms of
proximity, x, do not change over time. Hence, the function Ik (z, x; s) does not depend on z. It
may seem surprising that the decision doesn’t depend on z, either. This transpires because a ﬁrm’s
proﬁts are linear in z, as (7) shows. It turns out that k1 = s1 , which implies that only x is relevant
[when comparing k1 z + k2 (x)z with s1 z + s2 z]. Likewise, the value of a patent agent also increases
at rate gζ/(ζ+λ) –point 3. Hence, equation (20) dictates that the price, q, at which a ﬁrm can sell
a patent must also grow at this rate. Additionally, it is easy to see from (16) that the price at
which the agent sells a patent to ﬁrms, p, will appreciate at this rate too. Note that this price does
not depend on z, because given the linear form of the value function, V , only x will be relevant
(when comparing v1 z  with v1 z). Additionally, using (17) it should now be not too diﬃcult to see
that the function Ia (z, x; s) will only depend on x. It’s easy to deduce from equation (14) that the
rate of innovation, i, will be constant over time if B, K, and S grow at the same rate as aggregate
productivity. Since the decisions to buy and sell patents only depend on x, it is not surprising
that the number of buyers and sellers on the patent market are ﬁxed along a balanced growth
path. Last, the evolution of shape of the distribution function Z over time does not matter for the
analysis. Its mean grows at the gross rate g, independently of any transformation in shape.

2.5.1

Stationary Firm-Size Distribution

The model will display a stationary ﬁrm-size distribution along a balanced growth, despite the fact
the distribution for Z is shifting over time and may be changing shape.
16

To see this, substitute

Buy, Keep or Sell: Economic Growth and the Market for Ideas

(19) into (18), while making use of the deﬁnition in (23), to get
l=

z
≡ z!.
z

Thus, the amount of labor that a ﬁrm hires is proportional to its own productivity, z, relative to
the mean level of productivity in the economy, z. So, specifying the ﬁrm-size distribution amounts
to characterizing the distribution for z/z.
To characterize the ﬁrm-size distribution, focus on a ﬁrm’s draw for x. This is an independently
and identically distributed random variable. To see this, note that in the current setting a ﬁrm
will innovate with probability i. If it innovates then it will draw x from the distribution X[0, 1].
Conditional on innovating, it will sell the technology with probability xk and will keep it with
probability 1 − xk . If it fails to innovate then it will go onto the market for patents. Conditional
on failing to innovate, it ﬁnds a buyer with probability mb (na /nb ). When it ﬁnds a buyer then it
will draw from U [0, 1]. A purchase then occurs with probability 1 − xa . Hence,
⎧
⎪
⎨ = 0,
x is
∼ X[xk , 1],
⎪
⎩
∼ U [xa , 1],

with Pr{(1 − i)[(1 − mb ) + mb xa ] + ixk },
with Pr[i(1 − xk )],

(30)

with Pr[(1 − i)mb (1 − xa )].

Note that 0 < E[x] < 1.
Turn to the ﬁrm’s law of motion for z or (4). Divide z through by z to get
z
z
zz
=  + γ  x,
z
z z
z

or

z! =

1
1
z! + γ x,
g
g
#$%&

(31)

<1

where z! ≡ z/z. This is a stationary autoregressive process with a non-Gaussian error term. Here,
treat g as a constant, The gross growth rate, g, can be taken as a constant because it can be solved
for independently of the form for the stationary distribution. Proposition 1 establishes this. In a
similar vein, mb , xa , and xk are known constants that are independent of the form of the stationary
distribution; again, this is a consequence of Proposition 1. Note that the process for z! will be
trapped within the compact set [0, z], where z ≡ γ/[(g − 1)], provided that it starts oﬀ within this
interval.
Proposition 2 (Existence of a Unique Stationary Firm-Size Distribution). The stochastic process
(31) converges weakly to a unique invariant distribution.
Proof. See Appendix A.2.
! Why does the stationary ﬁrm-size distribution
Denote the stationary distribution for z! by Z.
have a ﬁnite upper bound, z? The answer is that it is diﬃcult for a ﬁrm’s productivity, z, to grow
faster than aggregate productivity, z. Growth in aggregate productivity pulls all ﬁrms along as
is evident in (4). When a ﬁrm’s growth in productivity pulls ahead of aggregate growth it loses
17

Akcigit, Celik, and Greenwood
this slipstream eﬀect, so to speak. Since z  increases in an arithmetic fashion with x growth must
decay when z is held ﬁxed. The distribution for productivity across ﬁrms, or Z, is not stationary.
Consider a point along a balanced growth path where z = 1. The z’s will be distributed on [0, z]
! where z ≡ γ/[(g − 1)]. Next period z will have grown to z = gz. Now, z will be
according to Z,

!
distributed on the [0, gz] according to Z  = Z(z/g).
Note the distribution for the z’s is getting
stretched rightward over time; i.e., the cumulative distribution function is being deﬁned over an
ever increasing domain. In general, if in the current period Z : [0, z ∗ ] → [0, 1] then for next period
Z  : [0, gz ∗ ] → [0, 1], where Z  (z) = Z(z/g). This implicitly deﬁnes the transition operator TZ in
(21).

2.6

Discussion

In this section, some important issues related to the patents and the theoretical model will be
discussed.
First, the model abstracts from licensing. While licensing is a potential mechanism for diﬀusing
ideas, it would not have a direct impact on the misallocation margin that is of interest. The goal is
to focus on misallocations where an idea is born to a bad match even though there is potentially a
better (good) match in the economy. The question is: how does licensing aﬀect the misallocation?
To see this, consider two ﬁrms, f1 and f2 , where f1 owns an existing patent p. There are two
possibilities:
1. Both ﬁrms are competitors in the same market, in which case there will be no licensing since
f1 would like to keep the competitor outside the market.
2. Firms f1 and f2 are in diﬀerent markets. In this case, there can be licensing only if the idea
is a good match for f2 . But now there are two subcases:
(a) p is a bad match to f1 : In this case a licensing arrangement is inferior to purchasing
the patent since the licensee cannot sue parties that infringe on the underlying patent
because the former does not own the patent. A non-exclusive licensing arrangement
may leave the purchaser facing competition from other license holders. Moreover f2 is
more likely to have more insider information about the potential user in its own industry
and can market the patent and license it out more eﬀectively than f1 who operates in a
diﬀerent industry. Therefore, a patent sale would be superior to licensing when f1 and
f2 are in diﬀerent markets and the idea is a bad match to f1 .
(b) p is a good match to f1 : In this case, there is no misallocation of ideas in the sense of the
model. The idea would have multiple uses in diﬀerent industries, and licensing would be
desired in this case.
Therefore licensing should not have an eﬀect on the misallocation that is quantiﬁed here.
18

Buy, Keep or Sell: Economic Growth and the Market for Ideas

Second, the model also abstracts from idea transfers due to M&A activities. M&A can occur
due to many diﬀerent reasons such as ﬁnancial or strategic reasons which might be orthogonal to
the misallocation that is being considered in this paper. Although analysing M&A is interesting in
its own right, this is beyond the scope of the current analysis. Therefore this consideration is left
out of the theoretical analysis and will be dropped in the empirical analysis.
Third, the model does not allow for specialization in the production of ideas. In the data,
it is not possible to distinguish between direct producers and users of innovations, therefore this
distinction is abstracted from. A naive intuition says that large ﬁrms would reduce their in-house
R&D and purchase disproportionately more from other (small) ﬁrms. However, one interesting and
surprising fact in the data is that most of the patent transfers occur among small ﬁrms [this fact
has already been shown by Serrano (2010, 2011)]. Because of this, specialization might not be as
common as one would think. Also note that specialization would increase the importance of the
secondary market. Therefore the quantitative numbers from the analysis can be seen as a lower
bound for the importance of the market for ideas.
Fourth, the current analysis ignores the rise of non-practicing entities and defensive aggregators.
The former buy patents and then seek licensing fees from ﬁrms under threat of litigation. The latter
try to reduce litigation for ﬁrms by buying “toxic patents” and providing licenses. There also ﬁrms
that are hybrids between these two forms of entities. See Hagiu and Yoﬃe (2011) for a discussion.
Entities that are solely specialized in buying and selling patents are not dominant in the data as
shown in Table 1. First, the fraction of patents that are traded at most one time accounts for 97%
of the data. Second, the buying or selling ﬁrms in Section 3 have at least one patent that they
produced themselves. Hence, the ﬁrms under consideration here are innovating ﬁrms rather than
sole traders.
Fifth, it is important to note the role that patent protection is playing in the current model.
Thanks to patents, ideas are being allocated to potentially better users. The typical trade-oﬀ
analyzed and discussed by the literature on patents weighs the monopoly distortions against the
beneﬁts of innovation incentives. The analysis here suggests an additional important role of patents:
the possibility of trading ideas. In the absence of patents, there would be no room for registering
an idea with the hope of selling it to a better user. Hence, the design of patent policy might need
to take this aspect into account as well. The discussion of the optimal patent protection is beyond
the scope of the current analysis, therefore monopoly distortions are particularly avoided in the
current work. An interesting avenue for future research would be to quantify the optimal patent
policy by bringing together the monopoly distortions, innovation incentive and the possibility of
trading ideas.
Finally, random search is considered instead of directed search. If directed search had been
used, the distance between the buyer of a patent and the patent would have been zero upon trade.
This is not what is observed in the data. Conditional upon sale, there is still a signiﬁcant distance
dispersion in the data (see Table 4 and its discussion).
19

Akcigit, Celik, and Greenwood

Eﬃciency Properties of the Model

In this model, there are two sources of ineﬃciencies.

The ﬁrst one is the usual intertemporal spillovers of the quality ladder models. Each single innovation raises the aggregate knowledge stock in the society, which beneﬁts the future generations
that stand on the shoulder of the giant through z̄ in (4). The second source of ineﬃciency emerges
due to bargaining frictions. The decisions of actors in this economy aﬀect the equilibrium market
tightness which makes it harder (or easier) to ﬁnd a match for others in the economy, an eﬀect
which is not internalized. Since these two eﬀects jointly determine equilibrium welfare, satisfying
the Hosios condition by changing the bargaining power will not necessarily lead to the constrained
eﬃcient outcome in this model due to the intertemporal spillovers.7 The details of the role of the
bargaining power can be found in Section 5.5.

3

Empirical Analysis

The empirical analysis is discussed now. The next section provides some details on data sources
and variable constructions. For further details, please see the Empirical Appendices C and D.

3.1

Data Sources

NBER-USPTO Utility Patents Grant Data (PDP). The core of the empirical analysis draws from
the NBER-USPTO Patent Grant Database (PDP). Patents are exclusionary rights, granted by
national patent oﬃces, to protect a patent holder for a certain amount of time, conditional on
sharing the details of the invention. The PDP data contains detailed information on 3,210,361
utility patents granted by the U.S. Patent and Trademark Oﬃce between the years 1976 and 2006.
A patent has to cite another patent when the former has a content related to the latter. When
patent A cites patent B, this particular citation becomes both a backward citation made by A to B
and a forward citation received by B from A. Moreover, the PDP contains an International Patent
Classiﬁcation (IPC) code for each patent that helps identify their relevant technologies.8 Extensive
use of the forward and backward citations are made, as well as the IPC codes assigned to each
patent, to determine a patent’s location in the technology space, its distance to a ﬁrm’s location in
the technology spectrum, and also to proxy for a patent’s quality. The exact methodology followed
to construct these measures will be detailed below.
Patent Reassignment Data (PRD). The second source of data comes from the recently-released
USPTO patent assignment ﬁles retrieved from Google Patents Beta. This dataset provides detailed
information on the changes of ownership of the patents for the years 1980 to 2011. The records
include 966,427 patent reassignments not only due to sales, but also due to mergers, license grants,
7
The constrained eﬃcient outcome here refers to a social planner’s allocation that is subject to the same search
frictions.
8
The USPTO originally assigns each patent to a particular U.S. Patent Classiﬁcation (USPC) which is a system
used by the USPTO to organize all patents according to their common technological relevances. The PDP also assigns
an IPC code to each patent using the original USPC and a USPC-IPC concordance based on the International Patent
Classiﬁcation Eighth Edition.

20

Buy, Keep or Sell: Economic Growth and the Market for Ideas

splits, mortgages, collaterals, conversions, internal transfers, etc. Reassignment records are classiﬁed according to a search algorithm that looks for keywords, such as “assignment”, “purchase”,
“sale”, and “merger”, and assigns them to their respective categories. Through this process, 99%
of the transaction records are classiﬁed into their respective groups.
Compustat North American Fundamentals (Annual). In order to assess the impact of patents
and their technological distance on ﬁrm moments such as real sales and stock market valuation, the
PDP patent data is linked to Compustat ﬁrms. The focus is on the balance sheets of Compustat
ﬁrms between the years 1974-2006, retrieved from Wharton Research Data Services. The Compustat database and the NBER PDP database are connected using the matching procedure provided
in the PDP data.
The empirical analysis requires the construction of a notion of distance in the technology space.
For that purpose, the citation patterns across IPC technology ﬁelds are utilized. The PDP contains
the full list of citations with the identity of citing and cited patents. Since the data also contains
the IPC code of each patent, the percentage of outgoing citations from one technology class to
another are observable. Using this information, the metric (1) is employed to gauge the distance
between a new patent and a ﬁrm’s location in the technology spectrum.
In what follows, for each empirical fact the best and largest possible sample is used. For instance,
for the ﬁrm value regressions all patents that are matched to the Compustat sample are utilized.
Similarly, to describe the change from seller to buyer, all patents for which the buyer and seller
could be uniquely identiﬁed are used. Therefore, even though the samples will be varying across
diﬀerent empirical facts, this approach delivers the most reliable results and robustness checks are
also provided.

3.2

Stylized Facts

Next, the empirical ﬁndings highlighted in the introduction of the paper are presented. Table 1
provides the summary statistics.
Panels A shows the summary statistics of the variables computed using Compustat Firms. To
convert nominal variables into their real counterparts, sector-speciﬁc NBER CES MID shipment deﬂators are used. The distance-adjusted patent stock is constructed in a way such that each patent’s
contribution to the portfolio is multiplied by its distance to the ﬁrm prior to the aggregation:


dι (p, f ) × quality(p)

p∈Pf

where dι (p, f ) and quality(p) are the distance and weighted citations of patent p.
Panel B reports the summary statistics of the USPTO/NBER patent data. As seen, the average
distance between a new patent and its ﬁrm is 0.48. The so-called “garage inventors” and ﬁrms that
21

Akcigit, Celik, and Greenwood

Table 1: Summary Statistics
Panel A. Compustat Facts
log
log
log
log
log

Observation
23,028
36,094
38,822
38,822
38,822

real sales
market value
employment
patent stock
distance-adjusted patent stock

Mean
5.33
5.60
.771
5.74
3.64

St. Dev
2.72
2.29
2.27
2.26
4.10

12.1
.481

20.7
.304

.156
.191
5.48

.363
.517
4.58

1 time
97%

2 times
99%

Panel B. USPTO/NBER Patent Facts
patent quality
patent distance

2,789,701
2,565,424
Panel C. Patent Reassignment Facts

sale probability (=1 if sale, =0 o/w)
number of times a patent is sold
conditional duration of patent sale (years)

3,210,361
3,210,361
421,936

Panel D. Cumulative Density
0 time
85%

number of times a patent is sold

Notes: Sales and market values are deflated by “nber ces mid” shipment deflators to convert into
real terms. Patent quality is measured by the number of patent citations corrected for truncation
using “hjt correction term” from Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg (2001). “Portfolio Size” is defined
as the number of patents that the innovating firm has ever produced by the time of the current
innovation. Transfer duration is measured by grant date, and negative durations are dropped.

do not have any existing patents in their portfolio are dropped when patent distance is computed.
Panel C lists the summary statistics using patent reassignment data. On average, 15.6% of
patents are being traded. On average, it takes about 5.5 years to sell a patent since the grant date
of a patent. The average number of trades per patent is 0.2. Panel D shows that 97% of patents
are traded at most one time and this number goes up to 99% when the fraction of patents that are
traded at most two times are considered.

3.2.1

Firm Moments and Patent-Firm Distance

Are patent-ﬁrm distances important when it comes to the relationship between a ﬁrm’s patent
portfolio and its moments, such as sales and assets? In order to answer this question, Table 2
regresses “log real sales” and “log market value” in year t on a ﬁrm’s patent portfolio, its distanceadjusted patent portfolio, and the ﬁrm’s size in the same year. The regressions also include year
and ﬁrm ﬁxed eﬀects to rule out ﬁrm-speciﬁc properties and time trends.
22

Buy, Keep or Sell: Economic Growth and the Market for Ideas

Table 2: Firm Moment Regressions
log sales
log market value
log sales
log patent stock
log dist-adj pat stock
log employment
Obs.

R2

log market value

(ﬁrm f.e.)

(ﬁrm f.e.)

(sector f.e.)

(sector f.e.)

0.195∗∗∗
(0.008)
−0.009∗∗∗
(0.003)
0.936∗∗∗
(0.008)
23,028
0.96

0.039∗∗∗
(0.008)
−0.020∗∗∗
(0.003)
0.728∗∗∗
(0.008)
36,094
0.92

0.085∗∗∗
(0.006)
−0.007∗∗
(0.003)
1.052∗∗∗
(0.004)
23,028
0.86

0.238∗∗∗
(0.005)
−0.050∗∗∗
(0.003)
0.733∗∗∗
(0.004)
36,094
0.78

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. *10%, **5%, ***1% significance. Year dummies and intercept
terms are included. Distance is computed using ι = 2/3. Columns 1-2 include firm and 3-4 include
2-digit SIC dummies.

As expected, the patent portfolio of a ﬁrm is positively related to its sales and stock market
valuation. More interestingly, a ﬁrm’s patent portfolio is negatively related to ﬁrm moments, once
it is adjusted by patent distances. Note that the coeﬃcient of the distance-adjusted patent stock
quantiﬁes the loss of correlation between the patent portfolio and the ﬁrm moments due to the
technological mismatch between the ﬁrm and its patents.
In order to interpret the results correctly, consider the ratio of the negative coeﬃcient of the
distance-adjusted patent stock to that of the unadjusted patent stock. This ratio is statistically
signiﬁcant, but not huge for real sales (4.62%), but quite high for the market value of equity (51.3%).
These regressions suggest that a patent portfolio that has a distance equal to the average value
(0.481) contributes 25% less to the average ﬁrm value (

0.481 × 0.02/0.039). Similarly, using

the sample means for log patent stock and log distance-adjusted patent stock, the percentage loss
generated by the observed misallocation turns out to be 2.93% [
real sales and 32.5% [

3.2.2

(3.64 × 0.009)/(5.74 × 0.195)] for

(3.64 × 0.020)/(5.74 × 0.039)] for market value on average.

Patent Sale Decision and Patent-Firm Distance

Does the technological distance of a patent to the ﬁrm inﬂuence the decision to keep or sell a
patent? In order to conduct this analysis, the indicator variable of whether a patent is sold or
kept (=1 if a patent is sold, =0 if not) is regressed on a number of potentially related regressors,
including the patent’s distance to the initial owner. Table 3 reports the OLS regression results:
This regression indicates that a patent is more likely to be sold if it is more distant to the ﬁrm.
23

Akcigit, Celik, and Greenwood

Table 3: Patent Resale Decision
Indicator (=1 if sold)
distance
patent quality
log (size of patent portfolio)
Obs.
R2

Indicator (=1 if sold)

(ﬁrm f.e.)

(sector f.e.)

2.12∗∗∗
(0.078)
0.039∗∗∗
(0.001)
−1.61∗∗∗
(0.044)
2,564,305
0.42

2.11∗∗∗
(0.101)
0.066∗∗∗
(0.001)
−1.05∗∗∗
(0.011)
2,564,306
0.09

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. *10%, **5%, ***1% significance. Year dummies and intercept
terms are included. Distance is computed using ι = 2/3. Column 1 includes firm and 2 includes 6-digit
IPC dummies. Reported coefficients are multiplied by 100. Patent quality is measured by the number
of forward citations.

The size of the patent portfolio of the ﬁrm, and patent quality are also included in the regression
to avoid spurious relationships, or mechanical bias that may be caused by the construction of the
distance metric. Year and ﬁrm ﬁxed eﬀects are likewise included to remove potential sources of bias.
Despite the addition of these controls, the coeﬃcient on the distance variable remains statistically
signiﬁcant, and positive. Considering the average number of patents sold (

15%) in the time

period, the coeﬃcient suggests that a perfectly mismatched patent is 14.1% (

0.0212/0.15) more

likely to be sold to another ﬁrm, rather than being kept. Recall also that the deﬁnition of sale
employed is quite conservative, in the sense that patent transfers due to mergers and acquisitions
are not considered sales, even though the primary motive for these events might be the acquisition
of patents. The results are in line with the intuition that a ﬁrm is more likely to sell patents that
are not a good ﬁt, rather than keeping them, due to the potential gains from trading the patent to
a ﬁrm that might be better suited to exploit the embedded ideas commercially.
3.2.3

Patent-Firm Distance Reduction Conditional on a Patent Resale

The primary motivation behind considering patent distance as a likely determinant of patent resale
decisions is the potential gains from trade that arise if the patent can be sold to a ﬁrm that can use
it better, which in expectation yields more proﬁts. If this intuition is correct, the distance between
the owner ﬁrm and the patent is expected to decrease after a patent is sold. In order to test this
hypothesis, a distance diﬀerence variable for each patent transaction is constructed, for which the
buyer and seller ﬁrms can be identiﬁed in the PDP data. Here d (p, fb ) denotes the distance of the
24

Buy, Keep or Sell: Economic Growth and the Market for Ideas

patent to the buyer ﬁrm, and d (p, fs ) to the seller ﬁrm. Next, a regression is run on the control
variables that consist of year and seller ﬁrm ﬁxed eﬀects. The sign and signiﬁcance of the intercept
term is used to test the hypothesis. Table 4 reports the results.
Table 4: Distance Reduction on Resale
Change in distance: d (p, fb ) − d (p, fs )
intercept
Obs.
R2

(seller f.e.)

(sector f.e.)

−0.182∗∗∗

−0.361∗∗∗
(0.058)
25,170
0.67

(0.061)
25,170
0.40

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. *10%, **5%, ***1% significance. Year dummies are included.
Distance is computed using ι = 2/3. Column 1 includes seller and 2 includes 6-digit IPC dummies.

The results indicate that after controlling for year and ﬁrm ﬁxed eﬀects, conditional on a patent
resale, the distance between a patent and its owner is signiﬁcantly decreased. In other words, the
mismatch between the idea and the ﬁrm owning it is reduced. This eﬀect is economically big.
Considering that the average measure for distance is 0.481, the average reduction in distance is
approximately 37.8% (

4

0.182/0.481) of the average distance.

Calibration

In order to simulate the model values must be assigned to the various parameters. There are twelve
parameters to pick: β, ε, κ, λ, δ, σ, γ, χ, ρ, μ, η, and ω. A distribution for X(x) needs to be
provided as well. In order to select values for the parameters a set of data targets is speciﬁed for
the model to match. Computing the solution to the model essentially involves solving a system of
nonlinear equations, as Point (10) in Proposition 1 makes clear. The invariant ﬁrm-size distribution
for the model is computed by conducting a Monte Carlo simulation. In particular, a panel of 100,000
ﬁrms is simulated for 3,000 periods. While it is not necessarily the case that a particular parameter
governs the ability of model to mimic a certain data target, due to simultaneity in the system
of equations that characterizes the model, some intuition about where each parameter is likely to
impinge is provided. The data targets are as follows:
1. Long-run growth in output. In the U.S. output grew at about 2% per year over the postwar
period. Intuitively, the parameter γ, which enters the law of motion for productivity growth
(4), should play an important role in determining this.
25

Akcigit, Celik, and Greenwood

2. Long-run interest rate. A reasonable value for the long-run interest rate in the U.S. is 4%.
Pick β using the equation β = rgεζ/(ζ+λ) – see (24).
3. The ratio of R&D expenditure to GDP. U.S. expenditure on research and development is
about 2.91% of GDP. The parameter χ is key here because it governs the cost of doing R&D,
as can be seen from (3).
4. Capital’s and labor’s shares of income, κ and λ. In line with Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel
(2009), capital’s and labor’s shares of incomes, κ and λ, are selected to 25 and 60%. Intangible
capital, as represented by ζ, then accounts for the remaining 15%. In the current setting, this
is interpreted as the value of patents, or intellectual property, in production.
5. Depreciation rate for capital, δ. The depreciation rate of capital is chosen to be 6.9%. This
is consistent with the U.S. National Income and Product Accounts.
6. Survival rate for a patent, σ. In the U.S. a patent lasts for 17 years. Hence, σ = 1−1/(1+17).
7. Fraction of patents sold. About 16% of patents are sold in U.S. The parameters governing the
matching function and the strength of the weight of the patent agent in bargaining underpin
this statistic for the model. The higher the weight of the patent agent in the bargaining, ω,
the higher will be the price q. This will entice more ﬁrms to sell. Similarly, the easier it is
to sell a patent, as determined by the matching function parameters, the higher will be the
price q.
8. Duration until a sale. The empirical frequency distribution for the duration of a sale is
targeted. In particular, the calibration procedure tries to minimize the sum of the squared
diﬀerences between the empirical distribution and the analogue for the model. It takes about
5.34 years on average to sell a patent. The coeﬃcient of variation around this mean is 0.82.
So, there is considerable variation in sale duration. The parameters governing the matching
function are obviously central here.
9. The Empirical Distribution for the Proximity of Patent to a Firm’s Technology Class. Empirical distance distributions for the U.S. displayed in Figure 5. For the baseline calibration,
take the distance distribution associated with ι = 2/3. Deﬁne a measure of proximity (or
closeness) between a patent p and a ﬁrm f by cι (p, f ) ≡ 1 − dι (p, f ), where dι (p, f ) is given
by (1). The density associated with cι (p, f ) is used for X(x). This amounts to just a simple
26

Buy, Keep or Sell: Economic Growth and the Market for Ideas

change in units on the horizontal axis in Figure 5. Assume that x is distributed uniformly
within each of the ten bins of the histogram.
10. R&D Cost Elasticity, ρ. In order to estimate the elasticity of the R&D cost function, the
cost function in the model is inverted to obtain a production function. Then a regression is
run using Compustat data to determine the parameter values, where the output of the R&D
production function is proxied for by citation-weighted patents.
11. CRRA parameter, ε. This parameter is taken to be 2, the midpoint between the various
estimates reported in Kaplow (2005).
12. Bargaining power, ω. The bargaining powers of buyers and sellers are chosen to be equal.
The details of the role of the bargaining power can be found in Section 5.5.

Parameter Value
β = 0.98
ε = 2.00
κ = 0.25
λ = 0.60
δ = 0.07
σ = 0.94
ω = 0.50
ρ = 3.00
X(x)
γ = 0.38
χ = 2.49
μ = 0.52
η = 0.15

Table 5: Parameter Values
Description
Identiﬁcation
External Calibration
Discount factor
Real interest rate
CRRA parameter
Kaplow (2005)
Tangible Capital’s share
Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel (2009)
Labor’s share
Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel (2009)
Depreciation rate
NIPA
Patent survival rate
U.S. patent law
Bargaining power
Imposed, equal for buyers and sellers
R&D cost elasticity
Regression using Compustat data
Proximity distribution
Empirical distribution in Figure 5
Internal Calibration
Law of motion, productivity
Growth rate in GDP
Cost of R&D
R&D expenditure to GDP
Exponent of the matching function Fraction of patents sold, sale
Scale of the matching function
Duration distribution

Notes: Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel (2009) report the share of intangible capital as 15%. All
internally calibrated parameters are identified jointly; the moments in the internal calibration
panel are provided for intuition.

The upshot of the calibration procedure is displayed in Tables 5 and 6. The parameters β, ε, κ,
λ, δ, σ, ρ, and ω can be calculated directly from the data targets (2), (4), (5), (6), (10), (11) and
(12) without having to solve the model. The distribution X(x) is constructed in line with point
(9). To obtain values for χ, μ, γ, and η the solution for the model must be computed. The values
for these parameters are selected by minimizing the Euclidean distance between the data targets
outlined in (1), (3), (7) and (8) and the model’s predictions for these targets.
27

Akcigit, Celik, and Greenwood

Table 6: Calibration Targets
Target
U.S. Data
Long-run growth in output
2.00%
Ratio of R&D expenditure to GDP
2.91%
Fraction of patents that are sold
15.6%
Average duration until a sale*
5.48 yrs.
Sale duration, c.v*
0.82

Model
2.00%
2.41%
15.2%
5.28 yrs.
1.09

Notes: In the calibration, in addition to the first three moments listed above, the full sale distribution (with 17 data points) is targeted as shown in Figure 10. The above table reports the average
sale duration and the coefficient of variation (moments with ‘*’) to summarize the performance.

The unique invariant ﬁrm-size distribution associated with this calibration is shown by Figure
8. This distribution resembles a log normal. The coeﬃcient of variation for the distribution is 50%.
Figure 9 illustrates how the productivity distribution shifts rightward over time due to growth in
the economy. (Here the histograms calculated from the Monte Carlo simulation are replaced by a
ﬁtted density function so the movement could be highlighted). A change in shape of the distribution
over time is evident.

Figure 8: Time-invariant firm size
distribution.

Figure 9: Time-dependent productivity
distribution.

Last, Figure 10 shows, for both the data and model, the frequency distribution over the duration
for a sale. As can be seen, it appears to be harder to aﬀect a sale in data than in the model.

28

Buy, Keep or Sell: Economic Growth and the Market for Ideas

Figure 10: Sale duration distribution, data and model.

5

Findings

The importance of a resale market for patents will be gauged. To do this, various experiments that
change the eﬃciency of the patent market will be entertained. The eﬃciency of the resale market
for patents is increased in stages. First, the resale market is shut-down by setting the meeting
rate to zero and then an experiment is performed where the meeting rate for matches is allowed
to rise. While it may be easier for buyers and sellers to meet now, a seller’s idea may still not
be well suited for the buyer. The next experiment considers a situation where patent agents can
ﬁnd buyers who are perfect matches for the ideas that they are selling. So, there is no mismatch
between buyers and sellers on the patent market. Still, innovating ﬁrms produce ideas that are
not ideally suited for their own businesses and this injects a friction into the analysis. A patent
that is not incorporated into an innovator’s production process will only have a ﬁnite life on the
resale market. Additionally, it may take time to ﬁnd a buyer. The ﬁnal experiment focuses on the
case where innovating ﬁrms produce ideas that are tailored toward their own production activity.
Here ideas are perfectly matched with the developer. The change in welfare from moving from one
environment to another is calculated. The metric for comparing welfare will be discussed now.

5.1

Welfare Comparisons

Consider two economies, namely A and B, moving along their balanced growth paths. The consumption/output ratio and gross growth rate for economy A are given by cA /oA and gA . Similar
29

Akcigit, Celik, and Greenwood

notation is used for country B. To render things comparable, start each country oﬀ from an initial
position where oA = oB = 1. Thus, cA = cA /oA and cB = cB /oB ; i.e., the initial consumption/output ratio for each country can be used as measure of initial consumption. Now, the levels
of welfare for economies A and B are given by
WA =

∞

t=1

β t−1

1−ε
A 1−ε
(cA
(cA
t )
1 /o1 )
,
=
1−ε
(1 − ε)[1 − β(gA )1−ε ]

and

WB =

B 1−ε
(cB
1 /o1 )
.
(1 − ε)[1 − β(gB )1−ε ]

How much would initial consumption in economy A have to be raised or lowered to make people
have the same welfare level as in economy B? Denote the fractional amount in gross terms by α
(which may be less than one). Then, α must solve
A 1−ε
(αcA
B
1 /o1 )
1−ε = W
A
(1 − ε)[1 − β(g ) ]

so that
α = (W B /W A )1/(1−ε) .
This is the welfare measure that is used in all experiments.

5.2

Varying the Contact Rate for Matches, η

The patent resale market mitigates the initial misallocation of ideas. Still, it takes time to sell a
patent as the patent agent may not be able to ﬁnd a buyer. To understand how this friction in
matching aﬀects the economy, it is useful to examine the relationship between the scale factor for
the matching function, η, and several key variables. Figures 11 and 12 summarize the results.

Figure 11: The impact of an increase in the contact rate for matching on sales
duration, growth, innovation and welfare.
The resale market is shut down when η = 0. When there is no resale market, the equilibrium
growth rate goes down to 1.8% from from its benchmark value of 2%. This results in a welfare
30

Buy, Keep or Sell: Economic Growth and the Market for Ideas

Figure 12: The impact of an increase in the contact rate for matching on price,
tightness and the cutoffs.
reduction of 4.8% in consumption equivalent terms, which is quite sizable. As the contact rate, η
rises it becomes easier to ﬁnd a buyer for a patent, ceteris paribus. This is reﬂected in a drop in the
length of time that it takes to ﬁnd a buyer, as the right panel of Figure 11 illustrates. The price
that an innovating ﬁrm receives for a patent, q, rises accordingly–see the left panel of Figure 12. As
the price moves up an innovating ﬁrm becomes choosier about the patents that it will keep. Figure
12 illustrates how an innovator’s cutoﬀ for selling, xk , rises with η. (Recall that better patents are
associated with higher values for the proximity metric.) Similarly, buyers become pickier about the
patents that will they purchase so that xa moves up with η.

The rate of innovation, i, also falls, which is more surprising. The consequences of failing to
innovate are now lessened because it will be easier for a ﬁrm to buy a patent. Market slackness,
na /nb , has an interesting ∩ shape, which is displayed in the left panel of Figure 12. When η = 0
the patent market is essentially closed as no innovators will want to sell their ideas. The number
of prospective buyers is 1 − i. As η starts to rise so does the number of innovators that want to
sell their ideas. This increases the ﬂow of new patents into the patent market and results in na /nb
moving upwards. As the rate of innovation, i, declines the number of prospective buyers, 1 − i,
rises. This force operates to reduce na /nb . Additionally, as the contact rates increases the market
becomes more eﬃcient. It is easier for a seller to ﬁnd a buyer, ceteris paribus. This works to reduce
the stock of sellers.

Growth increases along with eﬃciency in matching, despite the reduction in the number of new
ideas–see the left panel of Figure 11. So does welfare. If the eﬃciency of the market was at its
extreme (the minimum value for η that results in all buyers meeting a patent agent with probability
1), growth would go up to 2.5% and welfare would be 10.4% higher than the calibrated economy.
The upshot is that the resale market for patents plays an important role in the economy.
31

Akcigit, Celik, and Greenwood

5.3

Perfectly Directed Search

A second source of ineﬃciency in the model is the random search technology used in the patent
market. In the baseline model, conditional upon a meeting between a buyer and a resale agent, the
proximity of the patent to the ﬁrm is drawn from a uniform distribution. Instead imagine a directed
search structure, where patent agents are able to target the segment of the economy that exactly
matches the patent they want to sell. In such a case, whether or not a patent agent meets a buyer
is still a probabilistic event governed by the matching function. The proximity between the patent
and the ﬁrm would be nonstochastic and equal to unity; in other words, a perfect match. The level
of welfare in this alternative economy is 7.4% higher than in the baseline one. The output growth
rate increases slightly from 2% to 2.3%, despite a small decline in the innovation rate. The fraction
of patents sold increases from 15.2 to 24.2%. But most strikingly, the decomposition of growth
reveals that fraction of growth due to patents sold doubles from 15.7 to 34.8%. This decomposition
can be done using equation (27). Note that there are two terms in the brackets. The ﬁrst term can
be used to measure the contribution to growth from the ideas that ﬁrms keep, the second from the
ones that they sell. Table 7 summarizes the results.
Table 7: Perfectly Directed Search
Baseline Model Directed Search
Output growth rate, gζ/(ζ+λ) − 1
0.020
0.023
Innovation rate, i
0.47
0.45
Welfare gain, α − 1
0.00
0.07
Fraction of patents sold
0.15
0.24
Growth from patents sold
0.16
0.35

5.3.1

Perfectly Directed Search with a High Contact Rate

Now, redo the above experiment while also using a high contact rate for matches.9 The results
are reported in Table 8. Output growth is now much higher at 3.1%, even though innovation is
slightly lower than in the baseline model. This reﬂects a reduction in misallocation. The reduction
in innovation is reﬂected by a slightly higher consumption/output ratio. As can be seen, now most
patents are sold. Economic welfare is 28% higher.10
9

η is set high enough that all buyers meet a patent agent with probability 1.
This large welfare gain derives solely from the large increase in growth, gζ/(ζ+λ) , given the assumed form of
preferences over consumption, as can be gleaned from Section 5.1. That is, if there is a large increase in growth then
this form of preferences will always show a large increase in welfare (when ε = 2, which is a standard value).
10

32

Buy, Keep or Sell: Economic Growth and the Market for Ideas

Table 8: Perfectly Directed Search with High Contact
Baseline Model Directed Search with High Contact
ζ/(ζ+λ)
−1
0.020
0.031
Output growth rate, g
Innovation rate, i
0.47
0.468
Welfare gain, α − 1
0.00
0.28
Fraction of patents sold
0.15
0.81
Growth from patents sold
0.16
0.83
Figure 13 gives the upshot from the experiments that have been conducted so far. It shows
how the cumulative distribution function for ideas, or for x, changes across the various experiments. First, in the U.S. data ﬁrms produce ideas that are not well suited for their own lines of
business, as can be seen from the distribution labeled “Empirical”. (Recall that a higher value for
x ∈ [0, 1] indicates that an idea is better suited for the ﬁrm’s business activity.) In the baseline
model, a ﬁrm is free to sell such an idea. A ﬁrm that fails to innovate can try to buy one from
another ﬁrm. This leads to a better distribution of ideas, as is reﬂected in the distribution function
for the baseline model after transactions on the secondary market for patents have been consummated. The distribution function for the baseline model stochastically dominates, in the ﬁrst-order
sense, the empirical distribution. When the contact rate for matching is high it relatively easy
to consummate a patent sale. The distribution for x improves–see the histogram labeled “High
Contact Rate”, which stochastically dominates the one for the baseline model. Of course, if search
could be perfectly directed things would be better still–“High Contact w Directed Search”, which
stochastically dominates all other distributions.
Note that not all ﬁrms sell their patents, even though they are not perfectly matched with their
ideas. This occurs because are still some frictions left in the patent market. First, there are more
sellers than buyers on the market, so not all patents will be immediately sold. Second, patents have
a ﬁnite life on the market and hence suﬀer some depreciation. Both these factors imply that the
price at which a ﬁrm can sell a patent, q, will be less than what it is worth to a perfectly matched
ﬁrm.

5.4

Removing the Misallocation of Ideas

The central ineﬃciency in the framework derives from the fact that ﬁrms develop ideas that are
imperfect matches for the own production processes. The presence of a secondary market for
patents mitigates this problem. Suppose that an innovating ﬁrm always comes up with an idea
33

Akcigit, Celik, and Greenwood

Figure 13: Misallocation of ideas.
Notes: This graph plots the cumulative distribution functions for x. A higher value for x implies
that an idea is better suited for a firm.

that is a perfect match for its production process. That is, let each innovating ﬁrm always draw
x = 1. This case is summarized in Table 9. In this situation, the economy could increase its growth
rate from 2 to 3.4%, a big jump. Welfare would increase by 35%. This illustrates that the frictions
arising from mismatches in innovation are large.
Table 9: Perfect Innovation
Baseline Model
ζ/(ζ+λ)
Output growth rate, g
−1
0.020
Innovation rate, i
0.47
Welfare gain, α − 1
0.00

5.5

Perfect Innovation
0.034
0.49
0.35

Importance of the Seller’s Bargaining Power, ω

The baseline calibration assumes that the bargaining power of buyers and sellers (patent agents)
are equal. It turns out that this gives the best ﬁt for calibration. It’s instructive to show how the
model behaves for varying values of ω, the bargaining power of patent agents. To see this, direct
attention to Figure 14.
To begin with, observe that the price received by the selling ﬁrm, q, rises continuously with the
34

Buy, Keep or Sell: Economic Growth and the Market for Ideas

Figure 14: The impact of the seller’s bargaining power on sales duration, the
price of a patent, innovation, the odds of finding a seller, growth and welfare.
bargaining power of the patent agent, ω. Recall that the selling ﬁrm takes all of the surplus earned
by the patent agent, as reﬂected in the form of (20). Next, as the price rises so does the average
time it takes to aﬀect a sale. This makes sense. Buyers will become choosier about the patents
they buy as prices rise; i.e., they will demand patents that are closer to their line of business.
Interestingly, the rate of innovation is ∪ shaped in ω. There are two forces at work here. On the
one hand, prices rise with the seller’s bargaining power. This increases the value of a selling ﬁrm,
S(z; s), and spurs innovation, as can be seen from (14). On the other hand, the odds of buying a
patent increase with ω, as there are more sellers on the market relative to buyers. The value of a
buying ﬁrm, B(z; s), rises on this account. This lowers the incentive to innovate; again see (14). At
low values for ω the second eﬀect dominates while at high values the ﬁrst one does. This results in
the ∪ shape. Despite the non-monotonic behavior for innovation, both growth and welfare increase
in ω. It is better for the economy when innovating ﬁrms capture the payoﬀs from developing new
ideas.

6

Robustness Analysis

Central to the analysis is the notion of how distant a new patent is to a ﬁrm’s location in the
technology spectrum. The distance between a new patent and a ﬁrm’s patent portfolio is measured
in a fairly general way using the metric (1), which is governed by the parameter ι. Figure 5
illustrates how the empirical distance distribution changes with ι. When ι = 1.0 the distance
metric just computes the average distance between the new patent and the other patents in the
ﬁrm’s portfolio. Lower values for ι put higher weight on patents in the portfolio that are closer to
the new patent. The analysis in the paper is done for three values of ι : ι = 1/3, ι = 2/3 (the
baseline model), and ι = 1 (average distance). The results hold for all three values of ι. Appendix
35

Akcigit, Celik, and Greenwood

B details some of the ﬁndings. In a nutshell:
1. The regression results reported in Section 3 do not change in a material manner.
2. The calibration targets can be hit for all three values of ι.
3. The model behaves essentially the same way for the three distance measures. For example,
shutting down the patent resale market in the baseline model leads to a welfare loss of 4.8%
in terms of consumption. This welfare loss rises to 5.4%, when ι = 1.0, and falls to 3.5%,
when ι = 1/3. Lower values for ι compress the distribution for new ideas; i.e., new ideas are
closer on average to the ﬁrm’s location in the technology spectrum. Therefore, shutting down
the patent market has a smaller eﬀect when ι is lower.
The empirical sale duration distribution is another object that disciplines the model. In the
baseline model duration is deﬁned as the time between the sale and grant dates for all patents sold
between 1980 and 2012. Diﬀerent criteria can be used for dating when an idea is born: (a) One
can consider using the application date instead of the grant date since some patents are sold before
they are granted. (b) Another important consideration is learning. Since patents introduce new
technologies, it might take some time for the economy to learn about them. The ﬁrst time that
another inventor builds on this invention (as measured by the ﬁrst citation that a patent receives)
might be a good proxy for the learning time. (c) Last, it is possible that excluding more recent
observations might prevent the confounding eﬀects of a potential truncation bias. This occurs
because patents toward the end of sample have less time to be sold. The analysis is repeated by
recalibrating the model with these three new sale duration distributions. The main ﬁndings are
robust to these changes in the sale duration distribution. Appendix B presents these ﬁndings.

7

Conclusions

A model of the market for patents is developed here. Each period a ﬁrm conducts research and
development. This R&D process may spawn ideas. Some of the ideas are useful for a ﬁrm’s line
of business, others are not. A ﬁrm can patent and sell the ideas that are not. The fact it can sell
ideas provides an incentive to engage in R&D. Likewise, ﬁrms that fail to innovate can attempt to
buy ideas. This allows a ﬁrm to grow its business. The eﬃciency of the patent market for matching
ideas with ﬁrms has implications for growth. These are examined here.
36

Buy, Keep or Sell: Economic Growth and the Market for Ideas

Empirical analysis, drawing on the NBER-USPTO patent grant database and patent reassignment data available from Google Patents Beta, established ﬁve useful facts. First, somewhere
between 15 and 20% of patents are sold. Second, it takes on average 5.48 years to sell a patent.
Third, a ﬁrm’s patent stock contributes more to its market value and sales the closer it is to the
ﬁrm in terms of average technological distance. Fourth, a patent is more likely to be sold the more
distant it is to a ﬁrm’s line of business. Fifth, when a patent is sold it is closer to the buyer’s line
of business than to the seller’s. These facts suggest that a resale market for patents may play a
important role in correcting the misallocation of ideas across ﬁrms. It may also inﬂuence a ﬁrm’s
R&D decision.
The developed model is calibrated to match several stylized facts characterizing the U.S. data,
such as the postwar rate of growth, the ratio of R&D spending to GDP, the fraction of patents sold,
and the empirical sale duration distribution. The importance of a market for selling patents is then
assessed. This is done by conducting a series of thought experiments where the resale market is
ﬁrst shut down and then the eﬃciency of the patent market is increased successively. The eﬃciency
of this market is important for economic growth and welfare. Last, economic growth and welfare
increase along with the bargaining power of the seller. As the seller’s bargaining power rises more of
the return from a new idea is assigned to the innovator. Given the spillovers in the growth process
that are present in the model, this is beneﬁcial.
The new NBER patent reassignment data opens new and exciting directions for future research
on innovation and technological progress. A ﬁrst direction is the analysis of optimal patent policy
that not only considers the monopoly distortions and innovation incentives, but also takes into
account the possibility of trading ideas through patents. The second direction is the analysis
of ﬁrm dynamics when patents are not only produced in-house, but also purchased from others.
Finally, the role of ﬁnancial frictions is also a new and important direction that could impact the
(mis)allocation of ideas. These are all very exciting and important aspects of technological progress
that await further research.

References
Acemoglu, D., P. Aghion, and F. Zilibotti (2006): “Distance to Frontier, Selection, and
Economic Growth,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 4(1), 37–74.
Acemoglu, D., U. Akcigit, N. Bloom, and W. R. Kerr (2013): “Innovation, Reallocation
and Growth,” National Bureau of Economic Research WP 18993.
37

Akcigit, Celik, and Greenwood

Aghion, P., U. Akcigit, and P. Howitt (2013): “What Do We Learn From Schumpeterian
Growth Theory?,” National Bureau of Economic Research WP 18824.
Benhabib, J., J. Perla, and C. Tonetti (2013): “Catch-up and Fall-back through Innovation
and Imitation,” Journal of Economic Growth, forthcoming.
Chatterjee, S., and E. Rossi-Hansberg (2012): “Spinoﬀs and the Market for Ideas,” International Economic Review, 53(1), 53–93.
Chiu, J., C. Meh, and R. Wright (2011): “Innovation and Growth with Financial, and other,
Frictions,” National Bureau of Economic Research WP 17512.
Corrado, C., C. Hulten, and D. Sichel (2009): “Intangible Capital and US Economic
Growth,” Review of Income and Wealth, 55(3), 661–685.
Gans, J. S., and S. Stern (2010): “Is there a Market for Ideas?,” Industrial and Corporate
Change, 19(3), 805–837.
Guner, N., G. Ventura, and Y. Xu (2008): “Macroeconomic Implications of Size-dependent
Policies,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 11(4), 721–744.
Hagiu, A., and D. B. Yoffie (2011): Intermediaries for the IP Market. Harvard Business School.
Hall, B. H., A. Jaffe, and M. Trajtenberg (2001): “The NBER Patent Citation Data File:
Lessons, Insights and Methodological Tools,” National Bureau of Economic Research WP 8498.
(2005): “Market Value and Patent Citations,” RAND Journal of Economics, 36(1), 16–38.
Hsieh, C.-T., E. Hurst, C. I. Jones, and P. J. Klenow (2013): “The Allocation of Talent
and US Economic Growth,” National Bureau of Economic Research WP 18693.
Hsieh, C.-T., and P. J. Klenow (2009): “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and
India,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4), 1403–1448.
Jones, C. I. (2013): “Misallocation, Economic Growth, and Input-Output Economics,” in Advances in Economics and Econometrics: Tenth World Congress, ed. by D. Acemoglu, M. Arellano, and E. Dekel, vol. II, pp. 419–456. Cambridge University Press.
Jovanovic, B., and G. M. MacDonald (1994): “The Life Cycle of a Competitive Industry,”
Journal of Political Economy, 102(2), 322–347.
Kaplow, L. (2005): “The Value of a Statistical Life and the Coeﬃcient of Relative Risk Aversion,”
Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 31(1), 23–34.
König, M., J. Lorenz, and F. Zilibotti (2012): “Innovation vs Imitation and the Evolution of
Productivity Distributions,” CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP8843.
Lamoreaux, N. R., and K. L. Sokoloff (2002): “Intermediaries in the US Market for Technology, 1870-1920,” National Bureau of Economic Research WP 9017.
Lucas, R. E., and B. Moll (2013): “Knowledge Growth and the Allocation of Time,” Journal
of Political Economy, forthcoming.
38

Buy, Keep or Sell: Economic Growth and the Market for Ideas

Perla, J., and C. Tonetti (2013): “Equilibrium Imitation and Growth,” Journal of Political
Economy, forthcoming.
Restuccia, D., and R. Rogerson (2008): “Policy Distortions and Aggregate Productivity with
Heterogeneous Establishments,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 11(4), 707–720.
Serrano, C. J. (2010): “The Dynamics of the Transfer and Renewal of Patents,” RAND Journal
of Economics, 41(4), 686–708.
(2011): “Estimating the Gains from Trade in the Market for Innovation: Evidence from
the Transfer of Patents,” National Bureau of Economic Research WP 17304.
Stokey, N. L., and R. E. Lucas (1989): Recursive Methods in Economic Dynamics. Harvard
University Press.

Appendix
A
A.1

Theory Appendix
Balanced Growth

Proof. The proof proceeds using a guess and verify procedure (or the method of undetermined
coeﬃcients).
Point (1). To derive the interest and rental rates, imagine the problem of a consumer/worker
who can invest in one period bonds that pay a gross interest rate of 1/r. The Euler equation for
asset accumulation will read
c−ε = (β/r)(c )−ε .
Along a balanced growth path, if the mean level of productivity grows at rate g then consumption,
the capital stock and output must grow at rate gζ/(ζ+λ) . This fact can be gleaned from the
production function (2), by assuming z grows at rate g, that capital and output grow at another
common rate, and that labor remains constant. Therefore, r = β/gεζ/(ζ+λ) . In standard fashion,
the rental rate on capital is given by r = 1/r − 1 + δ = gεζ/(ζ+λ) /β − 1 + δ.
Point (4). The form of the threshold rule for buying a patent follows from the fact the sum
of the surplus (sans price) accruing to a ﬁrm that buys a patent and the surplus (sans price) to
the patent agent must be greater than zero; otherwise, a non-negative sale price, p, for the patent
would not exist. First, plug the solutions for w and r, or (19) and (25), into the proﬁt function (7)
to obtain
z
Π(z, s) = π λ/(ζ+λ) = πz̃,
z
with
[κ−λκ/(ζ+λ)]/ζ
κ
ζ
.
(32)
π ≡ λ/(ζ+λ)
g
gζ/(ζ+λ) /β + δ − 1
Second, conjecture that the value functions V (z; s) and A(s) have the forms V (z; s) = v1 z + v2 z
and A(s) = az. Third, given the above, note that the (sans price) surpluses for a buying ﬁrm and
the patent agent are given by




π(z̃ + γxz) − πz̃ + rV z + γxz, s − rV z, s = (π +
39

rv1
)γxz,
λ/(ζ+λ)
g

Akcigit, Celik, and Greenwood

and

−σrA(s ) = −σrgζ/(ζ+λ) az [cf. (17)].

Finally, note that whether or not the sum of the above two equations is nonnegative does not
depend on z. This sum is also increasing in x. Solving for the value of x that sets the sum to zero
yields
σrgζ/(ζ+λ) a
.
(33)
xa =
(π + rv1 /gλ/(ζ+λ) )γ
Thus, xa is a constant.
Point (8). The solutions for patent prices are easy to obtain. Insert the above formulae for the
(sans price) surplus for a buying ﬁrm and the (sans price) surplus for a patent agent into expression
(16) to get


P (z, x; s) = (1 − ω)σrgζ/(ζ+λ) a + ω(π + rv1 /gλ/(ζ+λ) )γx z.
It is immediate from (20) that q = az, predicated upon the guess A(s) = az.
Point (5). It will now be shown that the value function for the patent agent has the conjectured
linear form. Focus on equation (15), which speciﬁes the solution for A. The price for a patent does
not depend on z, given Point (8). Additionally, D(x) = U [0, 1]. Furthermore, Ia = 1 for x > xa
and is zero otherwise. Thus,
A(s) = az = ma (na /nb )

1
xa

P (z, x; s)dx + [1 − ma (na /nb )P r(x ≥ xa )]σrA(s ),

from which it follows that
a = σrgζ/(ζ+λ) a − ms (na /nb )(1 − xa )ωσrgζ/(ζ+λ) a
+ms (na /nb )ω(π + rv1 /g

ζ/(ζ+λ)

(34)

)γ(1 − xa )(1 + xa )/2.

Point (2). The value function for a buying ﬁrm can be determined in a manner similar to that
for A in Point (5). Here
B(z, z) = b1 z̃ + b2 z,
with

b1 = π + rv1 /gλ/(ζ+λ) ,

(35)

and
b2 = −mb (na /nb )(1 − xa )(1 − ω)σrgζ/(ζ+λ) a + rv2 gζ/(ζ+λ)
+mb (na /nb )(1 − ω)(π + rv1 /g

λ/(ζ+λ)

(36)

)γ(1 − xa )(1 + xa )/2.

To derive this solution, the results in Points (4) and (8), along with the conjectured solution for
V , are used in equation (8). Similarly, using equation (11) it can be shown that the value function
for a seller is given by
S(z, s) = s1 z̃ + s2 z,
with
and

s1 = π + rv1 /gλ/(ζ+λ) ,

(37)

s2 = σa + rv2 /gζ/(ζ+λ) .

(38)

40

Buy, Keep or Sell: Economic Growth and the Market for Ideas

Last, following from (10),
K(L(z, x; s); s) = k1 z̃ + k2 (x)z,
with
and

k1 = π + rv1 /gλ/(ζ+λ) ,

(39)

k2 (x) = (π + rv1 /gλ/(ζ+λ) )γx + rv2 /gζ/(ζ+λ) .

(40)

Point (3). The threshold rule for keeping or selling a patent is determined by the condition
k1 z̃ + k2 (xk )z=s1 z̃ + s2 z;
that is, at the threshold a ﬁrm is indiﬀerent between keeping or selling the patent. Now, s1 = k1
so that
(π + rv1 /gλ/(ζ+λ) )γxk + rv2 gζ/(ζ+λ) = σa + rv2 gζ/(ζ+λ) .
Hence,
xk = 

σa
 ,
π + rv1 /gλ/(ζ+λ) γ

(41)

a constant.
Point (6). Turn now to the beginning-of-period value function for the ﬁrm and the rate of
innovation that it will choose. By using the linear forms for the value functions B(z, z), K(z, z, x),
and S(z, z), the fact that b1 = k1 = s1 , and the property that the threshold rule takes the form
Ik = 1 for x > xk and Ik = 0 otherwise, the ﬁrm’s dynamic programming problem (13) can be
rewritten as
V (z, s) = z max {[X(xk )s2 +
i∈[0,1]

xk

k2 (x)dX(x) − b2 ]i −

χ 1+ρ
i } + (π + rv1 /gλ/(ζ+λ) )z̃ + b2 z.
1+ρ

Diﬀerentiating with respect to i then gives
X(xk )s2 +

xk

k2 (x)dX(x) − b2 = χiρ ,

from which (26) follows. Using the solution for i, as given by (26), in the above programming
problem yields
V (z, s) =

ρ
[X(xk )s2 +
(1 + ρ)χ1/ρ

xk

k2 (x)dX(x) − b2 ]

It then follows that
v1 =
and
v2 = b2 +

1+ ρ1

z + (π + rv1 /gλ/(ζ+λ) )z̃ + b2 z.

gλ/(ζ+λ)
π,
gλ/(ζ+λ) − r

ρ
[X(xk )s2 +
(1 + ρ)χ1/ρ

xk

k2 (x)dX(x) − b2 ]

(42)
1+ ρ1

.

(43)

Point (7). The gross rate of growth for aggregate productivity, g, will now be calculated.
Suppose that aggregate productivity is currently z. A fraction i of ﬁrms will innovate today. Those
ﬁrms that draw x > xk will keep their patent. The productivity for these ﬁrms will increase. The
fraction 1 − i of ﬁrms will fail to innovate. Out of these ﬁrms the proportion mb (na /nb ) will ﬁnd a
41

Akcigit, Celik, and Greenwood

seller on the patent market. They will buy a patent when x > xa . Thus, z will evolve according to
z = z + i

1
xk

γxzdX(x) + mb (na /nb )(1 − i)

1

γxzdx.
xa

This implies (27).
Point (9). The number of buyers on the patent market is given by nb = 1 − i; all ﬁrms that fail
to innovate will try to buy a patent. Along a balanced growth path, the number of patent agents,
na , must satisfy the equation
na = σna [1 − ma (na /nb )(1 − xa )] + σiX(xk ).
Focus on the right-hand side. Take the ﬁrst term. Suppose that there are na patent agents at the
beginning of the period. A fraction σ of these agents will survive. Out of these, mb (na /nb )(1 − xa )
will ﬁnd a buyer. Thus, they will not be around these next period. Move to the second term. A
mass of iX(xk ) new ﬁrms will decide to sell their patents Out of this σ will survive. The sum of
these two terms equals the new stock of patent for sale, na . Solving yields
na =

na
σiX(xk )
σiX(xk )
and
.
=
1 − σ[1 − ma (na /nb )(1 − xa )]
nb
(1 − i){1 − σ[1 − ma (na /nb )(1 − xa )]}

Equations (28) and (29) follow immediately.
Point (10). The 12 constants, viz a, b1 , b2 , k1 , k2 , π, s1 , s2 , v1 , v2 , xa and xk , are speciﬁed by
the 12 non-linear equation (32) to (43). The equations include the variables g, i,r, ma (na /nb ), and
mb (na /nb ). So, equations (24), (26), (27), (28) and (29) must be appended to the system to obtain
a system of 17 equations in 17 unknowns. This system does not depend on either z or z.

A.2

Existence of a Unique Stationary Firm-Size Distribution

Proof. By Stokey and Lucas (1989), Theorem 12.12, it is suﬃcient to establish three things. First,
the transition operator associated with (31) needs to satisfy the Feller Condition [see Stokey and
Lucas (1989), p. 220]. Second, it is required that this transition operator is monotone [Stokey and
Lucas (1989), p. 220]. Third, the transition operator must satisfy a mixing condition [Stokey and
Lucas (1989), Assumption 12.1].
The stochastic diﬀerence equation (31) is continuous in z!, trivially. It then follows, using Stokey
and Lucas (1989) Theorem 8.9 and Exercise 8.10, that a transition operator connected with (31)
exists and satisﬁes the Feller property. Denote this operator by P (!
z , B), which gives the probability
measure connected with a move for z from the point z! into the set B. Similarly, let Q(B) represent
the probability measure connected with drawing an x ∈ B. To establish monotonicity, consider the
integral
γ
1
z , d!
z  ) = H( z! + x)Q(dx),
H(z  )P (!
g
g
for any non-decreasing function H(z  ). Clearly,
γ
1
H( z! + x)Q(dx) ≥
g
g

1
γ
H( z + x)Q(dx),
g
g

for all z! >z. Thus, P is monotone.
Finally, turn to the mixing condition. The long-run mean of the above process is z ∗ = E[x]z,
42

Buy, Keep or Sell: Economic Growth and the Market for Ideas
where 0 < z ∗ < z. To satisfy the mixing condition, it suﬃces to show that if the process starts oﬀ
at z! = 0 then there exists some chance that it will cross into the interval [z ∗ , z], and analogously
if originates at the z! = z then there are some odds that it will cross into the set [0, z ∗ ]. Clearly, if
the process starts oﬀ from z! = z then there are some odds that it will cross into the set [0, z ∗ ]. The
ﬁrm can draw 0 with strictly positive probability, as can be seen from (30). So, just think about
drawing 0 for some prolonged but ﬁnite period of time, T + 1. Eventually, the process will cross
into [z ∗ , z]; this will take a maximum of T + 1 periods where T = ln(z ∗ /z)/ ln(1/g). This occurs
with probability, {(1 − i)[(1 − mb ) + mb xa ] + ixk }T +1 > 0. Likewise, if the process starts oﬀ from
z! = 0 then there are some odds that it will cross into the set [z ∗ , z]. Think about drawing an x
shock in the interval [x, 1], where x = max{E[x] + ε, xa , xk } with ε > 0. This occurs with some
strictly positive probability denoted here, in this proof only, by ξ–again see (30). Imagine drawing
this shock for some long, ﬁnite period of time. Then, it will take a maximum of t + 1 periods for
the process to cross into the set [z ∗ , z], where t = ln[1 − (z ∗ /x)(1 − ρ)/ρ]/ ln ρ, with ρ ≡ γ/g. The
probability of this occurring is ξ t+1 > 0.

B
B.1

Robustness Analysis
Changes in the Distance Metric, ι

The behavior of the model does not change signiﬁcantly as ι changes. For example, Figure 15
illustrates how the model behaves as the contact rate for matches, η, changes, for ι = 1/3 and
ι = 1.0 (average distance). As can be seen, the results closely resemble those reported in Figure 11
for the baseline model.
Table 10 exhibits the performance of the model in matching the calibration targets. Comparing
Table 10 to Table 6 reveals there is no noticeable diﬀerence in performance.
Likewise, the empirical ﬁndings are qualitatively and quantitatively similar when the distance
measures created by ι = 1/3 and ι = 1.0 are employed. The signiﬁcance of the results are maintained. The coeﬃcients of interest are also similar in magnitude. This implies that the observed
losses to sales or stock market value due to misallocation, the likelihood that a mismatched patent
is sold, and the average reduction in distance upon resale remain more or less the same. Tables 11,
12, and 13 show the regression results with the diﬀerent metrics.
Table 10: Calibration Targets - Robustness, ι
Target
U.S. Data
ι = 1.0
Long-run growth in output
2.00%
2.00%
Ratio of R&D expenditure to GDP
2.91%
2.34%
Fraction of patents that are sold
15.6%
15.9%
Average duration until a sale
5.34 yrs.
5.91 yrs.
Sale duration, c.v
0.82
1.08

B.2

ι = 1/3
2.00%
2.50%
13.3%
4.53
1.10

Changes in the Criteria for Dating for When an Idea is Born

Three diﬀerent criteria are used for dating the incarnation of an idea. The dating for when an idea
is born aﬀects the distribution for the length of time until a sale. Three diﬀerent sale duration
distributions are created using the following deﬁnitions:
43

Akcigit, Celik, and Greenwood

Figure 15: The impact of an increase in the contact rate for matching on sales
duration, growth, innovation and welfare (for ι = 1/3 and ι = 1.0)

Table 11: Firm Moments - Robustness, ι
Variable
log real sales
log market value
ι = 1.0
ι = 1/3
ι = 1.0
ι = 1/3
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
0.194
0.037
0.039∗∗∗
log patent stock
0.191
(0.008)
(0.008)
(0.008)
(0.008)
−0.008∗∗∗
−0.018∗∗∗
−0.021∗∗∗
log dist-adj pat stock
−0.006∗∗∗
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
log employment
0.936∗∗∗
0.936∗∗∗
0.728∗∗∗
0.728∗∗∗
(0.008)
(0.008)
(0.008)
(0.008)
Obs.
23,028
23,028
36,094
36,094
0.96
0.96
0.92
0.92
R2
Notes: Standard errors are reported in parentheses. *10%, **5%, ***1% significance. Year
fixed effects, firm fixed effects, and intercept terms are included.

1. The diﬀerence between the sale date and the application date for transactions between 19802012.
2. The diﬀerence between the sale date and the date of receiving the ﬁrst citation for transactions
between 1980-2012.
3. The diﬀerence between the sale date and the grant date for transactions between 1980-2000.
44

Buy, Keep or Sell: Economic Growth and the Market for Ideas

Table 12: Patent Resale Decision - Robustness, ι
Variable
Indicator (=1 if sold)
ι = 1.0
ι = 1/3
distance
patent quality
log (patent)
Obs.
R2

0.0228∗∗∗
(0.001)
0.0004∗∗∗
(0.000)
−0.0163∗∗∗
(0.000)
2,564,305
0.4197

0.0193∗∗∗
(0.001)
0.0004∗∗∗
(0.000)
−0.0159∗∗∗
(0.000)
2,564,304
0.4198

Notes: Standard errors are reported in parentheses. *10%, **5%, ***1% significance. Year
fixed effects, firm fixed effects, and intercept terms are included.

Table 13: Distance Reduction on Resale - Robustness, ι
Variable

Change in distance: d (p, fb ) − d (p, fs )
ι = 1.0
ι = 1/3

intercept

−0.176∗∗∗
(0.056)
25,170
0.4210

Obs.
R2

−0.123∗∗
(0.067)
25,170
0.3626

Notes: Standard errors are reported in parentheses. *10%, **5%, ***1% significance. Year
fixed effects and seller fixed effects are included.

The results of the calibration exercise can be found on Table 14. The model achieves a good
ﬁt despite changes in the shape and the mean of the sale distribution. Likewise, the results of the
quantitative exercises do not vary by much. For comparison, the welfare contribution of the market
for ideas was 4.8% in consumption equivalent terms in the baseline exercise. This number is found
to be 4.8%, 4.9%, and 4.5% for the sale duration distributions calculated using the application
date, the ﬁrst citation date, and the grant date with the smaller sample, respectively. The other
magnitudes change more or less in the same proportion between these welfare numbers, and are
qualitatively the same.
Table 14: Calibration Targets - Robustness, dating
Target
Data
App.
Data
First Cit. Data
Long-run growth in output
2.00% 2.00% 2.00%
2.00%
2.00%
Ratio of R&D expenditure to GDP 2.91% 2.41% 2.91%
2.41%
2.91%
Fraction of patents that are sold
15.6% 15.2% 15.6%
15.4%
15.6%
Average duration until a sale (yrs.)
6.06
5.27
5.09
5.21
6.70
Sale duration, c.v
0.79
1.09
0.80
1.10
0.72

45

1980-2000
2.00%
2.42%
14.1%
5.57
1.09

Akcigit, Celik, and Greenwood

C

Data Description

In a nutshell, data from three sources are used: United States Patent and Trademark Oﬃce
(USPTO), NBER Patent Database Project (PDP), and Compustat. The ﬁrst sources contains
data on the patents that are reassigned across ﬁrms. The second is used to retrieve information on
the technological classes for patents and the stocks of patents for ﬁrms. Facts about employments,
stock market values and sales for ﬁrms are obtained from the third source.

C.1

Patent Assignment Data (PAD)

The patent assignment data is obtained from the publicly available United States Patent and
Trademark Oﬃce (USPTO) patent assignment ﬁles hosted by Google Patents Beta. These ﬁles
contain all records of changes made to U.S. patents for the years 1980-2011. The ﬁles are parsed
and combined to create the dataset. The following variables are kept:
• Patent number: The unique patent number assigned to each patent granted by the USPTO.
• Record date: Date of creation for the record.
• Execution date: Date for the legal execution of the record.
• Conveyance text: A text variable describing the reason for the creation of the record.
Examples are: “Assignment of assignor’s interest”, “Security Agreement”, “Merger”, etc.
• Assignee: The name of the entity assigning the patent (i.e., the seller if the patent is being
sold).
• Assignor: The name of the entity to which the patent is being assigned (i.e., the buyer if
the patent is being sold).
• Patent application date: Date of application for the patent.
• Patent grant date: Date of grant for the patent.
• Patent technology class: The technology class assigned to the patent by the USPTO
according to its internal classiﬁcation system.11
The entries for which this information is inaccessible are dropped from the sample.
During the parsing process, the following are done:
• Only transfer agreements between companies are kept.
• Only utility patents are kept; entries regarding design patents are dropped.
Using the string variable that states the reason for the record, all reassignments that are not
directly related to sales are dropped (for instance, mergers, license grants, splits, mortgages, court
orders, etc.)
In order to create an even more conservative indicator of patent reassignments, a company
name-matching algorithm is employed, so that marking internal transfers as reassignments can
be avoided, where patents are moved within the same ﬁrm, or between the subsidiaries of the
11

This variable is not used, however, to represent the technology class for a patent, as is discussed below.

46

Buy, Keep or Sell: Economic Growth and the Market for Ideas

ﬁrm. The idea behind the company name-matching algorithm is to clean the string variables for
the assignor and the assignee of all unnecessary indicators and company type abbreviations. If
the cleaned assignor and assignee strings are equal, the type of the record is changed to internal
transfer, provided that it was identiﬁed as a reassignment before.
The pseudo-code for the algorithm is as follows:
1. All letters are made upper case.
2. The portion of the string after the ﬁrst comma is deleted. (e.g., AMF INCORPORATED, A
CORP OF N.J. becomes AMF INCORPORATED)
3. If the string starts with “THE ”, the ﬁrst 4 characters are deleted.
4. All non-alphanumeric characters are removed.
5. Trailing company identiﬁers are deleted if found. The string goes through this process 5
times. The company identiﬁers are the following: B, AG, BV, CENTER, CO, COMPANY,
COMPANIES, CORP, CORPORATION, DIV, GMBH, GROUP, INC, INCORPORATED,
KG, LC, LIMITED, LIMITED PARTNERSHIP, LLC, LP, LTD NV, PLC, SA, SARL, SNC,
SPA, SRL, TRUST, USA, KABUSHIKI, KAISHA, AKTIENGESELLSCHAFT, AKTIEBOLAG, SE, CORPORATIN, CORPORATON, TRUST, GROUP, GRP, HLDGS, HOLDINGS,
COMM, INDS, HLDG, TECH, and GAISHA.
6. If the resulting string has length zero, that string is declared as needing protection. Some
examples that are protected by this procedure: “CORPORATION, ORACLE”, “KAISHA,
ASAHI KAISEI KABUSHIKI”, “LIMITED, ZELLWEGER ANALYTICS”.
7. The algorithm is re-run from the beginning on the original strings with one diﬀerence: The
strings that are declared as needing protection skip the second step.

C.2

USPTO Utility Patents Grant Data (PDP)

The patent grant data comes from the NBER Patent Database Project (PDP), and contains data
for all the utility patents granted between the years 1976-2006. How the PDP and PAD are linked
to each other is discussed later on.

C.3

Compustat North American Fundamentals (Annual)

The Compustat data for publicly traded ﬁrms in North America between the years 1974-2006 is
retrieved from Wharton Research Data Services. The Compustat database and the NBER PDP
database are connected using the matching procedure provided alongside the PDP data. Extensive
information on how the matching is done can be found on the project website.

C.4

Connecting PAD and PDP Data

There are two diﬀerent questions of interest, which require combining the Patent Database Project
data with the Patent Assignment Data. The ﬁrst analysis is on whether a patent is ever reassigned
(i.e. sold) over its entire lifetime, and what determines the probability of this event. For this
purpose, it is only necessary to connect the information from PAD to the ﬁrm which applied for
the patent. This is easily done by using the unique patent number each patent is given by USPTO.
47

Akcigit, Celik, and Greenwood

The second question involves the change in match quality of the patent when it is traded between
two ﬁrms. In this case, one needs to know the characteristics of both the assignor and the assignee
ﬁrm for each reassignment record in the PAD dataset. However, there is no existing connection
established between the PAD and PDP datasets. To connect these datasets, the company namematching algorithm described earlier is employed.

D
D.1

Variable Construction
Patent-to-Patent Distance Metric

In order to construct a topology on the technology space empirically, it is necessary to create a
distance metric between diﬀerent technology classes. Such a metric enables one to speak about
the distance between two patents in the technology space, and leads to the construction of more
advanced metrics.
The ﬁrst 2 digits of the IPC (International Patent Classiﬁcation) codes of a patent are chosen
to indicate its technology class. The IPC code used for a patent is taken from the PDP data and
diﬀers from the classiﬁcation scheme employed in the PAD data. It should be noted that the PDP
data actually contain more than a single IPC class for a single patent in some cases, since the IPC
codes were assigned using a concordance between the IPC and the internal classiﬁcation system
of USPTO. The IPC code provided in the PDP ﬁle with assignees is used in such cases, which is
unique for each patent.
As discussed in the main text, a plausible distance metric between patent classes can be generated by looking at how often two diﬀerent technology classes are cited together. Formally:
d(X, Y ) ≡ 1 −

#(X ∩ Y )
, with 0 ≤ d(X, Y ) ≤ 1.
#(X ∪ Y )

where #(X ∩ Y ) denotes the number of patents that cite technology classes X and Y together, and
#(X ∪ Y ) denotes the number of patents which either cite X or Y or both.

D.2

Deﬁnition of a Firm in the Data

There are four diﬀerent entity identiﬁers in the PDP dataset. The USPTO assignee number is
the identiﬁer provided by USPTO itself, but the creators of the PDP have found that it is not
very accurate. A single assignee might have many diﬀerent USPTO assignee numbers. The PDP
uses some matching algorithms on the names of the assignees to create a more accurate assignee
identiﬁer, called PDPASS. They also link the patent data to Compustat data. Compustat has an
identiﬁer called GVKEY. However, these refer to securities rather than ﬁrms. So a single ﬁrm
might be represented by many GVKEY’s. For this reason, they use a dynamic matching algorithm
again to link all GVKEY’s to certain PDPCO’s, where the latter is a unique ﬁrm identiﬁer that is
created by the authors of the project. They create this identiﬁer in order to be able to account for
name changes, mergers & acquisitions, etc. This paper follows the same procedure.

D.3

Patent-to-Firm Distance Metric

In order to measure how close a patent is to a ﬁrm in the technology spectrum, a metric is necessary.
However, throughout their lifetimes ﬁrms register patents in multiple technology classes. Hence the
patent-to-patent distance metric is insuﬃcient for this purpose. One possible way to construct a
patent-to-ﬁrm distance metric is to compare a patent to the past patent portfolio of the ﬁrm. The
48

Buy, Keep or Sell: Economic Growth and the Market for Ideas

distance measure between each patent a ﬁrm registered in the past, and the new patent in question
can be calculated using the patent-to-patent distance metric oﬀered earlier. The distance between
the ﬁrm and the patent should be a function of these separate distances. Equation (1) deﬁnes a
parametric family of distance measures indexed by ι. The analysis is conducted for several values
of ι.

D.4

Creating the Patent Stock Variable for Compustat Firms

As argued in Hall, Jaﬀe, and Trajtenberg (2005), the citation-weighted patent portfolio of a ﬁrm
is a plausible indicator of the intangible knowledge stock of a ﬁrm. The authors demonstrate that
this measure has additional explanatory power for the market value of a ﬁrm above and beyond the
conventional discounted sum of R&D spending of a ﬁrm, since R&D is a stochastic process which
can succeed or fail; whereas patents are quantiﬁable products of this process when it is successful.
Furthermore, it is revealed that the number of citations a patent receives is a ﬁne indicator of
the patent’s worth, increasing the market value of a ﬁrm at an increasing rate as the number of
citations go higher.
Since all the future citations to a patent cannot be observed at any given date, the citations
variable suﬀers from a truncation problem. There are also technology class and year ﬁxed eﬀects
to consider. All of these issues are thoroughly investigated by Hall, Jaﬀe, and Trajtenberg (2005);
they provide a variable called hjtwt in order to correct the citation number of each patent in the
PDP dataset. This study uses their correction method. In the end, a corrected citations number
for each patent is obtained. In order to create the patent stock variable of a ﬁrm (PDPCO), the
corrected citations number across all the patents of a ﬁrm are added together at each year. This
variable is called patent stock.
In addition to the patent stock, the corrected citations number across all the patents of a ﬁrm,
multiplied by the patent-to-ﬁrm distance generated at the date of the patent’s inclusion into the
portfolio are also added together to create a new variable. This variable quantiﬁes the overall waste
in the patent stock caused by the mismatch between the technology class of the patents and the
ﬁrm. This variable is expected to have a negative eﬀect on ﬁrm moments such as real sales and
market value of equity. The variable is called the distance-adjusted patent stock.

49

