                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 DOES SECULAR EDUCATION IMPACT RELIGIOSITY, ELECTORAL PARTICIPATION
   AND THE PROPENSITY TO VOTE FOR ISLAMIC PARTIES? EVIDENCE FROM
             AN EDUCATION REFORM IN A MUSLIM COUNTRY

                                              Resul Cesur
                                             Naci H. Mocan

                                         Working Paper 19769
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19769


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2013




We are grateful to Bekir Ağırdır for providing us with the data and to Eren Pultar, and Aydın Erdem
for generously sharing their expertise of the survey. We thank Luiza Pogorelova and Bahadır Dursun
for excellent research assistance, and Dani Rodrik, Michael Grossman, Leyla Mocan, Alper Dinçer,
Sezgin Polat, Ayça Akarçay Gürbüz, Etienne Lehmann, Nurhan Davutyan, Claudine Desrieux, Barış
Kaymak, Damba Lkhagvasuren, Duha Altındağ and seminar participants at ERMES-Universite de
Paris II, Kadir Has University, Concordia University and LSU for helpful comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Resul Cesur and Naci H. Mocan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Does Secular Education Impact Religiosity, Electoral Participation and the Propensity to Vote
for Islamic Parties? Evidence from an Education Reform in a Muslim Country
Resul Cesur and Naci H. Mocan
NBER Working Paper No. 19769
December 2013
JEL No. I21,I28,K4,Z1,Z12,Z18

                                               ABSTRACT

Turkey, which is a predominantly Muslim country, enacted an education law in 1997 which increased
the compulsory secular education from five to eight years. We employ a unique nation-wide survey
of adults in 2012 to investigate the impact of education on religiosity, lifestyles and political preferences
by using exposure to the law as an instrument for schooling. The data set includes information about
the extent of religiosity, lifestyle choices (e.g. modern, conservative, religious), ethnic background
(e.g. Kurd, Turk, Arab) and the religious sect of the respondents (Sunni, Alevite Shii’te, etc.) The results
show that the reform had a significant impact on middle school completion for both men and women,
with stronger effects on women. An increase in education, generated by exposure to the law, decreases
women’s propensity to identify themselves as religious. Education also lowers women’s tendency
to wear a religious head cover (head scarf, religious turban or burka) and it increases their propensity
to have a modern lifestyle. Education reduces women’s propensity to cast a vote for Islamic parties,
but it has no impact on the propensity to vote. Education has no statistically significant impact on men’s
religiosity or their tendency to vote for Islamic parties. The results are robust to controlling for indicators
of individuals’ economic well-being as well as variations in empirical specification of the treatment
by the law. Using a smaller version of the survey, conducted in 2008, we perform a variety of tests,
which demonstrate that the results are not due to a cohort effect. Finally, we show that the effect of
education on religiosity and voting preference is not working through migration, residential location
or labor force participation.


Resul Cesur
Finance Department
University of Connecticut
2100 Hillside Road Unit 1041
Storrs, CT 06269-1041
and University of Connecticut
cesur@business.uconn.edu

Naci H. Mocan
Department of Economics
Louisiana State University
3039 BEC
Baton Rouge, LA 70803-6306
and NBER
mocan@lsu.edu
Does Secular Education Impact Religiosity, Electoral Participation and the Propensity to
Vote for Islamic Parties? Evidence from an Education Reform in a Muslim Country


1. Introduction

       Education has a causal impact on productivity in the labor market as well as productivity

outside the labor market. For example, education increases wages (Oreopoulos 2006, Card

2001), and the more educated are healthier (Grossman 1972, Grossman 2008, Cutler and Lleras-

Muney, 2010, Mocan and Altindag 2013). Education can also change individuals’ behaviors by

altering their time discounting (Becker and Mulligan 1997) and it can change their preferences in

a variety of dimensions ranging from fertility to tolerance for violence (Cannonier and Mocan

2012, Lavy and Zablotsky 2011, Osili and Long 2008).

       A particularly important impact of education on individual beliefs and preferences

involves religion. Philosophers and social scientists, ranging from Durkheim to John Stuart

Mill, from Karl Marx to Max Weber have long argued that increased levels of education would

generate a decline in religiosity. Specifically, it has been hypothesized that as countries develop

economically and as the levels of education rise, the need for religious adherence would

diminish. Empirical evidence on the issue, however, is mixed. Using the World Values Survey

data over 80 countries ranging 1981 to 2001 as well as other data sets spanning longer periods,

Norris and Inglehart (2004) describe the evolution of religious participation, religious values and

beliefs by country. They present evidence that while advanced industrial societies have

generally trended away from religiosity, the same is not true for developing countries.

       Isolating the impact of education on religiosity is complicated. Analyses of country-level

data reveal correlations between education and the extent of religiosity (McClearry and Barro

2006 a,b) but they are not useful in determining causality from education to religiosity. Glaeser



                                                 1
and Sacerdote (2008) use individual-level data from the General Social Survey of the U.S. and

find that church attendance is positively related to education at the individual level but that the

relationship between the two variables is negative at the aggregate level.1 The survey of

Iannacone (1998) reports that religious activity tends to rise, rather than decline, with education.

Deaton (2011), on the other hand, finds a negative relationship between individual education and

religiosity using the Gallup World Poll data. No causal interpretation is possible in these studies

either because individual-level data suffer from the same problem as aggregate data.

Specifically, it is difficult to make a cause-and-effect interpretation without making use of some

exogenous variation in individuals’ education that is uncorrelated with their religious beliefs.

         In this paper, we exploit the impact of a law enacted in Turkey in 1997 that increased the

mandatory years of schooling from 5 to 8 years. The law, which was passed very quickly and

rather unexpectedly, generated an exogenous increase in education of the cohorts of children

who were younger than 11 years of age in 1997 but it had no impact on those who were older.

We employ a unique data set, obtained from the KONDA Research and Consultancy—one of the

most prominent research and consultancy firms in Turkey, of a large nation-wide survey about

voting behavior, religious beliefs and practices in 2012.2 As we explain in the data section, the

KONDA Research and Consultancy has an outstanding record of predicting the outcomes of

recent Turkish elections using these same data, which minimizes any concerns about the

reliability of the information provided by the respondents.




1
  They present a model in which education has two distinct effects on religious attendance. Education has a direct
negative effect on religious beliefs and religious activity, but secondarily education increases the returns from social
connections and networks and that church attendance gives people networking opportunities although attendance per
se is not related to religiosity.
2 Founded in 1986, KONDA Research and Consultancy is one of the leading public opinion survey companies in

Turkey.http://www.konda.com.tr/en/about_us.php


                                                           2
        The data contain detailed information on individuals, some of which are not available in

any other data sets including the religious sect of the person (Sunni, Alevite Shiite, etc.), as well

as his/her ethnic identity (Turk, Kurd, Arab, and so on). We investigate the extent to which

being exposed to three additional years of education due to the law has impacted religious beliefs

and practices, such as whether individuals consider themselves an atheist, a “believer”, a

religious Muslim, or a devout Muslim; and whether women wear head cover (a headscarf, a

religious “turban”) or completely cover themselves with a burka—all strong indications of

religiosity. We also analyze the extent to which people describe their lifestyle as modern, as

opposed to traditional conservative or religious conservative.

        The impact of education on religiosity has implications for the political economy of

development because there is significant and growing influence of religion on politics in a

number of countries around the world (Micklethwait and Wooldridge 2009). This has been

especially the case for Muslim countries in the Middle East and North Africa during the last

decade. Typical features of these countries are low income per capita, an immature democracy,

low levels of education, and high religiosity.3 Furthermore, this region has been experiencing a

surge in Islam-inspired politics during the last decade. If education has a causal impact on

religiosity, an increase in the level of secular education could have an impact on the political

landscape of these countries.

        We have information in the data about the specific political party the person voted for in

the 2011 general election in Turkey as well as how he/she would to vote if elections were held

today. We investigate whether an increase in education, produced by the reform, alters the

3 The northern part of this region consists of Morocco, Tunisia, Libya, Egypt, Jordan, Iraq, Syria, Iran,
Algeria, Turkey, Israel and Cyprus. In all of these countries, with the exception of the last two, Islam is
the dominant religion. Table A1 in the appendix presents income per capita, education, a measure of
religiosity and an index of democracy in these countries.


                                                      3
propensity to vote for an Islamic political party.4 Because Turkey was governed by an Islamic

party in 2012, an individuals’ propensity to vote against an Islamic party could in part be a

reflection of his/her dissatisfaction with economic and social policies. For example, because

younger individuals have higher joblessness rates they may be more concerned about their

economic future.5 Younger individuals generally have more education as they were exposed to

the education reform, but the propensity to vote against the governing Islamic party may be

driven by the concern of joblessness, rather than by education. To account for this potential

confounding, we also estimate models by adding two variables that measure whether the

individual faces economic difficulty currently, and the extent to which he/she expects difficult

economic times in the months ahead. This exercise does not alter the estimated impact of

education on religiosity, modernity or voting behavior.

        Education is also expected to provide social externalities by improving individuals’

propensity for civic participation.6    While empirical evidence generally indicates that education

increases the propensity to vote (e.g. Dee 2004, Milligan, Moretti, Oreopoulos 2004), the

research on voter turnout and civic participation has focused on developed countries (Degan and



4
 A brief history of Islamic political movement in Turkey and the concept of Islamic political parties are
provided in the appendix.
5
  In Turkey the unemployment rate of men ages 15-24 was 17% in 2011, while the rate was 9% for men
ages 25-34. Women ages 15-24 faced an unemployment rate of 21% in 2011, while the unemployment
rate of women ages 25-34 was 13%. On the other hand, Mocan L. (2013) finds that the same education
reform had a significant impact on wages conditional on employment, especially for women.

6 Theoretical reasons for this impact of education include an increase in cognitive ability that would
reduce the cost of civic participation (Wolfinger and Rosenstone 1980), and an increase in subjective
benefits of civic engagement by altering preferences in favor of democratic values (see Dee 2004 for a
detailed discussion). Along similar lines, Campante and Chor (2012a,b) underline the interplay between
schooling, economic conditions and political participation. More generally, Botero, Ponce and Shleifer
(2012) argue and present evidence that better educated people are more likely to engage in monitoring the
functioning of the government and that they are more likely to complain about the misconduct by
government officials.

                                                     4
Merlo 2011, Siedler 2010, Di Pietro and Delprato 2009).7 Because our data contain information

about whether the respondent went to the ballot box and casted a vote during the last election and

whether he/she intends to do so if an election were held today, we analyze whether an increase in

education leads to a greater tendency to vote.

        Two recent papers investigate the impact compulsory schooling laws on religiosity.

Hungerman (2011) uses data from Canadian censuses and run regressions where the unit of

observation is the fraction of people in each province and year with no religious affiliation. He

finds that increases in the province-level mandatory years of education (enacted mostly in the

1950s and 1960s) had a positive impact on the proportion of people with no religious affiliation

in the 1971-2001 census years. Gulesci and Meyersson (2013) examine the effect of the same

education reform we analyze. They use a sample of about 1,800 observations from Turkish

Demographic Health Survey and find that in case of women the education reform lowered some

indicators of religiosity such as wearing a head scarf and studying the Qur’an, but the reform had

no significant impact on other important indicators of religiosity such as praying five times a day

and fasting during Ramadan.8 The authors find somewhat more consistent results in the analysis

of the marriage attributes of women, where those women who were exposed to the reform are

more likely to make their own marriage decisions and their own fertility decisions, but there is

no impact of the reform on labor market outcomes. The lack of the impact on most outcomes

could be because of the relatively small sample size the authors had to employ, although the




7
  Studies providing descriptive accounts of the relationship between education and civic participation in
developing counties report conflicting findings on the association between the two variables (Pande
2011).
8
  Praying five times a day and fasting during the month of Ramadan are two of the five requirements of
Islam, by which each religious Muslim must abide.

                                                     5
point estimates of the coefficient of schooling in some of these regressions, such as praying,

fasting as well as labor market outcomes are very small (Gulesci and Meyersson 2013).9

        We use exposure to the mandate of the reform as an instrument for education and find

that education has a significant impact on religiosity of women. Specifically, having a middle

school diploma, as opposed to having an elementary school degree due to the exposure to the

reform, reduces women’s propensity for self-identifying themselves as being religious by about

30 percentage points, and it increases the propensity to have a modern lifestyle by the same

magnitude. Three additional years of education, associated with a middle school diploma,

reduces the propensity to wear a head cover such a head scarf, a religious turban, or a burka by

about 40 percentage points. Although middle school education does not impact women’s

propensity to vote in elections, it reduces the propensity to cast a vote for an Islamic party by

about 50 percentage points. An increase in education does not have a statistically significant

impact on religiosity or voting behavior of Muslim men.

        The effect we estimate is the total impact of secular education on religiosity and on the

propensity to vote for Islamic parties. The impact of education can work through a number of

channels. For example, education is expected to increase the cognitive ability of people, which

in turn can influence people’ s beliefs. In addition, being required to attain three additional years

of schooling during adolescence may increase sociability, social networks and exposure to a

variety of experiences, all of which may alter preferences. Increased education could also

motivate individuals to move from rural areas to cities, and residing in a city may change

people’s preferences in a number of dimensions, including religion. Furthermore, education may

9 The small sample size is also the likely reason for these authors not to detect an impact of the education
reform on years of schooling for men. In our sample, which is larger, we find that the reform had a
positive impact on male educational attainment. Mocan L. (2013) who uses a large national sample from
Turkish Statistical Institute, also reports that male educational attainment is significantly impacted by the
reform.

                                                      6
increase the propensity to participate in the labor force, which may also alter religiosity. In

Section V of the paper we present evidence which demonstrates that migration, residential

location or labor force participation are not likely channels through which education impacts the

outcomes analyzed in the paper.

       Regressions control for linear and quadratic age variables. Nevertheless, concerns might

be raised about the possibility that the results could have been confounded because younger

individuals are exposed to the education reform while older ones are not, and some unobserved

correlate of age might be the primary reason for the impact on religiosity and support for Islamic

parties. To address this concern, we use a supplementary survey from the year 2008. This

survey, which is similar to the main survey used in the paper, is conducted by the same company

and it includes questions on modernity and wearing a head cover. By using both the 2012 and

the 2008 surveys we perform analyses which demonstrate that the impact of education identified

in the paper is not due to a cohort effect. We also estimate a difference-in-differences

specification, the results of which support the findings of the paper. These specifications are

discussed in Section V.

       Section II describes the education reform that has increased the mandatory years of

schooling in Turkey, and introduces the data set. Section III introduces the data and the

variables, Section IV presents empirical methodology and the results; Section V includes the

robustness analyses and Section VI is the conclusion.     In the appendix we provide detailed

background information on the history of Islamic parties and the headscarf debate in Turkey.




                                                  7
II. The 1997 Education Reform

           On August 18, 1997, the secular Turkish government increased compulsory schooling

from 5 to 8 years (Law no: 4306).10 Commonly known in Turkey as the “The Reform for

Uninterrupted 8-years of Education” the new law went into effect immediately in the beginning

of the 1997-98 education year, in the Fall of 1997 (Kırdar et al. 2011, 2012). Students who had

completed the fourth grade or lower at the end of the 1996-97 education year in Spring 1997 had

to comply with the new law (Kirdar et al. 2011, 2012), while students who had finished the fifth

grade in the spring of 1997 were exempt from it.

           In Turkey students may enroll in the first grade once they are six years old. The

interpretation of this restriction has been for the child to be at least 72 months old when the

school year starts in September. This means that a child born in September 1986 would be 73

months old in September 1992 and would start the first grade, but children born in October-

December 1986 would miss the age cut-off to start the school in September 1992. The law,

however, states that a child may start the first grade if he/she is 72 months old at the end of the

calendar year.11 It is also known that the age cut-off is not strictly enforced and that children are

allowed to start school if they are on the margin of the 72-month cut-off. Thus, those who are

born at the end of 1986 (in October-December) could have started school in 1992. By the same

token, those who are born in early 1986 would start the first grade in Fall 1991, rather than Fall

1992.

            The upshot is that although most of the children of the 1986 cohort would have enrolled

in the first grade in 1992 and therefore have completed the fifth grade in Summer 1997 and thus




10
     http://mevzuat.meb.gov.tr/html/126.html
11   Resmi Gazete; Friday, 7 August 1992, Section 14.

                                                        8
were exempt from the mandate of the education reform, some children who were born in 1986

have completed only the fourth grade and these children were impacted by the reform.

        During the time period when the law was enacted Turkey was involved in heavy

negotiations for the European Union membership and the government was concerned that

European Union negotiations would not proceed without the implementation of a reform that

increased the level of education in Turkey (Dulger 2004). The law was also an attempt to limit

the extent of religious education. We elaborate on this issue and the political landscape in

Turkey in 1997 in the next sub-section. Prior to the education reform, mandatory education was

limited to five years in Turkey and after completing five years of primary schooling, students had

three options: (i) discontinue their education, (ii) go on to secondary schooling (for an additional

three years) at traditional middle schools; (iii) go on to secondary schooling at vocational

schools, including the religious schools which are in part designed to educate religious clerics to

be employed by religious enterprises including the mosques.12, 13 The education reform of 1997

did not involve any changes in curriculum; that is neither the course contents nor the

composition of courses are effected by the reform (Dulger 2004). But, the reform combined the

primary and middle schools. Therefore, stand-alone middle schools, including vocational middle

schools, were closed. Vocational high schools, including religious ones, could only admit

students after the students have completed their 8-year of mandatory schooling.

        The reform had a strong effect on educational attainment. Previous research has shown

that among those who were affected by the law, the probability of completing middle school and

years of schooling significantly increased (Mocan L. 2013, Kirdar et al. 2011, 2012). We

confirm this result in our data. Excluding books, supplies, school uniforms and commuting

12
    Girls can also attend these religious vocational schools, although they are not allowed to be clerics
upon graduation by the rules of Islam.
13
   http://www.studyinturkey.com/content/sub/education_system.aspx

                                                      9
costs, compulsory education is free and non-compliance is subject to monetary fines in Turkey.14

However, even though the original 5-year mandatory education law, as well as the new law

require financial penalties for the families that do not send their children to school and for

families of the students who drop out prior to the completion of compulsory schooling, the fine

has not been strictly imposed.15 Therefore, while the middle school graduation rates increased

above 90 percent after the reform, perfect compliance could not be achieved (Kirdar et al. 2012).



Political Backdrop when the Law was Passed

          The law was passed in August 1997 by the 55th government of Turkey, led by the Prime

Minister Mesut Yilmaz. This was a coalition government made up by three political parties with

secular traditions.16 The immediately preceding government was a coalition between the

Welfare Party (Refah Partisi) which has Islamic roots and center-right True Path Party (Dogru

Yol Partisi). Because the Welfare Party had more seats in the Parliament than the True Path

Party, its leader Necmettin Erbakan was the Prime Minister of this government. This 54th

government of Turkey was formed in June 1996 and it was the first government of the country

led by an Islamic Party. A number of events during the fall of 1996 and winter of 1997,

however, raised concerns about intrusion of religion into the government, and prompted

reactions from both the military and the secular segments of the society. On February 28, 1997

the National Security Council of Turkey declared a manifesto and recommended a list of actions

to curb the rise of political Islam in Turkey. In May 1997 the Chief Constitutional Prosecutor of

the country filed a law suit against the governing Welfare Party, charging it with actions that


14   http://mevzuat.meb.gov.tr/html/24.html
15   http://spm.ku.edu.tr/wp-content/uploads/pdf/okulterk.pdf
16Two center-right parties: The Motherland Party (ANAP) and The Democratic Party of Turkey (DTP)
and the center-left Democratic Left Party (DSP).

                                                    10
undermine the secular foundations of the nation. Under this pressure, on June 18, 1997 after

having served one year as Prime Minister, Erbakan resigned to allow the leader of the coalition

party, Tansu Ciller, to take over as Prime Minister instead. After this resignation, however, the

demands of the secular segments of the society as well as the pressure from the military led the

President of the country to task a different political party to form a new government.

Consequently, a new coalition government was formed between three secular parties and the

leader of one of these parties, Mesut Yilmaz, became the Prime Minister and the head of the 55th

government on June 30, 1997; and his government passed the education reform in August 1997

and implemented in Fall 1997.

         The sequence of these events is potentially important, because the Welfare Party, which

in 1996 became the first government with Islamic roots in Turkey, had received 21 percent of the

popular vote in the general elections one year earlier.17 The fact that this Islamic party was

forced to step down during the summer of 1997, and a secular education reform was passed a

few months later by a different government could have influenced the sensitivity of the

supporters of the Welfare Party. Specifically, even though the law mandated three additional

years of education beyond the fifth grade, a religious conservative family could have provided

religious education to their children on the weekends or after school to counteract and neutralize

the influence of the additional years of secular education imposed on their children. The same is

true for a family that may have been planning to enroll their child at a religious school before the

enactment of the law, but was forced to keep the child three additional years in school after the

law. If such families and children are prevalent, it would be more difficult to detect an impact of

the reform on religiosity. This is because although such students are exposed to the law and their


17
  Although the predecessor of this Islamic Party participated in governments as a coalition partner in the 1970s,
1996 is the first year the party became the lead-party of the government and held the post of Prime Minister.

                                                         11
education is increased, the impact of education on increasing scientific and critical thinking skills

and reducing the tendency to believe in supernatural forces may have been mitigated by

enhanced religious education provided at home. If this conjecture is true and if it is widespread,

the estimated impact of the reform on religiosity would be biased towards zero. It should be

noted, however, that the share of students enrolled at religious middle and high schools among

all students in the relevant age group was only about nine percent in the 1990s, until the reform

year of 1997 (Cakir, Bozan and Talu, 2004).

       The flipside to this argument is the following possibility. Consider the families whose

children just missed the reform’s cutoff and therefore were not required to enroll in middle

school. Some of these families might decide to send their children to middle school after the

reform anyway, although they had no such intensions before the reform. This could be because

these parents might recognize that some of their children’s friends, who are only one or two

years younger, will end up with more education due to the reform and their kids might have a

comparative disadvantage in the labor market down the road. We show in the paper that this was

not a prevalent phenomenon to be detected in the data.



III. Data

       We use a unique data set, drawn from the KONDA Barometer, collected by the KONDA

Research and Consultancy, which is a prominent research and consultancy firm in Istanbul,

Turkey. The KONDA Barometer surveys were conducted nation-wide 11 times a year—during

the last weekend of each month except for the month of Ramadan (the month of fasting for

Muslims, the timing of which is determined by lunar calendar). Standard election poll questions




                                                 12
as well as lifestyle questions, including religious beliefs and attitudes are asked on each survey.18

Because of their aim to accurately predict the election results and to provide information on

public opinion on a number of timely social and political issues, the KONDA Barometer surveys

are specifically designed to produce a nationally representative sample. The data we use in the

empirical analyses consist of about 9,600 voting-age adults surveyed in 2012. The reliability of

KONDA surveys were confirmed on many occasions as they closely predicted a number of

election results including the past two general elections in Turkey, which took place in 2007 and

2011. Hence, the KONDA surveys are well respected both in the Turkish19 and international20

media (The Economist 2007, The Economist 2008, Reuters 2011). These election predictions are

based on the same data used in this paper. The monthly surveys, upon which the data are based,

are not conducted on behalf of a particular political party or organization, nor are they sold to

such organizations. Instead, these data are used to conduct independent political analyses as well

as to predict political trends and election outcomes.

       The data we use were collected in 2012. The analysis sample consists of respondents

who were born between 1980 and 1994; that is, they were between the ages of 18 and 32 in

2012. Turkey is a country in which 98 percent of the population is Muslim. This is also




18
   In addition, each month’s survey is organized around a unique socio-political theme each month.
Detailed information on 2012 KONDA Barometer themes can be found at the following link:
http://www.konda.com.tr/en/raporlar/KONDA_Barometer_2012_Brochure.pdf.
19
   http://www.sabah.com.tr/Gundem/2011/06/13/secimi-hangi-anket-sirketi-bildi
http://www.konda.com.tr/konda_images/tr/ulusal_basin/2011_06_KONDA_Gazetelerin_Tanikligiyla_K
ONDA_Olcumleri.pdf
http://www.blogmilliyet.com/19-temmuz-persembe/Blog/?BlogNo=53053
20
   Note: in some of the below articles, Tarhan Erdem, the founder of KONDA, is mentioned.
http://www.economist.com/node/9558347?story_id=E1_JVVRPQS
http://www.economist.com/node/11745570?story_id=E1_TTSQVVSD
http://www.reuters.com/article/2010/09/11/us-turkey-referendum-poll-
idUSTRE68A0EV20100911?feedType=RSS&feedName=everything&virtualBrandChannel=11563
http://www.aljazeera.com/video/europe/2010/09/201091244237769389.html

                                                 13
reflected in our data, where 1.6 percent of the respondents indicated that they were non-Muslims.

We excluded these individuals to focus on Muslims.

           Table 1 displays the descriptive statistics of both the independent variables (personal

attributes of individuals) and the outcomes. Those who were 12 years of age or older in 1997

would have completed 5 years of elementary schooling and therefore they were exempt from the

mandate of the law. These individuals, who were born in 1985 or earlier, are not “treated” by the

law; thus they constitute the “control” group. Those who were 10 years old or younger in 1997

were forced to acquire 8 years of schooling instead of 5 years. This group consists of those who

were born in 1987 or later and they constitute the “treatment group.” Those who were born in

1986 (11 years old in 1997) may or may not have been treated by the law, depending on their

birthday. Thus, in empirical analyses we exclude this group. Running the models by including

this cohort and assigning them a value of ½ or 1/3 for the value of treatment did not change the

results.

           As shown in Table 1 the proportion of individuals who have at least a middle school

degree (eight years of schooling) is higher among those who are in the treatment group in

comparison to those who are in the control group. The difference is striking for females. About

54 percent of females who were born before 1986 have a middle school education or more. On

the other hand, the rate is 83 percent among those who are exposed to the education reform (born

after 1986). Figure 1A displays this information by birth cohort. As mentioned above, those

who were born in 1986 constitute the first cohort that is exposed to the policy although it cannot

be determined with certainty whether the entire 1986 birth cohort was treated by the reform. The

vertical line in Figure 1A identifies this cohort. The full impact of the policy should be felt

starting with the cohort of 1987. Figure 1A indicates that the proportion of females with at least



                                                    14
a middle school education is 51 percent among those who were born in 1980. The rate rises

gradually and reaches 58% in the cohort of 1985. It goes up to 62% among those who were born

in 1986 and jumps to 71 % in the 1987 cohort and keeps rising. About 92 percent of those who

were born in 1995 have at least a middle school diploma.21

        Consider the case of a student who was born in 1985 and therefore just missed the

mandate of the law when it was implemented in 1997. Assume that the parents of this student

were not planning to send their children to the middle school prior to the passage of the law. It

could, however, be the case that upon the passage of the law the parents might recognize that

their child, who just completed 5 years of schooling, could be in a disadvantaged position if

he/she is not enrolled in middle school. This is because of the realization that the friends and

peers of their child, who are only one or two years younger, will acquire eight years of schooling

and this may create a disadvantage for their child in the labor market. If this were the case,

children who just missed the mandate of the law (those who had completed the 5th grade right

before the law was passed) would enroll in middle school despite the fact that the law was not

binding for them.

        There is no evidence for this conjecture in the data. Children who were just above the

age cutoff do not have higher levels of education than predicted. Children who were born in

1985 just missed the mandate of the law; similarly those who were born in 1984 or earlier were

not bound by the law either. Figure 1A shows that none of these cohorts exhibit a spike in

middle school completion rate. We ran individual-level regressions where the indicator of


21We compare this information to the 2012 Turkish Household Labor Force Survey that is obtained from
Turkish Statistical Institute. This institute is a government agency, responsible for collecting data on a
variety of indicators, ranging from labor markets to financial markets. The Turkish Household Labor
Force Survey is similar in its design to the Current Population Survey in the U.S. Using about 80,000
females in the relevant age range, we plotted the proportion with at least a middle school degree in Figure
A1 in the Appendix. Appendix Figure-A1 is very similar to Figure 1A.

                                                    15
having a middle school diploma is regressed on individual level covariates and a linear trend in

birth year. We obtained the residuals from this regression, and calculated the mean residual by

birth year, which represent unexpected changes in middle school completion rates by birth

cohort. Consistent with Figure 1A, there were no outliers, indicating that the level of education

of the cohorts that missed the reform did not jump up unexpectedly.22

          To present the long-run trend in middle school completion, Figure 1B displays the

proportion of females with at least a middle school education by birth cohort, going back to those

born in 1960. Put differently, Figure 1A is a close-up of Figure 1B, and it is evident that the

female middle school completion rate jumps in 1997 after the law was enacted, and stays above

its long-run trend.

          Table 1 also shows that a similar increase in education is evident in the male sample.

Males were more educated than females before the reform, but the proportion of males with at

least a middle school degree went up after the reform as well. Seventy-seven percent of males

who were not exposed to the reform have at least a middle school degree, while the rate is about

93 percent among those who were treated by the reform. Figure 2A shows the proportion of

males with a middle school diploma or higher by birth cohort. The last cohort that missed the

reform (those born in 1985) and the first cohort that is fully exposed to it (those born in 1987)

have about a 9 percentage point difference in the rate of having at least a middle school diploma.

Figure 2B presents the trend in male middle school completion rate by birth cohort starting with

those who are born in 1960. A comparison of Figures 1B and 2B shows that the proportion of

females with at least middle school degree was 20 percentage points lower than that of males in

all cohorts from 1960 and 1985, and that the education reform closed the gap significantly:

among the cohorts born after in 1990s, the gap is only about five percentage points.
22
     These results are available from the authors upon request.

                                                       16
Measures of Religiosity

        The survey has posed a question to individuals about their religious beliefs. Specifically,

people are asked to indicate whether they are atheist, believer, religious, or devout.23 The

variable Religious takes the value of one if the respondent indicated that he/she was religious or

devout Muslim, and it is zero for those who are atheist or a believer. The reason for classifying

those who indicated that they were a “believer” into non-religious category is that in Turkey

there is a divide between a person who declared himself as religious and someone who indicated

that he was just a believer. A “believer” in Turkey believes in the existence of some power of

creation, yet he/she does not necessarily practice religion, or practices selective components of it.

For example, two of the five “pillars” of Islam are fasting during the month of Ramadan and

praying five times a day.24 Islam requires each adult to perform these acts. Surveys show that

94 percent of Turkish Muslims who consider themselves as religious and 98 percent of those

who are devout practice fasting during Ramadan, while the rate is only 65 percent among

believers. Similarly, 60 percent of the Turkish Muslims who identify themselves as religious and

85 percent of the devout pray five times day, while the rate is only 9 percent among the believers

(KONDA 2007). Similarly, alcohol consumption is considered a sin in Islam. In Turkey a

Muslim “believer” may consume alcohol, but somebody who declares themselves as religious

(dindar) is much less likely to consume alcohol. For example, while only 11 percent of those




23
  The exact wording of these alternatives as posed to the individuals are: inancsiz, inancli, dindar, sofu.
24
  The others are declaring that there is one God, and Mohammed is God’s messenger; doing pilgrimage
to Mecca at least once in a lifetime if the prospective pilgrim is financially secure; and giving out about
2.5 percent of one’s net worth to those in need each year.

                                                     17
who declared themselves as religious do consume alcohol, the rate of alcohol consumption goes

up to 42 percent among those who declared themselves “believers” in 2011.25

          We also created a variable, Atheist, which takes the value of one if the person declared

themselves a “non-believer” and zero if they indicated that they were a believer, a religious

person, or devout. Less than two percent of the sample declared that they were atheists, but

despite the small size of this group, there is a statistically significant difference between those

who were and were not exposed to the education reform, both for males and for females.

          Table 1 shows that about 52 percent of males in the treated group consider themselves as

religious, while the rate is about 60 percent in the control group. Similarly, 59 percent of

females of the treated group are religious while 70 percent of females on the control group

identified themselves as religious. The fact that females in both the treatment and the control

groups are more religious in comparison to their corresponding male counterparts is consistent

with previous research that has repeatedly shown that women are more religious than men. It

has been argued that women are raised to be submissive, which makes it easier for them to

accept religion (Suziedelis and Potvin 1981). Similarly, it has been hypothesized that the

traditional role of women involves teaching morality and spirituality to their children and this

role makes it easier to be religious (Walter and Davie 1998). Miller and Stark (2002) argue that

women are more risk averse than men and to the extent that being non-religious constitutes risk-

taking behavior, the difference in risk aversion between men and women can explain the

difference in religiosity. Azzi and Ehrenberg (1975) formulate a model in which agents are

making inter-temporal choices, and religious practices and accumulation of religious capital is a

time-intensive activity similar to that of accumulation of human capital which can take place

through education. In this model women are more religious than men because market wages are
25
     http://konda.com.tr/icki_sigara.pdf

                                                  18
lower for women than men, generating more (less) incentive for women to invest in religious

(human) capital. Also, the model predicts that people optimally delay investing in religious

capital until later in life because the return to religious capital can only be realized after death.

Instead, people invest in education earlier in life to increase human capital. Thus, this model

predicts that religiosity increases in age. This, in part, can explain the difference in the rate of

religiosity between the younger individuals who were exposed to the education reform and the

older ones who missed the reform. Thus, it is important to control for cohort effects in empirical

analyses.

          That aging is a potentially important determinant of religiosity is also relevant for the

investigation of the propensity for women to wear a headscarf, a turban, or a burka. It is not

common among Muslim women in Turkey to wear a burka: the rate of burka-wearing women in

the sample is about 1 percent. A “turban” is a symbol of political Islam in Turkey, and it has

been the center of a political debate about secularism, freedom of expression and political Islam

since the 1980s.26 It is a piece of fabric, larger than a headscarf, which covers up all of the hair

and is tightly wrapped around the neck.27 It also involves a narrow piece of fabric on the

forehead to make sure that no hair is shown above the forehead. A picture of a woman wearing a

turban is provided at the end of the Appendix. Ten percent of women in the sample (ages 18 to

32) have reported wearing a turban. A headscarf, on the other hand, is by far the most common

head gear worn by Muslim women in Turkey. Thirty-eight percent of women in our sample

wear a head scarf. Thus, about 49 percent of the women in the sample have reported wearing a




26
     The details of the turban issue are summarized in the Appendix.
27
     A “turban” does not refer to the type of head gear worn by Sikhs.

                                                      19
head scarf, a turban or a burka. The rate is 59 percent among those in the control group and it is

39 percent among those who were exposed to the education reform.28

        It is expected that the propensity to wear a head cover would go up after girls transition to

being young adults and perhaps after they get married if their husbands put pressure to wear a

head scarf. Figure 3A presents the proportion of women wearing a head cover. Even though the

proportion of women wearing a head cover is rising with age as expected, the trend shown in the

graph between the 1980 and 1985 cohorts is not different from zero. On the other hand, starting

with the 1987 cohort, which is the first cohort fully exposed to the law, the propensity to wear a

head cover declines dramatically from 52% in the 1987-cohort to 33 percent in the 1991-cohort

(those who are 21 years old in 2012), and to 27 percent in the 1994-cohort (those who are 18

years old in 2012). Figure 3B shows that about 75 percent of women born in the early 1960s

(who are around 50 years of age in 2012) wear a head cover and the rate is declining as cohorts

get younger. The break in the trend in the birth year of 1986 (26 years olds) is striking.

        The respondents of the survey were also asked about their lifestyle. The choices given

were “modern,” “traditional conservative” and “religious conservative.” The dichotomous

variable Modern indicates whether the person stated that his/her lifestyle was modern. The

question posed to the respondents does not specify what is meant by modern lifestyle. Although

interpretations may differ, in the context of the question and the alternatives presented to the

respondents, it is clear that modernity is understood as a lifestyle choice including dimensions

from what type of clothes to wear to relationship with the opposite sex and social interactions.

Table 1 shows that the rate of self-declared modernity is higher in the treatment group for both

males and females. Figures 4 and 5 display the rate of modernity by birth year for women and

28
  A TESEV report (Çarkoğlu and Toprak, p. 24) found that in 2006 about 49 percent of women wore a
headscarf, 11 percent wore a turban and 1 percent wore a burka. These rates are very similar to the rates
found in our data.

                                                    20
men, respectively. In both cases there is a clear break in the trend of self-declared modern life

style starting with the first cohort that was exposed to the education reform.



The Tendency to Cast a Vote, and the Propensity for Vote for an Islamic Party

       The survey included a question which asked the respondents: “If elections were held

today, which party would you vote for?” A comprehensive list of political parties is provided to

the respondents to choose from, as well as the options of voting for independent candidates, not

going to the ballot box, and casting a blank vote. Voter Now is a dummy variable that takes the

value of one if the person has identified a political party for which he/she would vote for, or

indicated that he/has not yet made up his/her mind as to how to vote. The variable takes the

value of zero if the individual indicated that she would not cast a vote.29

       Similarly, the survey asked the respondents which political party they voted for in the

general elections on June 12, 2011. The variable Voter 2011 takes the value of 1 if the person

declared he/she has voted for a political party or for an independent candidate. Voter 2011 is

zero if the respondent indicated that he/she did not go to the ballot. We also employ an

alternative version of this variable by including people who indicated that they went to the ballot

box but casted a blank vote.

       Using the same survey question we created a binary variable, Islamic Voter Now. This

variable takes the value of one if the person indicated that he/she would vote for Justice and

Development Party (AKP), Felicity Party (SP), or People’s Voice Party (HAS) if elections were

held today.30 These are Islamic political parties, and the AKP has been the governing party in


29
   Turkey, which is governed by democracy since 1923, gave suffrage to women in local elections in
1930. Women gained full suffrage (any type of election) in 1934, and 18 women were elected to the
parliament in the general elections of 1935.
30
   People’s Voice Party (HAS) has merged with the Justice and Progress Party (AKP) in September 2012.

                                                 21
Turkey since November 2002.31 The variable takes the value of zero if the person indicated that

she would vote for any political party, other than the Islamic parties listed above. Political

scientists use the term “Islamic Party” to describe a political party that stems from Islamic roots

(Fuller 2004; Roy 1994) and as we describe in the appendix this is the case for the parties listed

here. In particular, although the Justice and Development Party (AKP) is trying to appeal to a

wider voter base, it is clearly an Islamic party (Taspinar 2012, Roy 2102).

          Figures 6 and 7 present the proportion of women and men, respectively, who would vote

for an Islamic party if elections were held today by birth cohort. In empirical analyses will use

the cohorts 1980 to 1994. As shown in Table 1, 66 percent of women born between 1980 and

1985 would vote for an Islamic party now. This cohort missed the education reform. The cohort

of 1987-1994 were treated by the education mandate and the proportion of women who would

vote for an Islamic party is 56 percent in the group. As shown in Figure 6, this drop is in sharp

contrast to the support received by Islamic parties from all cohorts born between 1960 and 1985.

Figure 7 presents the same information for men. The difference in the proportion of men who

would vote for an Islamic party today is only five percentage points between the cohorts of 1980-

85 and 1987-94.

          We also used the question about how the respondents have voted in 2011 and created a

dichotomous variable Voted Islamic in 2011 if the person has voted for an Islamic party in the

2011 general elections. Table 1 shows that there are differences between the treatment and

control groups in this variable as well, and the graphs were similar to Figures 6 and 7.

          As Table 1 shows, ninety-three percent of the sample adheres to the Sunni sect of Islam,

and five percent is Alevite Shiite Muslims. The dichotomous variable Kurt/Zaza takes the value

of one if the person identified himself/herself as being of Kurdish or Zaza ethnic origin. Other
31
     The details of the Islamic Party movement in Turkey are provided in the Appendix.

                                                    22
ethnicity takes the value of one if the person is Arabic or of other ethnic origin. The omitted

category is being ethnically Turkish.

       The bottom panel of Table 1 displays fours variables, which are not employed in

benchmark analyses in the paper, but are used in an investigation of potential channels through

which education may impact religiosity and the propensity to vote for Islamic parties. Migrant is

a dummy variable that takes the value of one if the person has migrated out of his/her region of

birth. City and Metropolitan Area are indicators of location of residence. They are mutually

exclusive variables where the omitted category is living in rural areas. Metropolitan Area

identifies the metro centers of 16 cities that are governed by special municipal structures.32

Labor Force Participation takes the value of one if the person is working or looking for work,

and zero otherwise. Only about 25 percent of women participate in the labor market.



IV. Empirical Specification and the Basic Results

       Our primary purpose is the investigation of the impact of education on outcomes such as

religiosity, the propensity to vote in general elections and the propensity to vote for an Islamic

party. More specifically, consider equation (1) below.



(1)    Ri = β0 + β1 Educi + Xi Ω + εi,

       where Ri represents a particular outcome, such as whether the person wears a head cover

or whether they have voted for an Islamic party. Educ is an indicator to show whether the person

has at least a middle school education (eight years of schooling). The vector X stands for

personal characteristics of the individual, including age, ethnicity, the religious sect, and the


32
  They are Istanbul, Ankara, Izmir, Bursa, Adana, Kocaeli, Gaziantep, Konya, Antalya, Kayseri,
Diyarbakir, Mersin, Eskisehir, Sakarya, Samsun and Erzurum.

                                                  23
location of residence. Vector X also contains survey region fixed-effects and month dummies to

control for the month and location in which the survey was registered. It also includes fixed-

effects for the region-of-birth of the respondent.

       Because unobserved determinants of religiosity and other outcomes of interest (R),

captured by the error term ε, are likely to be correlated with education, we use exposure to the

1997 law as an instrument for education. Specifically, the law was designed to increase the

minimum level education from 5 to 8 years. Thus, the first stage regression is



(2)    Educi = γ0 + γ1 Lawi + Xi Ψ + μi,

       where Law is a dummy variable that indicates whether the individual was treated by the

law. It takes the value of one if the person was born in 1987 or later, and it is zero if the person

was born before 1986. In all regressions the estimated standard errors of the coefficients are

clustered by region of birth--age group. Alternatively, we cluster the standard errors by

treatment status--region. This specification provides only 24 clusters as there are 12 regions;

therefore the standard errors obtained from this clustering should be interpreted with caution,

although as we report in the tables the standard errors obtained from two alternative clustering

methods are similar. In an alternative specification, we included those who were born in 1986

and assigned them the value of 0.33 or 0.50 as alternative values of the treatment. The results,

presented in the Appendix, are very similar to our main estimates.



The Impact of the Law on Educational Attainment

       Table 2 displays the results estimating equation (2) for the whole sample as well as for

males and females separately. The regressions are estimated by OLS and the standard errors of



                                                 24
the estimated coefficients are clustered by age-region of birth, as well as by treatment status-

region of birth. Column (1) shows that in the whole sample, exposure to the law increases the

propensity to have at least a middle school education by 10 percentage points. At the sample

mean of 0.77, this represents a 13 percent increase in the probability of having at least eight

years of education. The result for males in column (2) indicates a 6 percentage point impact,

which translates into a 7 percent increase in the probability of having at least a middle school

education. Column (3) shows that the impact of the law is stronger for females (about 14

percentage points), which is a 20 percent increase at the sample mean of 0.67. In summary, the

results in Table 2 reveal the effectiveness of the reform in terms of increasing educational

attainment, especially for females.

       We also investigated the impact of the reform on the probability of completing at least

high school and having at least a college degree. The results, which are presented in Appendix

Table A2, show that the reform had spillover effects and it also impacted the probability of

having a high school diploma as well as a college degree. Column (1) of Table A2 reports the

results of a falsification test. It shows the impact of the exposure to the reform on the propensity

to complete 5 years of primary schooling. As expected, the reform has no impact on the

propensity to complete at least five years of schooling.



The Impact of Education on Religiosity, Electoral Participation, and the Propensity to Vote for

Islamic Parties

       Table 3 displays the instrumental variables regressions results for the whole sample,

where middle school education is instrumented with the treatment dummy. The bottom section

of each column reports the F-value of the instrument from the first-stage. The F-values are



                                                 25
mostly in the range of 20-24, indicating the strength of the instrument. Column (1) shows that

having at least a middle school diploma, as opposed to elementary school education, decreases

the propensity to be religious by about 40 percentage points. This impact, which is generated by

three extra years of schooling, implies that one additional year of education reduces the

propensity of being religious by about 13 percentage points, or by 22 percent at the sample mean.

Similarly, column (2) of table 3 demonstrates that an increase in education increases the

probability a person declaring himself/herself atheist, and column (3) shows that having at least 8

years of middle school education as opposed to five years of elementary school, increases the

propensity to identify one’s lifestyle as modern instead of conservative or religious.33

        Column (4) of Table 3 displays the results of the IV regression where the dependent

variable is an indicator that shows whether the person has casted a vote in the 2011 general

elections. Column (5) presents a similar regression, where the dependent variable takes the value

of one if the person has indicated that he/she would vote if elections were held this Sunday, and

zero otherwise. In both cases, education has no impact on the propensity to vote.34 This result is

in contrast with studies that reported a positive impact of education on civic participation in

developed countries.

        Columns (6) and (7) present the results where the dependent variable is an indicator of

whether the person has casted a vote for an Islamic party in 2011 general elections, or whether

he/she would vote for an Islamic party if elections were held this Sunday (in 2012), respectively.


33
    In the regression of atheism in Table 3, only 138 people (1.4% of the sample) are atheists. These
individuals, however, reported a religious sect such as Sunni or Alevite Shii’te, suggesting that for them
this is cultural, rather than religious identity.
34
   In Turkey voting is compulsory and there is a monetary penalty associated with non-voting. Although
the 22.5 Turkish Lira penalty (about $13) for not voting is not substantial, and enforcement is spotty,
compulsory voting which has been in effect since 1986 is likely the reason for high rates of voter turnout
which is usually greater than 85 percent.


                                                    26
The results indicate that an additional year of education reduces the probability of casting a vote

for an Islamic party by 19-26 percent (given the point estimates and the baseline probabilities).

       Column (6) of Table 3 analyzes how the respondents voted in the elections of June 2011

and column (7) investigates how they would have voted now (in 2012). Given the short time

distance between these two events, we expect that most respondents would not have changed

their voting preferences. Table 4 displays the distribution of people with respect to how they

voted in 2011 and how they would vote if an election were held in 2012. Not surprisingly, the

majority are not inclined to change their minds. Specifically, information is available on 5,834

people on regarding how they voted in 2011 and also how they would vote now. Three

thousand-one hundred seventy nine of them (54.5 percent) indicated that they voted for an

Islamic party in 2011 and they would vote again for an Islamic party today, while 40.3 percent

revealed that they have not voted for an Islamic party and they would not vote for an Islamic

party today. Five percent of this sample indicated that they would switch their vote. The

bottom section of each cell in Table 4 displays the proportion of voters in each group that has at

least a middle school diploma. For example, among those who have not voted and who will not

vote for an Islamic party, the proportion with at least a middle school diploma is 0.84. Among

those who would switch away from Islamic parties, the proportion with a middle school

education is 0.81. Those who would switch to an Islamic party have on average lower levels of

education: 74 percent of this group has at least a middle school diploma and the rate is 0.66

among those who voted for an Islamic party in 2011 and who would vote again for an Islamic

party today.

       Although voting preferences are highly consistent between 2011 and 2012, it is useful to

classify voters into two groups and investigate the extent to which education impacts movement



                                                 27
between these two groups. In this analysis the first group consists of those who have not voted

for an Islamic party in 2011 and who declared that they would not vote for an Islamic party today

either. For these voters the variable Never Vote Islamic takes the value of one. These individuals

are in cell D of Table 4. This variable takes the value of zero for individuals who have voted for

an Islamic party in 2011 and/or indicated that they would vote for an Islamic party today. In

other words, Never Vote Islamic takes the value of zero for those who are in cells A, B, or C in

Table 4. The result, reported in column (8) of Table 3 are consistent with those reported in

columns (6) and (7). An increase in education, generated by the reform, increases the propensity

for having political preferences that are consistently against Islamic parties.

       The control variables used in these regressions reveal insights into religiosity and

political preferences. For example, being a Sunni Muslim (as opposed to being an Alevite

Shii’te Muslim or being an adherent of another sect of Islam) has a significant positive impact on

the propensity of being religious and a negative impact of being an atheist. It also has a negative

impact on the propensity to self-identify as having a modern life style. Being a Sunni has also a

significant impact on the propensity to vote for Islamic parties. Being an Alevite Shii’te has the

exact opposite effects as being a Sunni. People of Kurdish or Zaza ethnicity have higher

probability of being an atheist in comparison to Turks (which is the left-out category in the

regressions). Kurds and Zazas are less likely to vote for Islamic parties. A potential reason for

this result is the fact that Kurds are more likely to vote for BDP, which is a political party with

Kurdish identity.

       Table 5 reports the same regressions as in Table 3, but they are estimated using the

sample of females. The survey includes one additional measure of religiosity, pertinent for

Muslim women: whether they wear a head cover such as a headscarf, turban or burka. The



                                                 28
regression using this variable reported in column (4) of Table 5. The results show that an

increase in secular education lowers religiosity, increases modernity, and reduces the propensity

to wear a head cover for women. Specifically, a middle school diploma reduces the propensity

for women to declare themselves as religious by about 30 percentage points (about 45 percent). It

increases their propensity to declare themselves as being modern by 29 percentage points, (about

85 percent), and reduces the propensity to wear a head scarf, religious turban or burka by about

40 percentage points (82 percent). Education also has a significant negative impact on the

propensity to vote for Islamic parties. Thus, Table 5 demonstrates that, in case of females,

secular education has a substantial impact on religious attitudes and political tendencies that are

influenced by religion.

       Table 6 shows that in case of men, education has no impact on either religiosity or the

propensity to vote for an Islamic party. It should be noted, however, that the first-stage

regressions are not very powerful in the regressions for men, with F-values around 6.

       To gain additional insight, we ran reduced form regressions, where the outcomes are

regressed on the treatment dummy that identifies the cohorts that are exposed to the education

reform as well as on other control variables. The results, presented in Appendix Table A5, are in

line with our main estimates presented in Tables 3, 5, and 6. For instance, for men in Panel C, the

impact of the treatment by the law is not significant in any outcome other than Voter 2011,

suggesting that we cannot reject the hypothesis that increased education has no meaningful

impact on religiosity and the political support of Islamic parties in case of men.

       For the purpose of comparison, we also ran the models using OLS, instead of

instrumental variables. In these specifications, education is considered exogenous. The results,

which are displayed in Appendix Table A6, show that OLS coefficients of education are smaller



                                                 29
than the instrumental variables coefficients reported in Tables 3, 5, 6 and that the impact of

education is statistically significant for males as well as for females.



The Impact of Economic Circumstances

          The dependent variable “Islamic Voter Now” measures whether people would vote for an

Islamic party if general elections were held today. This question, as all other questions in the

survey, was posed to the respondents in 2012. The 2011 elections were won by an Islamic party

(AKP), and therefore Turkey was governed by an Islamic party in 2012.35 Thus, a declaration in

favor of voting for a non-Islamic party in 2012 could reflect a person’s dissatisfaction with the

policies of the current Islamic government. While the survey does not include questions about

approval of government policies, it includes questions about personal economic circumstances of

the respondents. Specifically, the variable “Can Make Ends Meet” takes the value of one if the

respondent indicated that he/she was financially comfortable and could even save some money

last month, or although not comfortable financially, managed to make ends meet last month. The

variable takes the value of zero if the person indicated financial difficulty, difficulty in paying

the bills, or having the need to borrow money to make ends meet last month. Along the same

lines, we employ a variable that asks the respondents whether they “expect personal economic

hardship during the next months.” The variable Expect Personal Economic Hardship takes the

value of one if the respondent answered in the affirmative. Our hypothesis is that, all else the

same, individuals who have difficulty making ends meet or who expect personal economic

hardship would be more inclined towards voting against the current Islamic government. If less

educated individuals face economic hardship and if they intend to cast a vote against the current

government as a result of their difficult economic circumstances, then their propensity to vote
35
     In fact, AKP has governed Turkey since 2002.

                                                    30
against Islamic parties (the strongest one of which is the governing AKP) may be misconstrued

as the impact of education. Under this scenario, the impact of education would be biased away

from voting for an Islamic party. Alternatively, younger cohorts, who are more educated, may

face tougher economic challenges and/or they may be more pessimistic about their economic

future in comparison to older and less-educated cohorts. In that case, the younger and the more

educated would cast their vote against the current Islamic government, not because of the causal

impact of education but because of their own economic circumstances.

        Table 7 presents the results of the models where Islamic Voter Now is regressed on the

same set of explanatory variables and middle school completion is instrumented with the

exposure to the education reform as before. These models, however, include the two new

variables that gauge personal economic circumstances of the individuals. Column (1) displays

the results obtained from the full sample. Columns (2) and (3) pertain to males and females,

respectively. In all cases, people who expect personal economic hardship in the months ahead

are less likely to vote for an Islamic party. Specifically, males (females) who expect personal

economic hardship are 14 (10) percentage points less likely to vote for an Islamic party if

elections were held today.36 The coefficient of Make Ends Meet indicates that females (males)

who stated that they could make ends meet this month are 9 (6) percentage points more likely to

vote for an Islamic party.37    These results indicate that voters who are concerned about their

own economic well-being plan to vote against the Islamic party that was in power in 2012. On

the other hand, controlling for these variables that gauge personal economic circumstances has

no effect on the magnitude of the estimated coefficients of education. For example, the

36
   In the sample used in regressions of column (1) of Table 7, the mean of Expect Personal Economic
Hardship is 0.38 in the treatment group, and it is 0.36 in the control group. The difference in these means
is not different from zero.
37
   The mean of Can Make Ends Meet is 0.79 in the treatment group and it is 0.75 in the control group, and
the difference is statistically significant.

                                                    31
coefficient of Middle School Diploma is -0.422 in column (1) of Table 7, and it was -0.419 in

the same specification that excluded economic circumstance variables (column 7 of Table 3).

Similarly, the coefficient is -0.545 for females in Table 7, and it was -0.537 in column (8) of

Table 5. In case of men, even though the impact of education is not statistically different from

zero, the point estimates are very similar between the model that included economic well-being

variables --column (2) of Table 7 and the model that excluded them – column (7) of Table 6.

These findings indicate that while economic well-being has an impact on the propensity to vote

for-or-against the governing political party, education has a direct separate impact on the

tendency to support Islamic parties.



V. Robustness Checks and the 2008 Data

       To investigate the robustness of the results, we estimated a number of alternative

specifications. Some individuals who were born in 1986 were impacted by the law, while others

of the same cohort were exempted by the law, depending on the exact birth day. Therefore, the

regressions reported in the paper excluded the 1986 cohort. We, however, estimated the models

by including those who were born in 1986 and assigning them the value of 0.5 or alternatively,

0.3 for the treatment. The results, reported in the Appendix Tables A3 and A4, were extremely

similar to those obtained from the benchmark specification. Second, we used years of completed

schooling, rather than a dichotomous indicator of whether the person has at least a middle school

diploma. The results remained the same and the estimated coefficients were about one-third of

those reported in the paper.

       Third, we excluded people who are enrolled in school and re-estimated the models. This

is potentially important in case of wearing a head cover because it was against the law in 2012 to



                                                32
wear a head cover inside of most public institutions, including schools. The results are presented

in Appendix Table A7. Although sample sizes get smaller when we drop students, the estimated

impact of the middle school diploma has not changed substantively either in magnitude or in

statistical significance.

        Our data set is based on a survey done in 2012. Younger individuals in the data (18-25

year old in 2012) are treated by the reform, while older ones (27-32 years old in 2012) are not

exposed to the reform. All regressions control for linear and quadratic age, but it could still be

argued that some unobserved factors might have impacted those who are 25 or younger in

comparison to those who are 27 or older, and that this could be the reason for identified impact

of education. To address this point, we use a survey conducted in 2008 by the same company

(KONDA) that provided the data used in the paper. The 2008 survey is smaller in sample size,

but is nation-wide and it includes the same questions on modernity and wearing a head cover

(head scarf, turban or burka) as well as information on other key variables that are employed in

regressions, including education, age, religious sect and ethnicity.

        Using both the 2012 and the 2008 data sets we investigate whether the results could have

been driven by cohort effects. Consider Table 8, which summarizes the cohort information

pertaining to the 2012 data used in the paper, as well the information on the 2008 data.

Specifically, columns (1) and (2) of Table 8 display the year of birth and exposure to the law,

and column (4) shows the age of the individuals in 2012. For example, someone who was born

in 1984 was not exposed to the law, and he/she was 28 years old in 2012. Column (3) shows the

age of the same people in 2008.

        From the 2008 data we extract those who were 23, 24 or 25 year old in 2008. The

descriptive statistics of the group are provided in the left panel of Appendix Table A8. We also



                                                 33
extract people of the same age group from the 2012 data. These two groups are represented by

the two boxes in Table 8, connected by arrow A. Those who are 23, 24 or 25 years old in 2012

are treated by the reform, but those who are 23, 24 or 25 in 2008 are not exposed to the reform.

Thus, we create a sample of 23-25 year olds using both the 2008 and 2012 surveys and assign a

value of 1 for the treatment dummy for those who are surveyed in 2012, and zero for those who

are surveyed in 2008. Regressions using this sample allow us to investigate if the results are

driven by the age difference between the treatment and control groups. Similarly, we also create

a sub-sample and run the instrumental variables regressions using those who are (23 or 24) in

2008 or in 2012.

       The results are reported in Table 9. All regressions in the table include every control

variable used in previous regressions including region of survey fixed-effects and region of birth

fixed effects. In addition, they include year-of-birth dummies to account for the fact that

although individuals in this sample are in the age range of 23-25, their year of birth ranges from

1983 to 85 and from 1987 to 1989 (see table 8).      Panel A of Table 9 displays the results that

pertain to the sample of 23-to-25 year olds. Column (1) presents the results of the instrumental

variables regression for men where the dependent variable is Modern. The sample consists of

1,258 observations and about 83 percent of these come from the 2012 survey. The first-stage

regression is powerful with an F-value of about 30 and the estimated coefficient of middle school

education indicates that having at least a middle school diploma increase the propensity for

modernity by 84 percentage points for men. Column (2) presents the same regression for

females and demonstrates that education has a positive impact on modernity, which is not

significant at conventional levels. This sample consists of 1,211 women who are 23-to-25 years

of age, and only 215 of them come from the 2008 survey (for whom the treatment value is equal



                                                34
to zero). This means that the imprecision of the estimate may be due to small variation in the

treatment. Despite small variation in the treatment variable, column (3) shows that education has

a significantly negative impact on the propensity to wear a head cover.

         Panel B of Table 9 displays the same results, but these samples use individuals who are

23 or 24 years old in 2008 or in 2012. Thus, these samples are smaller, but the results are

consistent with those reported in Panel A.38 In summary, the results in Table 9 indicate that the

impact of education reported in Tables 3-7 in the paper are not due to the age difference between

those who are exposed to the education reform and those who are not exposed.

        We conduct another test to investigate whether age effects are responsible for the

estimated impact of education. In our primary analysis sample, age is negatively correlated with

education. More precisely, younger individuals had exposure to the education reform while

older individuals were not treated by the law. We simulate a scenario to test whether ageing of

the same cohort can explain the variation in religiosity. Consider those who are 23-to-25 in 2008.

This group is not exposed to the reform. Four years later, in 2012, this group becomes 27-29

years old. We create a sample, consisting of individuals who are 23-25 in 2008 and those who

are 27-29 in 2012. We assign a placebo treatment, which takes the value of 1 for those in the

younger group (23-25) and zero in the older group (27-29). Note again that nobody in this

sample is exposed to the treatment by the reform. However, if being young alone is responsible

for less religiosity and more modernity, then our placebo treatment (T=1 for ages 23-25 of the

2008 survey, and T=0 of 27-29 of the 2012 survey) should explain these outcomes. (See Arrow

B in Table 8).




38
  The exception is column (2) where the first-stage is not powerful and the estimated coefficient of
education is greater than one.

                                                    35
       Tables 10A and 10B present the results of this analysis. Table 10A displays the results

where the dependent variable is an indicator of having at least a middle school education. This

table is counterpart of Table 2. In addition to standard explanatory variables, regressions also

control for year-of-birth dummies. Because neither the individuals from the 2008 survey nor

those from the 2012 survey are exposed to the law in this sample, their education level is not

expected to be different from each other. This is confirmed in Table 10A, where the coefficient

of the placebo treatment dummy is not different from zero. This, in turn indicates that the

instrumental variables regressions that use the placebo dummy as an instrument for education

would be meaningless. Instead, we run reduced form regressions where modernity and wearing

a head scarf are regressed on the full set of explanatory variables and the placebo treatment

dummy. This specification investigates whether religiosity of individuals of the same cohort

(born in 1983, 1984 or 1985; see Arrow B in Table 8) changes as they get older. Table 10B

displays the results. Each regression includes the explanatory variables used previously, as well

as year-of-birth fixed effects. The key variable is titled Exposure to the Placebo Law, which

takes the value of one for those who are 23-25 years old in 2008, and takes the value of zero for

those who are 27-29 in the 2012 survey. As Table 10B shows, the estimated coefficients of

Placebo Treatment are small and not different from zero, indicating that being young is not a

confounder of the impact of education on religiosity reported earlier.



Difference-in-Difference

       Finally, we estimate a difference-in-difference specification. We consider individuals

who are 23-25 or 27-29 in 2012. These are the people who are on both side of the education

reform: those who are 23-25 in 2012 were treated by the reform, while those who are 27-29



                                                36
missed it.39 We also consider people of the same exact age from the 2008 survey (the

descriptive statistics of this group of individuals surveyed in 2008 are provided in the right-hand

side panel of Appendix Table A8). Although the 2012 and 2008 groups are of the same age,

nobody in the 2008 group is exposed to the reform. We create a dummy variable Young, which

takes the value of one if the person is 23-to-25 years old, and zero otherwise. We create a

second indicator variable, Year2012, which identifies whether the individual was surveyed in

2012. This design is depicted by arrows C in Table 8.

           We estimate the following model.

     (3)   Ri = α + Xi Φ +λ1Youngi+λ2Year2012i+λ3Youngi*Year2012i+τi,



     where λ1 is the impact of being young (as opposed to being 27-to-29 year old) in 2008 on

modernity or on the probability of wearing a head cover, and λ3 represents the dif-in-dif

magnitude: it is the differential impact of being young in 2012 versus being young in 2008. As

the young group surveyed in 2012 has been treated by the reform while their counterparts

surveyed in 2008 have not, λ3 is an estimate of the reduced form effect of the exposure to the

reform.

           The results are presented in Table 11. In column (1), which displays the results of the

regression where the dependent variable is modernity for men, the dif-in-dif estimate is not

statistically different from zero. In column (2), which pertains to women, the estimate is 0.09 and

significantly different from zero. Similarly the dif-in-dif estimate in column (3) indicates an

impact of 11 percentage-point reduction in the probability of wearing a head cover. Thus, the

dif-in-dif estimates confirm the results provided by the instrumental variables regressions.

39As we have done throughout the paper those who are 26 years old in 2012 are excluded in the benchmark
models because some individuals of this cohort may be exposed to the law while some other are certainly not
exposed.

                                                    37
Regional Heterogeneity

        In this section we investigate if the results are location-specific. While our data set is not

big enough to estimate the models by region, it can be coherently divided into two broad

segments as Eastern Turkey and Western Turkey. 40 These regions differ systematically in a

number of dimensions, ranging from economic development to cultural conservatism, where

Western Turkey enjoys higher per capita income and higher levels of schooling. Some of the

major cities such as Istanbul and Izmir are in the West, while some others such as the capital city

Ankara, are in the East.

        Figures 8A to 9B present the proportion of women and men with middle school education

in the East and in the West. There is a visible increase in the rate of middle school completion

following the reform in both regions, which is especially pronounced for women. In Appendix

Table A9 we present the results of models where probability of having at least a middle school

diploma is regressed on full set of control variables and a variable capturing the treatment to the

education reform. These are the same specifications as in Table 2, but in this table we report

these education regressions by region (East v. West) and gender. Panel A of Table Appendix A9

replicates Table 2 as these results are obtained from the whole sample. The results shown in

panels B and C of Appendix Table A9 show that the impact of the reform has been larger on

women than men in both Eastern and Western Turkey. The impact has been smallest in

magnitude on men in the West, which is not surprising given that their middle school completion

rates were the highest among the four groups. These results indicate that the impact of the



40The former groups consists of Central Anatolia, The Black Sea Region, Northeast Anatolia, North Central
Anatolia and Southeastern Anatolia. The latter group consists of Istanbul, West Marmara, East Marmara, The
Aegean Coast, Western Anatolia and the Mediterranean Coast.

                                                    38
education reform was not contained to a specific area, but rather it was felt throughout the

country.

       Figures 10 to 15 display the outcomes analyzed in the paper among women who reside in

the East or in the West by birth cohort. Figure 14, which presents the proportion of women in

Eastern Turkey who would vote for an Islamic party if elections were held in 2012, displays no

clear break between the cohorts that are/are not exposed to the law. In all other cases, the reform

seems to have impacted the outcomes analyzed.

       Appendix Table A10 presents the instrumental variables regressions that are estimated

separately for women in Eastern and Western Turkey. These are the 1980-1994 cohorts of

women who are behind Figures 10-15. The number of observations in the Western sample ais

more than 3,000 in most regressions and the first-stage F-values are close to 10 in most cases.

Consequently, regressions on Western Turkey are estimated with reasonable precision and the

results are consistent with those obtained from the sample of all women. The sample of women

from the East, on the other hand, is much smaller with 900-1,300 observations and the first-stage

F-values are around 4. As a result, not much can be inferred from the regressions using the

subsample of women from Eastern Turkey.



Potential Mechanisms

       The effect we identify in the paper represents the total impact of secular education on

religiosity and on the propensity to vote for Islamic parties. This total impact can work through

a number of channels. For example, education can increase cognitive ability, analytical thinking

skills and appreciation of scientific analysis, all of which can influence religiosity. Furthermore,

going to school during adolescence may increase the network of friends which could allow



                                                 39
exposure to a variety of viewpoints and experiences, which in turn may impact preferences.

Increased education could also lead to migration, and moving from rural areas to cities and

residing in a big city may also influence preferences in a number of dimensions, including

religion. Furthermore, education may increase the propensity to participate in the labor force,

which may also alter religiosity.

       To investigate whether any of these factors have an influence on the estimated impact of

education, we re-estimate the same specification for women as in the benchmark model

displayed in Table 5, but we include additional variables that measure the location of residence

(City, Metro Area vs. rural), whether the person has migrated out of the city she was born

(Migrant), and whether the person is in the labor force (Labor Force Participation). 41 Table 12

presents the results. For the sake of comparison, Panel A displays the coefficients of education

reported in Table 5. These coefficients represent the total effect of education. Panel B displays

the results of the models that include migration and labor force participation and residential

location variables. The coefficients on these variables are consistent with priors in that if the

person is a migrant she is less likely to vote, and more likely to self-identify as modern. Women

living in metro areas are less likely to be religious, less likely to wear a religious head cover and

more likely to be modern. The same is true for women who are in the labor force: they are less

likely to be religious, less likely to wear a religious head gear, and more likely to indicate that

they have a modern life style.

       A comparison of the coefficients of the middle school diploma between the panels A and

B of Table 12 shows that they are very similar, although statistical significance is reduced in

same cases in Panel B. For example, in columns (1) and (3) we observe that adding variables


41
 This exercise is in the same spirit as Hamermesh and Abrevaya (2013), Mocan and Tekin (2010), and
Cullen, Jacob and Levitt (2005).

                                                  40
which measure the immigration status, labor force participation behavior and the location of

residence changes the coefficient of education by only about 16 percent in the religiosity and

modernity regressions (from about -0.29 to -0.25). The coefficient of education changes only

slightly from -0.399 to -0.339 in the religious head cover regression of column (4), and the

education coefficients in regression on voting for Islamic parties are almost the same between the

two specifications. These results suggest that migration, choice of residential location or labor

force participation are not likely channels through which education impacts religiosity and

preferences for Islamic parties.



VI. Summary and Discussion

           Education is shown to change individuals’ preferences in a number of dimensions,

ranging from time discounting to intolerance for violence. Whether education affects religiosity,

however, has been a difficult question to answer because of the empirical challenge it presents.

An exogenous change in education has to be identified that would have an influence on some

individuals, but that would have no impact on others in an effort to tease out the causal impact of

education on religiosity from other correlates and confounders.

           The impact of education on religiosity is also important to investigate because of the

implications for political economy of development. During the last decade there has been a

surge of political Islam in the Middle East and North Africa.42 As shown in Table A1 in the

Appendix, these countries are characterized by low per capita income, low levels of education,

low level of democracy and high religiosity. If secular education has a causal impact on

religiosity and on voter preferences for Islamic parties, education policies can impact political

landscape of these developing countries.
42
     With the exception of Israel and Cyprus, the predominant religion in these countries is Islam.

                                                       41
       In this paper we exploit an education reform in Turkey that was implemented very

quickly and rather unexpectedly in 1997. A law that was passed in August 1997 increased the

mandated years of education from 5 to 8 years for those students who were about to start the fifth

grade or lower in the Fall of 1997. Students who had completed five years of schooling before

the fall of 1997 were not bound by the new law.

       We employ a unique nationally-representative data set that gauges the extent of

religiosity and voting behavior of individuals in Turkey in 2012. In addition, the data set

includes information that is not available in standard data sets, such as ethnic background of the

survey respondents (e.g. being Kurdish or Arabic), as well as information on the religious sect of

the individuals, such as whether they are Sunni-Muslim or Alevite Shii’te.

       We investigate the extent to which an increase in education, generated by the reform has

an impact on individuals’ religiosity in this predominantly Muslim country. Religiosity is

measured by whether individuals are atheists, believers, religious Muslims or devout Muslims.

We also investigate the impact of education on self-declared lifestyles such as being a religious

conservative, conventional conservative, or modern. In case of women, we analyze whether an

increase in education has an impact on a strong indicator of religiosity in Islam: the propensity to

wear a head cover such as a head scarf, or burka, or a religious turban. Importantly, the data set

includes information on the specific political party the individuals have voted for in the 2011

general elections and how they would vote if elections were held today. Using this information

we investigate the impact of education on the propensity to participate in elections as a voter and

on the propensity to vote for an Islamic party.




                                                  42
       We first analyze whether the education reform has in fact increased educational

attainment, and find that exposure to the reform has increased the propensity to have at least a

middle school education (8 years). The impact is particularly strong for females.

       We use exposure to the reform, determined by the year of birth, as an instrument for

educational attainment. Instrumental variables regressions show that in case of women,

education lowers the propensity for being religious, and it decreases the probability of wearing a

head/body cover such as a headscarf or burka. Education increases the propensity for women to

identify themselves as having a modern lifestyle. On the other hand, education has no impact on

men’s religiosity. For both men and women, education has no impact on electoral participation;

that is, increased education does not make individuals more likely to vote in a general election.

This result is in contrast to the research on developed countries which, in general, identified a

positive impact of education on voter turnout.

       Finally, and importantly, we find that education makes women less likely to vote for an

Islamic party. This is true for those who have voted in the 2011 elections and in the analysis of

how they would vote if elections were held today. Because in 2012 Turkey was governed by a

party with Islamic roots (Justice and Development Party –AKP), the tendency to cast a vote

against this party today could in part be a reflection of dissatisfaction with current economic

circumstances. We control for two variables that gauge whether individuals face economic

difficulty and whether they foresee personal economic hardship in the months ahead. While

these variables negatively impact the propensity to vote for the incumbent Islamic party,

inclusion of these variables in the models had no influence on the negative impact of education

on the propensity to vote for the governing Islamic party. For men, the impact of education on




                                                 43
the propensity to vote Islamic is not different from zero. The results are robust to how the 1986

cohort is treated, and to the exclusion of current students from the analyses.

        Our data set is from the year 2012, and younger individuals in the data (18-25 year old in

2012) have been exposed to the education reform, while older ones (27-32 years old in 2012)

were exempt from the mandate of the reform. Although all regressions control for age, it can

still be argued that some unobserved factors might have impacted those who are 25 or younger in

comparison to those who are 27 or older, and that this could be the reason for the identified

impact of education. Even though the dramatic change in behavior that is presented in the

graphs indicate that this is not likely the case, we address this concern by using a smaller but

similar survey from 2008 that includes all key variables and information on individuals’

modernity, and in case of women, whether they wear a head cover. Using these two years of

data enables us to conduct a variety of tests, including a dif-in-dif specification, which show that

the identified impact of education is not due to a cohort effect.

        These results show that education alters women’s preferences on religiosity and their

political tendencies to vote for an Islamic party. It is interesting that no such statistically

significant impact of education exists for men. Middle school education, which is mandated by

the new law, consists of a standard curriculum including a wide range of courses from

mathematics to literature, from history to geography. While exposure to such subject matters

and the corresponding increase in cognition may alter preferences, the difference in the impact of

education between males and females may suggest that the change in preferences may not be

driven by what is taught in the classroom. An alternative explanation could involve being

“outside of the home.” It should be noted that female labor force participation is low in Muslim

countries and Turkey is no exception. The labor force participation rate of women ages 15 to 24



                                                  44
was 32% in 1997, while the rate was double (63%) for men in that same year. This difference,

stemming from both economic and cultural factors, indicates higher rates of girls and young

women stay at home. Thus, it could be the case that the education mandate allowed girls to have

exposure to a larger network of friends, ideas and experiences, and enabled them to socialize

outside the home and to participate in society more heavily via school attendance between the

ages of 12-15, when such experiences could have long-lasting effects. 43 Although we cannot

test this socialization hypothesis directly, we show evidence in the paper to indicate that

migration out of the city of birth, labor force participation, or the location of residence are not

likely channels through which education impacts religiosity and the propensity to vote for an

Islamic party.




43
  This explanation is consistent with that reported by Cannonier and Mocan (2012) who found that
exposure to an education reform in Sierra Leone has changed the preferences of women regarding matters
that impact women’s well-being, although the quality of schooling received was likely very low.


                                                  45
                                   Figure 1A
       Proportion of Females with at Least Middle School Education in 2012
                           Birth Cohorts 1980 to 1994




 1
.9
.8
.7
.6
.5
.4




     1980                  1985                      1990                       1995
                                    Birth Year


                                   Figure 1B
       Proportion of Females with at Least Middle School Education in 2012
                           Birth Cohorts 1960 to 1994
 1
.9
.8
.7
.6
.5
.4
.3
.2




                                                   Cohorts Used in Estimation
.1




     1960     1965      1970      1975      1980        1985      1990          1995
                                    Birth Year


                                   Figure 2A
        Proportion of Males with at Least Middle School Education in 2012
                           Birth Cohorts 1980 to 1994
 1
.9
.8
.7




     1980                  1985                      1990                       1995
                                    Birth Year



                                     46
                                   Figure 2B
        Proportion of Males with at Least Middle School Education in 2012
                           Birth Cohorts 1960 to 1994




 1
.9
.8
.7
.6
.5




                                                 Cohorts Used in Estimation
.4




     1960    1965      1970       1975      1980       1985      1990         1995
                                    Birth Year


                                   Figure 3A
            Proportion of Females Who Wear a Head Cover in 2012
                           Birth Cohorts 1980 to 1994
.6
.5
.4
.3
.2




     1980                  1985                    1990                       1995
                                    Birth Year


                                   Figure 3B
            Proportion of Females Who Wear a Head Cover in 2012
                           Birth Cohorts 1960 to 1994
.8
.7
.6
.5
.4
.3




                                                 Cohorts Used in Estimation
.2




     1960    1965      1970       1975      1980       1985      1990         1995
                                    Birth Year



                                     47
                                     Figure 4
        Proportion of Females Who Declare Themselves 'Modern' in 2012
                           Birth Cohorts 1960 to 1994




.5
.4
.3
.2




                                                Cohorts Used in Estimation
.1




     1960       1965     1970      1975      1980     1985      1990         1995
                                     Birth Year


                                     Figure 5
            Proportion of Males Who Declare Themselves 'Modern' in 2012
                              Birth Cohorts 1960 to 1994
.5
.4
.3
.2




                                                Cohorts Used in Estimation
.1




     1960       1965     1970      1975      1980     1985      1990         1995
                                     Birth Year


                                     Figure 6
             Proportion of Females Who Are Islamic Voters Now (in 2012)
                              Birth Cohorts 1960 to 1994
.7
.6
.5




                                                Cohorts Used in Estimation
.4




     1960       1965     1970      1975      1980     1985      1990         1995
                                     Birth Year



                                      48
                                   Figure 7
            Proportion of Males Who Are Islamic Voters Now (in 2012)
                           Birth Cohorts 1960 to 1994




.7
.6
.5




                                               Cohorts Used in Estimation
.4




     1960     1965      1970     1975      1980      1985      1990         1995
                                   Birth Year


                                  Figure 8A
       Proportion of Females with at Least Middle School Education in 2012
                   Birth Cohorts 1960 to 1994 - Eastern Turkey
.9
.8
.7
.6
.5
.4
.3
.2
.1
 0




     1960     1965      1970     1975      1980      1985      1990         1995
                                   Birth Year


                                  Figure 8B
       Proportion of Females with at Least Middle School Education in 2012
                   Birth Cohorts 1960 to 1994 - Western Turkey
 1
.9
.8
.7
.6
.5
.4
.3
.2
.1




     1960     1965      1970     1975      1980      1985      1990         1995
                                   Birth Year



                                     49
                                  Figure 9A
        Proportion of Males with at Least Middle School Education in 2012
                   Birth Cohorts 1960 to 1994 - Eastern Turkey




 1
.9
.8
.7
.6
.5
.4
.3




     1960    1965      1970      1975      1980      1985      1990         1995
                                   Birth Year


                                  Figure 9B
        Proportion of Males with at Least Middle School Education in 2012
                   Birth Cohorts 1960 to 1994 - Western Turkey
 1
.9
.8
.7
.6
.5
.4




     1960    1965      1970      1975      1980      1985      1990         1995
                                   Birth Year


                                  Figure 10
            Proportion of Females Who Wear a Head Cover in 2012
                 Birth Cohorts 1960 to 1994 - Eastern Turkey
.8
.7
.6
.5
.4
.3
.2




     1960    1965      1970      1975      1980      1985      1990         1995
                                   Birth Year



                                     50
                                 Figure 11
            Proportion of Females Who Wear a Head Cover in 2012
                 Birth Cohorts 1960 to 1994 - Western Turkey




.8
.7
.6
.5
.4
.3
.2




     1960    1965      1970     1975      1980     1985     1990     1995
                                  Birth Year


                                 Figure 12
        Proportion of Females Who Declares Themselves 'Modern' in 2012
                   Birth Cohorts 1960 to 1994 - Eastern Turkey
.4
.3
.2
.1




     1960    1965      1970     1975      1980     1985     1990     1995
                                  Birth Year


                                 Figure 13
        Proportion of Females Who Declares Themselves 'Modern' in 2012
                   Birth Cohorts 1960 to 1994 - Western Turkey
.6
.5
.4
.3
.2
.1




     1960    1965      1970     1975      1980     1985     1990     1995
                                  Birth Year



                                    51
                                   Figure 14
            Proportion of Females Who Are Islamic Voters Now (in 2012)
                     Birth Cohorts 1960 to 1994 - Eastern Turkey




.9
.8
.7
.6
.5




     1960      1965     1970      1975      1980     1985     1990       1995
                                    Birth Year


                                   Figure 15
            Proportion of Females Who Are Islamic Voters Now (in 2012)
                    Birth Cohorts 1960 to 1994 - Western Turkey
.8
.7
.6
.5
.4




     1960      1965     1970      1975      1980     1985     1990       1995
                                    Birth Year




                                     52
                                                     Table 1
                        Descriptive Statistics by Exposure to the 1997 Education Reform

                                                                                            Men                 Women
          Variable                   Variable Definitions                   All
                                                                                     Treatment Control    Treatment Control
Middle School           = 1 if holds at least a middle school degree,       0.775     0.925      0.772     0.826     0.536
Diploma                 = 0 otherwise                                      (0.418)   (0.264)    (0.419)   (0.379)   (0.499)
Religious               = 1 if religious or devout,                         0.596     0.516      0.603     0.588     0.695
                        = 0 if believer or atheist                         (0.491)   (0.500)    (0.489)   (0.492)   (0.461)
Atheist                 = 1 if atheist,                                     0.014     0.020      0.014     0.013     0.009
                        = 0 if believer, religious, or devout              (0.119)   (0.140)    (0.117)   (0.114)   (0.096)
Modern                  = 1 if modern,                                      0.350     0.414      0.269     0.411     0.283
                        = 0 if conventional or religious conservative      (0.477)   (0.493)    (0.443)   (0.492)   (0.451)
Wears Head Cover        = 1 if wears headscarf/burka/turban,                0.489       -          -       0.394     0.589
                        = 0 otherwise                                      (0.500)      -          -      (0.489)   (0.492)
Voted Islamic in 2011   =1 if voted for an Islamic political party in       0.566     0.503      0.548     0.550     0.649
                        2011 general elections, = 0 otherwise              (0.496)   (0.500)    (0.498)   (0.498)   (0.477)
Islamic Voter Now       = 1 if would vote for an Islamic political party    0.560     0.493      0.537     0.561     0.666
                        if general elections were held this Sunday         (0.496)   (0.500)    (0.499)   (0.496)   (0.472)
                        (2012), = 0 otherwise
Voter 2011              = 1 if voted in the general elections               0.899     0.836      0.941     0.875     0.945
                        in 2011,= 0 otherwise                              (0.301)   (0.371)    (0.235)   (0.331)   (0.228)
Voter Now               = 1 if would vote if general elections              0.932     0.921      0.936     0.930     0.945
                        were held this Sunday, = 0 otherwise               (0.252)   (0.270)    (0.246)   (0.256)   (0.227)
Sunni                   = 1 if Muslim Sunni, = 0 otherwise                  0.927     0.931      0.928     0.923     0.926
                                                                           (0.260)   (0.254)    (0.258)   (0.267)   (0.263)
Alevite Shiite          = 1 if Muslim Alevi, = 0 otherwise                  0.053     0.048      0.055     0.055     0.055
                                                                           (0.224)   (0.214)    (0.227)   (0.229)   (0.228)
Kurdish or Zaza         = 1 if Kurdish or Zaza, = 0 otherwise               0.143     0.141      0.141     0.153     0.135
Ethnicity                                                                  (0.350)   (0.348)    (0.348)   (0.361)   (0.342)
Arabic or Other         = 1 if ethnicity is not either Turkish              0.042     0.042      0.040     0.045     0.042
Ethnicity               or Kurdish, = 0 otherwise                          (0.202)   (0.201)    (0.197)   (0.208)   (0.199)
City                    = 1 if lives in a city, = 0 otherwise               0.293     0.302      0.277     0.312     0.278
                                                                           (0.455)   (0.459)    (0.448)   (0.464)   (0.448)
Metropolitan Area       = 1 if lives in a metropolitan area,                0.505     0.485      0.503     0.498     0.539
                        = 0 otherwise                                      (0.500)   (0.500)    (0.500)   (0.500)   (0.499)
Migrant                 = 1 if migrated out of the birth region,            0.267     0.226      0.286     0.253     0.315
                        = 0 otherwise                                      (0.442)   (0.418)    (0.452)   (0.435)   (0.464)
Labor Force             =1 if working, looking for work                     0.500     0.548      0.967     0.253     0.275
Participation           =0 if housewife or not in the labor force          (0.500)   (0.497)    (0.178)   (0.435)   (0.447)
No. of Observations                                                         9,625     2,809      2,105     2,444     2,267
        The data pertain to 2012. Treatment group consists of those born in 1987-1994. The control group
        consists of those who were born in 1980-1985. Exposure to the Law is unclear for the 1986 cohort.




                                                                 53
                                           Table 2
    The Impact of Exposure to the Education Reform on the Propensity to Have at Least Eight
                             Years of Education-- OLS regressions
                                              (1)                       (2)                       (3)
                                              All                      Males                    Females

Exposure to the Law                        0.102***                   0.062**                  0.138***
                                            (0.022)                   (0.026)                   (0.035)
                                            [0.023]                   [0.029]                   [0.040]

Male                                        0.159***
                                             (0.019)
Age                                            0.004                  0.036*                      -0.039
                                             (0.020)                  (0.019)                    (0.029)
Age Squared                                   -0.000                 -0.001**                      0.000
                                             (0.000)                  (0.000)                    (0.001)
Sunni                                         -0.027                   -0.025                     -0.036
                                             (0.028)                  (0.026)                    (0.042)
Alevite Shiite                               0.064**                   -0.003                   0.119**
                                             (0.030)                  (0.034)                    (0.045)
Kurdish or Zaza Ethnicity                  -0.117***                 -0.063**                  -0.175***
                                             (0.029)                  (0.026)                    (0.039)
Arabic or Other Ethnicity                    -0.038*                   -0.039                     -0.052
                                             (0.022)                  (0.028)                    (0.033)

N                                                9,590                     4,896                       4,694
    The entries in parentheses are standard errors of the estimated coefficients, clustered by birth province-
    age level. Twelve regions and five age groups yield 60 clusters. Standard errors, which are presented in
    brackets, are clustered by region of birth-exposure to the law, generating 24 clusters. A * indicates
    statistical level at the 10 percent level, ** stands for significance at the 5 percent level, *** indicates
    significance at the 1 percent level or better. Exposure to the Law=1 if the person was born between 1987
    and 1994, it is zero if the year of birth is between 1980 and 1985. The 1986 cohort is excluded as
    exposure to the law depends on the exact day of birth for this cohort. If Kurdish or Zaza Ethnicity=0 and
    Arabic and Other Ethnicity=0, the individual is a Turk. Regressions include region fixed-effects and
    monthly dummies for the survey month, as well as dummies for region of birth.




                                                        54
                                              Table 3
           The Impact of Education on Religiosity, the Propensity to Cast a Vote, and the
           Propensity to Vote for an Islamic Party—Instrumental Variables Regressions
                                          Whole Sample
                               (1)         (2)       (3)          (4)        (5)         (6)       (7)          (8)
VARIABLES                   Religious    Atheist    Modern       Voter      Voter      Voted    Islamic       Never
                                                                 2011       Now      Islamic in Voter         Vote
                                                                                        2011     Now         Islamic

Middle School Diploma       -0.398**     0.082*      0.301*     -0.149      0.005     -0.330*    -0.419** 0.453**
                             (0.201)     (0.042)     (0.169)    (0.145)    (0.095)    (0.181)     (0.175) (0.219)
                             [0.176]     [0.045]     [0.167]    [0.147]    [0.102]    [0.203]     [0.175] [0.254]

Age                         -0.011        0.001    -0.049*** 0.074***     0.019** -0.013 -0.035** 0.018
                            (0.018)      (0.003)     (0.013) (0.013)      (0.008) (0.020) (0.016) (0.024)
Age Squared                  0.000        0.000     0.001*** -0.001***    -0.000*    0.000    0.001*   -0.000
                            (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.000) (0.000)      (0.000) (0.000) (0.000) (0.000)
Male                        -0.016       -0.007      -0.054*    0.004      -0.010   -0.013    -0.022    0.001
                            (0.035)      (0.007)     (0.030) (0.026)      (0.015) (0.034) (0.031) (0.040)
Sunni                       -0.005      -0.029**   -0.150*** 0.017          0.028 0.158*** 0.094** -0.126**
                            (0.033)      (0.014)     (0.030) (0.032)      (0.018) (0.050) (0.043) (0.060)
Alevite Shiite            -0.356***     0.038**     0.177*** 0.045          0.010 -0.334*** -0.391*** 0.398***
                            (0.046)      (0.017)     (0.037) (0.039)      (0.024) (0.061) (0.053) (0.071)
Kurdish or Zaza Ethnicity 0.016         0.023***     -0.040*   -0.024      -0.017 -0.207*** -0.199*** 0.212***
                            (0.030)      (0.008)     (0.023) (0.021)      (0.014) (0.044) (0.039) (0.043)
Arabic or Other Ethnicity 0.070**       0.024**       -0.025   -0.018      -0.021 0.063**      0.049 -0.073**
                            (0.030)      (0.010)     (0.031) (0.019)      (0.014) (0.029) (0.032) (0.035)

N                             9,590        9,590        9,467     8,330       9,452       6,923     7,214      5,834
1st Stage F-test              21.80        21.80        21.43     22.82       24.11       20.46     24.46      15.86
P-value                        0.00         0.00         0.00      0.00        0.00        0.00      0.00      0.00
        The entries in parentheses are standard errors of the estimated coefficients, clustered by birth
        province-age level. Twelve regions and five age groups yield 60 clusters. Standard errors, which
        are presented in brackets, are clustered by region of birth-exposure to the law, generating 24
        clusters. A * indicates statistical level at the 10 percent level, ** stands for significance at the 5
        percent level, *** indicates significance at the 1 percent level or better. Exposure to the Law=1 if
        the person was born between 1987 and 1994, it is zero if the year of birth is between 1980 and
        1985. The 1986 cohort is excluded as exposure to the law depends on the exact day of birth for
        this cohort. If Kurdish or Zaza Ethnicity=0 and Arabic and Other Ethnicity=0, the individual is a
        Turk. Regressions include region fixed-effects and monthly dummies for the survey month, as
        well as dummies for region of birth.




                                                         55
                                     Table 4
The Joint Distribution of Voters for an Islamic Party in 2011 and Now (in 2012)

                                                                  Voted for Islamic Party in 2011
                                                                  Yes                             No
      Voted for Islamic Party Today (in 2012)                      A                               B

                                                                N=3,179                          N=157
                                                                (54.5%)                          (2.7%)
                                                Yes
                                                      Proportion of this group with   Proportion of this group with
                                                         at least middle school          at least middle school
                                                             education: 0.66                 education: 0.74

                                                                   C                               D

                                                                 N=148                          N=2,350
                                                                 (2.3%)                         (40.3%)
                                                No
                                                      Proportion of this group with   Proportion of this group with
                                                         at least middle school          at least middle school
                                                             education: 0.81                 education: 0.84




                                                                            56
                                                    Table 5
                 The Impact of Education on Religiosity, the Propensity to Cast a Vote, and the
                 Propensity to Vote for an Islamic Party—Instrumental Variables Regressions
                                                    Females
                                 (1)         (2)       (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)         (7)       (8)         (9)
VARIABLES                     Religious    Atheist    Modern      Wears       Voter      Voter      Voted    Islamic      Never
                                                                  Head        2011       Now      Islamic in Voter        Vote
                                                                  Cover                              2011     Now        Islamic

Middle School Diploma         -0.298**      0.072     0.293** -0.399** 0.044             0.046 -0.518** -0.537*** 0.607**
                               (0.152)     (0.049)    (0.148) (0.203) (0.119)           (0.084) (0.224) (0.177) (0.281)
                               [0.145]     [0.043]    [0.125] [0.225] [0.112]           [0.095] [0.242] [0.209] [0.325]

Age                               0.013     0.007    -0.050*** 0.103*** 0.089*** 0.033*** -0.021        -0.026             0.034
                                (0.018)    (0.005)     (0.016) (0.018) (0.021) (0.009) (0.041) (0.023)                    (0.046)
Age Squared                      -0.000    -0.000     0.001*** -0.002*** -0.001*** -0.001*** 0.000       0.000            -0.000
                                (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000) (0.000) (0.000) (0.000) (0.001) (0.000)                    (0.001)
Sunni                             0.022    -0.034      -0.093* 0.145*** -0.011        0.000   0.119*     0.086            -0.079
                                (0.044)    (0.021)     (0.052) (0.047) (0.030) (0.023) (0.065) (0.057)                    (0.067)
Alevite Shiite                -0.343***     0.034     0.232*** -0.220*** -0.031      -0.037 -0.327*** -0.416***          0.428***
                                (0.055)    (0.024)     (0.058) (0.056) (0.044) (0.028) (0.071) (0.069)                    (0.089)
Kurdish or Zaza Ethnicity         0.031   0.028**       -0.043   0.074*    -0.000    -0.006 -0.234*** -0.205***          0.239***
                                (0.034)    (0.011)     (0.032) (0.041) (0.024) (0.018) (0.053) (0.052)                    (0.060)
Arabic or Other Ethnicity         0.044   0.039***      -0.014    0.026    -0.016     0.025    0.056     0.056            -0.073
                                (0.036)    (0.013)     (0.037) (0.035) (0.023) (0.024) (0.041) (0.040)                    (0.048)

N                               4,694       4,694        4,641      4,659      4,135      4,612       3,527      3,489    2,958
1st Stage F-test                15.80       15.80        15.66      15.59      14.38      16.43       13.16      16.86     9.66
P-value                          0.00        0.00         0.00       0.00       0.00       0.00        0.00       0.00     0.00
              The entries in parentheses are standard errors of the estimated coefficients, clustered by birth
              province-age level. Twelve regions and five age groups yield 60 clusters Standard errors, which
              are presented in brackets, are clustered by region of birth-exposure to the law, generating 24
              clusters. A * indicates statistical level at the 10 percent level, ** stands for significance at the 5
              percent level, *** indicates significance at the 1 percent level or better. Exposure to the Law=1 if
              the person was born between 1987 and 1994, it is zero if the year of birth is between 1980 and
              1985. The 1986 cohort is excluded as exposure to the law depends on the exact day of birth for
              this cohort. If Kurdish or Zaza Ethnicity=0 and Arabic and Other Ethnicity=0, the individual is a
              Turk. Regressions include region fixed-effects and monthly dummies for the survey month, as
              well as dummies for region of birth.




                                                                57
                                                    Table 6
                 The Impact of Education on Religiosity, the Propensity to Cast a Vote, and the
                 Propensity to Vote for an Islamic Party—Instrumental Variables Regressions
                                                    Males
                                  (1)         (2)        (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)         (7)          (8)
VARIABLES                      Religious    Atheist     Modern       Voter       Voter       Voted      Islamic       Never
                                                                     2011        Now       Islamic in    Voter        Vote
                                                                                              2011       Now         Islamic

Middle School Diploma            -0.549      0.130       0.252       -0.551      -0.085      0.077       -0.112       0.150
                                (0.506)     (0.101)     (0.390)     (0.371)     (0.243)     (0.397)     (0.412)      (0.338)
                                [0.486]     [0.105]     [0.456]     [0.383]     [0.236]     [0.424]     [0.400]      [0.336]

Age                              -0.028      -0.006     -0.037   0.084***     0.016   -0.031   -0.064**   0.028
                                (0.034)     (0.005)     (0.025)   (0.020)   (0.013)   (0.028)   (0.027)  (0.027)
Age Squared                       0.001       0.000      0.000  -0.002*** -0.000       0.001    0.001**  -0.001
                                (0.001)     (0.000)     (0.001)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.001)   (0.001)  (0.001)
Sunni                            -0.034      -0.023   -0.207***     0.047   0.051* 0.205***      0.105  -0.202**
                                (0.045)     (0.020)     (0.037)   (0.051)   (0.029)   (0.065)   (0.066)  (0.091)
Alevite Shiite                -0.380***     0.044*     0.128**    0.100*      0.041 -0.305*** -0.359*** 0.324***
                                (0.060)     (0.023)     (0.053)   (0.058)   (0.036)   (0.075)   (0.067)  (0.096)
Kurdish or Zaza Ethnicity         0.010     0.019*      -0.040     -0.037    -0.027 -0.190*** -0.194*** 0.192***
                                (0.039)     (0.012)     (0.030)   (0.034)   (0.021)   (0.055)   (0.040)  (0.049)
Arabic or Other Ethnicity       0.092*        0.012     -0.038     -0.018 -0.066*** 0.076*       0.056   -0.072
                                (0.050)     (0.013)     (0.052)   (0.033)   (0.024)   (0.045)   (0.054)  (0.050)

N                                4,896       4,896        4,826      4,195        4,840       3,396       3,725      2,876
1st Stage F-test                 5.907       5.907        6.172      7.245        6.462       7.528       6.302      7.168
P-value                          0.018       0.018         0.01       0.01         0.01        0.01        0.01       0.01
            The entries in parentheses are standard errors of the estimated coefficients, clustered by birth
            province-age level. Twelve regions and five age groups yield 60 clusters. Standard errors, which
            are presented in brackets, are clustered by region of birth-exposure to the law, generating 24
            clusters. A * indicates statistical level at the 10 percent level, ** stands for significance at the 5
            percent level, *** indicates significance at the 1 percent level or better. Exposure to the Law=1 if
            the person was born between 1987 and 1994, it is zero if the year of birth is between 1980 and
            1985. The 1986 cohort is excluded as exposure to the law depends on the exact day of birth for
            this cohort. If Kurdish or Zaza Ethnicity=0 and Arabic and Other Ethnicity=0, the individual is a
            Turk. Regressions include region fixed-effects and monthly dummies for the survey month, as
            well as dummies for region of birth.




                                                              58
                                         Table 7
  The Impact of Education on the Propensity to Vote for an Islamic Party if Elections
          Were held Today (in 2012)—Instrumental Variables Regressions
        with Control Variables Measuring Personal Economic Circumstances
                                                 (1)                  (2)                   (3)
                                                 All                 Males                Females

Middle School Diploma                         -0.422**                -0.080             -0.545***
                                               (0.177)               (0.427)               (0.173)
                                               [0.178]               [0.411]               [0.201]

Expect Personal Economic Hardship             -0.120***            -0.138***             -0.102***
                                                (0.017)              (0.020)               (0.021)
Can Make Ends Meet                             0.077***             0.062***              0.091***
                                                (0.012)              (0.017)               (0.019)
Age                                             -0.027*             -0.057**                -0.019
                                                (0.016)              (0.028)               (0.023)
Age Squared                                       0.000              0.001*                  0.000
                                                (0.000)              (0.001)               (0.000)
Male                                             -0.024
                                                (0.031)
Sunni                                           0.096**              0.110*                 0.086
                                                (0.043)              (0.067)               (0.056)
Alevite Shiite                                -0.362***            -0.332***             -0.384***
                                                (0.052)              (0.067)               (0.068)
Kurdish or Zaza Ethnicity                     -0.190***            -0.178***             -0.202***
                                                (0.039)              (0.041)               (0.051)
Arabic or Other Ethnicity                         0.052               0.067                 0.053
                                                (0.032)              (0.055)               (0.040)

N                                                 7,158                 3,698                 3,460
1st Stage F-test                                  24.37                 6.164                 17.39
P-value                                            0.00                  0.01                 0.00
  The entries in parentheses are standard errors of the estimated coefficients, clustered by birth
  province-age level. Twelve regions and five age groups yield 60 clusters. Standard errors, which
  are presented in brackets, are clustered by region of birth-exposure to the law, generating 24
  clusters. A * indicates statistical level at the 10 percent level, ** stands for significance at the 5
  percent level, *** indicates significance at the 1 percent level or better. Exposure to the Law=1 if
  the person was born between 1987 and 1994, it is zero if the year of birth is between 1980 and
  1985. The 1986 cohort is excluded as exposure to the law depends on the exact day of birth for
  this cohort. If Kurdish or Zaza Ethnicity=0 and Arabic and Other Ethnicity=0, the individual is a
  Turk. Regressions include region fixed-effects and monthly dummies for the survey month, as
  well as dummies for region of birth.




                                                   59
                            Table 8
   Exposure to the Law in the 2012 and 2008 Survey Years &
  Graphical Representation of the Samples used in Tables 9-11

        (1)                (2)              (3)             (4)
Exposure to the Law   Year of Birth     Age in 2008     Age in 2012
       No                1979               29              33
       No                1980               28              32
       No                1981               27              31
       No                1982         C     26              30
       No                1983               25              29
       No                1984               24      B       28
       No                1985               23              27
    Uncertain            1986               22 A            26     C
       Yes               1987               21              25
       Yes               1988               20              24
       Yes               1989               19              23
       Yes               1990               18              22
       Yes               1991               17              21
       Yes               1992               16              20
       Yes               1993               15              19
       Yes               1994               14              18




                               60
                                     Table 9
  Instrumental Variables Regressions Using Individuals Ages 23-25 or Ages 23-24
                                in 2008 and 2012
                                                         (2)              (3)            (4)
 VARIABLES                                             Modern           Modern          Wears
                                                       (Males)         (Females)      Head Cover

                                                                 Panel A: Ages 23, 24, 25
 Middle School Diploma                                0.841***            0.273          -0.869***
                                                       (0.279)           (0.200)          (0.159)
                                                       [0.282]           [0.202]          [0.159]

 Sunni                                                -0.166***           -0.000           0.031
                                                       (0.062)           (0.077)          (0.105)
 Alevite Shiite                                          0.082          0.412***         -0.285**
                                                       (0.104)           (0.115)          (0.133)
 Kurdish or Zaza Ethnicity                               0.006             0.019          -0.097*
                                                       (0.065)           (0.052)          (0.055)
 Arabic or Other Ethnicity                              -0.049            -0.079           0.009
                                                       (0.075)           (0.072)          (0.053)

 N                                                      1,258            1,211              1,215
 1st Stage F-test                                       29.97            20.54              20.76
 P-value                                                0.00             0.00               0.00

                                                                  Panel B: Ages 23, 24
 Middle School Diploma                                1.154***            0.132           -0.570*
                                                       (0.287)           (0.312)          (0.306)
                                                       [0.240]           [0.291]          [0.300]

 Sunni                                                  -0.032             0.003            0.007
                                                       (0.100)           (0.120)          (0.102)
 Alevite Shiite                                        0.263*           0.440***         -0.309**
                                                       (0.149)           (0.158)          (0.134)
 Kurdish or Zaza Ethnicity                              -0.009             0.009           -0.040
                                                       (0.098)           (0.073)          (0.072)
 Arabic or Other Ethnicity                              -0.122            -0.049            0.015
                                                       (0.100)           (0.090)          (0.062)

 N                                                       824              746                752
 1st Stage F-test                                       7.506            13.14              13.41
 P-value                                                0.00             0.00               0.00

Individuals are of the same age in different years (2008 or 2012). Exposure to the Law=1 if the
person was 23-25 years old in 2012 and it is zero if the person was 23-25 in 2008 (See Table 8).
Regressions control for year-of-birth dummies. The entries in parentheses are standard errors of
the estimated coefficients, clustered by birth province-age level. Standard errors, which are
presented in brackets, are clustered by region of birth-exposure to the Law. Each model controls
for birth year fixed effects. A * indicates statistical level at the 10 percent level, ** stands for
significance at the 5 percent level, *** indicates significance at the 1 percent level or better. If
Kurdish or Zaza Ethnicity=0 and Arabic and Other Ethnicity=0, the individual is a Turk.
Regressions include region fixed-effects as well as dummies for region of birth.


                                                 61
                                    Table 10A
   The Impact of Exposure to the Placebo Treatment on the Propensity to Have at
                 Least Eight Years of Education-- OLS regressions
                                                                                   (1)           (2)
                                                                                  Males        Females
    Exposure to the Placebo Law                                                  -0.027         0.042
                                                                                 (0.029)       (0.030)
                                                                                 [0.036]       [0.039]

    Sunni                                                                        -0.077          0.080
                                                                                 (0.053)       (0.109)
    Alevite Shiite                                                               -0.063        0.258**
                                                                                 (0.079)       (0.085)
    Kurdish or Zaza Ethnicity                                                     0.040         -0.157
                                                                                 (0.040)       (0.115)
    Arabic or Other Ethnicity                                                    -0.010         -0.090
                                                                                 (0.043)       (0.063)

    N                                                                             1,303          1,377
Exposure to the Placebo Law=1 if the person was between 23 and 25 years of age in 2008, it is zero if the
respondent was between 27 and 29 years of age in 2012 (See Table 8). The entries in parentheses are
standard errors of the estimated coefficients, clustered by birth province-age level. Standard errors, which
are presented in brackets, are clustered at the birth region by exposure to the Placebo Law. Each model
controls for birth year fixed effects. A * indicates statistical level at the 10 percent level, ** stands for
significance at the 5 percent level, *** indicates significance at the 1 percent level or better. The 1986
cohort is excluded as exposure to the law depends on the exact day of birth for this cohort. If Kurdish or
Zaza Ethnicity=0 and Arabic and Other Ethnicity=0, the individual is a Turk. Regressions include region
fixed-effects as well as dummies for region of birth.

                                  Table 10B
  Reduced Form Estimates of the Impact of Placebo Treatment on Modernity and
                  Wearing a Head Cover-- OLS Regressions
                                                                    (2)            (3)            (4)
    VARIABLES                                                     Modern         Modern        Wears
                                                                  (Males)       (Females)    Head Cover
    Exposure to the Placebo Law                                   -0.027          0.037         0.001
                                                                  (0.030)        (0.035)       (0.039)
                                                                  [0.043]        [0.049]       [0.044]

    Sunni                                                         -0.192*        -0.100          0.169
                                                                  (0.102)       (0.106)         (0.098)
    Alevite Shiite                                                  0.123       0.313**        -0.322**
                                                                  (0.103)       (0.140)         (0.119)
    Kurdish or Zaza Ethnicity                                      -0.014        -0.044        0.153**
                                                                  (0.030)       (0.055)         (0.069)
    Arabic or Other Ethnicity                                       0.045        -0.048          0.026
                                                                  (0.072)       (0.053)         (0.068)

    N                                                              1,303          1,377         1,394

         See notes to Table 10A.

                                                      62
                                    Table 11

  Difference in Difference Analysis using the 2008 and 2012 Surveys

                                        (2)           (3)           (4)
     VARIABLES                        Modern        Modern         Wears
                                      (Males)      (Females)     Head Cover

     Young                             0.050          -0.027        0.009
                                      (0.041)        (0.040)       (0.041)
     Year 2012                        0.069**      -0.072***        0.006
                                      (0.026)        (0.013)       (0.026)
     Young*(Year 2012)                 0.029        0.094**       -0.114**
                                      (0.049)        (0.044)       (0.044)
                                      [0.051]        [0.049]       [0.049]

     Sunni                           -0.168***       -0.135*        0.137*
                                       (0.058)       (0.068)        (0.071)
     Alevite Shiite                   0.158**       0.298***      -0.333***
                                       (0.068)       (0.086)        (0.083)
     Kurdish or Zaza Ethnicity          -0.037        -0.037       0.128**
                                       (0.025)       (0.035)        (0.049)
     Arabic or Other Ethnicity          -0.019        -0.031         0.041
                                       (0.048)       (0.044)        (0.045)

      N                                   2,617        2,616           2,637
The sample consists of those who are 23-25 or 27-29 in either 2008 or 2012.
Young=1 if the person is 23-25 years old. Year2012=1 if the person is surveyed in 2012.
No individual who is 23-29 in 2008 is exposed to the law. Those who are young (23-25)
in 2012 are exposed to the law. The entries in parentheses are standard errors of the
estimated coefficients, clustered by birth province-age level. Standard errors, which are
presented in brackets, are clustered by region of birth-exposure to the Law. Each model
controls for year of birth fixed effects. A * indicates statistical level at the 10 percent
level, ** stands for significance at the 5 percent level, *** indicates significance at the
one percent level or better. If Kurdish or Zaza Ethnicity=0 and Arabic and Other
Ethnicity=0, the individual is a Turk. Regressions include region fixed-effects as well as
dummies for region of birth.




                                        63
                                                     Table 12
                   The Impact of Education on Religiosity, the Propensity to Cast a Vote, and the
                   Propensity to Vote for an Islamic Party—Instrumental Variables Regressions
                   Controlling for Migration, Residential Location and Labor Force Participation
                                                      Females
                                    (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)          (8)       (9)
VARIABLES                        Religious     Atheist     Modern       Wears        Voter       Voter       Voted       Islamic    Never
                                                                        Head         2011        Now       Islamic in     Voter     Vote
                                                                        Cover                                 2011        Now      Islamic

                                                                 Panel A: Baseline Results from Table 5
Middle School Diploma             -0.298**      0.072      0.293** -0.399**       0.044       0.046   -0.518** -0.537*** 0.607**
                                   (0.152)     (0.049)     (0.148)    (0.203)    (0.119)     (0.084)    (0.224) (0.177)  (0.281)

Observations                       4,694        4,694       4,641          4,659     4,135       4,612       3,527        3,489    2,958
1st Stage F-test                   15.80        15.80       15.66          15.59     14.38       16.43       13.16        16.86    9.66
P-value                             0.00        0.00        0.00           0.00      0.00        0.00        0.00         0.00     0.00

                                   Panel B: Results C ontrolling for Migration, Residential Location and Labor Force Participation
Middle School Diploma              -0.253      0.076       0.245     -0.339*       0.057     0.060    -0.495** -0.521*** 0.590*
                                  (0.168)    (0.054)     (0.158)     (0.201)     (0.133)    (0.088)    (0.250)  (0.191)     (0.323)
Age                                0.032       0.008   -0.070*** 0.132*** 0.092*** 0.039*** -0.013               -0.021       0.030
                                  (0.023)    (0.006)     (0.019)     (0.020)     (0.025)    (0.010)    (0.049)  (0.027)     (0.057)
Age Squared                        -0.001     -0.000    0.001*** -0.002*** -0.002*** -0.001***           0.000    0.000      -0.000
                                  (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.001)  (0.000)     (0.001)
Sunni                              0.011     -0.036*     -0.090* 0.134*** -0.013             -0.003    0.118*     0.081      -0.073
                                  (0.044)    (0.021)     (0.051)     (0.046)     (0.031)    (0.023)    (0.066)  (0.057)     (0.067)
Alevite Shiite                   -0.349***     0.030    0.231*** -0.221*** -0.033            -0.039 -0.327*** -0.422*** 0.437***
                                  (0.057)    (0.024)     (0.059)     (0.059)     (0.045)    (0.029)    (0.071)  (0.071)     (0.090)
Kurdish or Zaza Ethnicity          0.040     0.029**     -0.055*     0.087**       0.003     -0.003 -0.232*** -0.202*** 0.238***
                                  (0.037)    (0.012)     (0.033)     (0.040)     (0.026)    (0.019)    (0.058)  (0.055)     (0.069)
Arabic or Other Ethnicity          0.042    0.042***      -0.011      0.025       -0.017     0.025       0.055    0.057      -0.074
                                  (0.037)    (0.013)     (0.034)     (0.034)     (0.024)    (0.025)    (0.039)  (0.040)     (0.050)
Migrant                            -0.007     -0.001    0.040**       0.020     -0.033**     -0.010      0.001   -0.007       0.022
                                  (0.022)    (0.004)     (0.019)     (0.022)     (0.014)    (0.010)    (0.027)  (0.029)     (0.030)
City                               -0.053    -0.015* 0.125*** -0.135*** -0.000               -0.009      0.020    0.029      -0.035
                                  (0.035)    (0.009)     (0.028)     (0.035)     (0.023)    (0.014)    (0.047)  (0.036)     (0.061)
Metro Area                       -0.074***     0.009    0.117*** -0.163*** -0.014            -0.008     -0.009    0.009      -0.014
                                  (0.026)    (0.009)     (0.031)     (0.038)     (0.021)    (0.015)    (0.043)  (0.040)     (0.055)
Labor Force Participation        -0.117*** -0.008       0.119*** -0.193*** -0.015           -0.039*     -0.046   -0.032       0.017
                                  (0.041)    (0.013)     (0.035)     (0.042)     (0.030)    (0.022)    (0.063)  (0.049)     (0.084)

N                                   4,694       4,694        4,641        4,659       4,135       4,612       3,527        3,489   2,958
1st Stage F-test                    16.18       16.18        16.37        16.23       13.55       16.95       12.08        15.89   7.684
P-value                              0.00        0.00         0.00         0.00        0.00       0.00         0.00        0.00    0.00
               The entries in parentheses are standard errors of the estimated coefficients, clustered by birth province-age
               level. Twelve regions and five age groups yield 60 clusters. A * indicates statistical level at the 10 percent
               level, ** stands for significance at the 5 percent level, *** indicates significance at the 1 percent level or
               better. Exposure to the Law=1 if the person was born between 1987 and 1994, it is zero if the year of birth
               is between 1980 and 1985. The 1986 cohort is excluded as exposure to the law depends on the exact day of
               birth for this cohort. If Kurdish or Zaza Ethnicity=0 and Arabic and Other Ethnicity=0, the individual is a
               Turk. Regressions include region fixed-effects and monthly dummies for the survey month, as well as
               dummies for region of birth.


                                                                      64
                                      References
Azzi, C., and R. Ehrenberg. 1975. “Household Allocation of Time and Church
Attendance.” Journal of Political Economy 83(1), pp. 27–56.

Becker, G., and C. Mulligan. 1997. “The Endogenous Determination of Time
Preference.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(3), pp.729-58.

Botero, J., Ponce, A., and A. Shleifer. 2012. “Education and the Quality of
Government.” NBER Working Paper, No. 18119.

Cakir, R., Irfan Bozan and B. Talu. 2004. “Imam Hatip Liseleri: Efsaneler ve Gercekler.”
TESEV, http://www.tesev.org.tr/.

Çarkoğlu ,Ali and Binnaz Toprak, Değişen T rkiye’de Din , Toplum ve Siyaset (Istanbul:
TESEV, 2006), 19.

Campante, F., and D. Chor. 2012a. “Schooling, Political Participation, and the
Economy.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 94(4), pp. 841-859.

          . 2012b. “Why Was the Arab World Poised for Revolution? Schooling,
Economic Opportunities, and the Arab Spring.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 26(2),
pp.167-88.

Cannonier, C., and N. Mocan. 2013. “Empowering Women Through Education:
Evidence from Sierra Leone.” NBER Working Paper, No.18016.

Card, D. 2001. “Estimating the Return to Schooling: Progress on Some Persistent
Econometric Problems.” Econometrica 69(5), pp. 1127-60.

Cullen, Julie Berry, Brian Jacob and Steven Levitt. 2005. “The Imapct of School Choice
on Student Outcomes: An Analysis of the Chicago Public Schools.” Journal of Public
Economics. 89(5-6), pp. 729-60.

Cutler, D., and A. Lleras-Muney. 2010. “Understanding Differences in Health behaviors
by Education.” Journal of Health Economics 29(1), pp. 1-28.

Dagi, I. 2005. “Transformation of Islamic Political Identity in Turkey: Rethinking the
West and Westernization.” Turkish Studies 6(1), pp. 21-37.

Deaton, A. 2011. “Aging, Religion, and Health.” In Explorations in the Economics of
Aging, David Wise (ed.) pp. 237-262. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Dee, T. 2004. “Are there Civic Returns to Education?” Journal of Public Economics
88(9), pp. 1697-1720.



                                            65
Degan, A., and A. Merlo. 2011. “A Structural Model of Turnout and Voting In Multiple
Elections.” Journal of the European Economic Association 9(2), pp. 209-245.

Di Pietro, G., and M. Delprato. 2009. “Education and Civic Outcomes in Italy.” Public
Finance Review 37(4), pp.421-446.

Dulger, Ilhan. 2004. “Turkey: Rapid Coverage for Compulsory Education: Case
study of the 1997Basic Education Program” World Bank, Washington DC.

Erbakan, Necmettin. 1975. “Milli Gör ş .” (Istanbul: Dergah Yayınları).

Fuller, D. 2004. “Turkey's Strategic Model: Myths and Realities.” The Washington
Quarterly 27(3), pp. 51-64.

Glaeser, E., and B. Sacerdote. 2008. “Education and Religion.” Journal of Human
Capital 2(2), pp.188-215.

Grossman, M. 2008. “The Relationship between Health and Schooling.” Eastern
Economic Journal, 34:3, pp. 281-92.

Grossman, Michael. 1972. “On the Concept of Health Capital and the Demand for
Health.” Journal of Political Economy, 80:2, pp. 223-255.

Gulesci, S., and E. Meyersson. 2013, “For the Love of the Republic' Education, Religion,
and Empowerment.” Working paper.

Hamermesh, Daniel S. and Jason Abrevaya. 2013. “Beauty is the Promise of Happiness?”
European Economic Review, 64, pp. 351-68.

Hungerman, Daniel, 2011. “The Effect of Education on Religion: Evidence from
Compulsory Schooling Laws.” NBER Working Paper, No. 16973.

Iannaccone, L. 1998. “Introduction to the Economics of Religion.” Journal of Economic
Literature 36(3), pp. 1465-1495.

Kirdar, Murat G. & Dayioglu, Meltem & Koc, Ismet, 2012. "Does longer compulsory
education equalize educational attainment by gender, ethnicity, and socioeconomic
background?," MPRA Paper 39995, University Library of Munich, Germany.

Kirdar, Murat G. & Dayioglu, Meltem & Koc, Ismet, 2011. " The Effect of Compulsory
Schooling Laws on Teenage Marriage and Births in Turkey," IZA Discussion Paper No.
5887

KONDA Research and Consultancy. 2007. Religion, secularism and the veil in daily life.
Available at http://www.konda.com.tr/html/dosyalar/ghdl&t_en.pdf.


                                           66
KONDA Research and Consultancy. 2011. “İçki ve Sigara Kullanımı”. KONDA Şubat
Barometresi. Siyasal ve Toplumsal Araştırmalar Dizisi. Available at
http://konda.com.tr/icki_sigara.pdf.

Lavy, V.,and A. Zablotsky. 2011. “Mother’s Schooling and Fertility under Low Female
Labor Force Participation: Evidence from a Natural Experiment.” NBER Working Paper,
No. 16856.

McCleary, R. M., and R. Barro, and 2006a. “Religion and Political Economy in an
International Panel.” Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion 45(2), pp. 149-175.

          .2006b. “Religion and Economy.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 20(2), pp.
49-72.

Micklethwait, J., and A.Wooldridge. 2009. “God Is Back: How the Global Revival of
Faith Is Changing the World.” Penguin Press. New York.

Miller, A., and R. Stark. 2002. “Gender and Religiousness: Can Socialization
Explanations Be Saved?” American Journal of Sociology 107(6), pp. 1399-1423.

Milligan, K., Moretti, E., and P. Oreopoulos. 2004. “Does Education Improve
Citizenship? Evidence from the U.S. and the U.K.” Journal of Public Economics 88(9-
10), pp. 1667–1695.

Mocan, Leyla. 2013. “The Impact of Education on Wages: Analysis of an Education
Reform in Turkey.” University of Pennsylvania Wharton School of Business Working
Paper.

Mocan, Naci and Duha Altindag, 2013. “Education, Cognition, Health Knowledge and
Health Behavior.” European Journal of Health Economics.

Mocan, Naci and Erdal Tekin. 2010. “Ugly Criminals.” The Review of Economics and
Statistics. 92(1), pp. 15-30.

Norris, P., and R. Inglehart. 2004. “Sacred and Secular: Religion and Politics
Worldwide.” Cambridge University Press. New York.

Oreopoulos, P. 2006. “Estimating Average and Local Average Treatment Effects of
Education when Compulsory Schooling Laws Really Matter.” American Economic
Review 96(1), pp. 152-175.

Osili, U., and B. Long. 2008. “Does female schooling reduce fertility? Evidence from
Nigeria.” Journal of Development Economics 87(1), pp. 57-75.

Pande, R. 2011. “Can Informed Voters Enforce Better Governance? Experiments in Low-
Income Democracies.” Annual Review of Economics 3(1), pp. 215-237.


                                            67
Roy, O. 1994. The Failure of Political Islam. Harvard University Press.

Roy, O. 2012. The Transformation of the Arab World", Journal of Democracy, Volume
23, July

Siedler, Thomas. 2010. "Schooling and Citizenship in a Young Democracy: Evidence
from Postwar Germany," Scandinavian Journal of Economics, Wiley Blackwell, vol.
112(2), pages 315-338, 06.

Suziedelis, A., and R. Potvin. 1981. “Sex Differences in Factors Affecting Religiousness
among Catholic Adolescents.” Journal for Scientific Study of Religion 20(1), pp. 38–50.

Taşpınar, Ömer. 2012. Turkey: The New Model?” in The Islamists are Coming: Who
They Really are; Robin Wright (editor), Washington DC: Woodrow Wilson Center Press

TUIK. News Bulletin on Youth with Statistics. 2012.
http://www.tuik.gov.tr/PreHaberBultenleri.do?id=13509

Walter, T., and G. Davie. 1998. “The Religiosity of Women in the Modern West.” British
Journal of Sociology 49(4), pp. 640–60.

Wolfinger, R., and S. Rosenstone. 1980. “Who Votes?” Yale University Press. New
Haven.

Yavuz, M. Hakan. 2000. “Cleansing Islam From the Public Sphere,” Journal of
International Affairs, 54(1), pp.21-40




                                           68
69
                                  Appendix Table A1
   Selected Attributes of a Sample of Countries in the Middle East and North Africa
                        with Predominantly Muslim Populations
                           GDP per capita                              Average years of total
                                                 Democracy Index
Country                    (current US$ in                             schooling in 2010, for      Religiosity
                                                    in 2012
                                2012)                                         Age 25+
Iraq                            6,455                   4.10                   5.58                   1.05
Iran, Islamic Rep.             6,816*                   1.98                   7.84                   1.28
Turkey                         10, 666                  5.76                   6.47                   1.36
Syrian Arab Republic            3,289                   1.63                   4.88                   N/A
Egypt, Arab Rep.                3,187                   4.56                   6.37                   1.05
Jordan                          4,945                   3.76                   8.64                   1.05
Tunisia                         4,237                   5.67                   6.48                   N/A
Algeria                         5,403                   3.83                   6.83                   1.09
Morocco                         2,925                   4.07                   4.36                   1.11
Libya                         10,456**                  5.15                   7.52                   N/A

                   Selected Attributes of a Sample of European Countries
                                                                    Average years of total
                GDP per capita (current          Democracy
  Country                                                           schooling in 2010, for      Religiosity
                    US$ in 2012)                Index in 2012
                                                                           Age 25+
  Sweden                  55,245                     9.73                   11.61                  2.91
  Germany                 41,514                     9.58                   12.21                  2.93
  France                  39,772                     7.88                   10.43                  2.74
  England                 38,514                     9.58                    9.13                  2.65
  Spain                   29,195                     8.02                   10.35                  2.76
  Italy                   33,049                     7.74                    9.30                  1.96
  Slovenia                22,001                     7.88                   11.70                  2.68

 The data on GDP are from the World Bank. GDP is measured in 2012, except for Iran and Libya, for which
 the GDP information pertain to years 2011 and 2009, respectively.

 The 2012 Democracy Index data are obtained from the Economist Intelligence Unit Report. The scale of
 the index is from 0 to 10 and the mean among 167 countries is 5.52. The maximum of the index is 9.93
 (Norway), the median is 5.86 (Bangladesh), and the minimum is 1.08 (North Korea).

 The average years of total schooling for the population aged 25 and over is obtained for the year 2010. The
 average years of total schooling in all countries is 7.82 years. Source: Barro, Robert and Jong-Wha Lee, "A
 New Data Set of Educational Attainment in the World, 1950-2010." Journal of Development Economics.

 The religiosity measure is computed from the World Values Survey (WVS). In the WVS the respondents
 were asked the following question: “How important is religion in your life? Would you say it is: Very
 important (coded as 1), Rather important (coded as 2), Not very important (coded as 3), Not at all important
 (coded as 4). The reported religiosity measure is the average answer of the country’s respondents.

 The religiosity measure is calculated using WVS 2005-2007 wave data, with the exception of Algeria, for
 which the most recent data are available from the 1999-2004 wave. The religiosity measure is not available
 for Syria, Tunisia, and Libya, as these countries are not in the WVS. The average for all countries in the
 2005-2007 wave is 1.91.




                                                     70
                                 Appendix Table A2
   The Impact of Exposure to the Education Reform on the Propensity to Have at
    Least 5 years , at Least 8 Years, at Least 12 Years, and at Least 16 Years of
                            Education -- OLS regressions

                                             (1)               (2)             (3)               (4)
 VARIABLES                                Primary +           Middle         High             College +
                                                             School +      School +
                                                                   Full sample

 Exposure to the Law                       -0.003           0.102***         0.123***         0.072***
                                           (0.006)           (0.022)          (0.030)          (0.021)

 Observations                               9,625             9,625             9,625           9,625
 Dependent Variable Mean                    0.974             0.775             0.597           0.166
 Dependent Variable SD                      0.159             0.418             0.491           0.372
                                                                      Females

 Exposure to the Law                        0.002           0.138***         0.120***         0.092***
                                           (0.015)           (0.035)          (0.040)          (0.026)

 Observations                               4,711             4,711             4,711           4,711
 Dependent Variable Mean                    0.959             0.686             0.515           0.142
 Dependent Variable SD                      0.199             0.464             0.500           0.349
                                                                       Males

 Exposure to the Law                       -0.006            0.062**         0.121***          0.050*
                                           (0.007)           (0.025)          (0.031)          (0.026)

 Observations                               4,914             4,914             4,914           4,914
 Dependent Variable Mean                    0.989             0.859             0.675           0.189
 Dependent Variable SD                      0.105             0.348             0.468           0.392
The entries in parentheses are standard errors of the estimated coefficients, clustered by birth province-age
level. Twelve regions and five age groups yield 60 clusters. A * indicates statistical level at the 10 percent
level, ** stands for significance at the 5 percent level, *** indicates significance at the 1 percent level or
better. Exposure to the Law=1 if the person was born between 1987 and 1994, it is zero if the year of birth
is between 1980 and 1985. The 1986 cohort is excluded as exposure to the law depends on the exact day of
birth for this cohort. If Kurdish or Zaza Ethnicity=0 and Arabic and Other Ethnicity=0, the individual is a
Turk. Regressions include region fixed-effects and monthly dummies for the survey month, as well as
dummies for region of birth.
.




                                                      71
                                           Appendix Table A3
             The Impact of Education on Religiosity, the Propensity to Cast a Vote, and the
             Propensity to Vote for an Islamic Party—Instrumental Variables Regressions
                          Treatment is Coded=0.33 for the 1986 Birth Cohort
                       (1)          (2)       (3)           (6)         (4)         (5)          (7)           (8)            (9)
VARIABLES           Religious     Atheist    Modern        Wears       Voter       Voter       Voted        Islamic         Never
                                                           Head        2011        Now        Islamic        Voter          Vote
                                                           Cover                              In 2011         Now          Islamic

                                                               Panel A: Full Sample
Middle School       -0.475**      0.083*      0.266                   -0.105    0.050        -0.370**      -0.495***       0.524**
                     (0.188)      (0.044)    (0.167)                 (0.149)   (0.093)        (0.184)       (0.173)        (0.221)

Observations         10,297       10,297      10,167                   9,016      10,150       7,507         7,726          6,312
1st Stage F-test      21.78       21.78       21.26                    21.26      23.60        20.21         24.71          16.79
P-value               0.00         0.00        0.00                     0.00       0.00        0.00          0.00            0.00

                                                             Panel B: Female Sample
Middle School       -0.391**       0.070     0.321**     -0.443**     0.061    0.069         -0.548**      -0.609***       0.684**
                     (0.159)      (0.051)    (0.148)      (0.191)    (0.120)  (0.084)         (0.241)       (0.187)        (0.300)

Observations          5,046       5,046       4,991        5,010       4,480       4,961       3,828         3,745          3,205
1st Stage F-test      14.38       14.38       14.53        14.13       12.36       14.44       11.42         14.22          8.291
P-value               0.00         0.00        0.00        0.00         0.00        0.00       0.00          0.00            0.00

                                                               Panel C: Male Sample
Middle School         -0.569       0.130      0.099                    -0.431   0.025          0.015         -0.212         0.219
                     (0.439)      (0.096)    (0.359)                  (0.339)  (0.229)        (0.398)       (0.384)        (0.345)

Observations           5,251        5,251       5,176                     4,536      5,189        3,679         3,981       3,107
1st Stage F-test       6.889        6.889       6.761                     7.707      7.411        8.421         7.573       8.296
P-value                 0.02         0.02        0.01                      0.01       0.01         0.01         0.01         0.01
          The entries in parentheses are standard errors of the estimated coefficients, clustered by birth province-age
          level. Twelve regions and five age groups yield 60 clusters. A * indicates statistical level at the 10 percent
          level, ** stands for significance at the 5 percent level, *** indicates significance at the 1 percent level or
          better. Exposure to the Law=1 if the person was born between 1987 and 1994, it is zero if the year of birth
          is between 1980 and 1985. The exposure to the law indicator is set equal to 0.33 for 1986. If Kurdish or
          Zaza Ethnicity=0 and Arabic and Other Ethnicity=0, the individual is a Turk. Regressions include region
          fixed-effects and monthly dummies for the survey month, as well as dummies for region of birth.




                                                                72
                                           Appendix Table A4
             The Impact of Education on Religiosity, the Propensity to Cast a Vote, and the
             Propensity to Vote for an Islamic Party—Instrumental Variables Regressions
                          Treatment is Coded=0.50 for the 1986 Birth Cohort
                       (1)          (2)       (3)           (6)         (4)         (5)          (7)           (8)            (9)
VARIABLES           Religious     Atheist    Modern        Wears       Voter       Voter       Voted        Islamic         Never
                                                           Head        2011        Now        Islamic        Voter          Vote
                                                           Cover                              In 2011         Now          Islamic

                                                               Panel A: Full Sample
Middle School       -0.411**      0.082*     0.299*                   -0.149    0.013         -0.324*      -0.433**        0.451**
                     (0.197)      (0.043)    (0.171)                 (0.145)   (0.095)        (0.177)       (0.172)        (0.222)

N                    10,297       10,297      10,167                   9,016      10,150       7,507         7,726          6,312
1st Stage F-test      21.21       21.21       20.64                    21.65      23.31        19.80         24.12          15.68
P-value               0.00         0.00        0.00                     0.00       0.00        0.00          0.00            0.00

                                                             Panel B: Female Sample
Middle School       -0.305**       0.071     0.305**     -0.400**     0.040    0.045         -0.503**      -0.546***       0.601**
                     (0.152)      (0.049)    (0.148)      (0.203)    (0.118)  (0.085)         (0.222)       (0.178)        (0.288)

N                     5,046       5,046       4,991        5,010       4,480       4,961       3,828         3,745          3,205
1st Stage F-test      15.25       15.25       15.03        15.00       13.70       15.62       12.48         16.18          9.175
P-value               0.00         0.00        0.00        0.00         0.00        0.00       0.00          0.00            0.00

                                                               Panel C: Male Sample
Middle School         -0.551       0.129      0.214                    -0.537   -0.053         0.088         -0.133         0.150
                     (0.488)      (0.100)    (0.388)                  (0.370)  (0.238)        (0.414)       (0.404)        (0.350)

N                      5,251        5,251       5,176                     4,536      5,189        3,679         3,981       3,107
1st Stage F-test       6.101        6.101       6.240                     7.088      6.666        7.446         6.531       7.039
P-value                 0.02         0.02        0.01                      0.01       0.01         0.01         0.01         0.01
          The entries in parentheses are standard errors of the estimated coefficients, clustered by birth province-age
          level. Twelve regions and five age groups yield 60 clusters. A * indicates statistical level at the 10 percent
          level, ** stands for significance at the 5 percent level, *** indicates significance at the 1 percent level or
          better. Exposure to the Law=1 if the person was born between 1987 and 1994, it is zero if the year of birth
          is between 1980 and 1985. The exposure to the law indicator is set equal to 0.5 for 1986. If Kurdish or
          Zaza Ethnicity=0 and Arabic and Other Ethnicity=0, the individual is a Turk. Regressions include region
          fixed-effects and monthly dummies for the survey month, as well as dummies for region of birth.




                                                                73
                                     Appendix Table A5
          The Impact of Education on Religiosity, the Propensity to Cast a Vote, and the
                            Propensity to Vote for an Islamic Party
                                  Reduced Form Regressions
                    (1)          (2)        (3)         (6)         (4)         (5)          (7)          (8)          (9)
                 Religious     Atheist     Modern      Wears       Voter       Voter       Voted       Islamic       Never
                                                       Head        2011        Now        Islamic       Voter        Vote
                                                       Cover                              In 2011        Now        Islamic

                                                           Panel A: Full Sample
Middle School     -0.041*      0.008**     0.031*                  -0.015    0.000        -0.032*      -0.046**     0.043*
                  (0.022)      (0.004)     (0.019)                (0.013)   (0.010)       (0.018)       (0.020)     (0.023)

N                  9,590        9,590       9,467                  8,330       9,452       6,923        7,214        5,834

                                                         Panel B: Female Sample
Middle School     -0.041*       0.010      0.041*     -0.055*     0.006     0.006        -0.066**     -0.080***     0.070**
                  (0.024)      (0.006)     (0.023)    (0.032)    (0.017)   (0.012)        (0.026)      (0.024)      (0.030)

N                  4,694        4,694       4,641       4,659      4,135       4,612       3,527        3,489        2,958

                                                          Panel C: Male Sample
Middle School      -0.034       0.008       0.016                -0.036*   -0.005          0.005        -0.008       0.011
                  (0.030)      (0.006)     (0.024)               (0.019)  (0.015)         (0.027)      (0.029)      (0.027)

N                   4,896         4,896       4,826                    4,195      4,840        3,396         3,725    2,876
       The entries in parentheses are standard errors of the estimated coefficients, clustered by birth province-age
       level. Twelve regions and five age groups yield 60 clusters. A * indicates statistical level at the 10 percent
       level, ** stands for significance at the 5 percent level, *** indicates significance at the 1 percent level or
       better. Exposure to the Law=1 if the person was born between 1987 and 1994, it is zero if the year of birth
       is between 1980 and 1985. The exposure to the law indicator is set equal to 0.5 for 1986. If Kurdish or
       Zaza Ethnicity=0 and Arabic and Other Ethnicity=0, the individual is a Turk. Regressions include region
       fixed-effects and monthly dummies for the survey month, as well as dummies for region of birth.




                                                            74
                                          Appendix Table A6
            The Impact of Education on Religiosity, the Propensity to Cast a Vote, and the
            Propensity to Vote for an Islamic Party—Education is Considered Exogenous
                                           OLS Regressions
             (1)          (2)          (3)           (6)            (4)          (5)            (7)           (8)            (9)
          Religious      Atheist      Modern        Wears          Voter        Voter         Voted        Islamic         Never
                                                    Head           2011         Now          Islamic        Voter          Vote
                                                    Cover                                    In 2011         Now          Islamic

                                                          Panel A: Full Sample
Middle   -0.158***      0.010***     0.193***                   -0.017*    -0.018***        -0.181***     -0.184***       0.171***
School    (0.013)        (0.003)      (0.013)                   (0.009)     (0.006)          (0.012)       (0.012)         (0.013)

N           9,590        9,590         9,467                       8,330        9,452         6,923         7,214          5,834

                                                        Panel B: Female Sample
Middle   -0.197***      0.011***     0.233***      -0.344***     -0.013   -0.022**          -0.221***     -0.227***       0.219***
School    (0.016)        (0.003)      (0.016)       (0.016)     (0.012)    (0.008)           (0.015)       (0.016)         (0.015)

N           4,694        4,694         4,641         4,659         4,135        4,612         3,527         3,489          2,958

                                                          Panel C: Male Sample
Middle   -0.093***       0.010*      0.132***                   -0.024**     -0.012         -0.110***     -0.113***       0.091***
School    (0.021)        (0.005)      (0.018)                    (0.011)    (0.009)          (0.022)       (0.022)         (0.024)

N            4,896         4,896        4,826                        4,195         4,840          3,396         3,725      2,876
         The entries in parentheses are standard errors of the estimated coefficients, clustered by birth province-age
         level. Twelve regions and five age groups yield 60 clusters. A * indicates statistical level at the 10 percent
         level, ** stands for significance at the 5 percent level, *** indicates significance at the 1 percent level or
         better. Exposure to the Law=1 if the person was born between 1987 and 1994, it is zero if the year of birth
         is between 1980 and 1985. The 1986 cohort is excluded as exposure to the law depends on the exact day of
         birth for this cohort. If Kurdish or Zaza Ethnicity=0 and Arabic and Other Ethnicity=0, the individual is a
         Turk. Regressions include region fixed-effects and monthly dummies for the survey month, as well as
         dummies for region of birth.




                                                              75
                                            Appendix Table A7
              The Impact of Education on Religiosity, the Propensity to Cast a Vote, and the
              Propensity to Vote for an Islamic Party—Instrumental Variables Regressions
                                            Excluding Students
                    (1)         (2)       (3)          (6)           (4)       (5)          (7)           (8)          (9)
                 Religious    Atheist    Modern       Wears         Voter     Voter       Voted        Islamic       Never
                                                      Head          2011      Now        Islamic        Voter        Vote
                                                      Cover                              in 2011         Now        Islamic

                                                          Panel A: Full Sample
Middle            -0.318*      -0.017     0.057                  -0.185     -0.057       -0.392**       -0.191     0.463**
School            (0.166)     (0.033)    (0.144)                (0.146)    (0.098)        (0.190)      (0.158)     (0.204)

N                  7,401      7,401       7,301                     6,897     7,288       5,856         5,668        4,920
1st Stage F        25.75      25.75       25.82                     21.17     26.78       20.82         24.03        14.52
P-value            0.00        0.00       0.00                       0.00      0.00       0.00          0.00          0.00

                                                         Panel B: Female Sample
Middle           -0.287**      0.017      0.219      -0.352**     0.011     -0.010       -0.467**     -0.355**     0.507**
School            (0.122)     (0.034)    (0.137)      (0.179)    (0.115)   (0.088)        (0.215)      (0.155)     (0.249)

N                  3,757      3,757       3,711        3,748        3,518     3,687       3,063         2,858        2,561
1st Stage F        17.21      17.21       17.10        17.21        14.64     17.23       14.74         17.06        10.67
P-value            0.00        0.00       0.00         0.00          0.00      0.00       0.00          0.00          0.00

                                                          Panel C: Male Sample
Middle             -0.349      -0.086     -0.313                  -0.666   -0.167         -0.215        0.148        0.338
School            (0.405)     (0.084)    (0.350)                 (0.451)  (0.245)        (0.421)       (0.351)      (0.343)

N                  3,644       3,644       3,590                     3,379       3,601       2,793        2,810       2,359
1st Stage F        7.762       7.762       8.266                     6.354       8.496       6.867        7.363       6.192
P-value            0.02         0.02        0.01                      0.01        0.01       0.01          0.01        0.01
       The entries in parentheses are standard errors of the estimated coefficients, clustered by birth province-age
       level. Twelve regions and five age groups yield 60 clusters. A * indicates statistical level at the 10 percent
       level, ** stands for significance at the 5 percent level, *** indicates significance at the 1 percent level or
       better. Exposure to the Law=1 if the person was born between 1987 and 1994, it is zero if the year of birth
       is between 1980 and 1985. The exposure to the law indicator is set equal to 0.5 for 1986. If Kurdish or
       Zaza Ethnicity=0 and Arabic and Other Ethnicity=0, the individual is a Turk. Regressions include region
       fixed-effects and monthly dummies for the survey month, as well as dummies for region of birth.




                                                               76
                                       Appendix TableA8
                 Descriptive Statistics of the 2008 Sample used in Tables 9-11

                                      Men         Women           Men        Women
                                     Ages          Ages          Ages         Ages
Variable                           (23 to 25)    (23 to 25)    (23 to 25)   (23 to 25)
                                    in 2008       in 2008          or           or
                                                               (27 to 29)   (27 to 29)
                                                                in 2008      in 2008
Middle School Diploma                0.807            0.623      0.769        0.544
                                    (0.396)          (0.486)    (0.422)      (0.499)
Modern                               0.289            0.367      0.270        0.361
                                    (0.454)          (0.483)    (0.444)      (0.481)
Sunni                                0.914            0.911      0.922        0.913
                                    (0.281)          (0.285)    (0.269)      (0.283)
Alevite Shiite                       0.065            0.046      0.061        0.053
                                    (0.246)          (0.211)    (0.239)      (0.224)
Kurdish or Zaza Ethnicity            0.106            0.082      0.104        0.084
                                    (0.308)          (0.275)    (0.306)      (0.278)
Arabic or Other Ethnicity            0.055            0.041      0.048        0.028
                                    (0.228)          (0.199)    (0.215)      (0.165)

Observations                          239             245         522          502
Standard deviations are in parentheses.




                                                77
                               Appendix Table A9
   The Impact of Exposure to the Education Reform on the Propensity to Have at
                        Least Eight Years of Education
                    OLS Regressions by Region and Gender
                                                   (1)                    (2)                      (3)
                                                   All                    Male                   Female

                                                                Panel A: Full Sample
Exposure to the Law                             0.102***              0.062**                  0.138***
                                                 (0.022)               (0.025)                  (0.035)

Observations                                      9,625                   4,914                   4,711
R-squared                                         0.190                   0.100                   0.223

                                                              Panel B: Eastern Turkey
Exposure to the Law                             0.091***              0.075**                   0.114**
                                                 (0.030)              (0.034)                   (0.055)

Observations                                      2,815                   1,479                   1,336
R-squared                                         0.263                   0.143                   0.318

                                                              Panel C: Western Turkey
Exposure to the Law                             0.106***               0.057                   0.148***
                                                 (0.025)              (0.034)                   (0.035)

Observations                                      6,810                   3,435                   3,375
R-squared                                         0.169                   0.090                   0.199
The entries in parentheses are standard errors of the estimated coefficients, clustered by province-age level.
Twelve regions and five age groups yield 60 clusters. A * indicates statistical level at the 10 percent level,
** stands for significance at the 5 percent level, *** indicates significance at the 1 percent level or better.
Exposure to the Law=1 if the person was born between 1987 and 1994, it is zero if the year of birth is
between 1980 and 1985. The 1986 cohort is excluded as exposure to the law depends on the exact day of
birth for this cohort. If Kurdish or Zaza Ethnicity=0 and Arabic and Other Ethnicity=0, the individual is a
Turk. Regressions include region fixed-effects and monthly dummies for the survey month. Each model
estimates controls for the same set of variables that are specified in Table 2.




                                                      78
                                  Appendix Table A10
       The Impact of Education on Religiosity, the Propensity to Cast a Vote, and the
                          Propensity to Vote for an Islamic Part
                      Instrumental Variables Regressions by Region
                                         Females
                      (1)         (2)       (3)        (4)        (5)       (6)         (7)          (8)         (9)
                   Religious    Atheist    Modern     Wears      Voter     Voter      Voted       Islamic      Never
                                                      Head       2011      Now       Islamic       Voter       Vote
                                                      Cover                          In 2011       Now        Islamic

                                                      Females in Eastern Turkey
Middle               -0.357      -0.093     -0.039     -0.321 0.683     0.142    -0.338            -0.087      0.274
School              (0.415)     (0.088)    (0.397)    (0.402) (0.455) (0.186)   (0.342)           (0.318)     (0.430)

N                    1,331      1,331      1,319      1,325     1,186     1,318        1,026       1,035       886
1st Stage F-test     4.416      4.416      4.772      4.772     3.286     4.660        5.243       6.662      4.171
P-value             0.0500      0.0500     0.0412     0.0573    0.0853    0.0440      0.0259      0.0229      0.0634

                                                Females in Western Turkey
Middle              -0.311*     0.129** 0.393** -0.454* -0.113 0.014 -0.597*** -0.770*** 0.772**
School              (0.160)     (0.061) (0.170) (0.239) (0.142) (0.102)   (0.225) (0.211) (0.314)

N                     3,363      3,363       3,322     3,334      2,949     3,294      2,501        2,454       2,072
1st Stage F-test      16.91      16.91       16.87     16.87      15.16     17.29      10.54        13.22       6.479
P-value               0.00        0.00        0.00      0.00       0.00      0.00      0.00         0.00         0.00
   The entries in parentheses are standard errors of the estimated coefficients, clustered by birth province-age
   level. Twelve regions and five age groups yield 60 clusters. A * indicates statistical level at the 10 percent
   level, ** stands for significance at the 5 percent level, *** indicates significance at the 1 percent level or
   better. Exposure to the Law=1 if the person was born between 1987 and 1994, it is zero if the year of birth
   is between 1980 and 1985. The 1986 cohort is excluded as exposure to the law depends on the exact day of
   birth for this cohort. If Kurdish or Zaza Ethnicity=0 and Arabic and Other Ethnicity=0, the individual is a
   Turk. Regressions include region fixed-effects and monthly dummies for the survey month, as well as
   dummies for region of birth.




                                                          79
Islamic Political Movement in Turkey and the Headscarf Issue

A Brief History of Islamic Political Movement in Turkey:

         Amended in 1937, Article 2 of the Turkish constitution states that the Republic of

Turkey is secular state, and the constitution does not permit the establishment of political

parties with explicit written references to any religion in party statutes.44 However, an

influential Islamic political movement started under the leadership of Necmettin Erbakan

in the late 1960s. In 1969, Erbakan published a manifesto named National View45 (Milli

Gӧr ş) . Inspired by the Ottoman history, and with intellectual connections to Nakşibendi

Sufi order, the National View was the inspiration of an Islamic political movement, called

National View Movement (Milli Gorus Hareketi).46 In 1970, Necmettin Erbakan

established the National Order Party (Milli Nizam Partisi), the first Islamic party in

Turkey (Dagi 2005). Since then, most political parties with Islamic preferences were

either established as direct descendants of the National Order Party or they were

offshoots of it. In the aftermath of the 1971 military intervention, the Constitutional

Court of Turkey closed the National Order Party for exploiting religion for political

purposes (Dagi 2005). Only one year after the closure of the National Order Party, in

1972, Necmettin Erbakan established another Islamic political party, the National

Salvation Party47 (Milli Selamet Partisi). The National Salvation Party received a

significant amount of recognition in the 1973 general elections. Receiving 11.8% of the

popular vote, the National Salvation Party secured 48 of the 450 seats in the Parliament

(The Grand National Assembly of Turkey). Even though the party’s popular support


44
   http://global.tbmm.gov.tr/docs/constitution_en.pdf
45
   Milli Gör ş
46
   Milli Gör ş Hareketi
47
   Milli Selamet Partisi

                                                    80
went down in the 1977 general elections (receiving 8.5% of the popular vote, gaining 24

of the 450 seats), the Islamic National Salvation Party managed to be part of a coalition

government—led by Republican People's Party (Cumhuriyet Halk Partisi) and its leader

Bülent Ecevit.

           Following the military coup of 1980, all political parties were shut down by the

Turkish military in 1981. Even though Necmettin Erbakan was banned from active

politics along with a total of 242 politicians from all over the political spectrum,

including major figures of Turkish politics (e.g. Süleyman Demirel, Bülent Ecevit, and

Alparslan T rke ş), Erbakan’s and his party’s legacy continued with the establishment of

the Welfare Party (Refah Partisi) in 1983. Despite being banned from active politics,

Necmettin Erbakan exerted strong control on the Welfare Party (Dagi 2005). He returned

to active politics after the 1981 ban was lifted following a referendum in 1987. The

Islamic Welfare Party received 4.8%, and 7% of the popular vote in the 1983 and 1987

elections, respectively, although it could not secure any seats in the parliament because

its share of votes were below the nation-wide 10% threshold required by law. In the

1991 election the Welfare Party received 16.9% of the popular vote and secured 62 of the

450 seats in the Parliament.

           In the 1990s, the Welfare Party gained strong popular support and increased its

vote share in consecutive elections. The 1994 local election was a major turning point for

the Islamic political movement. The Welfare Party received 19.1% of the total vote and

won mayoral elections in 28 of the 76 provinces including Ankara, the capital, and

Istanbul, the largest city in Turkey.48 Receiving 21.4% of the popular vote, Erbakan’s

Islamic Welfare Party became the leading party at the 1995 general election. The Welfare
48
     Currently Turkey has 81 provinces.

                                               81
Party’s victory in the 1995 elections generated a strong secularist reaction, led by the

secular military and the followers of the Kemal Atatürk, the founding father of the

modern Turkish Republic. The major criticism of the Welfare Party and Necmettin

Erbakan was centered on a potential secret Islamic political agenda. That is, the Armed

Forces and followers of Mustafa Kemal Atatürk believed that Necmettin Erbakan and his

supporters wanted to transform the secular Turkish Republic into a country ruled by the

Sharia (Islamic Law). Therefore, due to strong opposition, other political parties refused

to form a coalition with the Welfare party after the 1995 general elections. Hence, the

53rd government of Turkey was established as a coalition of two center-right parties: The

Motherland Party (Anavatan Partisi) and True Path Party (Dogru Yol Partisi) even though

these two parties together did not have enough seats to constitute the majority in the

parliament.49

        As the 53rd government did not last long due to the conflicts between the

Motherland Party and True Path Party, Necmettin Erbakan was charged by the President

of Turkey in 1996 with the formation of the 54th government, and this government was

established as a coalition between Erbakan’s Welfare Party and the True Path Party,

Erbakan being the Prime Minister. This development heightened the concern of the

military and secularists. Therefore, on February 28 1997, the Turkish National Security

Council, consisting mainly of military officials, decided to adopt a number of actions to

curb the rise of political Islam in Turkey (Yavuz 2000). In June 1997, Erbakan resigned

as Prime Minister to provide the opportunity for his coalition partner Tansu Ciller to be

the head of the government instead. This resignation, however, provided the opportunity


49
  Bulent Ecevit’s Democratic Left Party agreed to provide external support to guarantee necessary majority
in the GNTA.

                                                   82
for the President of the country to task a different political party to form a government.

Consequently, a new coalition was formed between three secular parties (Anavatan

Partisi, Demokratik Sol Parti and Demokrat Türkiye Partisi) on June 30 1997, and the

leader of Anavatan Partisi, Mesut Yilmaz became the Prime Minister of the 55th

government.

       Meanwhile, the Constitutional Court of Turkey closed the Welfare Party in

January 1998 based on the charge of activities against the secular Turkish state, and

banned its leader Necmettin Erbakan from participating in active politics for five years.

Nevertheless, a successor of the Welfare party was quickly established in 1998 under the

name of the Virtue Party (Fazilet Partisi). The Constitutional Court closed the Virtue

Party in 2001 for violation of the secularist articles of the constitution. Following the

closure of the Virtue Party in 2001, a major divide took place among the political leaders

of the Islamic movement. The supporters of Necmettin Erbakan founded the Felicity

Party (Saadet Partisi) as the successor of the Virtue Party. A second group, on the other

hand, led by Recep Tayyip Erdogan, the former mayor of Istanbul and the current prime

Minister, and Abdullah Gul, the current president of Turkey formed the Justice and

Development Party (AKP) in the same year. The Justice and Development Party won

victories in general elections of 2002, 2007 and 2011, as well as in local elections in 2004

and 2009.

       Another offshoot of the Islamic Felicity Party was formed by Numan Kurtulmus

and his supporters, under the name of People’s Voice Party (HAS Parti) in 2010. This

party participated in the 2011 general elections, but subsequently merged with the Justice

and Development Party in September 2012.



                                              83
The Headscarf Debate

         Even though the first official nation-wide headscarf ban for public sector workers

went into effect on December 8, 1978 in Turkey, the use of head cover has been

prohibited in practice since the early 1920s.50 51 While the enforcement of the headscarf

ban among government employees has not been extensively debated, the application of

the ban in schools has been a center of contention. The headscarf ban in schools goes

back to the first constitution of the Republic of Turkey, which was adopted in 1924. For

primary school students (i.e., the first 5 years of schooling), the headscarf ban has always

been strictly enforced. However, the extent of enforcement in secondary and tertiary

schools varied over time. In non-vocational secondary schools (i.e., middle schools and

high schools with no vocational training), students have not been allowed to wear

headscarf within the school boundaries. However, in a particular type vocational

secondary schools, the religious imam-hatip schools, students could wear a headscarf

even though the law explicitly banned the use of headscarf in all school and public

workplaces (Cakir et al. 2004).52 Headscarf use in universities has been subject to

extensive public debate and there have been relatively frequent regulatory changes and

variations in the strictness of the enforcement of the headscarf ban since the early

1980s.53 While the Council of Higher Education54 banned the use of headscarf in

universities in 1982, it reversed the decision in 1984. In 1987, the Turkish Parliament



50
   http://www.taraf.com.tr/ayse-hur/makale-gelenek-inanc-siyaset-ve-tesettur.htm
51
   December 8 1978, circular note #52
52
   Other types of vocational schools include industrial-occupation high schools, girl-occupation high
schools, health-occupation high schools, and trade-occupation high schools.
53
   http://arama.hurriyet.com.tr/arsivnews.aspx?id=8201449
54
   Yuksek Ogretim Kurumu

                                                    84
passed a law enabling students wearing headscarf to attend universities. The

Constitutional Court of Turkey, however, declared the law unconstitutional in 1988. The

Constitutional Court of Turkey found a similar legislation unconstitutional in 1990. The

Council of Higher Education declared in 1997 that those who wear headscarf shall not be

allowed to enter (or attend classes in) universities. The head scarf ban is officially

eliminated in October 2013 by the governing Justice and Development Party.55




55
  http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052702303442004579123320877810350.html
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/10/09/world/europe/turkey-lifts-ban-on-head-scarves-in-state-
offices.html?_r=0
http://news.nationalgeographic.com/news/2013/10/131011-hijab-ban-turkey-islamic-headscarf-ataturk/

                                                 85
A Religious “Turban” as worn by an actress in a movie




Photo credit: http://kadinvemadam.blogspot.com/2013/05/selin-demiratar-da-tesetture-
girdi.html. May, 2013.




                                          86
