                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        RETURNS TO SKILLS AROUND THE WORLD:
                               EVIDENCE FROM PIAAC

                                          Eric A. Hanushek
                                          Guido Schwerdt
                                         Simon Wiederhold
                                         Ludger Woessmann

                                        Working Paper 19762
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19762


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2013




We would like to thank Andreas Schleicher and William Thorn from the OECD for access to and help
with the international PIAAC data, as well as Dan McGrath, Eugene Owen, and Saida Mamedova
from the National Center for Education Statistics and the PIAAC team at GESIS for providing access
to the U.S. and German continuous-earnings data, respectively. Simon Wiederhold and Ludger Woessmann
gratefully acknowledge financial support from the European Union’s FP7 through the LLLight’in’Europe
project. Simon Wiederhold also gratefully acknowledges the hospitality of the OECD in Paris during
the initial phase of work on this paper The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Eric A. Hanushek, Guido Schwerdt, Simon Wiederhold, and Ludger Woessmann. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Returns to Skills around the World: Evidence from PIAAC
Eric A. Hanushek, Guido Schwerdt, Simon Wiederhold, and Ludger Woessmann
NBER Working Paper No. 19762
December 2013
JEL No. I20,J31

                                               ABSTRACT

Existing estimates of the labor-market returns to human capital give a distorted picture of the role
of skills across different economies. International comparisons of earnings analyses rely almost exclusively
on school attainment measures of human capital, and evidence incorporating direct measures of cognitive
skills is mostly restricted to early-career workers in the United States. Analysis of the new PIAAC
survey of adult skills over the full lifecycle in 22 countries shows that the focus on early-career earnings
leads to underestimating the lifetime returns to skills by about one quarter. On average, a one-standard-
deviation increase in numeracy skills is associated with an 18 percent wage increase among prime-age
workers. But this masks considerable heterogeneity across countries. Eight countries, including all
Nordic countries, have returns between 12 and 15 percent, while six are above 21 percent with the largest
return being 28 percent in the United States. Estimates are remarkably robust to different earnings and
skill measures, additional controls, and various subgroups. Intriguingly, returns to skills are systematically
lower in countries with higher union density, stricter employment protection, and larger public-sector
shares.


Eric A. Hanushek                                      Simon Wiederhold
Hoover Institution                                    Ifo Institute for Economic Research
Stanford University                                   Poschingerstr. 5
Stanford, CA 94305-6010                               81679 Munich, Germany
and NBER                                              wiederhold@ifo.de
hanushek@stanford.edu
                                                      Ludger Woessmann
Guido Schwerdt                                        University of Munich
University of Siegen                                  Ifo Institute for Economic Research and CESifo
Hölderlinstr. 3                                       Poschingerstr. 5
57076 Siegen GERMANY                                  81679 Munich, Germany
guido.schwerdt@vwl.uni-siegen.de                      woessmann@ifo.de
1. Introduction
     The skills of the population are generally viewed as a key ingredient in modern knowledge-
based economies (e.g., Hanushek and Woessmann (2008)). However, existing evidence on the
returns to skills in the labor market is surprisingly limited, coming almost exclusively from
earnings of early-career workers in the United States. As a result, any sense of how rewards to
skills evolve over the work life or of how they might differ across economies is absent.1 New
international data from the Programme for the International Assessment of Adult Competencies
(PIAAC) dramatically changes the ability to understand how economies value skills. Using
these data, this paper provides new insights into the value of skills in different economic settings
by developing estimates of the earnings returns to cognitive skills across the entire labor force
for 22 countries.
     Unlike the case of the returns to school attainment, obtaining estimates of the value of
individual cognitive skills has had to rely on a small number of specialized data sets. While
assessments of the achievement of students are common, tested students are seldom followed
from school into the labor market where the impact of differential skills can be observed.
Developing estimates of the returns to skill has most generally relied on U.S. panel data that
permit observing the subsequent earnings of youth who can be followed into their initial jobs.2
However, estimates based on such early-career earnings are likely to suffer from downward
lifecycle bias as people with higher lifetime earnings show systematically steeper earnings
growth (Haider and Solon (2006)). Furthermore, individual skills may take time to be revealed
(Altonji and Pierret (2001)). Importantly, returns to skills may also depend on a country’s
specific labor-market and social institutions.
     The main prior source of international comparisons of returns to cognitive skills has
come from analyses of the International Adult Literacy Survey (IALS), collected in the mid-


     1
       There has been extensive estimation of returns to school attainment as found in Mincer earnings functions
with Psacharopoulos and Patrinos (2004) providing estimates for some 98 countries. Nonetheless, these estimates
provide limited comparative information that can indicate how different economies value skills (see the discussion
in Hanushek and Woessmann (2012)). Note also that, for expositional simplicity, we simply use common but
imprecise language interpreting the earnings impact of additional years of schooling as the return to schooling; see
Heckman, Lochner, and Todd (2006).
     2
       See, for example, Bishop (1989), Murnane, Willett, and Levy (1995), Neal and Johnson (1996), Mulligan
(1999), Murnane et al. (2000), Lazear (2003), and Chetty et al. (2011). Bowles, Gintis, and Osborne (2001) provide
an early survey of studies of achievement effects, and Hanushek and Woessmann (2008) and Hanushek and Rivkin
(2012) survey more recent evidence.


                                                            1
1990s.3 However, the returns from two decades ago may no longer be good indicators of the
situation in economies that have undergone substantial technological change (Autor, Levy, and
Murnane (2003); Goldin and Katz (2008); Acemoglu and Autor (2011)). Moreover, while
informative, the IALS analyses suffer from a number of limitations: a restricted number of 15
countries with relevant data, relatively small sample sizes, and skill tests that assess very basic
competencies.
     The new PIAAC survey, conducted under the auspices of the Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development (OECD) in 2011-2012 and released in the fall of 2013, provides
a number of advantages over existing datasets. First, while again observing people across the
entire work life, it covers more countries (currently 22, but ultimately up to 33). Second, it
provides substantially larger sample sizes per country (more than twice the effective IALS
sample sizes), allowing richer analyses in subgroups.4 Third, PIAAC substantially extends the
depth and range of measured skills including an attempt to assess problem-solving skills in
technology-rich environments.
     This paper makes three contributions to the literature. First, we place individual earnings in
a more general human capital model and then document the pattern of returns to cognitive skills,
focusing on variations in overall earnings impacts across 22 countries. Second, we provide
evidence on the sensitivity of these returns to varying samples, measures, and specifications.
Third, we describe how these returns differ according to features of country economies including
union density and various labor and product market regulations.
     Our results confirm that estimates based on early-career earnings underestimate the lifetime
returns to skills, in our analyses by an average of about one quarter. Across the 22 countries, a
one-standard-deviation increase in numeracy skills is associated with an average 18 percent wage
increase among prime-age workers. Moreover, because of measurement errors in skills, these
estimates should be thought of as lower bounds on the return to skill.
     But this overall measure of returns to skill also masks considerable cross-country
heterogeneity: Returns are below 15 percent in eight countries, including all four participating


     3
       See Leuven, Oosterbeek, and Ophem (2004), Denny, Harmon, and O’Sullivan (2004), Hanushek and Zhang
(2009), and Barone and van de Werfhorst (2011) along with the review in Hanushek and Woessmann (2011). Other
country-specific uses of the IALS data are found in McIntosh and Vignoles (2001), Green and Riddell (2003), and
Green and Riddell (2013) who also use data from the 2003 follow-on Adult Literacy and Life Skills Survey (ALL).
     4
       In total, the sample of prime-aged, full-time workers is more than three times as large in PIAAC as in IALS.


                                                           2
Nordic countries, and above 21 percent in six countries, with the largest return being 28 percent
in the United States. Estimated returns tend to be largest for numeracy and literacy skills and
smaller for problem-solving skills, although the relative importance of different skill dimensions
varies across countries. Estimates prove highly robust to different earnings measures, additional
controls, and various subgroups. Finally, exploiting the cross-country dimension of our analysis,
we find that returns to skills are systematically lower in countries with higher union density,
stricter employment protection, and larger public-sector shares.
    In the following, Section 2 provides our conceptual framework and derives our empirical
model. Section 3 introduces the PIAAC data. Section 4 presents our empirical results on returns
to skills in the different countries, going into the details of model specifications, different skill
domains, heterogeneous returns, and robustness checks. Section 5 presents stylized facts about
what accounts for differences in skill returns across countries. Section 6 concludes.


2. Conceptual Framework and Empirical Model
    Even though the labor economics literature is replete with analyses of how workers’ wages
are determined, we believe that it has settled on a stylized model that in the main derives from
common measurement and data deficiencies. We begin by broadening the perspective on human
capital and wages to include recognition of elements of skill determination. We follow this with
details of our empirical approach.

2.1 Conceptual Framework

    Most analyses of individual earnings rest on a very simple underlying model of human
capital, which we can write simply as (Hanushek and Woessmann (2008)):

                                              y   H                                                 (1)

where individual earnings (y) are a function of the labor-market skills, or human capital, of the
individual (H). The stochastic term (ε) represents idiosyncratic earnings differences, generally
presumed in empirical analyses to be orthogonal to H.
    Human capital is nonetheless a latent variable. A central part of the critique of early human
capital ideas was that human capital was inherently an elusive concept that lacked any
satisfactory measurement. Early arguments, for example, suggested that differences in earnings



                                                      3
were caused by skill or human capital differences and thus that measurement of human capital
could come from observed wage differences – an entirely tautological statement. To be useful
and verifiable, it is necessary to specify the measurement of H.
     The contributions of Jacob Mincer were especially important in establishing the course of
empirical work. Mincer (1970, 1974) argued that a primary motivation for schooling was
developing the general skills of individuals and, therefore, that it made sense to measure human
capital by the amount of schooling completed by individuals. From this, Mincer showed how
wage differentials could be significantly explained by school attainment and, in a more nuanced
form, by on-the-job training investments. This insight was widely accepted and has dictated the
empirical approach of a vast majority of empirical analyses in labor economics through today.
     It has obviously been productive to rely on this formulation, because information on school
attainment is frequently measured and reported in surveys and censuses that also contain
earnings information. Propelled by readily available data on school attainment within and across
countries, economists have devoted considerable energy to estimating the returns to additional
years of schooling in formulations that are based on substituting years of schooling (S) for H in
equation (1). This work has been summarized and interpreted in a number of different places.5
     But Mincer’s empirical innovation has perhaps been too successful as it has also led
researchers to ignore many important and continuing measurement issues. Implicitly, the
standard Mincer formulation assumes that schooling is the sole systematic source of skill
differences.
     In a different branch of research, a vast amount of research has delved into “educational
production functions.” This work has considered how, besides schools, also other factors enter
into the determination of skills.6 This line of research indicates that skills are affected by a range
of factors including family inputs (F), the quantity and quality of inputs provided by schools
(which we incorporate as the function Q(S), where S is school attainment), individual ability (A),
and other relevant factors (X) that include labor-market experience, health, and so forth. Along
with a stochastic term (ν), assumed uncorrelated with the other determinants of H, we can write a
linear version of this general model simply as:

     5
       See early discussions in Mincer (1970) and Griliches (1977) and more recent reviews in Card (1999) and
Heckman, Lochner, and Todd (2006). In an international context, see Harmon, Oosterbeek, and Walker (2003) and
Psacharopoulos and Patrinos (2004).
     6
       See, for example, the general discussion in Hanushek (2002).


                                                        4
                                        H   F  Q(S )   A   X                                              (2)

     Some empirical applications of this production function model have simply substituted
equation (2) into equation (1) and directly estimated the impact of various inputs into the
educational process on income, presumably arising from their impact on relevant labor-market
skills. More commonly, however, estimation is restricted just to equation (2) where skills (H)
are measured by achievement tests. This analysis also matches more closely current educational
policy debates that are centered on improving levels of student achievement and reducing the
variance in such outcomes across schools and population groups.
     This work on the determinants of skills implies that it is inappropriate just to substitute a
single input into skills (importantly, such as S) into equation (1) to estimate the impact of human
capital on earnings. It is highly unlikely that the stochastic term, ε, is orthogonal to school
attainment once it is recognized that it includes the other determinants of skills.
     There is a long line of research focused on whether omitting individual ability, A, leads to
bias in the estimated returns to schooling if more able students tend to attain more schooling.7
But the more general issue is that schooling is just one of a series of well-researched factors that
affect individual skills. The natural interactions among these various factors and school
attainment suggest that the simple estimation of the schooling-earnings relationship is prone to
severe biases that are difficult to correct in any satisfactory way.
     Our estimation follows an alternative approach built on direct measures of cognitive skills.8
Consider test score measures of the relevant human capital skills – that is, standardized
assessments of numeracy and literacy achievement. If these measures, denoted C, completely
captured variations in H, the key parameter (γ) of equation (1) could be directly estimated by
using C as the measure of H. Further, if school quantity, S, were added to the estimation
equation, it would have no independent influence (in expectation), because the relevant skills
were fully contained in C.



     7
       See Card (1999). Indeed, one approach to looking at the returns to schooling is simply to estimate a standard
Mincer earnings function with an additive test score that is alternatively interpreted as ability or as school quality.
But neither is consistent with the educational production functions of equation (2). Skill tests are to varying degrees
subject to the influences depicted in equation (2), and thus are not generally thought of as fixed ability.
Alternatively, as a measure of school quality, such measures should modify the impact, or marginal product, of time
spent in formal schooling. See also Hause (1972) on the functional form.
     8
       This view is closely related to the empirical analysis in Neal and Johnson (1996) and Murnane et al. (2000).


                                                             5
     But few people believe that existing test data are complete measures of H. Instead, the
achievement test measures, C, are best thought of as error-prone measures of H:

                                                     C  H                                                        (3)

With classical measurement error, one would expect the estimate of γ in equation (1) to be biased
toward zero, and, if S and C are positively correlated as would be expected, the coefficient on S
in the same estimated equation would be biased upward, even if S had no independent effect over
and above its relationship with C. This simple model would imply that the coefficient on C
would be a lower bound on the impact of human capital on incomes.9
     The discussion is further complicated by the fact that part of the return to cognitive skills
undoubtedly comes through continuation in school. There is substantial U.S. evidence that
students who do better in school, either through grades or scores on standardized achievement
tests, tend to go farther in school.10 Murnane et al. (2000) separate the direct returns to measured
skill from the indirect returns of more schooling and suggest that perhaps one-third to one-half of
the full return to higher achievement comes from further schooling. Similarly, Rivkin (1995)
finds that test score variation captures a considerable proportion of the systematic variation in
high-school completion and in college continuation, to the extent that test score differences can
fully explain black-white differences in schooling. Indeed, this relationship between cognitive
skill and further investments in formal schooling is implicit in the idea of skill complementarities
over the life cycle, as development by James Heckman and his co-authors (e.g., Cunha et al.
(2006); Cunha and Heckman (2007)) and summarized by the stylized conclusion that “skill
begets skill.” Early measures of human capital contained in cognitive skills during the schooling
process index future additions to human capital, again thought of in terms of the quality of skills.

2.2 Empirical Model

     Following this conceptualization, our baseline empirical model is simply an analog to a
Mincer equation except that it is built on measured cognitive skills (C) instead of years of
schooling:

     9
        Unfortunately, while information on test reliability would help to bound the potential effects of measurement
error, we do not have such information for these tests. Note also that the standard test-retest measures of reliability
will themselves understate the amount of error in our measure, because we are interested in using the tests to measure
the concept of human capital – which is undoubtedly broader than the test constructs that have been developed.
      10
         See, for example, the early work by Dugan (1976) and Manski and Wise (1983).


                                                              6
                               ln yi   0  1Ci   2 Ei   3 Ei2   4 Gi   i                            (4)

where yi is the hourly wage of individual i, E is years of actual labor-market experience,11 G is a
gender indicator, and ε is a stochastic error. The focus of our attention is β1, the earnings gradient
associated with measured human capital. (We frequently refer to this simply as the “return to
skill.” It does not, however, correspond to a rate of return calculation, not only because of the
general arguments in Heckman, Lochner, and Todd (2006) but also because we have no indication
of the cost of achieving any given level of skill). To show the empirical relevance of school
attainment, we will also report estimations that add attainment to this model, but it is difficult to
assess whether any independent impact of school attainment implies either an impact of schooling
through, say, a non-cognitive channel or through the measurement errors in cognitive skills.
     More than in other empirical analyses, there is a question about the appropriate functional
form of the earnings relationship. In the investment paradigm developed by Mincer (1974), a
log-linear relationship between earnings and human capital is quite natural. However, as alluded
to earlier, there is reason to suspect that the earnings gradient for cognitive skills is lower in early
career spans and higher later. First, because skills are difficult to observe, it may take time for
firms to learn about relevant differences among workers (e.g., Altonji and Pierret (2001)).
Second, since early careers often involve finding the right match of skills with employers (e.g.,
Jovanovic (1979)), early career observations would tend to understate the full value of skills
when observed in imperfect job matches. Third, Haider and Solon (2006) and Böhlmark and
Lindquist (2006) show that current earnings are a good proxy for lifetime earnings only when
observed between the mid-30s and late-40s. Earnings observed at earlier ages can give rise to
substantial downward lifecycle bias because the measurement error at earlier ages is not of
classical type, but mean-reverting: Workers with high lifetime earnings have particularly steep
earnings trajectories.12 All this suggests that any empirical analysis must be sensitive to position
in the career. We will therefore restrict our baseline analysis to prime-age workers and test for
possible age patterns in the returns to skill.


     11
         Although actual work experience might in part be endogenous to skill levels, robustness analyses described
below indicate that results hardly change when using potential experience (age minus year of schooling minus six)
instead of actual experience.
      12
         Estimates of the intergenerational earnings elasticity have been found to double when sons’ earnings are
measured in their 30s rather than in their 20s; see Solon (1999) and Black and Devereux (2011) for reviews. Similar
bias might be expected for estimates of the return to skills based on earnings observed early in the career.


                                                           7
     A caution to our direct estimation approach, however, is that none of the studies of the
impact of cognitive skills on either earnings or school attainment have provided any convincing
analysis of the causal impact of scores. Unlike the efforts to identify the rate of return to school
attainment through a variety of means, the estimation based on measured achievement has
stopped without providing any substantial evidence that the observed variation in cognitive skills
is truly exogenous. The concern is that other influences on earnings – say, non-cognitive skills
or direct influences of families on earnings – are omitted from the estimation, leading to standard
omitted variables bias in the analysis of cognitive skills. To gauge the possible empirical
relevance of such concerns, we will test for the robustness of our baseline model to additional
controls such as parental education. Furthermore, to the extent that any bias of the absolute
returns to skills is similar across countries, the cross-country pattern of our analysis should still
give a correct picture of the relative returns to skills across countries. Nonetheless, a causal
interpretation of the estimated coefficient of cognitive skills remains to be established.
     Even in the absence of convincing identification strategies for cognitive skills, we believe
that these estimates provide an indication of the potential earnings impacts of policies that lead to
improved skills. The consistency of the estimated impacts across different model specifications
and different subsamples that we will see below provides support for the underlying importance
of cognitive skills, and we know of no alternative model that would consistently produce our
stylized results.


3. The PIAAC Data
     Our primary data source is the Programme for the International Assessment of Adult
Competencies (PIAAC). Developed by the OECD and collected between August 2011 and March
2012,13 PIAAC provides internationally comparable data about skills of the adult populations in
24 countries,14 22 of which can be used in our analysis:15 Austria, Belgium (albeit just Flanders),

     13
         Exceptions are Canada (November 2011 to June 2012) and France (September to November 2012).
     14
         Nine additional countries plan to implement PIAAC in 2014: Chile, Greece, Indonesia, Israel, Lithuania,
New Zealand, Singapore, Slovenia, and Turkey.
      15
         We do not use data for Australia and the Russian Federation in our analysis. The Australian data are not
available to us at the time of writing. According to the OECD (2013), data for the Russian Federation are
preliminary, may still be subject to change, and are not representative of the entire Russian population because they
do not include the population of the Moscow municipal area. Based on the relatively small sample of 574 available
observations, we estimate a return to skills of 6.8 percent in our baseline model on the available data from the
Russian Federation, but this may be biased downwards by the neglect of the capital region.


                                                             8
Canada, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Korea, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, the Slovak Republic, Spain, Sweden, the
United Kingdom (specifically England and Northern Ireland), and the United States.
     PIAAC was designed to measure key cognitive and workplace skills needed for individuals
to advance in their jobs and participate in society. In each participating country, a representative
sample of adults between 16 and 65 years of age was interviewed at home in the language of
their country of residence. The standard survey mode was to answer questions on a computer,
but for respondents without computer experience there was also the option of a pencil-and-paper
interview.16 The countries used different sampling schemes in drawing their samples, but these
were all aligned to known population counts with post-sampling weightings. Our analyses
employ sample weights in the estimations throughout.
     The survey included an assessment of cognitive skills in three domains: literacy, numeracy,
and problem solving in technology-rich environments.17 The tasks respondents had to solve
were often framed as real-world problems, such as maintaining a driver’s logbook (numeracy
domain) or reserving a meeting room on a particular date using a reservation system (problem-
solving domain). The domains, described more completely in OECD (2013), refer to key
information-processing competencies and are defined as
      Literacy: ability to understand, evaluate, use and engage with written texts to participate
          in society, to achieve one’s goals, and to develop one’s knowledge and potential;
      Numeracy: ability to access, use, interpret, and communicate mathematical information
          and ideas in order to engage in and manage the mathematical demands of a range of
          situations in adult life;
      Problem solving in technology-rich environments: ability to use digital technology,
          communication tools and networks to acquire and evaluate information, communicate
          with others and perform practical tasks.
     PIAAC measures each of the three skill domains on a 500-point scale. For analytical
purposes, we standardize scores in the subsequent regression analyses to have a within-country


     16
         On average across countries, 77.5 percent of assessment participants took the computer-based assessment
and 22.5 percent took the paper-based assessment. A field test suggested no impact of assessment mode (OECD
(2013)).
      17
         Participation in the problem-solving domain was optional; Cyprus, France, Italy, and Spain did not
participate in this domain.


                                                           9
mean of zero and a within-country standard deviation of one.18 All three scales are intended to
measure different dimensions of a respondent’s skill set. IALS, the predecessor of PIAAC,
suffered from pairwise correlations of individual skill domains that exceeded 0.9, making it
virtually impossible to distinguish between different skills. The score domains in PIAAC are
less strongly correlated with an individual-level correlation between numeracy and literacy
(problem-solving) of 0.85 (0.76). In our preferred empirical specification, we focus on
numeracy skills, which we deem most comparable across countries, but we show below that our
results do not depend on the choice of a particular measure of cognitive skills.
     Before the skill assessment, all participants responded to a background questionnaire that
gathered information about labor-market status, earnings, education, experience, and demographic
characteristics of the respondents. The measure of experience refers to actual work experience
and was collected as the number of years where at least six months were spent in paid work.
     The wage measure in our baseline model refers to gross hourly earnings of wage and salary
workers. In the Public Use File, earnings data for Austria, Canada, Germany, Sweden, and the
United States are reported only in deciles. For Germany and the United States, we obtained
access to continuous wage measures at the national data centers. For the other three countries,
we obtained information on the median wage of each decile, which allows us to assign the decile
median to each survey participant belonging to the respective decile of the country-specific wage
distribution. In robustness specifications based on countries with continuous wage data, we
show that using decile medians has no substantive impact on our results. The models that pool
all countries have to rely on the Public Use File, so that the German and U.S. earnings data are
also measured in deciles in the pooled regressions. In each country, we trim the bottom and top
one percent of the wage distribution to limit the influence of outliers.19
     To obtain a homogeneous sample of workers with strong labor-force commitment, in our
baseline model we limit the estimation sample to survey respondents who work full-time at the
time of the survey, where full-time employees are defined as those working at least 30 hours per
week.20 This sample decision implies that we are underestimating the impact of skills on worker

     18
        Throughout, we use the first plausible value of the PIAAC scores in each domain.
     19
        Preliminary investigation of outliers suggests that these largely represent data entry or coding errors.
     20
        In Austria, the full-time working status is based on a question of whether a respondent works full-time. The
Canadian sample includes full-time and part-time workers because the available data do not report working hours or
work status. Since returns to skills tend to be slightly smaller when including part-time workers (17.1 vs. 17.7
percent on average across countries), this sample difference may lead to slightly conservative estimates for Canada.


                                                           10
earnings to the extent that higher skills also lead to higher employment probabilities.21
Nonetheless, we wish to isolate the direct labor-market effects of skills and to avoid other
influences such as family demands, health limitations, or the like that might affect labor-force
attachment. To get the best estimates of long-run returns to skills, we further restrict the baseline
sample to prime-age workers, defined as those between 35 and 54 years of age. Self-employed
workers are also excluded from the baseline analysis. Robustness analyses show the relevance
of these sample restrictions.
     Table 1 provides summary statistics for the baseline samples of prime-aged, full-time
employees in the 22 countries. Sample sizes range from 816 in Poland to 1,875 in Denmark and
7,178 in Canada (which oversampled to obtain regionally reliable estimates), with a total of
34,447 observations in the pooled sample.22 Respondents in Japan achieve the highest average
numeracy score, and respondents in Italy the lowest, with a difference in average achievement
between these two countries amounting to 89 percent of a standard deviation in test scores in the
international sample. There is also considerable variation across countries in average years of
schooling, actual work experience, and the share of females in the population of prime-aged,
full-time employees.
     Wage inequality, measured by the log wage differential between the 90th and 10th percentile
of the wage distribution, is largest in Estonia, Korea, and the United States at around 1.5. In
these countries, a worker at the 90th percentile of the wage distribution earns 4.5 times as much
as a worker at the 10th percentile. In Sweden, which is the other extreme, workers at the 90th
percentile earn only twice as much as workers at the 10th percentile.


4. Returns to Skills around the World
     Other things equal, how do earnings vary with different skills? In addressing this question,
we begin with a set of baseline estimates and then investigate how these results change with
modifications of the model specification or sample. Our starting point is equation (4) which
     21
         From estimating simple linear employment probability models (available from the authors), we find that our
measured skills are systematically related to higher employment.
      22
         Table A-1 in the Appendix reports equivalent summary statistics for the full PIAAC sample (including the
full age range 16-65, part-time and self-employed workers, and the non-employed), which leads to a total sample
size of 153,675 observations in the pooled international sample. The main reduction to our sample comes from
restricting the age range from fifty years to twenty years (age range 35-54, reduction to 62,981), with further
reductions from restricting to individuals with positive income (45,790), as well as exclusion of part-time and self-
employed workers and trimming of the bottom and top one percent of the wage distribution.


                                                            11
expresses log hourly wages as a function of numeracy skills, gender, and a quadratic polynomial
in actual work experience for the sample of full-time employees aged 35-54. Since our skill
measure is standardized to (0,1), the parameter of interest, β1, can be interpreted as the percentage
increase in income associated with a one-standard-deviation increase in measured skills.

4.1 Baseline Results

    Our baseline estimates consistently indicate that better skills are significantly related to
higher labor-market earnings, as seen in Table 2. The coefficient on numeracy in the pooled
estimation suggests that a one-standard-deviation increase in numeracy skills is associated with
an average increase in hourly wages of 17.8 percent across the 22 countries.
    But perhaps the clearest finding from our baseline estimation across countries, shown also in
Figure 1, is that the wage impact of skills varies significantly across our sample of countries. Six
of the countries indicate returns to skills that exceed 21 percent: the United States with almost
28 percent, Ireland and Germany with 24 percent, as well as Spain, the United Kingdom, and
Korea. These high returns differ noticeably from those in another set of eight countries with
returns to skills falling below 15 percent: Belgium, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Italy, and all the
participating Nordic countries – Denmark, Finland, Norway, and Sweden. While a number of
these countries do have significant income redistribution programs, it is important to remember
that pre-tax and pre-transfer wages are being analyzed.
    On average, the experience terms suggest a concave earnings-experience relationship and
the gender term a male-female earnings gap in these samples of prime-aged, full-time
employees. But again, there are substantial differences across countries, with no significant
gender difference in earnings in four countries (Belgium, Ireland, the Netherlands, and Spain)
and an earnings disadvantage of women of 20 percent and more in six countries (Cyprus, the
Czech Republic, Estonia, Japan, Korea, and the Slovak Republic).

4.2 Age Varying Returns to Skills

    As discussed, a prime motivation for this study is that most prior evidence on the return to
skills has come from samples of workers that are likely to give misleading and biased estimates
for the range of world economies – i.e., relying on just U.S. samples of young workers. Figure 1
shows clearly that returns to skills in the U.S. labor market might not adequately characterize the



                                                    12
labor-market situation in other countries. But additionally, there are multiple reasons to believe
that these estimates understate the true impact of skills across the life cycle.
     To test for age varying returns to skills, Table 3 uses the extended sample of employees aged
25-65 and allows the returns to skills to differ between entry-age (25-34), prime-age (35-54), and
exit-age (55-65) workers. Results suggest that there are indeed significant age differences in
returns to skills: Across all countries, returns to numeracy are only 14 percent in the baseline
category of workers aged 25-34 and are 4 percentage points (some 30 percent) higher among
workers aged 35-54 or 55-65. In the aggregate, there are no significant differences between
prime-age and exit-age workers. In fact, estimates of returns to skills increase steadily with age
until age 35 and are reasonably flat from there on, getting only slightly smaller beyond age 55
(Figure 2).23 Thus, the focus on early-career earnings in the existing literature is likely to
downward bias estimated returns to skills. As earnings of prime-age workers tend to be good
proxies for lifetime earnings (Haider and Solon (2006)), returns estimated in the prime-age
category will more likely capture lifetime returns to skills.
     Looking at individual countries, returns to skills are significantly higher for prime-age
workers than for entry-age workers in 15 out of the 22 countries. In all but one country (the
Slovak Republic), the interaction between skills and the dummy variable indicating prime-age
workers is positive. Insignificant age interactions are observed primarily in the transition
economies in Eastern Europe (the Czech Republic, Estonia, Poland, and the Slovak Republic),
where transition dynamics are likely to be important in explaining earnings across workers of
different ages. These transition economies experienced a radical change in their labor markets
after the fall of the Iron Curtain. In the process of restructuring after privatization (e.g., Frydman
et al. (1999); Mertaugh and Hanushek (2005)), workers who are in their prime age or exit age
today may have lost much of their specific human capital during the early 1990s and may face a
job-skill mismatch, whereas workers in their entry age today may have acquired skills that are of
closer labor-market relevance. Without the four Eastern European transition countries, returns to
skills of prime-age and exit-age workers are even 5.0 percentage points (or 37 percent) higher
than among entry-age workers (13.5 percent) in the pooled sample.


     23
        The aggregate picture in Figure 2 might suggest including older workers in our estimates. However, past age
50, variations in retirement and labor-force participation across countries come into play (as seen by variations in
returns to exit-age workers in Table 3). Thus, we focus just on the prime-age worker population.


                                                           13
4.3 Returns to Skills and Interaction with Years of Schooling

     As discussed, our focus on measured skills differs from the standard Mincer approach of
using years of schooling as the sole measure of human capital. When adding years of schooling
to our baseline model, as shown in Table 4, both numeracy skills and years of schooling enter
significantly in the wage equation. The point estimate on numeracy skills goes down by 43
percent (from 17.8 percent to 10.1 percent in the pooled sample), indicating that a large part of
the skills-earnings relation is related to the fact that people with higher skills are more likely to
advance further in the formal education system.24 In our estimation sample, the correlation
between numeracy skills and years of schooling is 0.45. Across countries, the reduction in the
point estimate on numeracy skills from the inclusion of years of schooling is particularly strong
(over one half) in Cyprus, Korea, Poland, the Slovak Republic, Spain, and the United States,
which are the countries where the point estimates on years of schooling are particularly large.
     Years of schooling enters significantly in each country, with point estimates ranging from
2.6 percent in Sweden to 9.0 percent in Poland. On average, one additional year of schooling is
associated with 5.9 percent higher earnings, conditional on numeracy skills. As discussed, the
independent impact of years of schooling implies either an impact of schooling through channels
other than cognitive skills or through measurement errors in cognitive skills. While it is difficult
to assess these possibilities, these results show the empirical importance of school attainment.
Note that, compared to a standard Mincer equation without the skill measure (shown in Table
A-2 in the Appendix), conditioning on numeracy skills lowers by some 20 percent the estimated
returns to years of schooling from its unconditional average of 7.5 percent. Again, the drop
varies considerably across countries, with the largest reduction in returns to years of schooling
due to the inclusion of numeracy scores being almost one-third in Germany.
     While it is difficult to compare the coefficient magnitude of our PIAAC results to estimates
of returns to skill from the IALS test in the mid-1990s because previous studies have used
different specifications and samples, the studies by Leuven, Oosterbeek, and Ophem (2004) and
Hanushek and Zhang (2009) report somewhat similar specifications that also include both skill
measures and years of schooling in one model. For the ten countries that are both in our PIAAC
analysis and in their IALS analyses, the average estimated return to skills is somewhat larger in

     24
        Results are very similar when we drop the assumption of linearity in years of schooling and instead include
separate indicator variables for six levels of school attainment (see bottom row of Table A-5 in the Appendix).


                                                           14
PIAAC than in IALS (9.1 percent here, 6.2 percent in Leuven, Oosterbeek, and Ophem (2004),
and 8.1 percent in Hanushek and Zhang (2009)).25 A few particular differences to the IALS
results stand out. On the one hand, our PIAAC estimates are substantially larger in Germany and
in Poland (where IALS did not show any significant return to skills). On the other hand, our
PIAAC estimates are smaller in the United States and (depending on the comparison study) in
the Netherlands, the two countries that had the largest estimates in IALS. Closer investigation of
the extent to which these comparisons are affected by differences in model specifications and
samples warrants additional future research.

4.4 Returns to Different Dimensions of Skills

     A particular innovation of the PIAAC survey is a richer measurement of various skills, both
in the sense that a wider range of competencies is assessed within each skill domain and that a
new skill domain was added. As noted, in contrast to the previous IALS assessments, the
correlation between numeracy and literacy skills in PIAAC is somewhat lower at 0.85,
potentially allowing for an identification of the associations of each skill domain with earnings
separately. Furthermore, PIAAC for the first time tested the new skill domain of problem
solving in technology-rich environments (“problem solving” for short). The correlations of
problem-solving skills with numeracy and literacy skills are 0.76 and 0.80, respectively.
     Table 5 reports estimates of returns to the alternative skill measures for the pooled sample,
first included separately and then jointly in the model.26 By themselves, average estimated returns
to literacy skills are very similar to those for numeracy skills (17.1 compared to 17.8 percent).
By contrast, estimated returns to problem-solving skills are systematically smaller, at 14.3
percent on average.27 This pattern tends to be similar within most countries (see Table A-3 in the
Appendix). The only partial exception to the pattern is found in Estonia, where the problem-
solving estimate is larger than the literacy estimate (but not than the numeracy estimate).
     Our general focus on numeracy skills comes from the joint consideration of the separate
skill domains. When numeracy and literacy skills are entered together in column (4), both enter

     25
         These comparisons refer to Table 3 in Leuven, Oosterbeek, and Ophem (2004), together with information on
the standard deviation in skills from their Table A2, and to Model 4 of Table 5 in Hanushek and Zhang (2009).
      26
         All pooled models include country fixed effects so that all estimates rely just on within-country variation.
      27
         The number of observations in the specifications that include the problem-solving skill domain is smaller
than in the baseline model because Cyprus, France, Italy, and Spain did not participate in the test of problem-solving
skills and because individual respondents were allowed to opt out of the problem-solving test.


                                                            15
significantly, but the numeracy estimates tends to dominate the literacy estimate at 12.0 percent
compared to 6.8 percent on average. However, there is also some variation in this pattern across
countries. In all countries except Austria, the Netherlands, and Poland, the point estimate on
numeracy is larger than on literacy. While the coefficient on numeracy is statistically significant
in all countries, the coefficient on literacy becomes statistically insignificant in five countries
(Estonia, France, Ireland, Norway, and the Slovak Republic) and even turns negative in Japan.
Of course, models that contain several skill measures at once have to be interpreted cautiously,
as they are identified only from the limited part of the skill variation that is independent of
variation in the other skill.
    The assessment of problem solving is an innovative attempt in PIAAC to measure skills
needed to succeed in an information-based economy where information and communication
skills are required.28 Interestingly, these skills, at least as assessed by PIAAC, are systematically
less strongly associated with individual earnings than more traditional cognitive skills. In
conjunction with numeracy skills, problem solving has half the estimated return: 6.2 percent on
average versus 12.1 percent for numeracy. This aggregate result holds across all countries
except the Czech and Slovak Republics. Further, the point estimate on problem solving is
insignificant in Japan, Korea, and Poland.
    With all three skill domains together, each enters statistically significantly in the pooled
model, but the point estimates on numeracy and literacy of 7.8 and 7.6 percent, respectively, are
twice as large as the point estimate on problem-solving skills of 3.7 percent. Identification of
separate effects is challenging in this model, particularly in the smaller within-country samples,
so we do not want to over-interpret the country results. Nonetheless, while the coefficient on
problem-solving skills gets small and statistically insignificant in nine of the eighteen countries,
it actually dominates the numeracy estimate in three countries (the Czech and Slovak Republics
and the United Kingdom) and the literacy estimate in six countries (Denmark, Estonia, Norway,
the Slovak Republic, Sweden, and the United States).
    The final column of Table 5 standardizes the numeracy skill measure to have mean zero and
standard deviation one for the entire international sample, rather than within each country
separately. This normalizes the numeracy scores to have comparable absolute returns across
countries. Overall, the estimated average return to skills is slightly larger with the international

    28
         See, for example, the description at: http://nces.ed.gov/surveys/piaac/problem-solving.asp.



                                                             16
standardization (18.3 percent compared to 17.8 percent). In fact, in most countries this makes
little difference (Table A-3), simply because within-country standard deviations in test scores are
similar in many countries. But in Japan and Korea, two countries with relatively narrow within-
country skill distributions, return estimates are 3.8 and 3.1 percentage points larger, respectively,
reflecting the fact that any given movement on the international distributions represents a wider
within-country change. The opposite holds in the United States, the country with the widest
within-country skill distribution, where return estimates are 1.7 percentage points smaller.

4.5 Heterogeneous Returns in Different Subgroups

     In discussions of wage determination, a variety of subgroups such as females, public-sector
workers, or immigrants are frequently singled out as facing different labor-market challenges.
Thus, it is useful to trace through the returns to skills in such identifiable groups. To address this
heterogeneity in wage determination, we added interaction terms of important subgroup indicators
with the skill measure (and with all control variables) to our baseline model. Figure 3 depicts the
results for the pooled estimation, with country details given in Table A-4 in the Appendix.
     There are some significant differences in estimated returns to skills in the overall
international sample, but the quantitative magnitude of the differences tends to be relatively
modest. First, estimated returns to numeracy are nearly identical for men and women in the
sample of prime-age, full-time employees. Second, estimated returns tend to slightly increase
with the education level of the workers’ parents (measured in three categories), but the difference
ranges only from 14.8 percent for workers with low-educated parents to 18.0 percent for workers
with high-educated parents. Third, estimated returns are significantly higher in the private sector
(at 18.3 percent) than in the public sector, but even in the latter, returns are at 14.7 percent.
Fourth, estimated returns are slightly higher in the native population (19.8 percent) than among
immigrants (15.9 percent).29 The small difference indicates, among others, that the fact that
interviews were performed in the country’s language does not affect the overall results. Fifth,
while the baseline model refers to full-time employees only, part-time employees also have a
considerable return to skills, albeit significantly smaller at 12.2 percent. In the sample of full-
time and part-time employees together (not shown), the estimated return to skills is 17.1 percent.


     29
        On average across countries, there are roughly 11 percent first-generation migrants in the sample of full-
time, prime-age employees.


                                                            17
     There are some differences for individual countries (see Table A-4). For example, returns
for women exceed returns for men by more than 4 percentage points in Austria and the Czech
Republic, while the opposite is true in Korea. While the advantage of private-sector returns over
public-sector returns is most pronounced in Germany, Ireland, Italy, Korea, and the United
Kingdom, returns are in fact slightly (albeit not significantly) higher in the public sector in
Cyprus, the Czech and Slovak Republics, and Finland. Exceptions to the general rule that part-
time workers have lower returns to skills than full-time workers are Belgium, Finland, and Italy.
In the Czech and Slovak Republics, Denmark, Poland, and Sweden, skill returns for part-time
workers are in fact very small and statistically insignificant.

4.6 Robustness to Additional Controls and Alternative Earnings Measures

     Another way to assess the robustness of our baseline results is to include additional control
variables in the model and to look at alternative measures of economic performance. As is
evident from Table A-5 in the Appendix, which reports returns to skills with alternative sets of
control variables, controlling for parental education reduces the estimated returns to skills only
from 17.8 to 16.2 percent on average. This suggests that any direct influences of families on
earnings are unlikely to be a major driver of our baseline result, easing this omitted-variable
concern. Similarly, adding a migrant indicator to the baseline model hardly affects the average
estimated return to skills.30
     Our baseline model controls for a quadratic polynomial in actual work experience. It might
be argued, though, that actual experience is endogenous to skill levels, thereby capturing a
channel of the effect of skills on earnings. However, as the next model in Table A-5 shows,
results are hardly different when we control for potential experience (age minus years of
schooling minus six) instead of actual experience. Although estimates tend to be slightly
smaller, the cross-country pattern is very similar to that obtained with actual experience.
     To investigate possible channels of the effect of skills on earnings, the next model adds
controls for 10 one-digit occupation (ISCO) categories. The reduction in the coefficient on skills
indicates that part of the aggregate return to skills materializes through selection into higher-


     30
        In an extended model shown in Table A-6 in the Appendix, the additional control variables are
simultaneously included in the sample including part-time employees. Estimated returns to skills are smaller in all
countries, but the aggregate magnitude remains large: 15.0 compared to 17.8 percent on average. The table also
shows that the associations of some of the control variables with earnings differ markedly across countries.


                                                           18
paying occupations. Still, even within occupations and ignoring any cross-occupation variation,
a one-standard-deviation increase in numeracy skills is associated with a 9.6 percent wage
increase on average. Controlling for 21 one-digit industry (ISIC) categories also lowers the
coefficient on skills, but much less so than controlling for occupations. Even within industries,
the return to skills is 15.0 percent on average, leading to the important conclusion that selection
into occupations or industries explains only part of the returns to skills. Looking just within such
“micro labor markets,” those workers with higher skills systematically have higher wages.
     Finally, the results prove highly robust in models with alternative earnings measures than
the baseline specification with log gross hourly wages (Table A-7). First, in Austria, Canada,
and Sweden, we do not have continuous wage information, but only the median wage of the
country-specific wage decile for each participant. When we use decile medians instead of
continuous wages in the other countries, estimated returns to skills are hardly different. In the
pooled sample, the point estimate is 16.4 percent instead of 17.0 percent.31 Also within
individual countries, results do not differ significantly. Only in the Czech Republic, Ireland, and
the United States are the decile-median estimates smaller than the continuous estimates to a
noteworthy extent (between 2.1 and 2.7 percentage points), whereas in several other countries,
the decile-median estimates are in fact larger than the continuous estimates. The overall pattern
suggests that estimates based on decile medians may be reasonable proxies for the true estimates.
     Second, while our baseline wage measure does not include bonuses, models where bonuses
are included in the hourly wage yield very similar estimates of skill returns that are slightly
larger (17.6 instead of 17.0 percent on average). Third, considering monthly rather than hourly
wages, so that hours worked come into play, hardly changes the picture (either with or without
bonuses), although there is some variation for individual countries. Finally, extending the
sample to the self-employed – 9 percent of the labor force on average in our estimation sample –
also has little effect on the estimated returns across countries.


5. Accounting for Cross-Country Differences in Returns to Skills
     In our assessment of wage determination, we have found that returns to skills differ
markedly across the 22 countries in our sample. This raises the question whether there are

     31
       All pooled models in the table exclude Austria, Canada, Germany, Sweden, and the United States, where
continuous earnings data are not available in the Public Use File.


                                                         19
features of country economies such as labor and product market regulations that are
systematically related to differences in skill returns. Thus, in this final section, we turn to
establishing a set of stylized facts about country characteristics that are systematically related to
differences in the returns to skills across countries.
     Over the past two decades, there have been significant changes in employment protection
policies, unionism, and other policies across Europe. These changes have been largely motivated
by a desire to improve the functioning of the economies and, by implication, the economic
wellbeing of individuals. Here we investigate whether these commonly identified aspects of
different countries interact with the returns to skills. For example, unions have been argued to
favor wage schedules that reduce skill returns (see Frandsen (2012) and the references therein).
     We begin with a baseline skill-earnings model (equation (2)) pooled across all countries and
including country fixed effects μn, for n=1, …, 22 countries. We then include interaction terms
between the individual skill measure C and various measures of country characteristics N:

                      ln yin   n  1Cin   2 Cin N n    3 Ein   4 Ein2   5Gin   in                   (5)

Note that the main effects of the country-level features are absorbed in the country fixed effects
μn. The coefficient of interest is β2, which shows how returns to skills vary with different
country characteristics. As the latter vary only at the country level, standard errors in this model
are clustered at the country level. While degrees of freedom are limited in such a cross-country
analysis, the extended PIAAC sample provides substantially more analytical potential than
previous studies. Note that any bias in estimated returns to skills that is the same across
countries would not affect this analysis, which is identified from the relative returns across
countries. To facilitate interpretation, all variables in the interacted model are de-meaned.
     For this analysis, we incorporate aggregate data about differences in the structure of the
international economies.32 Union density measures the share of wage and salary earners who are
trade union members. Employment protection legislation indicates the strictness of employment

     32
         Data are provided by the OECD and refer to 2011 unless otherwise noted. Union density refers to 2009 in
the Czech Republic and to 2010 in Denmark, Estonia, Poland, and Spain. The employment-protection indicator is
the weighted sum of sub-indicators concerning the regulations for individual dismissals (weight of 5/7) and
additional provisions for collective dismissals (2/7), incorporating 13 data items (see Venn (2009) for details). The
product-market regulation indicator refers to 2008 and covers formal regulations in state control of business
enterprises, legal and administrative barriers to entrepreneurship, and barriers to international trade and investment
(see Wölfl et al. (2009) for details). Results are similar when using other measures of employment protection
legislation or sub-indices of product-market regulation. The public-sector share is calculated from the PIAAC data.


                                                            20
protection against individual and collective dismissal of employees on regular contracts.
Existence of minimum wages is measured by a binary variable that takes the value 1 if a country
has a statutory minimum wage and 0 otherwise. Product-market regulation is a composite
indicator measuring the degree to which policies promote or inhibit competition in areas of the
product market where competition is viable. Public-sector share is the share of wage and salary
workers employed in the public sector.
    Analysis of the various aggregate institutional factors produces an interesting pattern of
results (Table 6). When entered separately, union density, employment protection, and the
public-sector share have significant negative interactions with the returns to skill. That is,
countries with a larger share of unionized workers, stricter employment protection, and larger
public sectors have systematically lower returns to skills on the labor market. For example, the
estimate in column (1) suggests that a 25 percentage-point increase in union density (the
difference, for example, between Belgium and the United Kingdom) is associated with a 3.5
percentage points lower wage increase for each one-standard-deviation increase in numeracy
skills. By contrast, product-market regulations are not significantly related to differences in
returns to skills across countries, whereas countries with a minimum wage in fact appear to have
larger returns to skill in this simple model. However, when all five country-level measures are
jointly included in column (6), only the interactions with union density and employment
protection legislation retain significance.
    To ensure that results are not driven by country differences in the level or dispersion of
skills, column (7) adds interactions with the mean numeracy score of the country and with skill
inequality (the differential between the 90th and 10th percentile of the numeracy skill
distribution). The skill level may capture the supply of skills within a country, while skill
inequality reflects how compressed the distribution of skills is. It turns out that neither countries’
skill means nor their skill inequalities are significantly related to differences in returns to skills,
and the previous results remain intact.
    Finally, column (8) adds a full set of 185 occupation-by-industry fixed effects to check
whether results are driven by differences in the occupation or industry structures of countries.
Identification in this model comes from variation within rather detailed industry-occupation
cells. Even in this quite demanding specification, the results on the interactions of returns to skill
with union density and with employment protection remain intact. In addition, the interaction



                                                     21
with the public-sector share recovers significance in this model. We conclude that returns to
skills are systematically lower in countries with higher union density, stricter employment
protection legislation, and larger public sectors.


6. Conclusions
    While human capital is virtually always identified as the key factor determining systematic
differences in individual wages, existing empirical evidence has rested on crude and (almost
certainly) biased estimates of its importance. The ubiquitous Mincer earnings function assumes
that skill differences can be encapsulated in measures of school attainment, neglecting any other
factors that might systematically affect skills. When direct measures of skill differences are
introduced, the bulk of evidence on the returns to skills is restricted to selective samples – namely,
young workers in the United States. These samples are, as we demonstrate, unrepresentative
both of the labor-market experiences in other countries and of older, prime-age workers. We
investigate the returns associated with a series of measures of cognitive skills across a large set
of countries. The new international PIAAC study provides insights into the extent to which
modern, knowledge-based labor markets reward skills.
    Higher cognitive skills – measured across numeracy, literacy, and problem-solving domains
– are systematically related to higher wages in all 22 participating countries. The effect sizes of
our returns to skills estimates (best thought of as lower bounds because of measurement errors in
skills) are economically meaningful. Among prime-age workers, a one-standard-deviation
increase in numeracy skills is associated with increased hourly wages averaging some 18 percent
across countries. But perhaps the most striking finding from the international analysis is the
substantial heterogeneity in returns to skills across countries. Estimated returns to skills in the
countries with the highest returns (the United States, Ireland, and Germany) are roughly twice as
large as in the countries with the lowest returns (Sweden, the Czech Republic, and Norway).
    In addition, the age pattern of returns underscores the problem of relying just on the
experiences of younger workers in evaluating the economic role of skill differences. Prime-age
workers (age 35-54) quite consistently show greater returns to skills than labor-market entrants
(age 25-34), averaging a 4 percentage-point difference. Only the participating Eastern European
transition economies fail to show this age pattern, probably reflecting the loss of human capital
to older workers when their economies changed.


                                                     22
    The skill-earnings associations prove immensely robust in a variety of dimensions when
looking at the labor-market earnings of prime-age workers. Perhaps surprisingly, though, returns
to general literacy and particularly numeracy are quite consistently higher than returns to problem
solving, a construct developed to measure skill demands in technologically-based economies.
Differences in returns to skills across subsets of workers also present interesting patterns. On
average, women and men have identical returns, while observed skills make somewhat less
difference to immigrants, part-time workers, and public-sector workers. Again, however, there
are country differences that warrant more investigation.
    Having established the pattern of returns to skills across countries, the cross-country
dimension of our analysis allows us to provide stylized facts about what accounts for differences
in returns to skills across countries. Intriguingly, returns to skills are systematically lower in
countries with higher union density, stricter employment protection legislation, and larger public
sectors, while minimum wages, product-market regulations, average skill levels, and skill
inequality are not systematically related to differences in skill returns. While this is just a
descriptive depiction of which countries have higher skill returns than others, the consistency
with standard conceptual models is striking.
    The regularity of the relationship between cognitive skills and higher earnings in all
countries documents the extent to which modern knowledge-based economies value skills. We
view the results presented here as a building block toward better understanding the sources and
mechanisms that relate individuals’ skills to productivity and labor-market outcomes. For
example, by quantifying this association, the new results may have immediate application in
parameterizing development-accounting studies that try to quantify the extent to which cross-
country differences in skills can account for cross-country differences in economic prosperity
(Caselli (2005); Hanushek and Woessmann (2012)). Additionally, understanding individual
productivity differences is a necessary ingredient into projecting how the average level and
inequality of economic outcomes of countries may move with future technological change.
    Importantly, almost all international discussion of educational policy is centered on school
quality and student achievement. To understand the full economic implications of these
discussions, it is necessary to move the analysis of labor-market outcomes to match the analysis
of school outcomes.




                                                    23
References
Acemoglu, Daron, and David Autor. 2011. "Skills, tasks and technologies: Implications for
   employment and earnings." In Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 4b, edited by Orley
   Ashenfelter and David Card. Amsterdam: North Holland: 1043-1171.
Altonji, Joseph G., and Charles R. Pierret. 2001. "Employer learning and statistical
   discrimination." Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, no. 1: 313-350.
Autor, David H., Frank Levy, and Richard J. Murnane. 2003. "The skill content of recent
   technological change: An empirical exploration." Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, no. 4:
   1279-1333.
Barone, Carlo, and Herman G van de Werfhorst. 2011. "Education, cognitive skills and earnings
   in comparative perspective." International Sociology 26, no. 4: 483-502.
Bishop, John H. 1989. "Is the test score decline responsible for the productivity growth decline?"
   American Economic Review 79, no. 1: 178-197.
Black, Sandra E., and Paul J. Devereux. 2011. "Recent developments in intergenerational
   mobility." In Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 4b, edited by Orley Ashenfelter and David
   Card. Amsterdam: North Holland: 1487-1541.
Böhlmark, Anders, and Matthew J. Lindquist. 2006. "Life-cycle variations in the association
   between current and lifetime income: Replication and extension for Sweden." Journal of
   Labor Economics 24, no. 4: 879-896.
Bowles, Samuel, Herbert Gintis, and Melissa Osborne. 2001. "The determinants of earnings: A
  behavioral approach." Journal of Economic Literature 39, no. 4: 1137-1176.
Card, David. 1999. "The causal effect of education on earnings." In Handbook of Labor
   Economics, Vol. 3a, edited by Orley Ashenfelter and David Card. Amsterdam: North
   Holland: 1801-1863.
Caselli, Francesco. 2005. "Accounting for cross-country income differences." In Handbook of
   Economic Growth, edited by Philippe Aghion and Steven N. Durlauf. Amsterdam: North
   Holland: 679-741.
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, Nathaniel Hilger, Emmanuel Saez, Diane Whitmore Schanzen-
   bach, and Danny Yagan. 2011. "How does your kindergarten classroom affect your earnings?
   Evidence from Project STAR." Quarterly Journal of Economics 126, no. 4: 1593-1660.
Cunha, Flavio, and James Heckman. 2007. "The technology of skill formation." American
   Economic Review 97, no. 2: 31-47.
Cunha, Flavio, James J. Heckman, Lance Lochner, and Dimitriy V. Masterov. 2006. "Interpre-
   ting the evidence on life cycle skill formation." In Handbook of the Economics of Education,
   edited by Eric A. Hanushek and Finis Welch. Amsterdam: North Holland: 697-812.
Denny, Kevin, Colm Harmon, and Vincent O’Sullivan. 2004. "Education, earnings and skills: A
   multi-country comparison." IFS Working Paper 04/08. London: Institute for Fiscal Studies.
Dugan, Dennis J. 1976. "Scholastic achievement: its determinants and effects in the education
   industry." In Education as an industry, edited by Joseph T. Froomkin, Dean T. Jamison, and
   Roy Radner. Cambridge, MA: Ballinger: 53-83.


                                                  24
Frandsen, Brigham R. 2012. "Why unions still matter: The effects of unionization on the
   distribution of employee earnings." Manuscript. Cambridge, MA: MIT.
Frydman, Roman, Cheryl Gray, Marek Hessel, and Andrzej Rapaczynski. 1999. "When does
   privatization work? The impact of private ownership on corporate performance in the
   transition economies." Quarterly Journal of Economics 114, no. 4: 1153-1191.
Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2008. The race between education and technology.
   Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Green, David A., and W. Craig Riddell. 2003. "Literacy and earnings: An investigation of the
   interaction of cognitve and unobsrved skills in earnings generation." Labour Economics 10,
   no. 2: 165-184.
Green, David A., and W. Craig Riddell. 2013. "Ageing and literacy skills: Evidence from
   Canada, Norway and the United States." Labour Economics 22, no. 2: 16-29.
Griliches, Zvi. 1977. "Estimating the returns to schooling: Some econometric problems."
    Econometrica 45, no. 1: 1-22.
Haider, Steven, and Gary Solon. 2006. "Life-cycle variation in the association between current
   and lifetime earnings." American Economic Review 96, no. 4: 1308-1320.
Hanushek, Eric A. 2002. "Publicly provided education." In Handbook of Public Economics, Vol.
   4, edited by Alan J. Auerbach and Martin Feldstein. Amsterdam: North Holland: 2045-2141.
Hanushek, Eric A., and Steven G. Rivkin. 2012. "The distribution of teacher quality and
   implications for policy." Annual Review of Economics 4: 131-157.
Hanushek, Eric A., and Ludger Woessmann. 2008. "The role of cognitive skills in economic
   development." Journal of Economic Literature 46, no. 3: 607-668.
Hanushek, Eric A., and Ludger Woessmann. 2011. "The economics of international differences
   in educational achievement." In Handbook of the Economics of Education, Vol. 3, edited by
   Eric A. Hanushek, Stephen Machin, and Ludger Woessmann. Amsterdam: North Holland:
   89-200.
Hanushek, Eric A., and Ludger Woessmann. 2012. "Schooling, educational achievement, and the
   Latin American growth puzzle." Journal of Development Economics 99, no. 2: 497-512.
Hanushek, Eric A., and Lei Zhang. 2009. "Quality-consistent estimates of international schooling
   and skill gradients." Journal of Human Capital 3, no. 2: 107-143.
Harmon, Colm, Hessel Oosterbeek, and Ian Walker. 2003. "The returns to education:
   Microeconomics." Journal of Economic Surveys 17, no. 2: 115-155.
Hause, John C. 1972. "Earnings profile: Ability and schooling." Journal of Political Economy
   80, no. 3, pt. 2: S108-S138.
Heckman, James J., Lance J. Lochner, and Petra E. Todd. 2006. "Earnings functions, rates of
   return and treatment effects: The Mincer equation and beyond." In Handbook of the
   Economics of Education, Vol. 1, edited by Eric A. Hanushek and Finis Welch. Amsterdam:
   North Holland: 307-458.
Jovanovic, Boyan. 1979. "Job matching and the theory of turnover." Journal of Political
   Economy 87, no. 5: 972-990.


                                                 25
Lazear, Edward P. 2003. "Teacher incentives." Swedish Economic Policy Review 10, no. 3: 179-
   214.
Leuven, Edwin, Hessel Oosterbeek, and Hans van Ophem. 2004. "Explaining international
   differences in male skill wage differentials by differences in demand and supply of skills."
   Economic Journal 114, no. 495: 466-486.
Manski, Charles F., and David A. Wise. 1983. College choice in America. Cambridge: Harvard
  University Press.
McIntosh, Steven, and Anna Vignoles. 2001. "Measuring and assessing the impact of basic skills
   on labor market outcomes." Oxford Economic Papers 53, no. 3: 453-481.
Mertaugh, Michael, and Eric A. Hanushek. 2005. "Education and training." In Labor markets
   and social policy in Central and Eastern Europe: The accession and beyond, edited by
   Nicholas Barr. Washington, DC: World Bank: 207-251.
Mincer, Jacob. 1970. "The distribution of labor incomes: a survey with special reference to the
   human capital approach." Journal of Economic Literature 8, no. 1: 1-26.
Mincer, Jacob. 1974. Schooling, experience, and earnings. New York: NBER.
Mulligan, Casey B. 1999. "Galton versus the human capital approach to inheritance." Journal of
  Political Economy 107, no. 6, pt. 2: S184-S224.
Murnane, Richard J., John B. Willett, Yves Duhaldeborde, and John H. Tyler. 2000. "How
  important are the cognitive skills of teenagers in predicting subsequent earnings?" Journal of
  Policy Analysis and Management 19, no. 4: 547-568.
Murnane, Richard J., John B. Willett, and Frank Levy. 1995. "The growing importance of cogni-
  tive skills in wage determination." Review of Economics and Statistics 77, no. 2: 251-266.
Neal, Derek, and William R. Johnson. 1996. "The role of pre-market factors in black-white
   differences." Journal of Political Economy 104, no. 5: 869-895.
OECD. 2013. OECD skills outlook 2013: First results from the survey of adult skills. Paris:
  Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
Psacharopoulos, George, and Harry A. Patrinos. 2004. "Returns to investment in education: a
   further update." Education Economics 12, no. 2: 111-134.
Rivkin, Steven G. 1995. "Black/white differences in schooling and employment." Journal of
   Human Resources 30, no. 4: 826-852.
Solon, Gary. 1999. "Intergenerational mobility in the labor market." In Handbook of Labor
   Economics, Vol. 3a, edited by Orley Ashenfelter and David Card. Amsterdam: North
   Holland: 1761-1800.
Venn, Danielle. 2009. "Legislation, collective bargaining and enforcement: Updating the OECD
   employment protection indicators." OECD Social, Employment and Migration Working
   Paper 89. Paris: OECD.
Wölfl, Anita, Isabelle Wanner, Tomasz Kozluk, and Giuseppe Nicoletti. 2009. "Ten years of
  product market reform in OECD countries: Insights from a revised PMR indicator." OECD
  Economics Department Working Paper 695. Paris: OECD.



                                                  26
                                          Table A-1: Descriptive Statistics in the Full Sample

                      Pooled    Austria   Belgium   Canada    Cyprus     Czech R.   Denmark    Estonia    Finland   France    Germany   Ireland
Gross hourly wage                13.5       17.0      24.1      11.0      120.4      179.7        5.1       17.0      12.9      14.3      17.7
(national currency)              (5.9)      (6.3)    (11.9)     (6.6)     (57.6)     (68.0)      (3.2)      (6.4)     (5.6)     (7.2)     (9.6)
Wage inequality         1.12     1.07       0.85      1.25      1.26       0.96       0.78       1.51       0.88      0.86      1.35      1.20
Numeracy               268.5    274.9      280.2    265.7      263.8      275.3      277.9      272.8      282.4     254.0     272.4     255.5
                       (52.5)   (49.1)     (51.4)    (55.9)    (46.7)     (43.8)     (51.2)     (45.2)     (52.2)    (56.5)    (52.7)    (53.7)
Yrs schooling           12.5     11.8       12.3      13.2      12.3       13.0       12.5       12.1       12.2      11.2      13.0      14.5
                        (3.1)    (2.7)      (2.9)     (2.7)     (3.1)      (2.7)      (2.7)      (2.7)      (3.0)     (3.6)     (3.0)     (3.2)
Experience (years)      18.7     20.0       20.8      19.3      17.5       20.0       21.0       19.0       19.0      19.4      19.2      17.0
                       (12.8)   (12.6)     (12.5)    (12.7)    (12.3)     (12.9)     (13.7)     (13.0)     (13.6)    (13.2)    (13.0)    (12.0)
Female (share)          0.50     0.50       0.50      0.50      0.52       0.50       0.50       0.52       0.50      0.51      0.50      0.51
Observations          153675     5130       5463     26683      5053       6102       7328       7632       5464      6993      5465      5983
                                 Italy     Japan    Korea     Netherl.   Norway      Poland   Slovak R.    Spain    Sweden      U.K.      U.S.
Gross hourly wage                11.5       1.6†     13.6†      16.5      211.9       16.6        4.4        9.8     162.3      12.1      21.0
(national currency)              (6.0)      (1.1)    (11.5)     (7.6)     (78.1)     (10.0)      (3.2)      (5.1)    (48.8)     (7.3)    (13.8)
Wage inequality                  1.02       1.31      1.50      1.06       0.80       1.25       1.22       1.21      0.69      1.20      1.49
Numeracy                        247.0      288.6    262.7      280.1      278.6      258.9      275.6      245.6     278.1     262.2     253.0
                                (50.2)     (43.7)    (45.3)    (51.4)     (55.1)     (50.9)     (47.2)     (51.4)    (54.9)    (54.8)    (57.1)
Yrs schooling                    10.5       12.9      12.6      13.1       13.9       12.5       12.9       11.3      12.0      13.0      13.3
                                 (3.9)      (2.4)     (3.2)     (2.8)      (2.6)      (3.1)      (2.8)      (3.5)     (2.5)     (2.2)     (3.1)
Experience (years)               18.1       18.8      13.2      18.7       18.7       17.0       19.1       17.4      19.3      19.6      19.4
                                (12.3)     (12.7)    (10.8)    (12.4)     (12.8)     (12.5)     (12.5)     (12.1)    (13.8)    (13.0)    (13.2)
Female (share)                   0.50       0.50      0.50      0.50       0.49       0.51       0.50       0.50      0.49      0.50      0.51
Observations                     4621       5278      6667      5170       5128       9366       5723       6055      4469      8892      5010


Notes: Means, standard deviations (in parentheses), and numbers of observations for selected variables by country. Sample: full PIAAC sample
(ages 16-65). Wage inequality: log wage diﬀerential between 90th and 10th percentile of wage distribution. Pooled speciﬁcation gives same
weight to each country. † wages divided by 1000. Data source: PIAAC.
                                            Table A-2: Standard Mincerian Wage Regressions

                 Pooled    Austria    Belgium    Canada         Cyprus      Czech R.       Denmark        Estonia    Finland     France    Germany    Ireland
Yrs schooling   .075∗∗∗    .077∗∗∗    .062∗∗∗     .078∗∗∗       .089∗∗∗      .059∗∗∗        .055∗∗∗        .074∗∗∗   .068∗∗∗     .055∗∗∗    .095∗∗∗    .085∗∗∗
                 (.001)     (.004)     (.003)      (.003)        (.006)       (.008)         (.003)         (.005)    (.003)      (.002)     (.005)     (.007)
Experience      .027∗∗∗    .027∗∗∗    .018∗∗∗     .029∗∗∗       .023∗∗∗         .014        .011∗∗∗        .025∗∗∗   .019∗∗∗     .021∗∗∗      .015∗    .040∗∗∗
                 (.001)     (.007)     (.006)      (.004)        (.008)       (.009)         (.004)         (.009)    (.005)      (.005)     (.008)     (.010)
Experience2     –.042∗∗∗   –.040∗∗∗     –.020    –.041∗∗∗         –.014        –.028          –.014       –.072∗∗∗   –.026∗∗    –.026∗∗       –.016   –.061∗∗∗
                 (.003)     (.014)     (.013)      (.008)        (.019)       (.020)         (.009)         (.020)    (.012)      (.011)     (.018)     (.023)
Female          –.200∗∗∗   –.140∗∗∗   –.078∗∗∗   –.160∗∗∗       –.204∗∗∗    –.216∗∗∗       –.135∗∗∗       –.470∗∗∗   –.228∗∗∗   –.136∗∗∗   –.163∗∗∗   –.077∗∗
                 (.005)     (.023)     (.017)      (.015)        (.033)       (.032)         (.013)         (.024)    (.015)      (.016)     (.025)     (.033)
R2                .272       .295        .238       .243           .306         .236           .236           .277     .375        .293        .274      .233
Observations     34161       1115       1219        7155           938         1065           1877           1767      1478        1707       1296       1031
                             Italy     Japan       Korea        Netherl.    Norway          Poland       Slovak R.    Spain     Sweden        U.K.       U.S.
Yrs schooling              .053∗∗∗    .088∗∗∗     .093∗∗∗       .082∗∗∗      .056∗∗∗        .101∗∗∗        .095∗∗∗   .079∗∗∗     .042∗∗∗    .085∗∗∗    .111∗∗∗
                            (.004)     (.005)      (.005)        (.005)       (.003)         (.005)         (.006)    (.003)      (.003)     (.006)     (.005)
Experience                  .014∗∗    .028∗∗∗     .027∗∗∗       .036∗∗∗      .029∗∗∗        .028∗∗∗          .017    .027∗∗∗     .020∗∗∗    .029∗∗∗    .022∗∗∗
                            (.007)     (.008)      (.005)        (.007)       (.005)         (.007)         (.012)    (.007)      (.005)     (.010)     (.008)
Experience2                  .001       –.025      –.025∗       –.064∗∗∗    –.055∗∗∗       –.046∗∗∗          –.031   –.038∗∗    –.036∗∗∗    –.052∗∗   –.039∗∗
                            (.017)     (.018)      (.015)        (.015)       (.012)         (.017)         (.027)    (.015)      (.010)     (.021)     (.017)
Female                     –.174∗∗∗   –.337∗∗∗   –.322∗∗∗       –.058∗∗     –.160∗∗∗       –.228∗∗∗       –.290∗∗∗   –.145∗∗∗   –.132∗∗∗   –.158∗∗∗   –.265∗∗∗
                            (.026)     (.025)      (.028)        (.024)       (.014)         (.028)         (.028)    (.024)      (.014)     (.028)     (.024)
R2                           .264        .345       .419           .279         .250           .394           .305     .365        .189        .198      .384
Observations                 1018       1322        1441          1013         1519            816           1198      1190        1316       1671        983
                                                            ∗              ∗∗             ∗∗∗
                                                                p<0.10,         p<0.05,         p<0.01

Notes: Least squares regressions weighted by sampling weights. Dependent variable: log gross hourly wage. Sample: full-time employees aged
35-54 (Canada includes part-time employees). Experience2 divided by 1000. Pooled speciﬁcation includes country ﬁxed eﬀects and gives same
weight to each country; R2 refers to within-country R2 . Robust standard errors in parentheses. Data source: PIAAC.
            Table A-3: Returns to Skills for Alternative Skill Measures: Numeracy, Literacy, and Problem Solving

                Pooled    Austria   Belgium   Canada         Cyprus         Czech R.         Denmark    Estonia   Finland   France    Germany    Ireland
Numeracy        .178∗∗∗   .179∗∗∗   .149∗∗∗   .193∗∗∗        .138∗∗∗         .124∗∗∗          .137∗∗∗   .179∗∗∗   .142∗∗∗   .174∗∗∗    .235∗∗∗   .241∗∗∗
                 (.003)    (.010)    (.009)    (.008)         (.019)          (.015)           (.008)    (.012)    (.010)    (.008)     (.013)    (.020)
Literacy        .171∗∗∗   .186∗∗∗   .150∗∗∗   .192∗∗∗        .126∗∗∗         .123∗∗∗          .139∗∗∗   .138∗∗∗   .133∗∗∗   .151∗∗∗    .233∗∗∗   .215∗∗∗
                 (.003)    (.010)    (.009)    (.007)         (.017)          (.015)           (.008)    (.013)    (.011)    (.009)     (.013)    (.021)
Problem solv.   .143∗∗∗   .143∗∗∗   .118∗∗∗   .140∗∗∗                        .110∗∗∗          .119∗∗∗   .165∗∗∗   .123∗∗∗              .185∗∗∗   .167∗∗∗
                 (.003)    (.013)    (.010)    (.008)                         (.016)           (.008)    (.015)    (.009)               (.013)    (.019)
Numeracy        .120∗∗∗   .079∗∗∗   .081∗∗∗   .101∗∗∗        .089∗∗∗         .078∗∗∗          .082∗∗∗   .201∗∗∗   .107∗∗∗   .163∗∗∗    .130∗∗∗   .185∗∗∗
                 (.005)    (.020)    (.018)    (.016)         (.027)          (.024)           (.016)    (.021)    (.016)    (.017)     (.026)    (.040)
Literacy        .068∗∗∗   .117∗∗∗   .078∗∗∗   .106∗∗∗         .061∗∗          .062∗∗          .066∗∗∗     –.027    .041∗∗     .012     .121∗∗∗     .062
                 (.005)    (.020)    (.019)    (.016)         (.024)          (.025)           (.016)    (.021)    (.018)    (.017)     (.026)    (.040)
Numeracy        .121∗∗∗   .117∗∗∗   .119∗∗∗   .134∗∗∗                          .038           .078∗∗∗   .098∗∗∗   .122∗∗∗              .184∗∗∗   .167∗∗∗
                 (.005)    (.021)    (.015)    (.014)                         (.025)           (.015)    (.026)    (.014)               (.024)    (.033)
Problem solv.   .062∗∗∗   .068∗∗∗    .035∗∗   .051∗∗∗                        .085∗∗∗          .064∗∗∗   .088∗∗∗   .036∗∗∗               .055∗∗    .058∗∗
                 (.005)    (.018)    (.015)    (.012)                         (.021)           (.014)    (.026)    (.014)               (.021)    (.029)
Numeracy        .078∗∗∗     .042    .069∗∗∗   .077∗∗∗                          –.002          .058∗∗∗   .088∗∗∗   .088∗∗∗              .106∗∗∗    .101∗∗
                 (.007)    (.026)    (.020)    (.018)                         (.027)           (.018)    (.029)    (.017)               (.030)    (.046)
Literacy        .076∗∗∗   .136∗∗∗   .090∗∗∗   .113∗∗∗                        .091∗∗∗           .040∗∗     .017    .060∗∗∗              .128∗∗∗    .098∗∗
                 (.007)    (.026)    (.023)    (.020)                         (.028)           (.019)    (.029)    (.019)               (.028)    (.048)
Problem solv.   .037∗∗∗     .019      .004      .007                          .046∗∗          .050∗∗∗   .082∗∗∗     .015                 .014      .029
                 (.005)    (.020)    (.017)    (.014)                         (.022)           (.016)    (.029)    (.016)               (.022)    (.030)
Numeracy        .183∗∗∗   .193∗∗∗   .151∗∗∗   .182∗∗∗        .153∗∗∗         .150∗∗∗          .135∗∗∗   .208∗∗∗   .149∗∗∗   .160∗∗∗    .240∗∗∗   .238∗∗∗
(int. stand.)    (.003)    (.011)    (.009)    (.007)         (.021)          (.019)           (.008)    (.014)    (.011)    (.008)     (.013)    (.020)
                                                        ∗              ∗∗              ∗∗∗
                                                            p<0.10,         p<0.05,          p<0.01
    Table A-3: Returns to Skills for Alternative Skill Measures: Numeracy, Literacy, and Problem Solving (continued)

                   Italy     Japan       Korea     Netherl.      Norway         Poland         Slovak R.    Spain    Sweden      U.K.      U.S.
Numeracy         .132∗∗∗    .184∗∗∗     .217∗∗∗    .183∗∗∗       .127∗∗∗        .191∗∗∗         .179∗∗∗    .228∗∗∗   .121∗∗∗   .225∗∗∗   .279∗∗∗
                  (.016)     (.014)      (.014)     (.011)        (.007)         (.017)          (.019)     (.017)    (.009)    (.013)    (.017)
Literacy         .127∗∗∗    .149∗∗∗     .206∗∗∗    .191∗∗∗       .116∗∗∗        .201∗∗∗         .139∗∗∗    .220∗∗∗   .123∗∗∗   .215∗∗∗   .271∗∗∗
                  (.016)     (.015)      (.015)     (.012)        (.008)         (.017)          (.019)     (.016)    (.008)    (.013)    (.016)
Problem solv.               .119∗∗∗     .153∗∗∗    .171∗∗∗       .110∗∗∗        .135∗∗∗         .135∗∗∗              .104∗∗∗   .191∗∗∗   .217∗∗∗
                             (.015)      (.017)     (.012)        (.007)         (.022)          (.021)               (.007)    (.013)    (.015)
Numeracy         .084∗∗∗    .233∗∗∗     .162∗∗∗    .075∗∗∗       .110∗∗∗         .069∗∗         .180∗∗∗    .137∗∗∗   .071∗∗∗   .124∗∗∗   .192∗∗∗
                  (.023)     (.024)      (.028)     (.023)        (.017)         (.028)          (.029)     (.029)    (.018)    (.025)    (.034)
Literacy          .058∗∗    –.062∗∗      .064∗∗    .126∗∗∗         .019         .145∗∗∗           –.001    .105∗∗∗   .058∗∗∗   .113∗∗∗   .099∗∗∗
                  (.024)     (.026)      (.029)     (.025)        (.018)         (.028)          (.028)     (.028)    (.017)    (.025)    (.032)
Numeracy                    .164∗∗∗     .186∗∗∗    .110∗∗∗       .067∗∗∗        .163∗∗∗          .077∗∗              .071∗∗∗   .109∗∗∗   .175∗∗∗
                             (.022)      (.029)     (.019)        (.015)         (.041)          (.030)               (.014)    (.024)    (.031)
Problem solv.                  .013       .037     .092∗∗∗       .064∗∗∗           .044         .095∗∗∗              .056∗∗∗   .116∗∗∗   .097∗∗∗
                             (.020)      (.026)     (.018)        (.013)         (.032)          (.025)               (.012)    (.021)    (.026)
Numeracy                    .185∗∗∗     .131∗∗∗     .054∗∗       .059∗∗∗           .058         .099∗∗∗              .051∗∗∗     .047    .173∗∗∗
                             (.027)      (.037)     (.025)        (.019)         (.044)          (.037)               (.018)    (.030)    (.036)
Literacy                      –.033      .093∗∗    .105∗∗∗         .013         .180∗∗∗           –.040                .033∗   .098∗∗∗     .005
                             (.029)      (.040)     (.030)        (.020)         (.043)          (.040)               (.019)    (.029)    (.039)
Problem solv.                  .020       .008      .049∗∗       .060∗∗∗          –.013         .106∗∗∗              .048∗∗∗   .085∗∗∗   .095∗∗∗
                             (.021)      (.029)     (.022)        (.014)         (.036)          (.029)               (.013)    (.023)    (.039)
Numeracy         .138∗∗∗    .223∗∗∗     .249∗∗∗    .195∗∗∗       .124∗∗∗        .203∗∗∗         .197∗∗∗    .224∗∗∗   .112∗∗∗   .222∗∗∗   .262∗∗∗
(int. stand.)     (.017)     (.016)      (.016)     (.012)        (.007)         (.018)          (.021)     (.017)    (.008)    (.013)    (.016)
                                                       ∗             ∗∗             ∗∗∗
                                                           p<0.10,        p<0.05,         p<0.01

Notes: Horizontal lines divide separately estimated models. First row replicates baseline model from Table 2. Least squares regressions
weighted by sampling weights. Dependent variable: log gross hourly wage. Sample: full-time employees aged 35-54 (Canada includes part-time
employees). All regressions control for gender and a quadratic polynomial in actual work experience. Test scores standardized to std. dev. 1
within each country, except for last speciﬁcation at the bottom where numeracy score is standardized to std. dev. 1 in the entire international
sample. All models with problem solving do not include Cyprus, France, Italy, and Spain, where problem-solving skills were not tested, as
well as individuals who opted out of the problem-solving test. Pooled speciﬁcation includes country ﬁxed eﬀects and gives same weight to each
country. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Data source: PIAAC.
                                         Table A-4: Returns to Skills in Alternative Subgroups

Subsample            Pooled    Austria    Belgium   Canada      Cyprus       Czech R.       Denmark    Estonia   Finland   France    Germany    Ireland
Baseline             .178∗∗∗   .179∗∗∗    .149∗∗∗    .193∗∗∗    .138∗∗∗       .124∗∗∗        .137∗∗∗   .179∗∗∗   .142∗∗∗   .174∗∗∗    .235∗∗∗   .241∗∗∗
                      (.003)    (.010)     (.009)     (.008)     (.019)        (.015)         (.008)    (.012)    (.010)    (.008)     (.013)    (.020)
Males                .178∗∗∗   .164∗∗∗    .150∗∗∗    .191∗∗∗    .148∗∗∗       .089∗∗∗        .131∗∗∗   .177∗∗∗   .130∗∗∗   .172∗∗∗    .241∗∗∗   .241∗∗∗
                      (.004)    (.011)     (.011)     (.010)     (.027)        (.025)         (.012)    (.019)    (.017)    (.011)     (.016)    (.027)
∆ Females              –.002    .045∗∗      –.004       .005      –.022        .065∗∗          .012       .004     .023      .004       –.024     –.002
                      (.006)    (.022)     (.018)     (.015)     (.037)        (.030)         (.016)    (.024)    (.020)    (.017)     (.021)    (.039)
Low parent ed.      .148∗∗∗    .157∗∗∗    .141∗∗∗    .188∗∗∗    .104∗∗∗       .089∗∗∗        .121∗∗∗   .097∗∗∗   .170∗∗∗   .143∗∗∗    .232∗∗∗   .200∗∗∗
                      (.005)    (.017)     (.014)     (.015)     (.023)        (.029)         (.013)    (.024)    (.012)    (.012)     (.046)    (.034)
∆ Medium par. ed.     .014∗∗     –.005      –.008      –.014       .070          .019           .014     .058∗   –.044∗∗     .001        .004      .039
                      (.007)    (.023)     (.022)     (.020)     (.043)        (.035)         (.019)    (.032)    (.018)    (.021)     (.020)    (.049)
∆ High parent ed.   .033∗∗∗     .068∗∗      –.013       .001      .129∗          .071          .005    .129∗∗∗    –.077∗   .108∗∗∗       .066     –.010
                      (.009)    (.034)     (.026)     (.021)     (.072)        (.061)         (.022)    (.035)    (.045)    (.034)     (.053)    (.049)
Private sector       .183∗∗∗   .180∗∗∗    .152∗∗∗    .190∗∗∗    .116∗∗∗       .112∗∗∗        .151∗∗∗   .185∗∗∗   .139∗∗∗   .188∗∗∗    .249∗∗∗   .270∗∗∗
                      (.004)    (.012)     (.011)     (.010)     (.024)        (.018)         (.011)    (.015)    (.016)    (.010)     (.016)    (.023)
∆ Public sector     –.036∗∗∗     –.012      –.002   –.042∗∗∗       .037          .043        –.034∗∗     –.009      .010   –.038∗∗   –.080∗∗∗   –.115∗∗∗
                      (.006)    (.024)     (.019)     (.016)     (.039)        (.036)         (.016)    (.025)    (.019)    (.018)     (.028)    (.040)
Natives              .180∗∗∗   .177∗∗∗    .149∗∗∗    .196∗∗∗    .132∗∗∗       .126∗∗∗        .137∗∗∗   .177∗∗∗   .155∗∗∗   .178∗∗∗    .239∗∗∗   .258∗∗∗
                      (.003)    (.013)     (.010)     (.009)     (.020)        (.017)         (.009)    (.013)    (.009)    (.009)     (.015)    (.023)
∆ Migrants          –.022∗∗      –.010      –.020      –.013       .061         –.033          –.020     –.028   –.103∗∗     –.030      –.048   –.086∗∗
                      (.008)    (.024)     (.029)     (.017)     (.064)        (.044)         (.021)    (.044)    (.042)    (.029)     (.039)    (.043)
Part-time            .122∗∗∗   .123∗∗∗    .182∗∗∗                 .132∗         –.005          .027      .096∗   .218∗∗∗   .159∗∗∗    .122∗∗∗   .151∗∗∗
                      (.008)    (.019)     (.024)                (.068)        (.103)         (.039)    (.053)    (.058)    (.023)     (.030)    (.031)
∆ Full-time          .057∗∗∗   .056∗∗∗      –.034                  .006          .129        .110∗∗∗      .083     –.077     .015     .113∗∗∗    .091∗∗
                      (.009)    (.021)     (.025)                (.070)        (.104)         (.040)    (.054)    (.059)    (.025)     (.032)    (.036)
                                                        ∗             ∗∗             ∗∗∗
                                                            p<0.10,        p<0.05,         p<0.01
                               Table A-4: Returns to Skills in Alternative Subgroups (continued)

Subsample              Italy     Japan      Korea     Netherl.      Norway          Poland        Slovak R.    Spain    Sweden        U.K.      U.S.
Baseline             .132∗∗∗    .184∗∗∗    .217∗∗∗    .183∗∗∗        .127∗∗∗        .191∗∗∗        .179∗∗∗    .228∗∗∗    .121∗∗∗    .225∗∗∗   .279∗∗∗
                      (.016)     (.014)     (.014)     (.011)         (.007)         (.017)         (.019)     (.017)     (.009)     (.013)    (.017)
Males                .124∗∗∗    .195∗∗∗    .240∗∗∗    .179∗∗∗        .125∗∗∗        .197∗∗∗        .178∗∗∗    .220∗∗∗    .124∗∗∗    .231∗∗∗   .284∗∗∗
                      (.022)     (.017)     (.018)     (.013)         (.010)         (.021)         (.029)     (.023)     (.013)     (.017)    (.028)
∆ Females               .026      –.032   –.062∗∗        .012           .005          –.022          –.001      .022       –.006      –.021     –.019
                      (.030)     (.028)     (.030)     (.025)         (.014)         (.034)         (.038)     (.033)     (.017)     (.025)    (.033)
Low parent ed.       .116∗∗∗    .149∗∗∗    .176∗∗∗    .166∗∗∗        .122∗∗∗        .082∗∗∗        .124∗∗∗    .216∗∗∗    .121∗∗∗    .191∗∗∗   .266∗∗∗
                      (.018)     (.026)     (.018)     (.014)         (.011)         (.025)         (.029)     (.017)     (.011)     (.032)    (.045)
∆ Medium par. ed.       .011       .032      .037        .007          –.000        .128∗∗∗          .031       –.092       .011       .015     –.043
                      (.035)     (.034)     (.038)     (.030)         (.017)         (.034)         (.039)     (.062)     (.020)     (.040)    (.054)
∆ High parent ed.      –.154       .025     .089∗∗       .050          –.026        .163∗∗∗          –.016      .080       –.014      –.002     –.031
                      (.126)     (.040)     (.044)     (.032)         (.018)         (.062)         (.083)     (.060)     (.021)     (.045)    (.054)
Private sector       .148∗∗∗    .180∗∗∗    .205∗∗∗    .187∗∗∗        .143∗∗∗        .193∗∗∗        .174∗∗∗    .199∗∗∗    .139∗∗∗    .246∗∗∗   .288∗∗∗
                      (.018)     (.015)     (.017)     (.014)         (.009)         (.023)         (.026)     (.021)     (.010)     (.016)    (.021)
∆ Public sector      –.080∗∗      –.038   –.093∗∗∗      –.025       –.041∗∗∗          –.030          .012       –.008   –.054∗∗∗   –.084∗∗∗     –.037
                      (.033)     (.032)     (.036)     (.024)         (.015)         (.034)         (.036)     (.033)     (.019)     (.025)    (.040)
Natives              .123∗∗∗                          .176∗∗∗        .119∗∗∗                                  .233∗∗∗    .128∗∗∗    .224∗∗∗   .270∗∗∗
                      (.017)                           (.012)         (.009)                                   (.016)     (.009)     (.014)    (.021)
∆ Migrants              .007                            –.016          .008                                    –.123∗      –.028       .053     .032
                      (.059)                           (.034)         (.016)                                   (.072)     (.022)     (.043)    (.039)
Part-time            .155∗∗∗      .067∗     .109      .097∗∗∗        .113∗∗∗         –.013          .044      .178∗∗∗       .021    .166∗∗∗    .152∗∗
                      (.031)     (.036)    (.078)      (.019)         (.026)        (.087)         (.101)      (.041)     (.036)     (.030)    (.059)
∆ Full-time            –.023    .117∗∗∗     .108      .086∗∗∗          .013         .203∗∗          .135        .050    .099∗∗∗       .059∗    .127∗∗
                      (.035)     (.039)    (.080)      (.022)         (.027)        (.089)         (.102)      (.044)     (.037)     (.032)    (.062)
                                                      ∗             ∗∗             ∗∗∗
                                                          p<0.10,        p<0.05,         p<0.01

Notes: Horizontal lines divide separately estimated models. Each row without a ∆ reports the coeﬃcient on numeracy for the respective
subgroup. Each row with a ∆ reports the marginal diﬀerence for the identiﬁed subgroup, estimated with an interaction term between numeracy
and the speciﬁed subgroup indicator. (The total gradient for this subgroup is the sum of the coeﬃcient of the top group and this marginal
eﬀect.) Least squares regressions weighted by sampling weights. Dependent variable: log gross hourly wage. Sample: full-time employees aged
35-54 (Canada includes part-time employees), except for bottom panel which additionally includes part-time employees. All regressions control
for gender, a quadratic polynomial in actual work experience, the respective subgroup indicator, and interactions of the covariates with the
respective subgroup indicator. Baseline: replicates Table 2. Parental education: low = neither parent attained upper secondary education;
medium = at least one parent attained upper secondary education; high = at least one parent attained tertiary education. Migrants: 1 =
workers born abroad (with at least one parent also born abroad). Full-time: 1 = working more than 30 hours per week. Numeracy score
standardized to std. dev. 1 within each country. Pooled speciﬁcation includes country ﬁxed eﬀects and gives same weight to each country.
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Data source: PIAAC.
                              Table A-5: Returns to Skills with Alternative Sets of Control Variables

Controls         Pooled    Austria   Belgium   Canada        Cyprus          Czech R.     Denmark       Estonia    Finland   France    Germany    Ireland
Baseline         .178∗∗∗   .179∗∗∗   .149∗∗∗   .193∗∗∗       .138∗∗∗          .124∗∗∗      .137∗∗∗      .179∗∗∗    .142∗∗∗   .174∗∗∗    .235∗∗∗   .241∗∗∗
                  (.003)    (.010)    (.009)    (.008)        (.019)           (.015)       (.008)       (.012)     (.010)    (.008)     (.013)    (.020)
Parental         .162∗∗∗   .164∗∗∗   .135∗∗∗   .182∗∗∗       .127∗∗∗          .115∗∗∗      .129∗∗∗      .156∗∗∗    .139∗∗∗   .155∗∗∗    .225∗∗∗   .220∗∗∗
education [3]     (.003)    (.011)    (.010)    (.008)        (.019)           (.016)       (.008)       (.013)     (.011)    (.010)     (.014)    (.022)
Migrant [1]      .175∗∗∗   .172∗∗∗   .147∗∗∗   .192∗∗∗       .137∗∗∗          .123∗∗∗      .134∗∗∗      .175∗∗∗    .140∗∗∗   .175∗∗∗    .231∗∗∗   .242∗∗∗
                  (.003)    (.011)    (.009)    (.008)        (.019)           (.016)       (.008)       (.012)     (.010)    (.009)     (.014)    (.020)
Potential        .169∗∗∗   .175∗∗∗   .150∗∗∗   .191∗∗∗       .136∗∗∗          .114∗∗∗      .128∗∗∗      .153∗∗∗    .134∗∗∗   .167∗∗∗    .224∗∗∗   .238∗∗∗
experience [2]    (.003)    (.010)    (.009)    (.008)        (.019)           (.017)       (.008)       (.012)     (.010)    (.009)     (.014)    (.021)
ISCO [10]        .096∗∗∗   .095∗∗∗   .088∗∗∗   .109∗∗∗       .080∗∗∗          .055∗∗∗      .082∗∗∗      .097∗∗∗    .054∗∗∗   .086∗∗∗    .125∗∗∗   .161∗∗∗
                  (.003)    (.010)    (.010)    (.008)        (.017)           (.016)       (.008)       (.012)     (.010)    (.008)     (.013)    (.022)
ISIC [22]        .150∗∗∗   .150∗∗∗   .133∗∗∗   .145∗∗∗       .096∗∗∗          .107∗∗∗      .121∗∗∗      .160∗∗∗    .120∗∗∗   .154∗∗∗    .200∗∗∗   .194∗∗∗
                  (.003)    (.010)    (.009)    (.008)        (.018)           (.015)       (.008)       (.013)     (.010)    (.008)     (.013)    (.022)
Educational      .103∗∗∗   .114∗∗∗   .085∗∗∗   .127∗∗∗       .062∗∗∗          .088∗∗∗      .084∗∗∗      .118∗∗∗    .075∗∗∗   .094∗∗∗    .144∗∗∗   .134∗∗∗
attainment [6]    (.003)    (.011)    (.010)    (.009)        (.019)           (.020)       (.008)       (.014)     (.011)    (.009)     (.014)    (.024)
Controls                     Italy    Japan     Korea        Netherl.        Norway        Poland      Slovak R.    Spain    Sweden       U.K.      U.S.
Baseline                   .132∗∗∗   .184∗∗∗   .217∗∗∗       .183∗∗∗          .127∗∗∗      .191∗∗∗      .179∗∗∗    .228∗∗∗   .121∗∗∗    .225∗∗∗   .279∗∗∗
                            (.016)    (.014)    (.014)        (.011)           (.007)       (.017)       (.019)     (.017)    (.009)     (.013)    (.017)
Parental                   .112∗∗∗   .170∗∗∗   .195∗∗∗       .176∗∗∗          .114∗∗∗      .170∗∗∗      .140∗∗∗    .210∗∗∗   .120∗∗∗    .198∗∗∗   .236∗∗∗
education [3]               (.017)    (.014)    (.015)        (.012)           (.008)       (.017)       (.019)     (.017)    (.008)     (.016)    (.019)
Migrant [1]                .123∗∗∗   .184∗∗∗   .217∗∗∗       .175∗∗∗          .122∗∗∗      .191∗∗∗      .179∗∗∗    .216∗∗∗   .119∗∗∗    .229∗∗∗   .278∗∗∗
                            (.017)    (.014)    (.014)        (.012)           (.008)       (.017)       (.019)     (.018)    (.009)     (.013)    (.018)
Potential                  .129∗∗∗   .184∗∗∗   .198∗∗∗       .179∗∗∗          .125∗∗∗      .173∗∗∗      .158∗∗∗    .212∗∗∗   .124∗∗∗    .209∗∗∗   .269∗∗∗
experience [2]              (.017)    (.014)    (.016)        (.012)           (.008)       (.017)       (.019)     (.018)    (.009)     (.014)    (.018)
ISCO [10]                  .066∗∗∗   .118∗∗∗   .113∗∗∗       .100∗∗∗          .075∗∗∗      .088∗∗∗      .099∗∗∗    .115∗∗∗   .061∗∗∗    .129∗∗∗   .158∗∗∗
                            (.016)    (.014)    (.015)        (.012)           (.008)       (.015)       (.018)     (.017)    (.008)     (.013)    (.018)
ISIC [22]                  .100∗∗∗   .158∗∗∗   .170∗∗∗       .158∗∗∗          .106∗∗∗      .155∗∗∗      .152∗∗∗    .152∗∗∗   .102∗∗∗    .166∗∗∗   .234∗∗∗
                            (.016)    (.014)    (.015)        (.012)           (.007)       (.017)       (.017)     (.017)    (.008)     (.013)    (.017)
Educational                .071∗∗∗   .111∗∗∗   .092∗∗∗       .105∗∗∗          .073∗∗∗      .083∗∗∗      .101∗∗∗    .098∗∗∗   .086∗∗∗    .158∗∗∗   .149∗∗∗
attainment [6]              (.016)    (.015)    (.015)        (.012)           (.008)       (.015)       (.018)     (.018)    (.010)     (.015)    (.020)
                                                         ∗              ∗∗              ∗∗∗
                                                             p<0.10,         p<0.05,          p<0.01

Notes: Each cell reports the coeﬃcient on numeracy skills from a separate regression. Least squares regressions weighted by sampling weights.
Dependent variable: log gross hourly wage. Sample: full-time employees aged 35-54 (Canada includes part-time employees). All regressions
control for gender, a quadratic polynomial in actual work experience (unless otherwise noted), and respective additional control variables as
indicated in ﬁrst column. Numbers in square brackets report the number of dummy variables included for the respective measure. Baseline:
replicates Table 2. Parental education: adds controls for low/medium/high parental education (see Table A-4). Migrant: adds control for
indicator variable for ﬁrst-generation migrants. Potential experience: replaces the quadratic polynomial in actual work experience by a quadratic
polynomial in potential work experience (age minus years of schooling minus 6). ISCO: adds controls for one-digit occupation categories. ISIC:
adds controls for one-digit industry categories. Educational attainment: adds controls for school attainment, measured by 6 ISCED dummies.
Numeracy score standardized to std. dev. 1 within each country. Pooled speciﬁcation includes country ﬁxed eﬀects and gives same weight to
each country. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Data source: PIAAC.
                    Table A-6: Extended Model with Part-Time Workers and Additional Control Variables

                 Pooled    Austria    Belgium    Canada         Cyprus          Czech R.     Denmark       Estonia    Finland     France    Germany    Ireland
Numeracy        .150∗∗∗    .145∗∗∗     .137∗∗∗    .179∗∗∗        .113∗∗∗         .110∗∗∗      .112∗∗∗       .150∗∗∗   .137∗∗∗    .157∗∗∗     .188∗∗∗    .194∗∗∗
                 (.003)     (.010)      (.009)     (.008)         (.019)          (.017)       (.009)        (.013)    (.010)     (.010)      (.015)     (.019)
Experience      .022∗∗∗       .006    .027∗∗∗     .021∗∗∗         .020∗∗          .017∗∗         .004       .030∗∗∗   .016∗∗∗    .022∗∗∗        .004   .033∗∗∗
                 (.001)     (.007)      (.006)     (.004)         (.010)          (.008)       (.004)        (.009)    (.005)     (.005)      (.007)     (.009)
Experience2     –.036∗∗∗     –.007    –.041∗∗∗   –.031∗∗∗          –.027         –.039∗∗        –.005      –.075∗∗∗   –.031∗∗∗   –.030∗∗∗       .003   –.051∗∗
                 (.003)     (.013)      (.012)     (.008)         (.021)          (.020)       (.008)        (.020)    (.012)     (.010)      (.016)     (.020)
Female          –.157∗∗∗   –.111∗∗∗      –.026   –.112∗∗∗       –.236∗∗∗        –.199∗∗∗     –.089∗∗∗      –.381∗∗∗   –.157∗∗∗   –.098∗∗∗   –.096∗∗∗       .005
                 (.005)     (.023)      (.017)     (.015)         (.034)          (.034)       (.014)        (.025)    (.016)     (.018)      (.027)     (.031)
Med. par. ed.   .079∗∗∗    .081∗∗∗       .032∗     .044∗∗        .172∗∗∗            .048         .009       .118∗∗∗     .021     .047∗∗∗        .013     .078∗∗
                 (.006)     (.021)      (.019)     (.019)         (.042)          (.046)       (.016)        (.029)    (.017)     (.018)      (.040)     (.034)
High par. ed.   .174∗∗∗    .165∗∗∗     .145∗∗∗    .102∗∗∗        .307∗∗∗          .156∗∗      .066∗∗∗       .206∗∗∗   .106∗∗∗    .160∗∗∗       .089∗    .230∗∗∗
                 (.007)     (.030)      (.023)     (.020)         (.059)          (.064)       (.019)        (.034)    (.027)     (.028)      (.043)     (.039)
Migrant         –.052∗∗∗    –.055∗       –.049      –.019       –.330∗∗∗           –.074     –.083∗∗∗      –.183∗∗∗     –.051      .020        –.063   –.131∗∗∗
                 (.009)     (.032)      (.036)     (.019)         (.063)          (.109)       (.021)        (.037)    (.048)     (.031)      (.040)     (.041)
Full-time       –.031∗∗∗   .078∗∗∗    –.066∗∗∗                  –.347∗∗∗           –.076      –.066∗∗      –.142∗∗      .045     –.069∗∗     .157∗∗∗      .069∗
                 (.009)     (.024)      (.025)                    (.074)          (.099)       (.032)        (.063)    (.046)     (.030)      (.034)     (.038)
R2                .206        .247        .232      .233            .213            .205         .168          .265      .258       .248        .239       .247
Observations     37935       1568        1431       7331           1024            1071         2045          1779      1521       1668        1583       1340
                             Italy      Japan      Korea        Netherl.        Norway        Poland      Slovak R.    Spain     Sweden        U.K.        U.S.
Numeracy                   .104∗∗∗     .155∗∗∗    .180∗∗∗        .144∗∗∗         .111∗∗∗      .149∗∗∗       .133∗∗∗   .197∗∗∗    .106∗∗∗     .185∗∗∗    .229∗∗∗
                            (.015)      (.013)     (.016)         (.011)          (.008)       (.019)        (.019)    (.017)     (.009)      (.016)     (.019)
Experience                  .016∗∗     .017∗∗∗    .034∗∗∗        .024∗∗∗         .020∗∗∗      .044∗∗∗         .015    .020∗∗∗    .017∗∗∗       .014∗       .002
                            (.006)      (.006)     (.006)         (.006)          (.005)       (.008)        (.011)    (.007)     (.005)      (.007)     (.006)
Experience2                  –.012       –.004   –.060∗∗∗       –.041∗∗∗        –.041∗∗∗     –.086∗∗∗         –.029    –.029∗    –.034∗∗∗      –.022       .002
                            (.016)      (.016)     (.018)         (.013)          (.010)       (.020)        (.025)    (.016)     (.010)      (.016)     (.012)
Female                     –.101∗∗∗   –.351∗∗∗   –.427∗∗∗          .002         –.118∗∗∗     –.100∗∗∗      –.247∗∗∗   –.055∗∗    –.088∗∗∗   –.101∗∗∗   –.176∗∗∗
                            (.026)      (.029)     (.030)         (.023)          (.014)       (.034)        (.029)    (.026)     (.014)      (.030)     (.031)
Med. par. ed.              .145∗∗∗     .136∗∗∗    .151∗∗∗        .074∗∗∗          .042∗∗      .148∗∗∗       .141∗∗∗   .208∗∗∗       .030       .056∗    .189∗∗∗
                            (.030)      (.028)     (.035)         (.022)          (.017)       (.036)        (.035)    (.042)     (.018)      (.031)     (.049)
High par. ed.              .397∗∗∗     .237∗∗∗    .226∗∗∗        .155∗∗∗         .080∗∗∗      .408∗∗∗       .468∗∗∗   .165∗∗∗    .049∗∗∗     .199∗∗∗    .298∗∗∗
                            (.096)      (.034)     (.045)         (.026)          (.019)       (.059)        (.063)    (.042)     (.017)      (.041)     (.053)
Migrant                    –.225∗∗∗                                –.057          –.040∗                              –.115∗∗      –.011        .030       .004
                            (.044)                                (.037)          (.023)                               (.050)     (.021)      (.047)     (.048)
Full-time                  –.210∗∗∗   .158∗∗∗    –.769∗∗∗        .116∗∗∗            .022     –.458∗∗∗       –.108      –.080∗       .013     .215∗∗∗    .286∗∗∗
                            (.038)     (.040)     (.069)          (.025)          (.025)      (.083)       (.117)      (.043)     (.035)      (.040)     (.031)
R2                            .235      .386       .358             .229            .232       .267          .207        .236       .212        .272       .330
Observations                 1207       1510       1608            1510            1700         859         1261        1335       1355        1990       1227
                                                            ∗              ∗∗              ∗∗∗
                                                                p<0.10,         p<0.05,          p<0.01

Notes: Least squares regressions weighted by sampling weights. Dependent variable: log gross hourly wage. Sample: employees aged 35-54.
Numeracy score standardized to std. dev. 1 within each country. Experience2 divided by 1000. See Table A-4 for variable deﬁnitions of
parental education categories, migrant, and full-time work status. Pooled speciﬁcation includes country ﬁxed eﬀects and gives same weight to
each country; R2 refers to within-country R2 . Robust standard errors in parentheses. Data source: PIAAC.
                                    Table A-7: Returns to Skills for Alternative Earnings Measures

Log wage            Pooled    Austria†   Belgium   Canada†      Cyprus       Czech R.       Denmark    Estonia     Finland   France     Germany    Ireland
Hourly (baseline)   .170∗∗∗   .179∗∗∗    .149∗∗∗   .193∗∗∗      .138∗∗∗       .124∗∗∗        .137∗∗∗   .179∗∗∗     .142∗∗∗   .174∗∗∗     .235∗∗∗   .241∗∗∗
                     (.003)    (.010)     (.009)    (.008)       (.019)        (.015)         (.008)    (.012)      (.010)    (.008)      (.013)    (.020)
Hourly deciles      .164∗∗∗   .179∗∗∗    .149∗∗∗   .193∗∗∗      .140∗∗∗       .097∗∗∗        .146∗∗∗   .174∗∗∗     .144∗∗∗   .167∗∗∗     .243∗∗∗   .216∗∗∗
                     (.003)    (.010)     (.009)    (.008)       (.018)        (.017)         (.009)    (.012)      (.009)    (.008)      (.013)    (.014)
Hourly+bonus        .176∗∗∗              .151∗∗∗                .139∗∗∗       .129∗∗∗        .136∗∗∗   .179∗∗∗     .145∗∗∗   .180∗∗∗     .243∗∗∗   .249∗∗∗
                     (.003)               (.009)                 (.019)        (.017)         (.009)    (.012)      (.010)    (.009)      (.014)    (.020)
Monthly             .172∗∗∗              .166∗∗∗                .133∗∗∗       .128∗∗∗        .164∗∗∗   .175∗∗∗     .149∗∗∗   .202∗∗∗     .266∗∗∗   .244∗∗∗
                     (.003)               (.009)                 (.018)        (.015)         (.011)    (.013)      (.011)    (.009)      (.016)    (.020)
Monthly+bonus       .178∗∗∗              .170∗∗∗                .134∗∗∗       .126∗∗∗        .163∗∗∗   .177∗∗∗     .155∗∗∗   .211∗∗∗     .268∗∗∗   .251∗∗∗
                     (.004)               (.010)                 (.018)        (.015)         (.011)    (.013)      (.009)    (.010)      (.017)    (.020)
Monthly+bonus       .177∗∗∗   .196∗∗∗    .164∗∗∗   .215∗∗∗      .134∗∗∗       .109∗∗∗        .166∗∗∗   .171∗∗∗     .163∗∗∗   .203∗∗∗     .275∗∗∗   .257∗∗∗
incl. self-emp.      (.004)    (.014)     (.012)    (.011)       (.019)        (.017)         (.013)    (.015)      (.014)    (.011)      (.018)    (.032)
Log wage                        Italy     Japan     Korea      Netherl.       Norway         Poland    Slovak R.    Spain    Sweden†      U.K.       U.S.
Hourly (baseline)             .132∗∗∗    .184∗∗∗   .217∗∗∗     .183∗∗∗        .127∗∗∗        .191∗∗∗    .179∗∗∗    .228∗∗∗    .121∗∗∗   .225∗∗∗    .279∗∗∗
                               (.016)     (.014)    (.014)      (.011)         (.007)         (.017)     (.019)     (.017)     (.009)    (.013)     (.017)
Hourly deciles                .122∗∗∗    .182∗∗∗   .205∗∗∗     .174∗∗∗        .133∗∗∗        .192∗∗∗    .169∗∗∗    .222∗∗∗    .121∗∗∗   .206∗∗∗    .258∗∗∗
                               (.016)     (.013)    (.014)      (.011)         (.007)         (.017)     (.017)     (.015)     (.009)    (.013)     (.021)
Hourly+bonus                  .144∗∗∗    .195∗∗∗   .226∗∗∗     .190∗∗∗        .134∗∗∗        .193∗∗∗    .192∗∗∗    .243∗∗∗              .230∗∗∗    .285∗∗∗
                               (.018)     (.014)    (.015)      (.012)         (.008)         (.017)     (.020)     (.017)               (.013)     (.018)
Monthly                       .123∗∗∗    .180∗∗∗   .166∗∗∗     .193∗∗∗        .151∗∗∗        .173∗∗∗    .182∗∗∗    .203∗∗∗              .227∗∗∗    .315∗∗∗
                               (.017)     (.013)    (.013)      (.012)         (.010)         (.017)     (.020)     (.016)               (.014)     (.018)
Monthly+bonus                 .140∗∗∗    .190∗∗∗   .181∗∗∗     .198∗∗∗        .154∗∗∗        .180∗∗∗    .195∗∗∗    .218∗∗∗              .225∗∗∗    .321∗∗∗
                               (.019)     (.014)    (.013)      (.013)         (.010)         (.017)     (.020)     (.016)               (.016)     (.019)
Monthly+bonus                 .145∗∗∗    .184∗∗∗   .187∗∗∗     .189∗∗∗        .161∗∗∗        .195∗∗∗    .177∗∗∗    .204∗∗∗   .127∗∗∗    .230∗∗∗    .306∗∗∗
incl. self-emp.                (.020)     (.014)    (.016)      (.013)         (.011)         (.020)     (.022)     (.016)    (.012)     (.021)     (.019)
                                                        ∗              ∗∗             ∗∗∗
                                                             p<0.10,        p<0.05,         p<0.01

Notes: Each cell reports the coeﬃcient on numeracy skills from a separate regression. Least squares regressions weighted by sampling weights.
Dependent variable: log gross earnings, diﬀerent measures as indicated in ﬁrst column. Hourly (baseline): log gross hourly wage excluding
bonuses (measured continuously, replicates Table 2). Hourly deciles: log gross hourly wage measured as decile medians. Hourly+bonuses: log
gross hourly wage including bonuses. Monthly: log gross monthly wage excluding bonuses. Monthly+bonuses: log gross monthly wage including
bonuses. Monthly+bonuses incl. self-employed: log gross monthly wage including bonuses for sample including self-employed. Sample: full-time
employees aged 35-54 (Canada includes part-time employees). All regressions control for gender and a quadratic polynomial in actual work
experience. Numeracy score standardized to std. dev. 1 within each country. Pooled speciﬁcation includes country ﬁxed eﬀects and gives
same weight to each country. All pooled models exclude Austria, Canada, Germany, Sweden, and U.S., where continuous earnings data are
not available in the Public Use File that pools all countries. Robust standard errors in parentheses. † Models in Austria, Canada, and Sweden
refer to earnings measured as decile medians. Data source: PIAAC.
                                           Figure 1: Returns to Skills around the World




                     .3           .25
        Returns to numeracy skills
    .05    .1     .150   .2

                                           G la .
                                               m d
                                               Sp ny
                                                 U n
                                              Ko .K.
                                              an a
                                             Po ada
                                         et a d
                                          ov la n
                                                R s
                                                     .
                                                to a
                                             Po nia
                                             Fr led
                                               lg e
                                             Fi ium
                                             C and

                                                m s
                                                     k
                                        C No Italy
                                                     y
                                                ed p.
                                                   en
                                             Ire .S




                                             Au ep
                                            ak nd




                                            en u
                                                  ar

                                            ch a
                                            er n

                                                  ai

                                            C re

                                        N J lan
                                        Sl her pa



                                            Es stri



                                            Be anc




                                            Sw Re
                                                  a




                                           D ypr


                                          ze rw
                                                 U




                                                 o


                                               nl
Notes: Coeﬃcient estimates on numeracy score (standardized to std. dev. 1 within each country) in a regression of log gross hourly wage on
numeracy, gender, and a quadratic polynomial in actual work experience, sample of full-time employees aged 35-54. Replicates baseline model
from Table 2. Data source: PIAAC.
                                                 Figure 2: Returns to Skills by Age Group




                  .2        .15
     Returns to numeracy skills
    .05          .1
                  0




                                  16−19 20−24 25−29 30−34 35−39 40−44 45−49 50−54 55−59 60−65
                                                            Age group

Notes: Coeﬃcient estimates on numeracy score (standardized to std. dev. 1 within each country) for indicated 5-year age groups in a regression
of log gross hourly wage on numeracy, gender, a quadratic polynomial in actual work experience, and country ﬁxed eﬀects, sample of full-time
employees pooling all countries. Slopes of solid lines reﬂect average change in returns by age groups (separately estimated for ages 16-34 and
35-54). Data source: PIAAC.
                                                 Figure 3: Returns to Skills in Alternative Subgroups




                  .2
    Returns to numeracy skills
    .05        .1 0    .15


                                   m s
                                        es




                                                                  .
                                                         re d.

                                                                  .



                                                           se r
                                                                 or




                                                                                            ig s
                                                                                                     s



                                                                                                                 rt− e
                                                                                                                         e
                                                ig re d


                                                               ed




                                                        ic to
                                 Fe ale




                                                                                           M ive
                                                                                                  nt



                                                                                                               Pa −tim
                                                                                                                     tim
                                              H pa t e
                                                     pa nt e




                                                              ct
                                     al




                                                     bl ec




                                                                                               ra
                                                           nt




                                                                                              at
                                   M




                                                  m en




                                                 Pu te s




                                                                                                                  ll
                                                                                            N




                                                                                                            Fu
                                               iu ar




                                                      a
                                             ed w p




                                                   iv
                                                  h



                                                Pr
                                         Lo
                                             M




Notes: Coeﬃcient estimates on numeracy score (standardized to std. dev. 1 within each country) for indicated subgroup in a regression of
log gross hourly wage on numeracy, gender, a quadratic polynomial in actual work experience, and country ﬁxed eﬀects, sample of full-time
employees aged 35-54 pooling all countries. Replicates fully interacted model from Table A-4. With the exception of gender, all subgroup
diﬀerences are statistically signiﬁcant at the 5 percent level. Data source: PIAAC.
                                                      Table 1: Descriptive Statistics

                      Pooled   Austria   Belgium   Canada    Cyprus     Czech R.   Denmark    Estonia    Finland   France    Germany   Ireland
Gross hourly wage               15.3       18.0      27.4      11.9      117.0      198.5        5.2       18.6      13.7      17.2      21.3
(national currency)             (6.1)      (6.1)    (11.9)     (6.7)     (50.8)     (62.4)      (3.3)      (6.7)     (5.6)     (7.8)    (10.3)
Wage inequality        1.11     1.07       0.85      1.25      1.26       0.96       0.78       1.51       0.88      0.86      1.35      1.20
Numeracy              279.0    282.1      290.4    271.9      273.8      274.2      291.9      275.1      293.5     262.7     285.4     271.9
                      (49.8)   (49.2)     (49.6)    (53.5)    (44.5)     (43.1)     (45.3)     (44.0)     (47.6)    (53.0)    (49.5)    (49.9)
Yrs schooling          13.3     12.4       13.0      13.9      13.1       13.2       13.3       12.5       13.4      11.8      14.3      15.7
                       (2.9)    (2.6)      (2.6)     (2.5)     (2.8)      (2.4)      (2.5)      (2.6)      (2.8)     (3.4)     (2.5)     (2.8)
Experience (years)     22.3     24.9       23.2      23.5      22.0       22.4       24.4       22.0       21.0      22.5      23.3      22.0
                       (7.8)    (7.4)      (7.0)     (8.0)     (7.5)      (7.4)      (7.8)      (7.2)      (7.4)     (8.0)     (7.5)     (7.7)
Female (share)         0.44     0.34       0.39      0.49      0.46       0.50       0.49       0.56       0.51      0.44      0.39      0.41
Observations          34447     1115       1220      7178       938       1066       1875       1767       1478      1715      1296      1031
                                Italy     Japan    Korea     Netherl.   Norway      Poland   Slovak R.    Spain    Sweden      U.K.      U.S.
Gross hourly wage               11.7       1.9†     13.0†      19.7      235.8       16.4        4.4       10.4     172.2      14.3      24.3
(national currency)             (5.5)      (1.1)     (8.7)     (7.7)     (75.2)      (9.2)      (2.7)      (5.2)    (49.4)     (7.6)    (15.0)
Wage inequality                 1.02       1.31      1.50      1.06       0.80       1.25       1.22       1.21      0.69      1.20      1.49
Numeracy                       256.1      300.2    265.9      292.7      294.4      261.9      286.6      260.3     288.0     274.0     266.0
                               (47.7)     (42.1)    (43.5)    (47.0)     (48.9)     (46.8)     (40.3)     (46.7)    (50.6)    (51.9)    (54.7)
Yrs schooling                   11.1       13.6      13.4      14.0       14.9       13.3       13.6       12.5      12.8      13.2      14.3
                                (3.6)      (2.4)     (3.0)     (2.5)      (2.3)      (2.9)      (2.5)      (3.5)     (2.4)     (2.3)     (2.9)
Experience (years)              20.8       21.3      16.2      22.9       22.2       20.7       22.4       20.5      22.4      24.5      24.0
                                (8.4)      (7.0)     (7.9)     (7.3)      (7.4)      (7.7)      (7.0)      (8.0)     (7.7)     (7.4)     (8.1)
Female (share)                  0.36       0.35      0.40      0.27       0.44       0.47       0.51       0.41      0.49      0.39      0.50
Observations                    1018       1322      1441      1013       1520        816       1198       1191      1316      1786      1105


Notes: Means, standard deviations (in parentheses), and numbers of observations for selected variables by country. Sample: full-time employees
aged 35-54 (Canada includes part-time employees). Full-time workers are deﬁned as those working at least 30 hours per week (except for Austria,
where classiﬁcation is based on respondents’ reports of whether they work full-time). Wage inequality: log wage diﬀerential between 90th and
10th percentile of wage distribution. Pooled speciﬁcation gives same weight to each country. † wages divided by 1000. Data source: PIAAC.
                                                Table 2: Returns to Skills around the World

                Pooled    Austria    Belgium    Canada         Cyprus      Czech R.       Denmark        Estonia    Finland     France    Germany    Ireland
Numeracy       .178∗∗∗    .179∗∗∗     .149∗∗∗    .193∗∗∗       .138∗∗∗      .124∗∗∗        .137∗∗∗        .179∗∗∗   .142∗∗∗     .174∗∗∗    .235∗∗∗   .241∗∗∗
                (.003)     (.010)      (.009)     (.008)        (.019)       (.015)         (.008)         (.012)    (.010)      (.008)     (.013)    (.020)
Experience     .023∗∗∗      .009       .016∗∗    .020∗∗∗       .033∗∗∗       .016∗∗          .001         .028∗∗∗   .015∗∗∗     .021∗∗∗       .003    .028∗∗
                (.002)     (.007)      (.006)     (.004)        (.008)       (.008)         (.004)         (.009)    (.006)      (.005)     (.008)    (.012)
Experience2    –.041∗∗∗     –.012      –.024∗   –.030∗∗∗       –.054∗∗∗     –.039∗∗          –.000       –.079∗∗∗   –.032∗∗    –.030∗∗∗       .008     –.043
                (.003)     (.015)      (.014)     (.009)        (.018)       (.019)         (.008)         (.021)    (.013)      (.011)     (.018)    (.027)
Female         –.150∗∗∗   –.136∗∗∗      –.020   –.115∗∗∗       –.199∗∗∗    –.213∗∗∗       –.088∗∗∗       –.399∗∗∗   –.170∗∗∗   –.092∗∗∗   –.105∗∗∗      .031
                (.005)     (.024)      (.018)     (.015)        (.036)       (.035)         (.014)         (.024)    (.017)      (.016)     (.026)    (.034)
R2               .209        .260        .202      .226          .154         .207            .185           .259      .255       .239        .258      .211
Observations    34447       1115        1220       7178           938         1066           1875           1767      1478        1715       1296      1031
                            Italy      Japan      Korea        Netherl.    Norway          Poland       Slovak R.    Spain     Sweden        U.K.      U.S.
Numeracy                  .132∗∗∗     .184∗∗∗    .217∗∗∗       .183∗∗∗      .127∗∗∗        .191∗∗∗        .179∗∗∗   .228∗∗∗     .121∗∗∗    .225∗∗∗   .279∗∗∗
                           (.016)      (.014)     (.014)        (.011)       (.007)         (.017)         (.019)    (.017)      (.009)     (.013)    (.017)
Experience                  .011       .018∗∗    .033∗∗∗       .019∗∗∗      .021∗∗∗        .046∗∗∗          .011    .024∗∗∗     .017∗∗∗       .000    .018∗∗
                           (.008)      (.007)     (.006)        (.007)       (.005)         (.008)         (.012)    (.008)      (.005)     (.009)    (.009)
Experience2                 –.005       –.012   –.056∗∗∗       –.036∗∗     –.045∗∗∗       –.095∗∗∗          –.030   –.037∗∗    –.032∗∗∗      –.002   –.035∗∗
                           (.019)      (.018)     (.016)        (.015)       (.011)         (.020)         (.027)    (.017)      (.010)     (.018)    (.018)
Female                    –.121∗∗∗   –.329∗∗∗   –.384∗∗∗         .013      –.119∗∗∗       –.122∗∗∗       –.250∗∗∗     –.023    –.090∗∗∗   –.081∗∗∗   –.176∗∗∗
                           (.028)      (.027)     (.030)        (.024)       (.014)         (.033)         (.030)    (.027)      (.014)     (.026)    (.032)
R2                          .162         .309      .343          .218         .220            .201           .169      .214       .217        .241      .308
Observations                1018        1322       1441          1013         1520            816           1198      1191        1316       1786      1105
                                                           ∗              ∗∗             ∗∗∗
                                                               p<0.10,         p<0.05,         p<0.01

Notes: Least squares regressions weighted by sampling weights. Dependent variable: log gross hourly wage. Sample: full-time employees aged
35-54 (Canada includes part-time employees). Numeracy score standardized to std. dev. 1 within each country. Experience2 divided by 1000.
Pooled speciﬁcation includes country ﬁxed eﬀects and gives same weight to each country; R2 refers to within-country R2 . Robust standard
errors in parentheses. Data source: PIAAC.
                                             Table 3: The Age Pattern of Returns to Skills

               Pooled    Austria   Belgium    Canada         Cyprus          Czech R.     Denmark       Estonia    Finland   France    Germany    Ireland
Numeracy       .140∗∗∗   .107∗∗∗   .116∗∗∗     .155∗∗∗       .111∗∗∗          .121∗∗∗      .088∗∗∗      .170∗∗∗    .105∗∗∗   .141∗∗∗    .189∗∗∗   .136∗∗∗
                (.004)    (.017)    (.012)      (.014)        (.018)           (.024)       (.012)       (.017)     (.011)    (.013)     (.021)    (.017)
× Prime Age    .042∗∗∗   .074∗∗∗    .032∗∗      .039∗∗         .032              .008      .050∗∗∗        .013     .040∗∗∗    .034∗∗      .045∗   .105∗∗∗
                (.005)    (.020)    (.015)      (.016)        (.026)           (.028)       (.015)       (.021)     (.015)    (.015)     (.025)    (.026)
× Exit Age     .038∗∗∗   .131∗∗∗   .088∗∗∗      .040∗∗        .087∗∗             .007      .043∗∗∗        –.041      .028     .053∗∗      –.015   .180∗∗∗
                (.007)    (.033)    (.028)      (.020)        (.037)           (.046)       (.015)       (.027)     (.019)    (.021)     (.040)    (.061)
Prime Age      .030∗∗∗    .062∗∗   .076∗∗∗     .065∗∗∗         .042             –.046      .084∗∗∗      –.094∗∗∗   .102∗∗∗   .054∗∗∗       .052    .071∗∗
                (.007)    (.027)    (.022)      (.019)        (.036)           (.042)       (.018)       (.035)     (.022)    (.020)     (.035)    (.036)
Exit Age       .034∗∗∗   .186∗∗∗   .166∗∗∗       –.003         .069              .071      .089∗∗∗       –.097∗    .130∗∗∗   .099∗∗∗     .103∗∗     .095
                (.010)    (.047)    (.042)      (.027)        (.065)           (.072)       (.025)       (.051)     (.034)    (.031)     (.052)    (.062)
R2               .197      .261       .244        .216         .199              .179         .193         .241      .237       .260       .237     .246
Observations    61384      1799      2026       12396          1769             2053         3593         3259       2705      2897       2211      1871
                           Italy    Japan       Korea        Netherl.        Norway        Poland      Slovak R.    Spain    Sweden       U.K.      U.S.
Numeracy                 .094∗∗∗   .128∗∗∗     .176∗∗∗       .131∗∗∗          .104∗∗∗      .184∗∗∗      .183∗∗∗    .196∗∗∗   .046∗∗∗    .188∗∗∗   .226∗∗∗
                          (.021)    (.017)      (.021)        (.019)           (.013)       (.022)       (.025)     (.022)    (.011)     (.018)    (.018)
× Prime Age                .037     .055∗∗      .053∗∗        .054∗∗            .026∗        .010         –.002      .035    .076∗∗∗      .039∗    .057∗∗
                          (.027)    (.022)      (.025)        (.022)           (.015)       (.028)       (.031)     (.027)    (.015)     (.022)    (.024)
× Exit Age               .123∗∗∗     .054∗        .058        .057∗∗             .012        –.024       .090∗∗      .011    .073∗∗∗       .010     .018
                          (.039)    (.031)      (.044)        (.024)           (.022)       (.043)       (.038)     (.036)    (.018)     (.029)    (.034)
Prime Age                .099∗∗∗      .024    –.061∗∗        .177∗∗∗          .071∗∗∗     –.133∗∗∗        –.060      .054       .030    .129∗∗∗   .148∗∗∗
                          (.033)    (.028)      (.028)        (.031)           (.020)       (.040)       (.042)     (.033)    (.020)     (.032)    (.034)
Exit Age                  .141∗∗     –.052    –.210∗∗∗       .254∗∗∗          .108∗∗∗      –.157∗∗        –.016      .050      .047∗       .034   .228∗∗∗
                          (.057)    (.047)      (.058)        (.044)           (.030)       (.066)       (.059)     (.056)    (.028)     (.051)    (.054)
R2                         .195       .298        .276         .265              .234         .176         .171      .234       .210       .243     .296
Observations               1534      2405        2490          1777             2596         2158         2105       1962      2381       3200      2143
                                                         ∗              ∗∗              ∗∗∗
                                                             p<0.10,         p<0.05,          p<0.01

Notes: Least squares regressions weighted by sampling weights. Dependent variable: log gross hourly wage. Sample: full-time employees aged
25-65 (Canada includes part-time employees). Prime age: 35-54 years. Exit age: 55-65 years. Coeﬃcient on numeracy reﬂects returns to
numeracy skills for baseline category, i.e., entry-age workers (25-34 years). All regressions control for gender and a quadratic polynomial in
actual work experience. Numeracy score standardized to std. dev. 1 within each country. Pooled speciﬁcation includes country ﬁxed eﬀects
and gives same weight to each country; R2 refers to within-country R2 . Robust standard errors in parentheses. Data source: PIAAC.
                                            Table 4: Skills, Years of Schooling, and Earnings

                 Pooled    Austria    Belgium    Canada         Cyprus      Czech R.       Denmark        Estonia    Finland     France    Germany    Ireland
Numeracy        .101∗∗∗    .120∗∗∗    .089∗∗∗     .129∗∗∗        .057∗∗∗     .074∗∗∗        .085∗∗∗        .116∗∗∗   .079∗∗∗     .094∗∗∗    .148∗∗∗   .151∗∗∗
                 (.003)     (.010)     (.010)      (.008)         (.018)      (.020)         (.009)         (.014)    (.011)      (.009)     (.014)    (.021)
Yrs schooling   .059∗∗∗    .058∗∗∗    .045∗∗∗     .057∗∗∗        .082∗∗∗     .045∗∗∗        .043∗∗∗        .055∗∗∗   .057∗∗∗     .041∗∗∗    .064∗∗∗   .060∗∗∗
                 (.001)     (.004)     (.004)      (.003)         (.007)      (.010)         (.003)         (.005)    (.003)      (.003)     (.005)    (.007)
Experience      .022∗∗∗     .016∗∗      .011∗     .020∗∗∗         .020∗∗       .015∗          .007∗        .024∗∗∗   .014∗∗∗     .018∗∗∗      .009    .030∗∗∗
                 (.001)     (.007)     (.006)      (.004)         (.008)      (.008)         (.004)         (.009)    (.005)      (.005)     (.008)    (.011)
Experience2     –.032∗∗∗     –.019      –.006    –.024∗∗∗          –.002       –.029          –.006       –.069∗∗∗     –.014      –.018∗      –.004     –.040
                 (.003)     (.013)     (.013)      (.008)         (.019)      (.019)         (.008)         (.020)    (.012)      (.010)     (.017)    (.024)
Female          –.176∗∗∗   –.119∗∗∗   –.050∗∗∗   –.131∗∗∗       –.193∗∗∗    –.196∗∗∗       –.116∗∗∗       –.442∗∗∗   –.205∗∗∗   –.118∗∗∗   –.125∗∗∗     –.029
                 (.005)     (.022)     (.017)      (.014)         (.034)      (.033)         (.013)         (.024)    (.015)      (.015)     (.024)    (.033)
R2                .308       .370        .286        .303           .315        .262           .282           .310      .414       .331        .338      .286
Observations     34159       1115       1219        7155            938        1065           1875           1767      1478        1707       1296      1031
                             Italy     Japan       Korea        Netherl.    Norway          Poland       Slovak R.    Spain     Sweden        U.K.       U.S.
Numeracy                   .057∗∗∗    .114∗∗∗     .102∗∗∗        .111∗∗∗     .082∗∗∗        .071∗∗∗        .086∗∗∗   .104∗∗∗     .089∗∗∗    .173∗∗∗   .138∗∗∗
                            (.016)     (.015)      (.015)         (.012)      (.008)         (.015)         (.018)    (.018)      (.010)     (.016)    (.022)
Yrs schooling              .046∗∗∗    .067∗∗∗     .076∗∗∗        .063∗∗∗     .042∗∗∗        .090∗∗∗        .084∗∗∗   .066∗∗∗     .026∗∗∗    .061∗∗∗   .081∗∗∗
                            (.004)     (.006)      (.005)         (.006)      (.003)         (.006)         (.006)    (.004)      (.004)     (.007)    (.007)
Experience                   .011     .022∗∗∗     .025∗∗∗        .027∗∗∗     .023∗∗∗        .027∗∗∗          .013    .021∗∗∗     .017∗∗∗      .009      .015∗
                            (.007)     (.007)      (.005)         (.006)      (.005)         (.007)         (.012)    (.007)      (.004)     (.009)    (.008)
Experience2                  .007       –.009       –.019       –.044∗∗∗    –.042∗∗∗        –.044∗∗          –.023     –.024    –.028∗∗∗      –.009    –.028∗
                            (.017)     (.018)      (.015)         (.014)      (.011)         (.017)         (.026)    (.015)      (.010)     (.019)    (.016)
Female                     –.168∗∗∗   –.308∗∗∗   –.314∗∗∗          –.022    –.137∗∗∗       –.216∗∗∗       –.282∗∗∗   –.111∗∗∗   –.109∗∗∗   –.107∗∗∗   –.228∗∗∗
                            (.026)     (.026)      (.028)         (.022)      (.014)         (.028)         (.027)    (.025)      (.014)     (.026)    (.032)
R2                           .278        .381        .438           .337        .297           .410           .323      .392       .252        .301      .420
Observations                 1018       1322        1441           1013        1519            816           1198      1190        1316       1671       983
                                                            ∗              ∗∗             ∗∗∗
                                                                p<0.10,         p<0.05,         p<0.01

Notes: Least squares regressions weighted by sampling weights. Dependent variable: log gross hourly wage. Sample: full-time employees aged
35-54 (Canada includes part-time employees). Numeracy score standardized to std. dev. 1 within each country. Experience2 divided by 1000.
Pooled speciﬁcation includes country ﬁxed eﬀects and gives same weight to each country; R2 refers to within-country R2 . Robust standard
errors in parentheses. Data source: PIAAC.
            Table 5: Returns to Skills for Alternative Skill Measures: Numeracy, Literacy, and Problem Solving

                                                (1)              (2)                  (3)             (4)       (5)       (6)        (7)
Numeracy                                     .178∗∗∗                                               .120∗∗∗   .121∗∗∗   .078∗∗∗
                                              (.003)                                                (.005)    (.005)    (.007)
Literacy                                                       .171∗∗∗                             .068∗∗∗             .076∗∗∗
                                                                (.003)                              (.005)              (.007)
Problem solving                                                                     .143∗∗∗                  .062∗∗∗   .037∗∗∗
                                                                                     (.003)                   (.005)    (.005)
Numeracy (international standardization)                                                                                           .183∗∗∗
                                                                                                                                    (.003)
R2 (within country)                            .209             .196                 .173           .215      .199      .205         .208
Countries                                       22               22                   18             22        18        18           22
Observations                                  34447            34447                24475          34447     24475     24475        34447
                                                       ∗             ∗∗             ∗∗∗
                                                           p<0.10,        p<0.05,         p<0.01

Notes: Least squares regressions pooling all countries with country ﬁxed eﬀects, weighted by sampling weights (giving same weight to each
country). Dependent variable: log gross hourly wage. Sample: full-time employees aged 35-54 (Canada includes part-time employees). All
regressions control for gender, a quadratic polynomial in actual work experience, and country ﬁxed eﬀects. Test scores standardized to std.
dev. 1 within each country, except for column (7) where numeracy score is standardized to std. dev. 1 in the entire international sample.
All models with problem solving do not include Cyprus, France, Italy, and Spain, where problem-solving skills were not tested, as well as
individuals who opted out of the problem-solving test. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Data source: PIAAC.
                          Table 6: What Accounts for Diﬀerences in Returns to Skills across Countries?

                                  (1)             (2)              (3)                (4)                 (5)       (6)          (7)            (8)
Numeracy                       .180∗∗∗         .186∗∗∗          .181∗∗∗            .181∗∗∗             .174∗∗∗   .184∗∗∗     .184∗∗∗         .089∗∗∗
                                (.007)          (.008)           (.008)             (.009)              (.008)    (.005)      (.005)          (.006)
× Union density                –.139∗∗∗                                                                          –.150∗∗∗    –.129∗∗         –.119∗∗
                                (.026)                                                                            (.042)      (.046)          (.043)
× Empl. protection                             –.040∗∗                                                           –.032∗∗∗    –.032∗∗∗        –.034∗∗∗
                                               (.016)                                                             (.011)      (.011)          (.009)
× Minimum wage                                                  .039∗∗                                             –.023       –.018           –.020
                                                                (.018)                                            (.020)      (.020)          (.019)
× PM regulation                                                                     –.030                          –.033       –.024           –.011
                                                                                   (.031)                         (.021)      (.020)          (.020)
× Public sector                                                                                        –.278∗∗     –.117      –.160∗         –.171∗∗
                                                                                                       (.110)     (.093)      (.084)          (.067)
× Skill inequality                                                                                                              .000           –.000
                                                                                                                              (.001)          (.001)
× Skill mean                                                                                                                   –.000           –.000
                                                                                                                              (.001)          (.000)
Country ﬁxed eﬀects              yes             yes              yes                yes                 yes       yes           yes            yes
Occupation × industry                                                                                                                           yes
 ﬁxed eﬀects [185]
R2 (within country)              .216            .214            .210               .213                .211       .218        .218            .408
Countries                         21              21              22                 21                  22         21          21              21
Observations                    33509           33509           34447              33509               34447      33509       33509           32798
                                                          ∗              ∗∗             ∗∗∗
                                                              p<0.10,         p<0.05,         p<0.01

Notes: Least squares regressions pooling all countries with country ﬁxed eﬀects, weighted by sampling weights (giving same weight to each country).
Dependent variable: log gross hourly wage. Sample: full-time employees aged 35-54 (Canada includes part-time employees). All regressions control for
gender, a quadratic polynomial in actual work experience, and country ﬁxed eﬀects. All variables are de-meaned. Union density: share of wage and
salary earners who are trade union members. Empl. protection: employment protection legislation (EPL), composite indicator measuring strictness of
employment protection for individual and collective dismissals. Minimum wage: binary variable indicating whether country has a statutory minimum
wage. PM regulation: composite indicator measuring product-market regulation (PMR). Public sector: share of workers employed in the public sector.
Skill inequality: numeracy score diﬀerential between 90th and 10th percentile of numeracy skill distribution. Skill mean: mean numeracy score of the
country. Number in square brackets reports the number of occupation × industry ﬁxed eﬀects. Numeracy score standardized to std. dev. 1 within
each country. Due to missing data, Cyprus is only included in columns (3) and (5). Robust standard errors (adjusted for clustering at country level) in
parentheses. Data sources: PIAAC, OECD.
