                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            MARKET-BASED LOBBYING:
                  EVIDENCE FROM ADVERTISING SPENDING IN ITALY

                                         Stefano DellaVigna
                                           Ruben Durante
                                            Brian Knight
                                          Eliana La Ferrara

                                        Working Paper 19766
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19766


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2013




We thank Tito Boeri, Daniel Diermeier, Oliver Latham, Andrew Oswald, Maria Petrova, Michele
Polo and Francesco Siliato for helpful comments and discussions. We also thank participants at the
2012 Nemmers Prize Conference, the 2012 Workshop on Media Economics (Bogotá), the 2013 AEA
conference, the 2013 SITE Conference, and seminar participants at Bocconi, CSEF Naples, Frankfurt,
Harvard, and Warwick for helpful discussion. Barbara Biasi, Elia Boe, Emanuele Colonnelli, Monica
Consorti, Simone Lenzu, Anna Martinolli, Arianna Ornaghi and Edoardo Teso provided excellent
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Stefano DellaVigna, Ruben Durante, Brian Knight, and Eliana La Ferrara. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Market-based Lobbying: Evidence from Advertising Spending in Italy
Stefano DellaVigna, Ruben Durante, Brian Knight, and Eliana La Ferrara
NBER Working Paper No. 19766
December 2013
JEL No. D73,P48

                                             ABSTRACT

An extensive literature has studied lobbying by special interest groups. We analyze a novel lobbying
channel: lobbying businessmen-politicians through business proxies. When a politician controls a
business, firms attempting to curry favors shift their spending towards the politician's business. The
politician benefits from increased revenues, and the firms hope for favorable regulation in return. We
investigate this channel in Italy where government members, including the prime minister, are not
required to divest business holdings. We examine the evolution of advertising spending by firms over
the period 1994 to 2009, during which Silvio Berlusconi was prime minister on and off three times,
while maintaining control of Italy's major private television network, Mediaset. We predict that firms
attempting to curry favor with the government shift their advertising budget towards Berlusconi's channels
when Berlusconi is in power. Indeed, we document a significant pro-Mediaset bias in the allocation
of advertising spending during Berlusconi's political tenure. This pattern is especially pronounced
for companies operating in more regulated sectors, as predicted. Using a model of supply and demand
in the advertising market, we estimate one billion euros of extra revenue to Berlusconi's group. We
also estimate the expected returns in regulation to politically motivated spenders of similar magnitude,
stressing the economic importance of this lobbying channel. These findings provide an additional rationale
for rules on conflict of interest.


Stefano DellaVigna                                  Brian Knight
University of California, Berkeley                  Brown University
Department of Economics                             Department of Economics, Box B
549 Evans Hall #3880                                64 Waterman Street
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880                             Providence, RI 02912
and NBER                                            and NBER
sdellavi@econ.berkeley.edu                          Brian_Knight@brown.edu

Ruben Durante                                       Eliana La Ferrara
Department of Economics                             Universita' Bocconi
Sciences Po                                         Dept. of Economics and IGIER
28, rue des Saints Pères                            via Roentgen 1
75007 Paris France                                  20136 Milano
and Yale University                                 Italy
Ruben.Durante@sciences-po.org                       eliana.laferrara@unibocconi.it
1       Introduction
Politicians face an inherent tension when setting policy. While they have incentives to represent
the interests of their constituents, they also face often conflicting incentives with respect to
special interest groups. An extensive literature has studied this direct lobbying relationship:
firms attempt to curry favor with politicians, via campaign contributions or other means, in
exchange for policy favors (Grossman and Helpman, 2001; Ansolabehere et al, 2003; Bertrand
et al, 2011; Querubin and Snyder, 2011; Blanes i Vidal et al., 2012).1
    An additional conflict of interest arises for politicians with business holdings. Politicians
in this situation have an interest to distort policy to benefit the firm(s) they have a stake in,
and thus reap the private benefits in the form of profits. A significant literature has focused
on this businessman-politician channel (Fisman, 2001; Cingano and Pinotti, forthcoming).
   In this paper, we consider a diﬀerent channel for the conflict of interest for politicians
with business holdings. Specifically, we study whether third parties, typically firms, attempt
to curry favor with conflicted politicians by shifting their business towards firms controlled
by a politician. The politician benefits financially from the increased business, and the third
parties hope for favorable regulation in return. We label this channel, involving lobbying
through business proxies and which has not received much attention in the literature, as
indirect lobbying.
    Figure 1 illustrates how this channel diﬀers from the channels identified in the literature.
The direct lobbying channel, mentioned above, involves firms lobbying politicians directly for
regulation. The businessman-politician channel applies to the case in which politicians are
stake-holders in a firm. These politicians reap the benefits of political decisions though the firm
revenue. The indirect lobbying channel operates through business proxies. Firms provide favors
to politicians indirectly by directing business orders to the firm controlled by the politician.
This channel, like the second channel, only applies when rules do not forbid the concentration
of political and business interests.
    To provide evidence on the business transfers behind this third channel, we consider a
particularly egregious case of concentration of business and political interests: the case of
Italy since the mid 1990s. In the Spring of 1994, Silvio Berlusconi, previously a successful
entrepreneur and owner of Italy’s main private television network, was elected prime minister.
Unlike the United States, Italy has no rules forbidding the concentration in one person of
business interest and prominent political positions, and does not have the tradition of blind
trusts for politicians with interests in companies. As such, Berlusconi retained control of his
business holdings in the media, inducing a conflict of interest with his role as prime minister.
    1
    As noted, the medium of exchange here includes, but is more general than, campaign contributions. In
Di Tella and Franceschelli (2011), for example, media firms exchange more positive coverage of government
scandals for advertising spending by the government.



                                                   1
    In this context, the indirect lobbying distortions take the form of advertising decisions. The
Italian broadcast television is dominated by two groups: the public broadcasting corporation
(RAI) and a private network, Mediaset, controlled by Berlusconi. The profitability of the three
Mediaset channels, which are free-to-air, depends on advertising revenue. The indirect lobbying
channel posits that firms attempt to curry favors with the government by shifting some of their
advertising from public channels to Berlusconi’s channels when Berlusconi is in power.
    The setting is ideally suited to identify the channel for three reasons. First, while firm
spending is often hard to observe, we have data on advertising spending at the firm-quarter
level from Nielsen. Second, over our sample period (1993 to 2009) Berlusconi’s coalition is in
and out of power three times, providing us with the necessary political variation. Third, the
absence of conflict of interest rules makes the setting a textbook example.
    While our analysis is focused on Italy, the indirect lobbying channel identified here applies
broadly, given that politicians have major business holdings in several other countries. In some
cases, the business interests are in the media, as in Italy. For example, Thaksin Shinawatra,
prime minister of Thailand between 2001 to 2006, owned the country’s largest free-to-air tele-
vision, and Sebastián Piñera, former president of Chile, owned Chile’s most influential TV
station.2 In other cases, the holdings are outside the media sector, as in the case of Nitin
Gadkari, leader of India’s opposition party BJP between 2010 and 2013 and main shareholder
of the Purti group, with interests in the energy, sugar, and alcohol sectors, among others.
    To illustrate the indirect lobbying channel in our context, we sketch a model of the adver-
tising market. We consider two types of firms, regulated and unregulated, who must decide
how to allocate their advertisements between the two networks. In addition to the economic
benefits associated with advertising, regulated firms receive a political benefit from advertising
on Berlusconi’s network when he is in power. When Berlusconi comes to power, demand for ad-
vertising on his network thus increases. This shift in demand induces an increase in the price
of advertising in Berlusconi’s channels and also a change in the composition of advertising
spending: regulated companies shift spending towards Berlusconi’s channels, while unregu-
lated firms do otherwise (given the price change). This quid-pro-quo increases the profits of
Berlusconi’s companies and lowers the profits of the competing public network.
    To test the predictions of the model, we use sector-level and firm-level data by Nielsen on
quarterly advertising expenditure by firm and media outlet between 1993 and 2009. We then
compare the advertising spending on the diﬀerent TV channels when Berlusconi is in power
versus when he is not. In this respect, we exploit the repeated switches in political balance:
Berlusconi was prime minister in 1994, between 2001 and 2006, and from 2008 to the end
of our sample. Further, to test the predictions on regulation, we conduct a survey of Italian
  2
   Additional examples include Andrej Babis, leader of Czech Republic’s second largest party and owner of
multiple newspapers and two national TV channels and, in the United States, Michael R. Bloomberg, mayor of
New York from 2002 to 2013 and main shareholder of the news conglomerate Bloomberg LP.



                                                    2
economists eliciting measures of regulation by industry, and use the responses to construct a
continuous measure of the degree of regulation in a sector.
    We first present a time-series analysis, comparing outcomes in the advertising market during
periods in which Berlusconi is in power to periods when he is not in power. Consistent with the
predictions, advertising spending on Mediaset, relative to the public network, is higher when
Berlusconi is in power. The result is clearly visible for both the second and third Berlusconi
government (the estimates for the first government are noisier given its short duration). The
result is driven by an increase in advertising prices on Mediaset and a corresponding reduction
in prices on the public network. Consistent with a relatively inelastic supply of advertising
slots, we find no changes in the quantity of advertisements on the two networks.
    Building upon this evidence, we conduct a diﬀerence-in-diﬀerence analysis, comparing more
regulated industries to less regulated industries. Consistent with the predictions of the model,
we find that regulated sectors, relative to unregulated sectors, spend more on Mediaset, relative
to the public network, when Berlusconi is in power. In contrast to the time-series evidence,
which was driven by a price response, this shift is mainly driven by a quantity response, with
regulated sectors, relative to unregulated sectors, purchasing more slots on Mediaset, relative
to the public network, when Berlusconi is in power. This eﬀect is stronger for the peak-hours
programming, which is of higher value to the networks.
    We then consider several key robustness checks on these results. Our results are robust
to the inclusion of both linear and quadratic sector-specific time trends and to the use of
a discrete (versus continuous) measure of regulation. The results are also not sensitive to
diﬀerent definitions of the television advertising market nor to the inclusion of advertising in
the printed media. A more important role is played by weighting by total advertising spending,
since the results are larger for sectors with higher spending on television advertising.
    We also test for a dynamic version of the quid-pro-quo. Our baseline analysis is based
upon a static comparison of periods in which Berlusconi is in power to periods when he is
not in power, assuming that current political state is all that matters. As an alternative, we
develop a forward-looking measure of the discounted expected future probability of Berlusconi’s
presence in government to capture the fact that firms may switch the advertising in advance of
an expected defeat (or victory) in an upcoming election. The forward-looking measure leads
to similar results, but in a horse-race with the static measure, the contemporaneous measure
captures the conflict of interest eﬀect. This is consistent with the view that political exchanges
in the context we are studying are inherently short-term.
    While these results are based on sector-level expenditures, we replicate the patterns using a
detailed firm-level data set of advertising expenditures for 800 top-spending firms. Consistently
with the above results, the conflict of interest eﬀects are larger for larger spenders, suggesting
that the quid-pro-quo may not be significant enough for firms that spend relatively less. We find
instead no systematic evidence of a mediating eﬀect of financial diﬃculties or of a diﬀerential


                                                3
eﬀect for Italian versus foreign-owned firms. Overall, our findings provide robust evidence of
the quid-pro-quo between firms and politicians.
    Finally, we exploit a key advantage of our setting. We use the simple economics of TV
advertising slots, given a fixed supply of seconds of advertising, to back out the estimated
profits accruing to Berlusconi’s company due to the quid pro quo. We estimate a profit increase
of over 1 billion euros over the nine years of Berlusconi government, accounting for 20 percent of
the market capitalization of Mediaset in 1997. In turn, this provides a measure of the expected
returns from favorable regulation for the regulated firms of 2 billion euros over nine years. The
large magnitudes indicate the first-order role played by the indirect lobbying channel.
    Our findings have several policy implications. We provide an additional rationale for rules
on conflict of interest like the ones in place in the modern US congress, with a tradition of blind
trusts for politicians with interests in companies. The traditional rationale for such separation
is to avoid self-serving legislation (the businessman-politician channel). We point out that, in
addition, the concentration of business and political interests allows for alternative forms of
lobbying–through business purchases–which are harder to monitor and regulate.
    Our research contributes to the literature on lobbying and special interest politics. This
literature, cited above, investigates firm actions, such as campaign contributions and lobbying,
designed to influence government policy. We point out that, in addition to this direct lobbying
channel, lobbying can take the form of business purchases when politician have a business
interest. Unlike the case of campaign contribution, business purchases directly enrich the
politician. Hence, this channel is a strong test for the distortions due to conflict of interest,
given that private benefits for the politician are largest. In addition, the supply and demand
structure in the advertising market allows for a straightforward estimation of the expected
value of the favors curried, which is typically diﬃcult for lobbying studies.
    Second, this paper contributes to the literature on the relevance of firms’ political connec-
tions (Fisman, 2001; Faccio, 2006; Khwaja and Mian, 2005; Knight, 2007; Coulomb and Sang-
nier, 2012; Luechinger and Moser, 2012). While we label this channel businessman-politician,
many of these papers do not involve direct ownership of firms by politicians. In several of these
papers, the response of stock returns to events is used to estimate the value of a connection.
In our case, we use instead price and quantity shifts in a market to back out the value of
regulation to the firms.
   Finally, our research also relates to the growing body of work on the relation between the
mass media and politics3 , including research more specifically focused on interactions between
advertising and politics, such as Di Tella and Franceschelli (2011), and other forms of bias in
advertising markets, such as Reuter and Zitzewitz (2006). While these studies have typically
   3
    These studies include Stromberg (2004), Groseclose and Milyo (2005), George and Waldfogel (2006), DellaV-
igna and Kaplan (2007), Larcinese et. al. (2007), Chiang and Knight (2011), Gentzkow and Shapiro (2010),
Durante and Knight (2012), and Enikolopov, et al. (2011).


                                                     4
examined the impact of the advertising market on media bias, we instead examine how political
ownership can distort competition in the advertising market.
   The remainder of the paper is as follows. In Section 2 we propose a simple model of the
advertising market. In Section 3 we describe the setting and data. In Section 4 we present the
evidence and in Section 5 we conclude.


2        Model
A large number ( ) of firms each have a continuum of potential advertisements, indexed by .
For each advertisement, the firm must decide whether to air it on the private network, owned
by Berlusconi (Mediaset), on the public network (RAI), or to not air it at all. Let  index the
two networks and let  denote Berlusconi’s network and  denote the public network. Firms,
indexed by , diﬀer in their degree of regulatory oversight, with  =  denoting regulated firms
and  =  denoting unregulated firms. Let  denote the fraction of firms that are regulated.
Finally, there are two coalitions: a Berlusconi government and a center-left government.
    Firm  receives three benefits from advertising. The first is an economic benefit  of
reaching consumers of network ; this benefit is independent of which government is in power.4
The second is a political benefit  that regulated firms receive when advertising on Mediaset.
This political benefit is positive (  0) for regulated firms when Berlusconi is in power
and is zero otherwise. There is no such benefit from advertising on the public network, and
unregulated firms receive no political benefits from placing advertisements on either network.
Finally, there is an idiosyncratic benefit   from firm  placing advertisement  on network
 This benefit can be interpreted as the quality of the match between the target audience of
the advertisement and the audience of the network and is independent across advertisements.
Firms receive only an idiosyncratic benefit of  0 from not placing an advertisement. These
idiosyncratic benefits are distributed type-I extreme value with precision  leading to a logit
structure.
   Firms pay a price  for airing an advertisement on network . These prices, as described
below, are determined by market conditions.5 In order to guarantee positive prices in equilib-
rium, we assume that the economic benefits to advertising are suﬃciently large.6
   Given all of this, the demand for placing an advertisement, expressed in shares of potential
advertising slots placed on the two networks ( and  ), for regulated () and unregulated
    4
     Empirically, we take into account the possibility that when Berlusconi is in power the popularity of his TV
channels may increase, hence the economic benefit  may increase, by controlling for the audience share of
Mediaset channels in each quarter.
   5
     We assume that prices are the same for all firms (no price discrimination) and that there are no quantity
discounts (the price paid per advertisement is
                                              independent of the number of advertisements
                                                                                             purchased).
    6                                        1                             1           
        In particular, we assume that        ln    − −
                                                                  and        ln    − −
                                                                                                  



                                                             5
( ) firms, is as follows:
                                              exp [( +  −  )]
                        =                                                                      (1)
                                  1 + exp [( +  −  )] + exp [( −  )]
                                                exp [( −  )]
                         =
                                  1 + exp [( +  −  )] + exp [( −  )]
                                              exp [( −  )]
                           =
                                  1 + exp [( −  )] + exp [( −  )]
                                              exp [( −  )]
                           =
                                  1 + exp [( −  )] + exp [( −  )]
   In terms of the supply side, we assume a perfectly inelastic supply curve: each network
has a fixed number of time slots devoted to advertising, given by  for Mediaset and  for
public, where    +  . While our results are robust to an elastic supply curve, this
assumption simplifies the analysis, and, as shown below, is consistent with the data given that
aggregate quantities are relatively stable over time.
  In equilibrium, prices equate the demand for advertisements with the supply of advertise-
ments on the two networks:
                                    [ + (1 − ) ] =                                     (2)
                                    [  + (1 − )  ] = 
With two equations and two unknown prices, we solve for the equilibrium prices ∗ () and
∗ () as a function of the political benefits to regulated firms (). When the left is in power, the
political benefits  are zero and hence inspection of (1) shows that  =  and   =   .
In this case, the equilibrium condition reduces to:
                                 exp [( − ∗ (0))]
                           £               ¤      £               ¤      = 
                     1 + exp ( − ∗ (0)) + exp ( − ∗ (0))
                                 exp [( − ∗ (0))]
                           £               ¤      £               ¤      = 
                     1 + exp ( − ∗ (0)) + exp ( − ∗ (0))
This leads to the following closed form solutions for equilibrium prices:
                                                 µ                ¶
                             ∗               1           
                            (0) =  − ln
                                                   −  − 
                                                 µ                ¶
                             ∗               1           
                            (0) =  − ln
                                                   −  − 
Prices on the network are increasing in the economic benefit of advertising on the network (
and  ), are decreasing in the supply of advertisements by the network ( and  ), and
are increasing in the overall supply of advertisements ( ). Moreover, the equilibrium price
diﬀerence ∆∗ () = ∗ () − ∗ () has a simple closed form solution for  = 0:
                                                       1
                                  ∆∗ (0) =  −  −     ln (  ) 
                                                       

                                                  6
When Berlusconi is in power, we have that   0 Given that there is now a distinction between
regulated and unregulated firms, there is no closed form solution for prices. There are, however,
simple comparative statics In particular, we have:
     Proposition 1: When Berlusconi comes to power, the price on Mediaset increases but by
less than the political benefits: 0  ∗ () − ∗ (0)   There is no change in the price on RAI:
∗ ()−∗ (0) = 0. Thus, the price diﬀerence also increases but by less than the political benefits:
0  ∆∗ () − ∆∗ (0)   Moreover, for small values of , the price increase on Mediaset can be
approximated by the product of  and : ∗ () − ∗ (0) ≈  Finally, given this, the increase
in the price diﬀerence can be approximated by the product of  and : ∆∗ () − ∆∗ (0) ≈ 
    We provide a proof in the Appendix. The intuition for the final result is that, when Berlus-
coni comes to power, the willingness to pay for an advertisement on Mediaset by regulated
firms increases by . This is only relevant for a fraction  of firms, and thus, for small values
of , the price increases by the product of these two factors, .
   So far we have considered the shares of potential advertising slots placed on the two net-
works,  , where firms have three options: advertise on Mediaset, advertise on the public
channels, or not advertise at all. Since the share of advertisements in the third group is not
observable, we derive the implied “two-option” share of advertising on Mediaset, conditional
on advertising at all.
    Proposition 2: When Berlusconi comes to power, the share of advertisements on Mediaset,
relative to Mediaset and RAI, for regulated, relative to unregulated firms, increases.
   Proof: In terms of notation, we refer to the three-option share as  and the two-option
share as . The two-option Mediaset share for regulated and unregulated firms is given by:
                                               exp [( −  +  − ∆)]
                    (∆ ) =                =
                                    +     1 + exp [( −  +  − ∆)]
                                               exp [( −  − ∆)]
                      (∆) =                 =                          
                                    +     1 + exp [( −  − ∆)]
   When the left is in power,  = 0 and  (∆ ) =  (∆) Since  (∆ ) is increasing in ,
we have that  (∆ )   (∆) when   0.¤
    Propositions 1 and 2 are illustrated in Figure 2, with the share  of advertisements placed
on Mediaset, relative to Mediaset and RAI, on the x axis and the diﬀerence in prices ∆ between
Mediaset and RAI on the y-axis. The inverse demand functions for regulated and unregulated
firms are given by ∆ () and ∆ ( ) and can be interpreted as the diﬀerence in willingness
to pay for a share  of advertisements on Mediaset for regulated and unregulated firms. These
inverse demand curves are downward sloping and have an S-shape given the logit expressions.
   When the left is in power, the willingness to pay does not diﬀer between regulated and
unregulated firms (i.e. ∆ ( 0) = ∆ ()), and the relevant demand curve is the one at the
bottom of Figure 2. The equilibrium price diﬀerence, ∆∗ (0) in this case, is determined as
the net price that equates demand of advertisements on Berlusconi’s channel to the supply

                                                  7
side of such ads,  ( +  ) In this case, the equilibrium price diﬀerence, as noted
above, is ∆∗ (0) =  −  − 1 ln (  )  The share of advertisements placed on Mediaset,
relative to Mediaset and RAI, is the same for regulated and unregulated firms:  (∆∗ (0) 0) =
 (∆∗ (0)) =  ( +  )
    When the right comes to power, the willingness to pay on Mediaset increases by  for
regulated firms, as captured by the higher demand function at the top of Figure 2. The
equilibrium is then obtained by considering the average willingness to pay, which is a convex
combination with weight  of the shifted demand curve for the regulated firms and of the
original demand curve, which still applies to the unregulated firms. We plot this average curve
in between the two curves. For small values of  the price increase is approximately  that
is, ∆∗ () ≈ ∆∗ (0) + . At this new price, the share of advertisements placed on Mediaset for
regulated firms increases from  ( +  ) to  (∆∗ () )) and the share of advertisements
placed on Mediaset for unregulated firms decreases from  ( +  ) to  (∆∗ ()).
    Given that most of our empirical analysis focuses on expenditure shares, defined as expen-
ditures on Mediaset relative to combined expenditures on Mediaset and RAI, we next consider
how expenditure shares change when Berlusconi comes to power. We first consider aggregate
shifts before turning our focus to diﬀerences between regulated and unregulated firms.
   Proposition 3: When Berlusconi comes to power, the aggregate expenditure share on Me-
diaset, relative to Mediaset and RAI, increases.
   Proof: Since quantities are fixed by assumption and prices increase on Mediaset, relative
to RAI (Proposition 1), aggregate expenditures on Mediaset, relative to RAI, increase.¤
   Proposition 4: When Berlusconi comes to power, the aggregate expenditure share on Me-
diaset, relative to Mediaset and RAI, for regulated, relative to unregulated firms, increases.
    The proof is provided in the Appendix. The intuition is that, given the assumptions of
the model, expenditure shares are the same for regulated and unregulated firms when the
left is in power. When Berlusconi comes to power, expenditure shares increase mechanically
for both regulated and unregulated firms due to the increase in price on Mediaset. Due to
the behavioral response, however, regulated firms increase their advertising on Mediaset and
unregulated firms decrease their advertising on Mediaset. Hence, when Berlusconi comes to
power, expenditure shares increase for Mediaset disproportionately for regulated firms.
    Extensions. We next consider two extensions of the model, with details of the analysis
in an Online Appendix. In the first extension we allow for a political benefit 0 for regulated
firms from advertising on RAI when the left is in power, previously assumed to be zero. This
generalization captures the idea that a left-leaning government may want to reduce the profits
of Mediaset. In the online appendix, we extend the four Propositions described above. In
terms of Proposition 1, we show that, when the right comes to power, the price on RAI falls
but by less than 0  For small values of 0 , this fall in prices can be approximated by 0  Given
this and the fact that the price on Mediaset rises by , the increase in the price diﬀerence can

                                                 8
by approximated by ∆∗ () − ∆∗ (0) ≈ ( + 0 ) Propositions 2, 3, and 4 are all strengthened
under this extension, given that the relative increase in demand for advertising on Mediaset
for regulated firms when the right comes to power is strengthened.
    In the second extension we remove the assumption of no benefits to unregulated firms and
allow for a political benefit 00 for these firms from advertising on Mediaset when the right is in
power. We assume that this benefit is smaller for unregulated firms than for regulated firms:
00  . In the Online Appendix, we extend the four Propositions described above. In terms of
Proposition 1, we show that, when the right comes to power, the price on Mediaset increases
but by less than  + 00  For small values of 00 , this increase in prices can be approximated by
 + 00 (1 − ) Given this, the increase in the price diﬀerence is approximately  + 00 (1 − )
Propositions 2 and 4 are weakened given that the distinction between regulated and unregulated
firms is now smaller, but still hold so long as 00   Proposition 3 is strengthened given the
larger price increase on Mediaset when the right comes to power.


3    Data
Political Timeline. Our analysis focuses on the 1993-2009 period, with a timeline in Table 1.
In 1993, a series of corruption scandals led to the collapse of the five-party centrist coalition that
had dominated Italy’s political landscape for over three decades. A technocratic government,
led by Carlo Azeglio Ciampi, was instituted and early elections were set for March 1994. Having
lost his main political sponsors and fearing the possible success of the left-wing coalition, Silvio
Berlusconi, until then a successful entrepreneur and the owner of Italy’s largest private media
conglomerate, decided to enter the political field. In December 1993 he announced the creation
of a new political party, Forza Italia (“Forward Italy”). In just three months, Berlusconi’s party
became Italy’s most voted-for party and led the right-wing coalition to gain a solid majority in
both branches of parliament. On May 1994, Berlusconi was sworn in as Italy’s prime minister.
    This first government, however, was short-lived: in January 1995 the Lega Nord, Forza
Italia’s electoral partner, withdrew its support forcing Berlusconi to resign. This paved the way
for a new technocratic government led by Lamberto Dini, an independent, which governed Italy
until new elections in March 1996. The left-wing coalition won the elections and in April 1996
its leader, Romano Prodi, became prime minister. In October 1998, due to divisions within the
ruling coalition, Prodi’s government fell; two other left-wing governments followed, until the
elections of May 2001, when the right-wing coalition won and Berlusconi returned to power,
this time for the entire five-year legislature. The left-wing coalition won the following elections,
held in May 2006 and Prodi became prime minister for the second time. The narrow margin of
control of the majority in the upper house however caused the fall of Prodi’s government in the
spring of 2008, triggering new elections that brought back to power the right-wing coalition.
Berlusconi’s third government, instituted in May 2008, lasted until November 2011, when, due


                                                  9
to concerns about the possible default of Italy’s economy and to a series of corruption and sex
scandals, it was replaced by a technocratic government led by Mario Monti.
    Overall, during the 17-year period of our sample (1993-2009), Berlusconi was in power
for 30 out of 68 quarters (i.e. q2-1994 through q4-1994, q2-2001 through q1-2006, q2-2008
through q4-2009, the end of our sample period). Our first measure for “Berlusconi in power”
is an indicator variable for the quarters during which Berlusconi was prime minister.
   Forward looking measure of Berlusconi in power. In addition, we also calculate
a forward-looking measure that accounts for Berlusconi’s prospects of being in oﬃce in the
future. The measure captures the expected discounted probability that Berlusconi will be in
power in the future, since advertisers may be more willing to invest in Berlusconi’s network if
they believe that he is likely to be in oﬃce, and this provide favors, in the future.
    In the Appendix, we describe how we calculate this discounted probability. In summary,
we proceed in four steps. First, we use the vote shares for Berlusconi’s party in all elections
(national, local and European) held in Italy between 1994 and 2010 to compute a measure of
his vote share were a general election to be held in a particular year. Second, we convert these
vote shares into probabilities of winning, conditional on an election being held, using a mapping
inferred from two sets of prediction market prices. Third, using the electoral calendar and the
empirical probability of an unscheduled election being held, we calculate the probability of an
election being held in each year. Finally, we set  = 5 which is the length of the electoral
calendar, and set  = 09 As Figure 3 shows, this discounted probability measure co-moves
with the electoral results, but compared to the simple indicator for Berlusconi in power it
displays considerable variation within and outside the periods of his governments.
    Advertising Expenditure. Total advertising spending on all media in Italy has grown
from 3,712 million euros in 1993 to 7,094 million euros in 2009. Broadcast TV is the largest
segment, accounting for roughly 60.5% of advertising expenditure in 1993 as well as in 2009.
Since the mid-1980s, the Italian broadcast TV industry has been dominated by two players:
RAI, the public service broadcaster, and Mediaset, the commercial television network founded
and controlled by Silvio Berlusconi. Both RAI and Mediaset operate three national channels
and capture a similar share of total TV audience (392% and 388% respectively in 2009).
However, given the legal limitations on advertising time for public channels, Mediaset captures
a larger share of TV advertising spending than RAI (637% and 255% respectively in 2009).
Other competitors include a small national network, La7, which, in 2009 accounted for 3% of
the audience and 3% of advertisement revenues, as well as a multitude of minor local channels.7
   7
    Advertising expenditure varies considerably across sectors with the bulk of spending coming from a handful
of industries such as automobiles and telecommunications. In addition to total spending, industries diﬀer
substantially with respect to the distribution of advertising budgets across diﬀerent media, with some spending
mainly on TV (i.e. toys, foodstuﬀs), others on printed press (i.e. apparel, tourism), and others, more recently,
on the Internet (i.e. electronics, financial services).



                                                      10
   We use two datasets on advertising expenditure, both available from Nielsen. The first
dataset, which we use for the bulk of the paper, is at the sector level and includes compre-
hensive information on quarterly advertising expenditure for twenty-two industrial sectors by
medium and outlet for the years between 1993 to 2009.8 The data set has information on total
expenditure9 , average price, and number of seconds purchased.
    The second dataset contains firm-level data and is based on disaggregated information on
all advertisements run on each Italian media outlet (for both TV and press) from 1993 to 2009.
Using this information, we generate advertising spending figures at the quarter-company-outlet
level. The firm-level dataset includes information for the universe of firms that ever reported
spending on advertising at any time in our sample period (i.e. over 73,000 firms). However, in
order to construct a balanced panel, we focus on a group of “top spenders” which includes any
company which ever makes the list of top 300 spenders in any year between 1993 and 2010.
This sample includes 810 firms, which we follow throughout the period.
   Audience. To control for the audience of diﬀerent TV channels over time, we use data on
the relative audience share of Mediaset channels. The source is Auditel, the research company
responsible for television audience measurement in Italy.
    Firm level characteristics. We match the Nielsen data to three databases of Italian
firms: (i) AIDA, which contains the financial statements of about 700,000 Italian firms; (ii)
ISIS, which provides similar information on insurance companies (not covered in AIDA); (iii)
Bankscope, which provides the information for banks. Across these data sets, the variables are
measured at annual frequency, and are taken from balance sheets.
    As proxies for firm size, we use the log of sales and the log of the number of employees.
As proxies for (negative) economic performance, we use: (i) an indicator for negative profits
in a given year; (ii) an indicator for whether the firm experienced a decrease in the value of
sales compared to the previous year; and (iii) an indicator for “financial distress”, defined as
financial leverage in excess of 10.10 To classify the nationality of the main owners, we employe
two diﬀerent definitions of owner: (i) owning more than 25.1% of total equity; (ii) owning the
largest share. We classify the ownership as Italian using information in the above databases
as well as from company websites and other internet sources.
    Regulation Measures. A key prediction of the model is that the quid-pro-quo between
the firms and Mediaset should be concentrated among the firms in sectors with higher scope for
regulatory favors. To test this prediction, we searched for industry-level measures of exposure
to regulation. However, the few available measures do not fit our setting because they do not
correspond to the Nielsen industry classification, they do not capture adequately the scope for
  8
     Data for 1990 to 1992 is available, but coverage is incomplete.
  9
     The data refer to advertising expenditure net of any discount applied by media companies on the oﬃcial
price, as estimated by Nielsen.
  10
     We construct financial leverage as one plus the debt/equity ratio.



                                                    11
regulatory favors, and are not necessarily applicable to the Italian context.11
    To get around such diﬃculties, we designed ourselves a survey to measure the sector-level
scope for regulatory favors in the Italian context. Specifically, in January 2012 we emailed
a 2-question survey to 26 Italian economists. The first question asked “How much, in your
opinion, can firms in the following sectors benefit, individually or collectively, from government
policies (for example public expenditure, regulations, or subsidies) in Italy?” The survey listed
the 22 industrial sectors as defined by Nielsen, including the names of three major companies
per sector to provide examples. The respondents rated each sector on a scale from 1 to 10,
with 1 indicating ‘not at all’ and 10 indicating ‘very much’. A second question (not required)
asked for qualitative feedback on what determined their answer. The survey made no reference
to this project, and as of the time of the survey, none of the authors had posted the project
on the website, nor presented it. Hence, it is reasonable to assume that the respondents were
blind to the purpose of the survey.
    We received 10 responses, for a response rate of 38 percent, which is respectable for an
online survey. The correlation across respondents in the rating of each industry is high, with
the correlation coeﬃcient between the responses of any two reviewers varying between .31 and
.83.12 We average across the 10 respondents the industry rating, and use both the continuous
measure for regulation, as well as an indicator variables for industries scoring above the median.
    Table 2 lists the 22 industries with their scores, as well as the median split. The ranking
lines up with common notions of regulation: high on the list are telecommunications, phar-
maceutical, media, and the financial sector. It may appear surprising that the automobile
industry is relatively high on the list too. However, in Italy automobile bailouts for FIAT,
consisting of incentives for purchases of new cars, have been very substantial. Low on the list
instead are industries such as housing, alcohol, food, leisure, apparel, and personal items.13
   Summary Statistics. In Appendix Table 1 we present summary statistics for some key
variables for the sector sample (Panel A) and for the firm sample (Panel B). The summary
  11
     The OECD, for example, calculates a number of regulatory indices, such as for the energy, transport and
communication sectors (ETCR), for the professional services and retail distribution sectors, and the economy-
wide indicators of product market regulation (PMR). Unfortunately, these indices are not suitable for our
analysis for two reasons. First, each index focuses on a small number of sectors and compares regulatory
conditions across countries; we instead need cross-sector comparability within Italy. (The only sector we can
match to the Nielsen industries is telecommunications.) Second, the OECD indices mostly focus on state control
of businesses, barriers to entry, obstacles to trade, and price controls. But the notion of “regulatory favors” is
broader and includes ad hoc temporary provisions such as scrapping subsidies, direct purchases by government
of goods and services, etc.
  12
     This correlation excludes three respondents who assigned score 10 to all industries. These three respondents
are included in the calculation of the indices. Excluding them does not alter the ranking of industries.
  13
     When using the regulation measures in the firm-level analysis, a firm may operate in multiple sectors. If
that is the case, we compute the weighted average of the regulation score for the diﬀerent sectors of operation,
weighted by the share of advertising by that company which went into that sector in that quarter.



                                                       12
statistics are weighted by total advertising spending in that quarter-year, for consistency with
the main Tables. As Panel A shows, all sectors have some spending in a quarter on Berlusconi’s
TV so we focus on the intensive, as opposed to extensive, margin. Panel B for the top spender
firms shows that there is an extensive margin of advertising, in that 11.7 percent of all firm-
quarter observations have no advertising at all on Berlusconi’s TV. We examine this margin
in Table 7, but mostly focus on the share of advertising on Berlusconi’s TV, in the next rows.


4         Estimates
We test the predictions of the model outlined in Section 2, starting with the time-series predic-
tion that the quarters in which Berlusconi is in government should be associated with higher
advertising revenue in the media he owns (Proposition 3). Next, we consider the diﬀeren-
tial prediction for the regulated sectors: the eﬀect of a Berlusconi government on advertising
revenue should be larger for more regulated firms (Proposition 4). Then, we breakdown the
revenue into quantity (number of seconds) and prices to test Propositions 1 and 2.
    Time-Series Spending. We provide graphical evidence on the time-series patterns in
Figure 4a. We plot the share of advertising on Berlusconi’s television, relative to the total
amount placed on Berlusconi’s televisions and the public television.14 The share of spending
hovers around 60 percent in the period 1994 to 2000, only to increase sizably to 66 percent in
2001 and drift up to 69 percent by 2005, the years of the second Berlusconi government. The
share decreases to 66 percent between 2006 and 2008, to reach a peak of 70 percent during the
third Berlusconi government. Thus, while there is no visible impact during the first Berlusconi
government, likely because it was so short (3 quarters), the two largest increases in the series
correspond with the second and third Berlusconi government. If we include also spending on
the press, the patterns are quite similar, with a large ramp-up during the second Berlusconi
government and again during the third Berlusconi government (Appendix Figure 1).
   The figures are suggestive of a sizeable eﬀect, but they do not control for the audience
share: it is possible that the shifts in advertising shares correspond to changes in the relative
attractiveness of advertising. In Table 3 we estimate the model

                                        =  +  + Γ +  +                        (3)

where  is the share of advertising spending of sector  in quarter  of year  in Berlusconi’s
media over the total spending in the relevant media. In Columns 1-3 we focus on Television,
while in Columns 4-6 we expand the analysis to include the print media. The key parameter, 
captures the average diﬀerence in advertising share when Berlusconi is in power ( = 1). In
all specifications we control for sector fixed eﬀects   calendar quarter fixed eﬀects  , and the
    14
         The series is de-seasonalized and weighted by total spending on television advertising.



                                                           13
Mediaset audience  . In addition, in Columns 2-3 and 5-6 we also control for sector-specific
linear trends.15 The observations are weighted by the total spending in that sector on TV
(Columns 1-3) and all media (Columns 5-6) and the standard errors are clustered at the sector
level, allowing for arbitrary correlation within a sector.
    The results indicate a clear impact of the Berlusconi governments on advertising revenue for
Mediaset. After controlling for linear time trends (column 2), the share of Television advertising
expenditure captured by Mediaset increases by 1.5 percentage points (a 2.3 percent increase)
when Berlusconi is in power, compared to when he is not. These results hold after controlling
for the audience measure which, as expected, is strongly correlated with the share of TV ads.
When we consider separately the three Berlusconi governments (Column 3), consistent with
the graphical evidence, we find statistical evidence of an eﬀect for both the second and third
government, but not the first. In Columns 4-6 we show that the results are similar for the
combined advertising on the television and printed press. Hence, both the graphical evidence
and the time-series regressions support Proposition 3.
   Spending by Regulation. These results suggest a quid-pro-quo benefiting Berlusconi’s
media holdings when he is in power. We now test the prediction (Proposition 4) that the eﬀect
should be larger for high-regulation sectors. An advantage of this second prediction is that is
robust to any time series shift since it is identified by diﬀerential shifts across sectors.
    In Figure 4b we split the plot of advertising shares by the median industry level of regulation
(corresponding to the split in Table 2). Firms in high-regulation industries experience upward
shifts in advertising shares during all three Berlusconi governments, compared to firms in
low-regulation industries. In Table 4, we estimate the diﬀ—in-diﬀ specification

                       =  +  +  +  ∗  + Γ +  +                          (4)

The focus is on coeﬃcient  on the interaction between the indicator for Berlusconi in power
( ) and the regulation variable ( ). The clustering and weighting is as in Table 3. The
estimates first control for audience, sector and calendar quarter fixed eﬀects (Column 1) and
then in addition for 68 quarter-year fixed eﬀects (Column 2). In this latter specification, the
Berlusconi indicator and the audience share are absorbed by the full time controls. Further,
we add sector-specific linear time trends (Column 3). Throughout these specifications, the
eﬀect of Berlusconi coming to power is larger for sectors with larger regulations scores, a result
that is significant even in the most stringent specification. We obtain similar results using
an above-median indicator for regulation instead of the continuous measure (Column 4). The
results hold when including also spending on the press (Columns 5-8).
   Sector-Specific Estimates. In Table 4 we categorize firms into levels of regulation using
the survey measure. We now present disaggregate results by sector so as to both provide evi-
  15
    In this time series specification, the results are the same if we include linear time trends that are not
sector-specific.


                                                     14
dence on which sectors are driving the results, and to allow potentially for diﬀerent groupings.
We run a specification as in (4), but instead of using the regulation measure , we use a full
set of fixed eﬀects for all the sectors. The specification includes sector fixed eﬀects, calendar
quarter fixed eﬀects, and sector-specific time trends, as in Column (2) of Table 3. In Figure 5,
we plot the estimated coeﬃcients, with the sectors ranked by the survey measure. The figure
shows a clear monotonic pattern: the eﬀect is larger for sectors rated as more regulated. While
no sector alone is driving the results, the biggest change in advertising when Berlusconi comes
to power is for the telecommunication and finance and insurance industries. For telecommuni-
cations, the importance of regulated licences is obvious, but regulation is also critical for the
finance industry, especially as legislation created highly-regulated private pension plans.
    Figure 5 also allows for a diﬀerent test of Proposition 4, based on a count of the number of
sectors which experience an increase (as opposed to a decrease) in spending with Berlusconi
in power. Of the industries which we code as regulated (Table 2), 11 out of 11 experience
increases in spending. Among the remaining industries, instead, we observe 6 increases out of
10, a much more muted pattern.16
    Quantity vs price eﬀects. In Table 5 we decompose the main results along two dimen-
sions. First, we consider the impact on both price and quantity (i.e., seconds) of advertising
to test Propositions 1 and 2. Second, we consider a further cut of the results which we do not
model formally: peak and oﬀ-peak advertising. As well-known, advertising in peak hours has
a higher price since the audience is higher.
    Panel A displays the time-series results with the full set of controls. Considering first the
benchmark result on expenditure shares (reproduced in Column 1), the increase in expenditure
when Berlusconi is in power is present both for peak hours (Column 2) and for oﬀ-peak hours
(Column 3), though it is larger during peak hours. Turning to quantities, Columns 4-6 show
that there is no shift in the share of seconds of advertising when Berlusconi comes to power,
whether one considers the peak or oﬀ-peak hours. This result is consistent with a fixed supply
of the number of seconds, as assumed in the model. This pattern is also visible in Figure 6b
which shows that the number of seconds of advertising (in thousands) in both the private and
public network is flat over time.
    There is instead a sizeable eﬀect on prices. When Berlusconi comes to power, prices on
Berlusconi’s televisions increases (Column 7) while the price on the public network decreases,
though the latter result is not statistically significant (Column 8).17 The same result is visible
in Figure 6a. These results, thus, are consistent with Proposition 1. In the final three columns
we consider this price result separately for peak and oﬀ-peak hours using as a summary measure
  16
      Our predictions imply that the relative increase in the Mediaset advertising share is larger for regulated
firms. Im Appendix Figure 2 we plot the corresponding figure including also press advertising.
   17
      In levels, the average price per second is higher on RAI than on Mediaset due to the binding ceiling on the
number of seconds in public channels.



                                                       15
the diﬀerence in prices per second on Mediaset versus the price on RAI. The prices increase
for both peak hours and oﬀ-peak hours (Columns 10 and 11).
    In Panel B we decompose these eﬀects by the sector-level regulation. Interestingly, the diﬀ-
in-diﬀ results on expenditure shares are largely driven by shifts in peak hours (Column 2): the
results for oﬀ-peak hours are smaller and not statistically significant (Column 3). We then test
Proposition 2 that the shift to Berlusconi’s televisions for regulated sectors should take place
along the seconds margins. We find some support for this prediction. In the aggregate, we
find qualitative evidence of such shift in seconds towards the more regulated sectors (Column
4 of Table 5 and Appendix Figure 3), but the shift is not statistically significant. The shift
is however significant when considering just peak hours (Column 5). Interestingly, the peak
seconds are much more expensive and hence are responsible for a large share of the profits.
    Finally, turning to prices, we find that, when Berlusconi is in power, the price of advertising
increases more for more regulated companies (Column 7 of Table 5 and Appendix Figure 4). At
first, this result may appear puzzling since the price reported by Nielsen refers to an average
price, and is unlikely to include firm-specific discounts. The patterns on seconds, however,
suggests an explanation. Similar to the observed shift of seconds for regulated firms towards
peak hours (Column 5), there is likely a further shift within peak hours (and within oﬀ peak
hours) towards more valuable programming times. Such a shift would show as an increase in
average prices, since the prices do not control for the exact time of the advertising.18
    In sum, the time series patterns for price and quantities are largely as predicted by the
model. In the cross-section, we observe evidence of reallocation of seconds as predicted, sig-
nificantly so for peak-hours. Furthermore, there is evidence of a further shift of regulated
industries towards pricier advertisements, leading to higher average prices for these firms.
    Implications. As noted in the model, the price on Mediaset, relative to the price on
RAI, should rise by approximately the product of the political benefits () and the faction of
regulated firms () when Berlusconi comes to power. Using the actual price changes and an
estimate of , we can thus infer a value for the political benefits of the quid-pro-quo,  As
noted in the rightmost column of Table 6, the price of an advertisement on Mediaset, relative
to RAI, rises by 15 euros per second. Further, we estimate  as the fraction of advertisements
placed by regulated firms when the Left is in power: ̂ = 03663. Thus, the estimated political
benefit associated with a second of advertising on Mediaset is 44 Euros per second (Row 3
of Table 6). Given that the average price of an advertisement is 182 Euros per second, we
infer that over 22 percent of expenditures by regulated firms on Mediaset when Berlusconi is
in power reflects perceived political benefits. With 5.2 million seconds of advertisements on
Mediaset annually by regulated firms, the estimated political benefits equal 231 million Euros
annually, and 2.1 billion Euros over the roughly nine years that Berlusconi has been in oﬃce
over the past two decades (Row 4). This is heavily concentrated in five industries, automobiles,
 18
      We do not observe more disaggregate prices to directly test this hypothesis.


                                                        16
retail, pharmaceuticals, media/publishing, and telecommunications.19
    To the best of our knowledge, these estimates of the value of the quid-pro-quo are unique
in the literature and are enabled by the simple supply-demand structure of the industry under
the assumption that the price of advertisements is determined by market-clearing. In contrast,
the literature on campaign contributions typically has a hard time pinning down a value of
the benefits to the firms contributing. The large magnitudes implied in the above calculations
stress the potential for large policy distortions.
    We also calculate the implications for the profits of Mediaset and RAI. Given the fixed
supply of seconds, the change in revenues is proportional to the change in prices. Averaging
across the years in our data, 13.7 million seconds of advertisements were aired on Mediaset
and 3.6 million seconds were aired on RAI (Row 6 of Table 6). Given the estimated impact
on prices (Row 1), we compute that annual revenues on Mediaset increased by 123 million
Euros and annual revenues on RAI fell by 22 million Euros due to the conflict of interest. Over
nine years with Berlusconi in oﬃce, the cumulative increase of revenues for Mediaset due to
the indirect lobbying channel is 1.1 billion Euros, and the decline of revenues for RAI is 194
million Euros. If we assume a profit margin of 20 percent, this translates into a profit increase
of 25 percent on Mediaset and a profit decline of 9 percent on RAI. An alternative benchmark
is with respect to the market capitalization of Mediaset (5.3 billion euros in 1997), implying
that the (undiscounted) indirect lobbying profits are 21% of the value of Mediaset.
    Robustness Checks. Returning to the main specifications on advertising shares, we
examine the robustness in Table 7. Column 1 reproduces our benchmark estimates. Starting
from the time series analysis (Panel A), the results are unaﬀected by either the addition of
quadratic, as opposed to linear, time trends (Column 2), or by clustering the standard errors by
year, which allows for cross-industry correlation (Column 3). The results are also very similar
if we include spending in the other (smaller) private network, La7 (Column 4). The estimates
are somewhat smaller when the regression is unweighted, implying that the quid-pro-quo is
larger in the high-spending sectors (Columns 5 and 6). We return to this pattern in Table 9.
    Columns 7 and 8 presents a more substantive variation. While all the specifications so
far have considered the impact of the contemporaneous presence of Berlusconi in power, the
expected duration in power in the near future could be important too. Consider for example
that in 2005 Berlusconi, while in power, was quite unpopular. In anticipation of him likely
losing the 2006 election, firms may have engaged less in a quid-pro-quo given the reduced
expected future returns to spending. We thus re-estimate the results with the forward-looking
measure of the expected discounted probability that Berlusconi is in power, plotted in Figure
3 and described in Section 3. The results in column 7 are similar to our benchmark estimates.
When using both the contemporaneous and the forward-looking measure together (Column
  19
    The sector-level computation is based on variation in the annual number of seconds of advertisements,
assuming a constant per-second value of the benefits .


                                                   17
8), however, the results load on the contemporaneous one. This result is consistent with
a relatively myopic behavior of advertisers, and with uncertainty in the ability to establish
medium-term returns of future favors in exchange for current advertising.
    In Panel B we consider the robustness checks for the regulation diﬀ-in-diﬀ specification. The
benchmark results are essentially unaﬀected by the sector-specific quadratic control for trends
(Column 2), the clustering of standard errors by year (Column 3), and the inclusion of La7
in the denominator of spending (Column 4). The results are smaller and not significant when
using the unweighted specification (Column 5), though they hold in an unweighted specification
when excluding the bottom 20 percent spenders (Column 6). Finally, we find an eﬀect of the
forward-looking measure (Column 7) when considered alone, but it is the contemporaneous
measure which loads positively when both are included (Column 8).
    Firm-level analysis. While the analysis so far used the sector-level data, in Tables 8
and 9 we employ the firm-level advertising data. This data allows us to test for a possible
interpretation of the results. The results could be due to a compositional shift within a sector
to firms which advertise more on Mediaset, as opposed to a shift occurring within a firm. (Our
interpretation would still account for this shift) In Columns 1 and 2 of Table 8 we replicate
the baseline time-series and diﬀ-in-diﬀ regressions in a weighted OLS regression, with the
addition of firm fixed eﬀects.20 The results are nearly identical to the ones in the benchmark
specifications, indicating that the results are not due to a compositional shift.
    We then decompose the eﬀect into the part which is due to entry into (or complete exit from)
Berlusconi’s channels in Columns 3-6. This extensive margin decision–whether to advertise
into Berlusconi’s network–is a component of the variation in the share of advertising.21 . There
is only suggestive evidence that the share of firms advertising on Berlusconi’s channels varies
with Berlusconi being in power (Column 3), with no diﬀerence in this pattern by regulation
(Columns 5 and 6). Overall, it appears that the observed shifts in revenue are for firms that
are already advertising on both networks, and are shifting the share.
   Firm-level characteristics. We now analyze whether the shift in advertising revenue
depends on variables other than regulation. We consider four firm characteristics: spending on
advertising, size, profitability, and ownership structure. While our simple model does not yield
predictions on the role of these variables, it is conceivable that the returns to the quid-pro-quo
  20
     The weights are given by the advertising expenditure for that firm in that quarter. The firm-level panel,
unlike the sector-level results, does not include all firms, just the 810 largest firms (see the Data section). The
dependent variable is set to missing if the firm did not spend any advertising money in a given quarter-year
in that type of media outlet. Out of 42,120 firm-quarter-year observations, we have 19,065 missing values for
“Share of spending on Berlusconi TV over Berlusconi + Public TV” and 764 missing values for “Share of
spending on Berlusconi TV and Press over total ad spending.” Some of these missing values reflect firms that
did not exist during some years of our sample.
  21
     We did not consider the extensive margin at the sector level because within a sector-quarter there is always
at least a firm advertising in Berlusconi’s Television, so there is no sector-level extensive margin.



                                                        18
would be larger for larger spenders, larger firms, firms in financial trouble, and Italian firms.
     We interact the Berlusconi indicator ( ) with firm characteristic  and estimate

                    =  +  + −1 +  ∗ −1 + Γ +  +  

We use one-year lags of  because the contemporaneous value could be endogenous.22 We
include sector-specific linear trends and cluster the standard errors by sector.
    In Panel A of Table 9 we consider the eﬀect of advertising spending and firm size. The
quid-pro-quo eﬀect is larger for firms with higher spending (Columns 1 and 2), as foreshadowed
by the results in Table 7. An interpretation is that firms with limited advertising spending are
unlikely to be able to trade favors given the small amount spent, and thus do not respond. We
also consider the eﬀect of firm size, proxied by the value of sales or by the number of employees
(Columns 3 and 4). We find directional, but not significant, evidence that larger firms shift
their spending towards Mediaset TV channels more when Berlusconi is in power.
    In Panel B, we examine whether the incentives to capture Berlusconi’s favor are stronger
for firms that have experienced low economic performance or financial diﬃculties, and we find
no significant evidence. We also test for the role of the nationality of the main owner(s) of
the firm. We find that the main results are not driven by firms whose owners are Italian:
conditional on operating in Italy, foreign-owned firms display a similar quid-pro-quo eﬀect.


5        Conclusion
A vast literature has investigated the lobbying process by third parties, and especially firms.
A separate literature has emphasized the distortions associated with the confluence of business
interests and political powers, as in the case of businessmen-politicians.
    This paper documents an important link between the two literatures. In the presence
of businessmen-politicians, the lobbying process can take an indirect route: Firms hoping
for regulatory favors may lobby the politician through business purchases towards the firm
controlled by the politician, who benefits from the additional revenue. We provide evidence
consistent with this channel in Italy, where we exploit the detailed advertising data, the frequent
switches in power, and variation in propensity for regulation. We show that the magnitudes
of this eﬀect are very sizeable, in the order of billions of euros. Our results suggest a further
rationale for rules dictating a separation between business and political interests.
   While the paper has focused on a specific setting–advertising markets in Italy–, we stress
that the channel at hand applies to all cases in which there is a confluence between business
    22
    We also tested whether the eﬀect we found for firms in highly regulated sectors is more prominent within
certain types of firms (e.g., larger ones, or firms in financial distress, etc.), by estimating a model with triple
interactions between the Berlusconi dummy, regulation and firm characteristics. The triple interaction terms
were largely insignificant. Results available upon request.


                                                        19
and political decision-making. In the classical Suharto paper (Fisman 2001), for example,
the returns to firms close to the dictator surely reflect the traditional favoritism channel, but
likely also capture the indirect lobbying channel highlighted in this paper. To start with, our
findings are likely to be relevant in other advertising markets in countries where media outlets
are owned by powerful families which, as Djankov et. al. (2003) document, is a common
situation. We hope that future research will investigate more such settings.


References
 [1] Ansolabehere, Stephen, John M. de Figueiredo, and James M. Snyder. 2003. ”Why is
     There so Little Money in U.S. Politics? ” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 17(1): 105-
     130.

 [2] Bertrand, Marianne, Matilde Bombardini, and Francesco Trebbi. 2011. ”Is it whom you
     know or what you know? An empirical assessment of the lobbying process.” NBER work-
     ing paper 16765. National Bureau of Economic Research.

 [3] Blanes i Vidal, Jordi, Mirko Draca, and Christian Fons-Rosen. 2012. ”Revolving Door
     Lobbyists” American Economic Review, 102(7): 3731-48.

 [4] Chiang C. and B. Knight. 2011. Media bias and influence: Evidence from newspaper
     endorsements. Review of Economic Studies.

 [5] Cingano F. and P. Pinotti. Forthcoming. Politicians at Work: the Private Returns and
     Social Costs of Political Connections. Journal of the European Economic Association.

 [6] Coulomb R. and M. Sangnier. 2012. Impacts of Political Majorities on French Firms:
     Electoral Promises or Friendship Connections. Paris School of Economics, Working Paper
     n. 2012-08.

 [7] DellaVigna S, Kaplan E, 2007. The Fox News eﬀect: Media bias and voting. Quarterly
     Journal of Economics, 122(3):1187—234.

 [8] Di Tella, Rafael, and Ignacio Franceschelli. 2011. ”Government Advertising and Media
     Coverage of Corruption Scandals.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 3,
     119-51.

 [9] S. Djankov, Shleifer, A., Nenova, T. and C. Mcliesh. 2003. Who Owns the Media. Journal
     of Law and Economics. 46(2): 341-383.

[10] Durante Ruben, Knight Brian. Forthcoming. Partisan control, media bias, and viewer re-
     sponses: evidence from Berlusconi’s Italy. Journal of the European Economic Association.

                                               20
[11] Enikolopov R, Petrova M, Zhuravskaya EV, forthcoming. Media and political persuasion:
     Evidence from Russia. American Economic Review.

[12] Faccio, M. 2001. Politically Connected Firms. American Economic Review 96(1): 369-386.

[13] Fisman, R. 2001. Estimating the Value of Political Connections. American Economic
     Review. 91(4): 1095-1102.

[14] Fisman, David, Ray Fisman, Julia Galef, and Rakesh Khurana. 2006. ”Estimating the
     value of connections to Vice-President Cheney.” working paper.

[15] Grossman, Gene M., and Elhanan Helpman. Special interest politics. The MIT Press,
     2001.

[16] Gentzkow M, Shapiro J. 2010. What drives media slant? Evidence from U.S. daily news-
     papers. Econometrica.

[17] George, Lisa and Joel Waldfogel. 2006. “The New York Times and the Market for Local
     Newspapers” American Economic Review, Vol. 96, pp. 435-447.

[18] Groseclose, Tim and Jeﬀrey Milyo. 2005. “A Measure of media bias”. Quarterly Journal
     of Economics, 120, 1191-1237.

[19] Khwaja, Mian, A. 2005. Do lenders favor politically connected firms? Rent provision in
     an emerging financial market. Quarterly Journal of Economics. 120(4): 1371-1411.

[20] Knight, B. 2007. Are policy platforms capitalized into equity prices? Evidence from the
     Bush/Gore 2000 presidential election. Journal of Public Economics. 90(4): 751-773.

[21] Larcinese V., Puglisi R., Snyder J.M. 2007. Partisan bias in economic news: evidence on
     the agenda-setting behavior of us newspapers. NBER Work. Pap. 13378.

[22] Luechinger S., C. Moser. 2012. The Value of the Revolving Door: Political Appointees
     and the Stock Market. Working Paper.

[23] Querubin, Pablo and James Snyder. 2011. ”The Control of Politicians in Normal Times
     and Times of Crisis: Wealth Accumulation by U.S. Congressmen, 1850-1880”, Working
     Paper.

[24] Reuter J, Zitzewitz E, 2006. Do ads influence editors? Advertising and bias in the financial
     media. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(1):197—227

[25] Strömberg, D. (2004) Radio’s impact on public spending. Quarterly Journal of Economics
     119(1), 189-221.

                                               21
Appendix 1: Proof of Propositions 1 and 4
Proof of Proposition 1. Taking the derivatives of the equilibrium conditions in equation
(2), we have:
                                                        
                                            = ( − 1)
                                                            
                                                         
                                            = ( − 1)
                                                            
   Using equation (1), when  increases from zero, shares change according to:
                                           ∙                ¸
                                                ()                 ()
                        =  (1 −  ) 1 −                  +   
                                                                         
                                           ∙              ¸
                                             ()                 ()
                        =  (1 −  ) −                  +   
                                                                      
                                           ∙             ¸            ∙              ¸
                                             ()                       ()
                        =   (1 −   ) −               −    1 −
                                                                            
                                            ()                ()
                        =   (1 −   )[−            ] +   
                                                                   
   Plugging these into the derivatives of the equilibrium conditions, we then have that:
                                       ∙              ¸
                                            ∗ ()                 ∗ ()
                       (1 −  ) 1 −               +    
                                                                      
                                             ∙ ∗         ¸
                                                ()                         ∗ ()
                  = (1 − ) (1 −  )                  + ( − 1)   
                                                                                
                                       ∙           ¸               ∙               ¸
                                          ∗ ()                        ∗ ()
                        (1 −   ) −            −    1 −
                                                                          
                                                 ∗
                                              ()                          ∗ ()
                  = (1 − )  (1 −   )[  ] + ( − 1)   
                                                                              
                                     ∗                                  ∗
   Solving the first equation for  () and the second for  (), we have that:
                                                ∗ ()
             ∗ ()        (1 −  ) + 
                                               
                                                    [   + (1 − )   ]
                        =
                                [ (1 −  ) + (1 − ) (1 −  )]
                                           ∗ ()
             ∗ ()       −   +  
                                                 [   + (1 − )   ]
                        =
                             [  (1 −   ) + (1 − )  (1 −   )]
   Substituting the first equation into the second, we have that:
                                         ∗ ()   
                                                  =
                                                  
   where the numerator is given by

               = −   [ (1 −  ) + (1 − ) (1 −  )]
                            +[   + (1 − )   ] (1 −  )

                                                22
    and the denominator is given by

  = [  (1 −   ) + (1 − )  (1 −   )] [ (1 −  ) + (1 − ) (1 −  )]
           − [   + (1 − )   ] [   + (1 − )   ]

    Cancelling terms in the numerator, we have that:

                           = −(1 − )    (1 −  )
                                      +(1 − )    (1 −  )

    To show that the numerator equals zero, we need that:

                                  (1 −  ) =   (1 −  )

   Substituting the expressions from the main text, the condition is satisfied. Thus, we have
that ∗ () = 0. Plugging back into the expression for ∗  above, we have that:
                      ∗ ()                (1 −  )
                               =
                               [ (1 −  ) + (1 − ) (1 −  )]
   Thus, we have that 0  ∗   1 and hence 0  ∗ () − ∗ (0)   To prove the last
part of the proposition, notice that when  = 0,  =  and thus, ∗  = 

    Proof of Proposition 4. Expenditures shares on Mediaset, relative to Mediaset and RAI,
for regulated and unregulated firms, are given by:
                                             exp [( +  −  )]
          =                      =
                     +       exp [( +  −  )] +  exp [( −  )]
                                             exp [( −  )]
            =                    =
                     +       exp [( −  )] +  exp [( −  )]
   When the left is in power,  = 0 and thus  =   When the right is in power, we
need to show that     Using the expressions above, cross multiplying, and cancelling
terms, we require that:

                        exp [( +  − ∗ ())]  exp [( − ∗ ())] 

which is satisfied when Berlusconi is in power (  0).


6    Appendix 2: Calculation of Forward Looking Measure
We compute the expected discounted probability that Berlusconi is in power. Let  ∈ { }
denote the coalition in the majority at time , where  denotes Berlusconi’s party and 
denotes the center-left. The discounted per-period probability of Berlusconi being in oﬃce is
                                       P
                                               −1 Pr(+ = )
                               ( ) =  =1 P
                                                          −1
                                                   =1 


                                                23
where  is the discount factor and  is the number of years considered for this measure. We
calculate the forward-looking probability measure in four steps.
    Step 1: Ideally, we would have a continuous poll-based measure of the support for Berlus-
coni’s coalition over time. Since there is no such comprehensive series for Italy going back
to 1994, we instead use the realized vote share for Berlusconi’s coalition over the years. The
complication is that diﬀerent types of elections take place in diﬀerent years, so we control for
that. More precisely, for all elections (national, local, or European) held between 1994 and
2010 we collect the number of eligible voters and the vote share of the center-right coalition
(i.e., Berlusconi’s coalition). Using this data, we then regress the vote share of Berlusconi’s
coalition on year fixed eﬀects (omitting the year 1994) and a set of election/location fixed
eﬀects (e.g. municipal elections in Rome, or regional elections in Tuscany). The latter controls
capture the average political leaning of a given area in a given type of election. We weight
each of observation by the share of the national electorate eligible to vote in that election. The
estimated year fixed eﬀects represent the relative electoral advantage of Berlusconi’s coalition
in each given year, which is the measure we use. Since the estimated year fixed eﬀects are
with respect to the baseline year (1994), we add to the estimated fixed eﬀects the baseline
center-right vote share in the 1994 national elections.
    Step 2: To translate these vote shares into probabilities of winning, let votes in favor of
Berlusconi’s party be given by  =  −  , where  is the expected vote share,  is the
unexpected vote share against his party, and  is the standard deviation of the unexpected
vote share. Were an election held at time , the likelihood of Berlusconi winning is given by:

                               Pr(  05) = Pr( −   05)

Under the assumption that  is logistic, this can be written as:
                                        ∙                  ¸
                                            Pr(  05)       ( − 05)
                    Pr(  05) = ln                        =
                                          1 − Pr(  05)         
To estimate  we use prices on two separate markets run by the Iowa Electronic Market for
the Presidential election years 2000, 2004, and 2008. In the winner-take all market, the price
of a contract paying $1 in the event that a candidate wins can be interpreted as the probability
that the candidate wins the election (i.e., Pr(  05)). In the vote-share market, the price of
a contract paying $, where  is the vote share, can be interpreted as the expected vote share
() Thus, we estimate  using daily data on prices in these two markets using the regression
specified above, yeilding an estimated ̂ of 0.053. Using ̂ we compute the probability that
Berlusconi wins as a function of his expected vote share  (computed in Step 1).
    Step 3: As noted above, the measure also accounts for the electoral calendar. In particular,
let Pr(election ) denote the probability that an election is held at time  If an election is not
scheduled, we use the empirical frequency of unscheduled elections in this period, 17. If

                                                24
an election is scheduled, we use probability one less the probabilities that any unscheduled
elections have re-set the electoral calendar in the intervening years. For example, from the
perspective of 2001, the next scheduled election is 2006 and there is a probability 1/7 of an
election in each of 2002, 2003, 2004, and 2005. Thus, the probability of an election in 2006
equals 1 − 4(17) = 37.
    Step 4. Then, the probability that Berlusconi is in oﬃce at time  is equal to:

         Pr( = ) = Pr( ) Pr(  05) + [1 − Pr( )] Pr(−1 = )

In words, the probability that Berlusconi is in oﬃce in time period  equals the probability
that an election occurs in time  times the probability that he wins such an election plus the
probability that an election does not occur times the probability that he was in oﬃce in time
period  − 1. Computing Pr( = ) for each period, using a discount factor of 0.9, and then
plugging into the expression for () yields the desired result.




                                             25
                                     Figu
                                        ure 1. Confliict of Intereest Channels




Note: This figure illustratees three channnels for ties between special in  nterests and pooliticians. The standard lobbyying
relationshipp, which we labbel direct lobby
                                          ying,involves traasnfers from firrms to politicians, for example e in the form off
campagin contributions,
            c              in the hope of more
                                          m      favorablee regulation in rreturn. The othe er two channells are dotted
because th hey apply only in presense of businessmen-politicians. The      e Businessman   n-Politician chaannel denotes tthe
fact that po
           olitician with bu
                           usiness interestts are tempted to issue favora  able regulation towards their o  own companie  es so
as to reap higher busines  ss earnings. Thhe Indirect Lobb bying channel, the one studie  ed in this paperr, consists in th
                                                                                                                          he
purchase ofo business serrvice by firms frrom the busine  ess connected tto the politician n. The politician
                                                                                                           n earns extra
business profits,
           p        and the firms hope for regulatory favoors in return.




                                                               26
 Figure 2. Advertisiing Shares and
                               a Price Differences
                                       D           ffor Regulateed and Unregulated Firms




Note: The share of adverrtisements plac ced on Mediase et, relative to M
                                                                       Mediaset and R  RAI, is given byy s. Δ(b) denote
                                                                                                                      es the
                        aset relative to RAI and Δ*(b) denotes
price difference on Media                               d         the eq
                                                                       quilibrium value e. ΔR(s,b) and ΔU(s) denote thhe
inverse dem mand curves fo
                         or regulated annd unregulated firms, respectiively. NB and NP denotes the     e fixed supply o
                                                                                                                      of
advertisemments on Mediaaset and RAI, re espectively. Th
                                                       he political beneefits for regulatted firms from advertising on
Mediaset are
           a given by b, and the fractioon of regulated firms is given b
                                                                       by r.




                                                            27
                  Figuree 3. Discoun
                                   nted probab
                                             bility measurre of Berlussconi in pow
                                                                                 wer




Note: The measure in Fig   gure 3 repreents the expected    d discounted pprobability that Berlusconi will be in power ovver
           ve years, with annual
the next fiv               a       discount factor of .9. The
                                                           T measure fo    or quarter j in ye
                                                                                            ear t uses the e
                                                                                                           election outcom
                                                                                                                         mes in
year t typic
           cally in the Spring) to create a measure of th  he probability fo
                                                                           or Berlusconi o of winning an eleciton, were th
                                                                                                                         he
election to be held in year t. The probab bility is then pro
                                                           ojected into the
                                                                          e future, assum ming an exogenous probabilityy that
early electiion could be heeld each year.




                                                              28
           Figure 4. Share of Adv
                                vertising on
                                           n Berlusconii’s Televisioons, Deseasoonalized

                                               Figure 4a.
                                                      4 Time Seeries




                              Figure 4b. By Regullation Indexx in the Indu
                                                                         ustry




Note: Figure 4a plots the residual of thee share of adveertising on Berl usconi’s televission after contrrolling for 4 qua
                                                                                                                         arter
fixed effectts to de-season
                          nalize the serie
                                         es. Figure 4b pllots the same sseries separate                es high or low in
                                                                                       ely for industrie
regulation, using the reguulation index in Table 2. The series
                                                        s       in both F
                                                                        Figures are weighted by the to   otal spending o on TV
          g.
advertising

                                                             29
                        Figure 5. Sector-by-Sector Estimates of Change in Share of Television Spending with
                                                        Berlusconi in Power

                                          0.07


                                          0.06
                                                                                                                                                  Finance/Insurance
                                          0.05
                                                                                                                                                         Telecommunications
                                                          Personal Items
  Expenditure Increase Under Berlusconi




                                          0.04                                                                                   Tourism/Travel     Media/Publishing
                                                                                           Professional Services
                                          0.03
                                                                           Drinks/Alcohol                   Electronics/Photography                     Pharmaceutical/Health
                                                          Apparel                              Home Appliances
                                          0.02

                                                                              Foodstuffs
                                                                                                                                    Automobiles
                                          0.01                                                          Motorcycles/Vehicles                        Manifacturing/Constructi
                                                                                                                                                              ons
                                             0           Toiletries Home Management                                     Retail

                                                                            Leisure
                                                          Toys/School Articles
                                          -0.01

                                                                                                                                                           Coefficients
                                          -0.02
                                                                                                                                                           Linear
                                                                    Personal Care                                                                          (Coefficients)
                                          -0.03                                               Housing


                                          -0.04
                                                  3.00       3.50          4.00       4.50         5.00          5.50            6.00     6.50         7.00       7.50          8.00

                                                                                               Regulation Score


Note: Figure 5 plots the coefficients from a regression of the share spending on Berlusconi’s Televisions on
interactions between each sector indicator and the indicator for Berlusconi in power. The controls are sector fixed
effects, calendar quarter fixed effects, and sector-specific time trends, as in Column (2) of Table 3. The point
estimates are plotted against the survey-based measure of regualtion. In 11 out of 11 of the above-median-regulation
11 sectors the expenditure share on Mediaset is higher when Berlsuconi is in power. Instead, among the below-
median-regulation sectors, this is the case in only 6 out of 11 industries. The figures also shows the best-fitting line.




                                                                                                            30
                       Figure 6a. Prrice per seco
                                                ond Mediasset/Rai and A
                                                                      Audience




                      Fig
                        gure 6b. Nu
                                  umber of Seeconds of Ad
                                                        ds, Mediaseet and RAI




Note: Pricee ratio is the ra
                           atio of the avera
                                           age price per second
                                                         s      on Med iaset over thatt on Rai. Audience share is th
                                                                                                                   he
ratio of Mediaset audienc  ce rate over (Mediaset + Rai) audience rate.. Note: Secon nds expressed in ‘000s. As in
Figure 4, th
           he series are de-seasonalized   d.




                                                           31
                           Table 1: Sequence of Italian General Elections and Governments (1993-2009)
  Election                   Winning                                                             Berlusconi
                                                          Prime Minister                                                    Beginning Date                    End Date
 Month/Year                  Coalition                                                           Government

                             DC, PSI,                     Giuliano Amato
  April 1992                                                                                            No                      06/28/1992                   04/27/1993
                            PSDI, PLI*                    (Socialist Party)

                                                      Carlo Azeglio Ciampi
                                                                                                        No                      04/28/1993                   05/09/1994
                                                          (Independent)

                                                         Silvio Berlusconi
   May 1994                Center-Right                                                                Yes                      06/28/1994                    1/16/1995
                                                          (Center-Right)

                                                           Lamberto Dini
                                                                                                        No                       1/16/1995                   05/16/1996
                                                           (Independent)

                                                           Romano Prodi
  April 1996                Center-Left                                                                 No                      05/17/1996                   10/20/1998
                                                           (Center-Left)

                                                        Massimo D'Alema
                                                                                                        No                      10/21/1998                   04/24/2000
                                                         (Center-Left)

                                                          Giuliano Amato
                                                                                                        No                      04/25/2000                   06/10/2001
                                                           (Center-Left)

                                                         Silvio Berlusconi
   May 2001                Center-Right                                                                Yes                      06/11/2001                   05/16/2006
                                                          (Center-Right)

                                                           Romano Prodi
  April 2006                Center-Left                                                                 No                      05/17/2006                   05/07/2008
                                                           (Center-Left)

                                                         Silvio Berlusconi
  April 2008               Center-Right                                                                Yes                      05/08/2008                   11/16/2011
                                                          (Center-Right)
Note. Shading denotes governments led by Berlusconi and his coalition. * In the months following the 1992 general elections, the four-party parliamentary majority - composed
by Christian Democrats (DC), Socialist Party (PSI), Democratic Socialist Party (PSDI) and Liberal Party (PLI) - was shaken by a series of corruption scandals. This situation led,
in 1993, to the resignation of the government presided by Antonio Amato, member of the Socialist Party, and the designation of a ``technical'' government presided by Carlo
Azeglio Ciampi, and independent figure. In 1994, the parliament was finally dissolved and new elections were held.




                                                                                       32
                   Table 2: List of Nielsen's Sectors with Survey-based Regulation Score (0-10)

                             Most regulated                                                                           Least regulated

                                                     Average Regulation                                                                       Average Regulation
                  Industry                                                                                Industry
                                                     Score from Survey                                                                        Score from Survey
        Telecommunications                              7.56 (2.07)                             Professional services                             4.67 (3.28)

       Pharmaceutical/Health                                7.33 (2.35)                                  Housing                                      4.60 (3.92)
 Manufacturing/Constructions                                7.00 (3.61)                             Drinks/Alcohol                                    4.11 (3.82)
          Media/Publishing                                  6.78 (2.86)                                 Foodstuffs                                    4.00 (3.61)
          Finance/Insurance                                 6.56 (3.09)                                   Leisure                                     4.00 (3.64)
              Automobiles                                   6.00 (3.50)                               Personal care                                   3.67 (3.67)
            Tourism/Travel                                  5.89 (3.79)                          Home management                                      3.56 (3.75)
                    Retail                                  5.56 (3.68)                        Toys/School Articles                                   3.56 (3.75)
     Electronics/Photography                                5.22 (3.27)                                   Apparel                                     3.44 (3.78)
       Motorcycles/Vehicles                                 5.22 (3.31)                              Personal items                                   3.44 (3.78)
           Home appliances                                  4.89 (3.55)                                  Toiletries                                   3.44 (3.78)

Note. The regulation score is the average score assigned to each sector by survey respondents (Italian economists) in response to the question: ``On a scale from 1 to 10, how
much do you think that firms in the following sectors can benefit, individually or collectively, from government policies (e.g. direct purchases, regulations, tax subsidies) in
Italy?''. We average the response of the 10 respondents who answered the survey. The standard deviation is reported in parentheses.




                                                                                     33
                          Table 3. Ad Spending and Berlusconi Governments: Time Series
                                             Share spent on Berlusconi TV over
Dependent variable:                           spending on Berlusconi + Public                           Share spent on Berlusconi TV &
                                                            TV                                           Press over Total ad spending
                                                  [1]                [2]                [3]                [4]               [5]               [6]
                                             0.026***           0.015***                                0.015**          0.018***
Berlusconi in power
                                              (0.007)            (0.004)                                (0.006)           (0.004)
1st Berlusconi government                                                            -0.003                                                 0.014**
(1994)                                                                              (0.009)                                                 (0.007)
2nd Berlusconi government                                                          0.019***                                                0.023***
(2001-06)                                                                           (0.005)                                                 (0.005)
3rd Berlusconi government                                                           0.014*                                                   -0.007
(2008-09)                                                                           (0.007)                                                 (0.005)
                                             0.649***           0.236***           0.245***              0.061             0.089              0.055
Audience share Mediaset
                                              (0.207)            (0.079)            (0.077)             (0.196)           (0.090)           (0.088)
No. Obs                                         1,496              1,496              1,496               1,496             1,496            1,496
R-squared                                       0.70               0.80               0.80                0.86              0.92             0.93
Mean of Dep. Var.                               0.68               0.68                0.68               0.44              0.44              0.44
Effect size (% of mean)                         3.8%               2.3%                                   3.3%              4%
Sector fixed effects                               X                  X                 X                   X                 X                 X
Calendar quarter f.e.s                             X                  X                 X                   X                 X                 X
Sector-specific linear trend                                          X                 X                                     X                 X
Notes: Each observation is a sector x quarter-year. The sample includes 22 sectors over the years 1993-2009. Weighted least squares estimates, using as
weights ad spending on Berlusconi + Public TV for columns 1-3 and total ad spending for columns 4-6. Standard errors clustered by sector in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                           34
                                                Table 4. Ad Spending and Berlusconi Governments: By Regulation Proxy
                                                 Share spent on Berlusconi TV over spending on                                      Share spent on Berlusconi TV & Press over Total ad
Dependent variable:
                                                            Berlusconi + Public TV                                                                       spending

                                                  [1]                   [2]                  [3]                   [4]                    [5]                  [6]                  [7]                  [8]
Berlusconi in power*                         0.016***              0.017***              0.008***                                     0.018***            0.018***              0.007**
Regulation score                              (0.004)               (0.004)               (0.002)                                      (0.004)             (0.004)              (0.003)
Berlusconi in power* High                                                                                       0.020**                                                                               0.015*
Regulation                                                                                                      (0.008)                                                                               (0.009)
                                            -0.055***                                                                                -0.075***
Berlusconi in power
                                              (0.018)                                                                                  (0.019)
                                             0.667***                                                                                   0.074
Audience share Mediaset
                                              (0.215)                                                                                  (0.201)
Observations                                    1,496                 1,496                 1,496                1,496                  1,496                1,496                1,496                1,496
R-squared                                       0.72                  0.76                   0.82                 0.82                   0.87                0.88                  0.93                 0.93
Sector fixed effects                               X                    X                     X                     X                      X                    X                    X                    X
Calendar quarter f.e.s                             X                                                                                       X
Quarter-year f.e.s                                                      X                     X                     X                                           X                    X                    X
Sector-specific linear trend                                                                  X                     X                                                                X                    X
Notes: Each observation is a sector x quarter-year. The sample includes 22 sectors over the years 1993-2009. Weighted least squares estimates, using as weights ad spending on Berlusconi + Public TV for cols. 1-
4 and total ad spending for cols. 5-8. Notice that in Columns 2-4 and 6-8 the indicator for Berlusconi in power and the audience share controls are absorbed by the quarter-year fixed effects. High Regulation is an
indicator variable that takes value one for sectors with regulation score above median and zero otherwise. Standard errors clustered by sector in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                                                         35
                                                             Table 5. Decomposition: Quantity vs. Price and Peak vs. Off-peak Minutes
Panel A: Time Series Specification
                                                                                                       Share Seconds on Berlusconi's                          Average Price per                    Difference in Price per Second
                                             Share Spending on Berlusconi's TV                                     TV                                          Second in Euros                            (Mediaset - RAI)
                                                              Peak                                                      Peak                              Berlusconi'         Public TV                              Peak
Dependent variable:                           All Times                         Off-peak             All Times                          Off-peak                                                 All times                           Off-peak
                                                              Hours                                                     Hours                                s TV               (RAI)                                Hours
                                                   [1]              [2]               [3]                 [4]              [5]              [6]                 [7]                [8]               [9]              [10]              [11]

                                              0.015*** 0.016***                   0.012**               0.003            0.007               0             8.955***             -6.015         14.973*** 13.984*** 9.010***
Berlusconi in power
                                                (0.004)          (0.005)           (0.005)             (0.003)          (0.004)          (0.003)             (2.288)            (3.511)           (3.879)           (4.267)           (2.749)
Observations                                     1,496            1,495             1,495               1,496            1,495            1,495               1,496              1,490             1,490             1,479             1,480
R-squared                                         0.80            0.73               0.78               0.84             0.76             0.80                 0.88              0.74              0.57               0.52             0.42
Mean of Dep. Var.                                0.705             0.674            0.751                0.807           0.717            0.856               182.9              341.9             -159.9             -97.4            -115.5
Full set of controls                                X                X                 X                   X                 X               X                   X                  X                 X                 X                 X

Panel B: Diff-in-diff With Respect to Regulation
                                                                                                       Share Seconds on Berlusconi's                          Average Price per                    Difference in Price per Second
                                             Share Spending on Berlusconi's TV                                     TV                                          Second in Euros                            (Mediaset - RAI)
                                                              Peak                                                   Peak                                 Berlusconi'         Public TV                              Peak
Dependent variable:                           All Times                         Off-peak             All Times                        Off-peak                                                   All times                           Off-peak
                                                              Hours                                                  Hours                                   s TV               (RAI)                                Hours

Berlusconi in power*                          0.008*** 0.010***                     0.004               0.003         0.007***            0.002             3.014**            -4.210*          7.203*** 7.454***                      2.472
Regulation score                                (0.002)          (0.002)           (0.003)             (0.002)          (0.002)          (0.002)             (1.393)            (2.174)           (2.150)           (2.518)           (1.778)

Observations                                     1,496            1,495             1,495               1,496            1,495            1,495               1,496              1,490             1,490             1,479             1,480
R-squared                                         0.82            0.76               0.81               0.85             0.77             0.81                 0.92              0.83              0.68               0.64             0.54
Full set of controls                                X                X                 X                   X                 X               X                   X                  X                 X                 X                 X

Notes: Each observation is a sector x quarter-year. The sample includes 22 sectors over the years 1993-2009. Weighted least squares estimates, using as weight ad spending on Berlusconi * Public TV. All regressions include sector and
calendar quarter fixed effects, a control for the Mediaset audience share, as well as sector-specific linear trends. The specification in Panel B also includes quarter-year fixed effects (which absorb the indicator for Berlusconi in power and
the audience control). Standard errors clustered by sector in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                                                                        36
                                                          Table 6. Implied Political Returns and Profits from quid-pro-quo

Panel A. Implied Political Returns from Regulation for Firms                                               Berlusconi's TV:       Public TV:                Difference:
          Change in Price in Euros per second when Berlusconi is
Row 1
          in power (Table 5, Columns 7-9)                                                                  8.955 (2.288)***     -6.015 (3.511)           14.973 (3.879)***
          Fraction of advertisements placed by regulated firms ( r
Row 2
          ) when Berlusconi is not power                                                                                                                    0.336 (.008)
          Implied political benefit in Euros per second b : Row 1
Row 3
          divided by Row 2                                                                                                                                      44.562
                Implied benefit (b ): Row 3 times 5.2m seconds of                                                                                        231m Euros per year
Row 4
                advertising in a year by regulated industries                                                                                      2.1bn Euros over 9 yrs in power
                Implied annual benefit by industry (b ): Row 3 times seconds Telecommunications: 40m Euros                                         Tourism/Travel: 6m Euro
Row 5
                of advertising in a year for the sector                      Pharmaceutical/Health: 22m Euro                                       Retail: 40m Euro
                                                                                                       Manufacturing/Construction: 3m Euro         Electronics: 3m Euro
                                                                                                       Media/Publishing: 51m Euro                  Motorcycles/Vehicles: 1m Euro
                                                                                                       Finance/Insurance: 13m Euro                 Home appliances: 13m Euro
                                                                                                       Automobiles: 38m Euro
Panel B. Mediaset Profits due to Indirect Lobbying Channel                                               Berlusconi's TV:       Public TV:                  Difference:
Row 6
                Total annual number of seconds of advertisements                                        13.7 million seconds 3.6 million seconds
                Implied annual revenue (and profit) change with
Row 7
                Berlusconi in power (Row 6 times Row 1)                                                   123 million Euros    -22 million Euros         144 million Euros
                Cumulative revenue (and profit) change from
Row 8           Berlusconi in power over 9 years of Berlusconi
                                                                                                           1.1 billion Euros   -194 million Euro          1.3 billion Euros
                governments
                Implied percent change in profits with Berlusconi in
Row 9
                power (assuming 20 percent margin)                                                                  +25%             -9%
                Implied percent of market capitalization of Mediaset in
Row 10
                1997 (5.3 billion Euros)                                                                                21%
Notes: Table reports implied annual benefit of regulation and revenue shifts due to to the indirect lobbying channel.



                                                                                                             37
                                                                                                       Table 7. Robustness Checks
                                                                                                                                                                      Unweighted
                                                          Quadratic        S.e.s     Dep. Var. Includes                                                                                  Forward-looking Both measures of
                                           Benchmark                                                                                         Unweighted           Regressions (Excludes
Robustness Check:                                       sector-specific Clustered by Spending in La7 TV                                                                                     Measure of      Berlusconi in
                                          Specification                                                                                      Regressions             Bottom 20% of
                                                             trend         Year        in Denominator                                                                                   Berlusconi in power    power
                                                                                                                                                                       spending)
Dependent variable:                                                                            Share spent on Berlusconi TV over spending on Berlusconi + Public TV
                                [1]                                     [2]                   [3]                       [4]                         [5]                         [6]                             [7]                          [8]
Panel A: Time Series Specification
Indicator for Berlusconi in  0.015***                              0.015***              0.015***                  0.018***                     0.011**                      0.010*                                                      0.023**
power                         (0.004)                                (0.004)               (0.004)                   (0.004)                     (0.005)                     (0.005)                                                      (0.009)
Expected probability of                                                                                                                                                                                    0.015***                       -0.014
Berlusconi in power                                                                                                                                                                                          (0.004)                      (0.010)
Observations                                   1,496                  1,496                 1,496                     1,496                       1,496                       1,196                           1,496                        1,496
R-squared                                      0.80                   0.81                  0.80                      0.79                        0.59                        0.76                             0.80                         0.80
Panel B: Diff-in-diff With Respect to Regulation
Berlusconi in power*       0.008***      0.007***                                         0.008**                  0.008***                       0.005                     0.008**                                                     0.015***
Regulation Score                               (0.002)               (0.002)               (0.003)                   (0.002)                     (0.004)                     (0.003)                                                      (0.004)
Exp. Prob. Berl. In Power*                                                                                                                                                                                  0.006**                    -0.013***
Regulation score                                                                                                                                                                                             (0.002)                      (0.004)
Observations                                   1,496                  1,496                 1,496                     1,496                       1,496                       1,196                           1,496                        1,496
R-squared                                      0.82                   0.83                  0.82                      0.82                        0.61                        0.78                             0.82                         0.82
Notes: Each observation is a sector x quarter-year. The sample includes 22 sectors over the years 1993-2009. Weighted least squares estimates, using as weight ad spending on Berlusconi + Public TV for all specifications except for columns 5
and 6, which are unweighted. All regressions include sector and calendar quarter fixed effects, a control for the Mediaset audience share, as well as sector-specific linear trends. The specifications in Panel B also include quarter-year fixed effects.
Standard errors in parentheses clustered by sector except in Column 4. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                                                                            38
                                                            Table 8. Firm-level Analysis
                                     Share spent on Berlusconi TV
Dependent variable:                                                                        Indicator for Any Spending on Berlusconi's TV
                                        over Total TV spending
                                             [1]                   [2]                     [3]                 [4]                   [5]                  [6]

                                        0.015***                                       0.005*                0.007
Berlusconi in power
                                          (0.004)                                       (0.002)              (0.007)
Berlusconi in power*                                          0.007***                                                             0.002                0.008
Regulation score                                                (0.002)                                                           (0.002)              (0.005)
Observations                              22,157                22,157                 22,157               39,878                22,157               39,878
R-squared                                  0.60                  0.60                   0.35                 0.43                  0.36                 0.43
No. Of different firms                       756                   756                    756                  792                  756                   792
Mean of Dep. Var.                           0.67                  0.67                    0.98                 0.51                 0.98                 0.51

Calendar quarter f.e.s                        X                                            X                    X
Quarter-year f.e.s                                                  X                                                                 X                    X
Full set of controls                          X                     X                      X                    X                     X                    X
Weighted by TV ad
                                             Yes                   Yes                    Yes                   No                  Yes                   No
spending
Notes: Each observation is a firm x quarter-year. The sample includes 756 firms over the years 1993-2009. An observation is missing if the firm has no TV ad
spending in that quarter-year. Weighted least squares estimates, using as weights ad spending on Berlusconi + Public TV, except in Columns 4 and 6. All
regressions include firm fixed effects, a control for the Mediaset audience share, as well as sector-specific linear trends. In columns 2 and 4 they also include
quarter-year fixed effects. Standard errors clustered by sector in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                                 39
                              Table 9. Firm-level Heterogeneity
Panel A. Ad Spending and Firm Size
Dependent variable:             Share spent on Berlusconi TV over Total TV spending
                                                         [1]                [2]                 [3]                    [4]

Berlusconi in power* Ad Spending                      0.002**           0.002**
Measure                                               (0.001)           (0.001)
Berlusconi in power* Firm Size                                                                0.003                 0.003
Measure                                                                                      (0.003)               (0.003)
                                                     TV ad             total ad
Proxy for ad spending:
                                                    spending          spending
Proxy for firm size:                                                                       log(sales)            log(empl.)
No. of firms                                           756                756                 576                    600
Observations                                          22,157             22,157              12,145                 13,227
R-squared                                              0.43               0.43                0.66                   0.66
Panel B. Firm performance and Ownership
Dependent variable:                   Share spent on Berlusconi TV over Total TV spending

Berlusconi in power * Bad                              0.004             0.003                -0.013
Performance in t-1                                    (0.006)           (0.008)              (0.024)
                                                                                                                    0.003                  0.003
Berlusconi in power * Italian                                                                                      (0.009)                (0.009)
                                                    Negative          Decrease            Financial
Proxy for bad performance:
                                                     profits          in sales             distress
Measure of Italian ownership:                                                                                 > 25% equity largest share
No. of firms                                           578                540                 579                    584                   584
Observations                                          12,236             10,288              12,086                 19,168                19,168
R-squared                                              0.66               0.68                0.66                   0.61                  0.61
Notes: Each observation is a firm x quarter-year. The sample includes the years 1993-2009, but an observation is missing if the firm has no TV ad spending
in that quarter-year. Weighted least squares estimates, using as weight ad spending on Berlusconi + Public TV, except for Columns 1 and 2 in Panel A
which are unweighted. All regressions include firm and quarter-year fixed effects, the standalone firm characteristic (size, performance or ownership), as
well as sector-specific linear trends. Standard errors clustered by sector in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                           40
                                                    Appendix Table 1. Summary statistics
Panel A: Sector-level Analysis
                                                          Full sample                          High regulation                       Low regulation
                                                      No. of sectors = 22                     No. of sectors = 11                   No. of sectors = 11
                                                     Obs.     Mean Std Dev                   Obs. Mean Std Dev                     Obs. Mean Std Dev
Any spending on:
    Berlusconi TV & Press                            1496            1           0            748          1           0            748           1           0
    Berlusconi TV                                    1496            1           0            748          1           0            748           1           0
Share spent on:
    Berlusconi TV over
    Berlusconi + Public TV
    spending                                         1496         0.676 0.0957                748       0.662 0.1084                748        0.685 0.085
    Berlusconi TV & Press over
    Total ad spending                                1496         0.441 0.137                 748       0.379 0.1228                748        0.493 0.1262
    Berlusconi TV over Total TV
    spending                                         1496         0.646 0.0889                748       0.631 0.0982                748        0.657 0.0805
Audience share Mediaset                              1496         0.484 0.0145                748       0.484 0.0142                748        0.483 0.0147
Regulation score                                     1496         5.012 1.3918                748       6.399 0.7869                748        3.872 0.3707
High regulation                                      1496         0.451 0.4978                748         1      0                  748          0      0
Berlusconi in power                                  1496         0.487 0.5                   748        0.5 0.5003                 748        0.476 0.4998
Panel B. Firm-level analysis
                                                          Full sample                          High regulation                       Low regulation
                                                      No. of firms = 792                      No. of firms = 467                    No. of firms = 440
                                                     Obs.     Mean Std Dev                   Obs. Mean Std Dev                     Obs. Mean Std Dev
Any spending on:
    Berlusconi TV & Press                              39684 0.977             0.150         19278 0.969             0.173         20406 0.983              0.128
    Berlusconi TV                                      39684 0.882             0.323         19278 0.867             0.340         20406 0.894              0.307
Share spent on:
    Berlusconi TV over
    Berlusconi + Public TV
    spending                                           22157 0.669             0.212           9603 0.652            0.218         12554 0.680              0.208
    Berlusconi TV & Press over
    Total ad spending                                  39684 0.479             0.240         19278 0.405             0.230         20406 0.542              0.230
    Berlusconi TV over Total TV
    spending                                           22157 0.646             0.209           9603 0.628            0.212         12554 0.657              0.206
Audience share Mediaset                                39684       0.484       0.015         19278 0.484             0.014         20406 0.483              0.015
Regulation score                                       39684       5.006       1.348         19278 6.333             0.781         20406 3.888              0.317
High regulation                                        39684       0.457       0.498         19278     1                 0         20406     0                  0
Berlusconi in power                                    39684       0.484       0.500         19278 0.500             0.500         20406 0.471              0.499
Notes: Results weighted using total ad spending, except for the following variables for which total ad spending on Berlusconi + Public TV is used: "Berlusconi TV
over total TV spending, Berlusconi TV over Berlusconi + Public TV spending".




                                                                                41
  Appen
      ndix Figure 1. Share off Advertising
                                         g on Berlus coni’s TV aand Press, D
                                                                           Deseasonalizzed
                                Figure A1.a.
                                        A     Time S
                                                   Series




                           Figure A1
                                   1.b. By Regu
                                              ulation Indeex in the Ind
                                                                      dustry




Note: Appeendix Figure A1 plots the equuivalent of Figure 4 except tha
                                                                     at the spending
                                                                                   g variable includes spending o
                                                                                                                on
press in ad
          ddition to ad sp
                         pending on telev
                                        vision.




                                                         42
Appendix Figure 2. Sector-by-Sector Estimates of Change in Share of Television and Press
                          Spending with Berlusconi in Power
                                           0.07


                                           0.06                                                                                              Finance/Insurance


                                           0.05                                                                                                    Media/Publishing
   Expenditure Increase Under Berlusconi




                                                                                 Leisure
                                           0.04
                                                                                                        Electronics/Photography                               Pharmaceutical/Health
                                                               Apparel                                                     Tourism/Travel
                                           0.03                                                                                                               Telecommunications
                                                                                                   Home Appliances
                                                                           Drinks/Alcohol
                                           0.02                                               Professional Services                                  Manifacturing/Constructio
                                                                                 Foodstuffs                                                                     ns
                                                           Home Management
                                           0.01                                                                                     Automobiles
                                                         Toiletries
                                                                                                                        Retail
                                             0
                                                             Personal Items                       Housing
                                -0.01                                                                           Motorcycles/Vehicles
                                                                         Personal Care                                                             Coefficients
                                -0.02                                                                                                              Linear (Coefficients)
                                                                       Toys/School Articles

                                -0.03
                                                  3.00          3.50          4.00         4.50        5.00           5.50       6.00       6.50       7.00        7.50       8.00

                                                                                                            Regulation Score




Note: Appendix Figure 2 plots the coefficients from a regression of the share spending on Berlusconi’s Televisions
and Press on interactions between each sector indicator and the indicator for Berlusconi in power. The controls are
sector fixed effects, calendar quarter fixed effects, and sector-specific time trends, as in Column (5) of Table 3. The
point estimates are plotted against the survey-based measure of regualtion. In 9 out of 11 of the above-median-
regulation 11 sectors the expenditure share on Mediaset is higher when Berlusconi is in power. Instead, among the
below-media-regulation sectors, this is the case in only 7 out of 11 industries.




                                                                                                               43
       App
         pendix Figu
                   ure 3. Sharee of seconds on Mediaseet, Deseason
                                                                 nalized, By Regulation




Note: Appeendix Figure 3 plots a comple  ement to Figure
                                                       e 6b in the pap
                                                                     per, showing the
                                                                                    e share of seco
                                                                                                  onds on Media
                                                                                                              aset
separately by level of regulation of the sectors.
                                         s

      App
        pendix Figu
                  ure 4. Price per
                               p second Mediaset/R
                                                 Rai, Deseasoonalized, by Regulation
                                                                                   n




Note: Appeendix Figure 4 plots the equiv
                                       valent of Figure
                                                      e 6a, showing tthe price ratio sseparately by le
                                                                                                     evel of regulatiion of
the sectors
          s.




                                                            44
