                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           DOES RELIGION AFFECT ECONOMIC GROWTH AND HAPPINESS"
                          EVIDENCE FROM RAMADAN

                                       Filipe R. Campante
                                    David H. Yanagizawa-Drott

                                        Working Paper 19768
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19768


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2013




We thank Alberto Abadie, Daron Acemoglu, Alberto Alesina, Robert Barro, Marianne Bertrand, Davin
Chor, Decio Coviello, QA Do, John Friedman, Bernard Gauthier, Paola Giuliano, Ed Glaeser, Rick
Hornbeck, Asim Khwaja, Robert Lawrence, Nathan Nunn, Rohini Pande, Torsten Persson, Jesse Shapiro,
Andrei Shleifer, Nico Voigtlander, and Katia Zhuravskaya for very helpful conversations, participants
at the NBER Political Economy Meeting, the "Institutional Challenges in Emerging Economies'' conference
at SITE Stockholm, and the 2013 NEUDC conference, and seminar participants at Chicago Booth,
Chicago Harris, ECARES, HKS, HEC Montreal, PSE, UC Berkeley, and UCLA for many useful comments,
and Aletheia Donald for superb research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Filipe R. Campante and David H. Yanagizawa-Drott. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Does Religion Affect Economic Growth and Happiness" Evidence from Ramadan
Filipe R. Campante and David H. Yanagizawa-Drott
NBER Working Paper No. 19768
December 2013
JEL No. E20,J20,O40,O43,Z12

                                             ABSTRACT

We study the economic effects of religious practices in the context of the observance of Ramadan
fasting, one of the central tenets of Islam. To establish causality, we exploit variation in the length
of the fasting period due to the rotating Islamic calendar. We report two key, quantitatively meaningful
results: 1) longer Ramadan fasting has a negative effect on output growth in Muslim countries, and
2) it increases subjective well-being among Muslims. We then examine labor market outcomes, and
find that these results cannot be primarily explained by a direct reduction in labor productivity due
to fasting. Instead, the evidence indicates that Ramadan affects Muslims' relative preferences regarding
work and religiosity, suggesting that the mechanism operates at least partly by changing beliefs and
values that influence labor supply and occupational choices beyond the month of Ramadan itself. Together,
our results indicate that religious practices can affect labor supply choices in ways that have negative
implications for economic performance, but that nevertheless increase subjective well-being among
followers.


Filipe R. Campante
Harvard Kennedy School
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
filipe_campante@harvard.edu

David H. Yanagizawa-Drott
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, 02138 MA
USA
David_Yanagizawa-Drott@hks.harvard.edu
1      Introduction
Religions are essentially ubiquitous across human societies. It is thus natural to speculate that
they may affect important economic outcomes, such as economic growth – as many have done
dating at the very least to Max Weber’s (1905) celebrated work. While this possibility is certainly
appealing, assessing its prevalence and importance is a rather complicated task, both conceptually
and empirically, not the least because religions are multifaceted social phenomena whose different
aspects could most likely have different effects.
    That said, one fundamental aspect that is common to all forms of religion is that they prescribe
rules of behavior, or practices, that constrain followers. In other words, religious practices are a
kind of informal institution (North 1991), imposing constraints that structure economic, political
and social interactions. First, religious practices impose an immediate trade-off, as they require
time and resources that are then unavailable for production. Going to temples or to pilgrimages,
taking time to pray or to meditate or to study sacred books, spending money on religious rituals,
not working on religious days of rest: these will all take away from what is devoted to (materially)
productive activities. Second, they could also directly affect productivity, for instance by limiting
social interactions with non-believers or by imposing dietary restrictions. Third, they may shape
beliefs and values that determine economic decisions such as labor supply, occupational choice, or
savings behavior.
    The recent empirical literature that has studied the relationship between religion and economic
performance – after years of relative neglect from economists – has found a negative correlation
between religious practices (e.g. attendance at religious services) and economic growth (Barro
and McCleary 2003, McCleary and Barro 2006), and between religiosity and income at the cross-
country and individual levels (e.g. Barro and McCleary 2003). However, as religious behavior and
religiosity are likely endogenous and affected by economic growth itself, convincing evidence that
there is a causal effect driving these relationships has proved elusive.1
    Still, taking this evidence at face value, if religions prescribe rules and practices that constrain
the behavior of followers in ways that lead to lower material living standards, it begs the question
of whether these practices also have private, non-pecuniary benefits. If such benefits exist, it
would help explain why religious practices are sustained in equilibrium and why religions are so
ubiquitous.2 An empirical strand of literature in the social sciences suggests that they do exist,
as religious engagement and religiosity is associated with higher levels of self-reported happiness
    1 The causal identification challenge was obviously acknowledged by the literature. For instance, Barro and Mc-
Cleary (2003) try to address it using instrumental variables (e.g. presence of a state religion). While reassuring with
respect to reverse causality, the limitations of their empirical setting do not let them deal with omitted variables.
   2 There are many arguments for the persistence of costly religious practices, relying on approaches ranging from

economic (e.g. Iannaccone 1992) to psychological (e.g. Plante and Sherman 2001) or evolutionary (e.g. Hinde 2009).



                                                          1
and life satisfaction, or more generally, subjective well-being (SWB) at the individual level (e.g.
Dolan, Peasgood, and White 2008; Deaton and Stone 2013). However, whether such associations
can be given a causal interpretation remains very much an open question as endogeneity issues
remain a fundamental challenge in this literature as well (Argyle 2003, Francis 2010).
     Against this background, we present in this paper what is, to the best of our knowledge, the
first estimate of a causal effect of a religious practice on economic growth and subjective well-
being.3 We do so by focusing on the specific example of fasting in observance of the Islamic holy
month of Ramadan. Ramadan fasting is surely a very prominent example of religious practice: as
one of the Five Pillars of Islam, its observance is understood to be obligatory for all billion-plus
Muslim believers. As this religious practice has a well-defined rule specifying that Muslims shall
fast from dawn to sunset, and as the month of Ramadan rotates over the seasons according to the
lunar calendar, it also provides us with an ideal context for dealing with the causal identification
issues that confound the study of the links between religious practices and economic outcomes.
     To give a concrete example, when Ramadan falls in the Northern Hemisphere winter, the pre-
scribed length of fasting according to the Qur’an will be longer in Bangladesh than in Turkey,
because Bangladesh is closer to the Equator. However, when Ramadan falls in the summer, fast-
ing will be longer in Turkey than in Bangladesh. This interaction of latitude and the vagaries of
the lunar calendar being exogenous to our outcomes of interest, we thus have an ideal source of
idiosyncratic variation in the prescribed intensity of the practice.
     Using country-level panel data, we show that longer prescribed Ramadan fasting has a robust
negative effect on output growth in Muslim countries, whether measured by GDP per capita or
GDP, and whether measured in yearly rates or aggregated up to five-year periods. Most reassur-
ingly, we find no effect whatsoever on GDP growth in non-Muslim countries, underscoring that
the result is unlikely to be spurious.
     The quantitative significance of our estimates can be illustrated as follows: if average daily
Ramadan fasting were to increase from the actual average of 12 hours to 13 hours – which is about
one standard deviation of the variation for the typical Muslim country over the Ramadan cycle –
output growth would be lower by about 0.7 percentage point. As a comparison, the coefficient
found by Barro and McCleary (2003) implies that a one-standard-deviation increase in church-
going would be associated with a 1.1 percentage point decline in growth rates.
     We then use the same empirical strategy to estimate the causal effect of Ramadan fasting on
SWB. Using data from the World Values Survey, we find that Ramadan fasting leads Muslim
individuals to report greater levels of both happiness and life satisfaction. Once again, we find no
    3 Clingingsmith, Khwaja, and Kremer (2009) document that the Hajj pilgrimage to Mecca, another of the Five

Pillars of Islam, leads to an increase in negative feelings suggesting distress (for women only). However, they find no
effect on self-reported life satisfaction.



                                                          2
effect whatsoever on the SWB of non-Muslim individuals in non-Muslim countries.
    The results thus shed light on the question of why religions persist despite containing practices
that impose constraints on individuals. Our evidence indicates that exogenously inducing Muslims
to fast longer, for religious reasons, has a net positive impact on their SWB: put simply, it makes
them happier in spite of making them relatively poorer. This is particularly interesting since recent
research has provided evidence that economic growth leads to higher SWB at the cross-country
level (Stevenson and Wolfers 2008), in contrast with the well-known “Easterlin paradox” (Easterlin
1974). Therefore, to the extent that lower GDP growth causally reduces SWB, our results show
that this effect is trumped by the non-pecuniary benefits of the practice on SWB.
    To further understand these results, we turn to the mechanisms that might be driving the effects
on economic growth. In particular, we focus on an arena that we would expect to be of first-
order importance: labor markets. The key insight is that different mechanisms would have distinct
implications in this domain. On the one hand, if labor productivity goes down because of fasting,
this would lead to a downward shift in labor demand. On the other hand, if increased fasting leads
workers to simply choose to work less – whether because of the direct competition from religious
activities or of an indirect effect through changed attitudes towards work in general – this should
correspond to a leftward shift in labor supply.
    Using country-level panel data on employment and wages in manufacturing sectors, and indi-
vidual survey data on employment status, we find evidence that the labor-supply effect dominates.
This evidence indicates that the negative effect of Ramadan fasting on GDP growth is mostly driven
by occupational choice out of formal employment and into the informal sector, rather than simply
by decreased productivity directly associated with fasting.
    In addition, we find direct suggestive evidence that Ramadan fasting affects work-related in-
dividual beliefs and values. Specifically, Ramadan leads Muslim men to report that they care
relatively more about religion and less about work and material rewards. This is interesting in its
own right, but may also help explain the underlying mechanism driving the shifts in labor supply
and occupational choice decisions. More generally, this finding underscores the view that religious
practices affect the formation of beliefs and values whose impact goes well beyond the month of
Ramadan itself.
    This evidence on mechanisms is illuminating in two crucial ways. First, it helps reconcile the
results linking religion, growth, and happiness. If the growth effect works at least partly through
labor supply choices – that is, individuals choosing to work less or in more flexible, if less pro-
ductive, occupations – that seems consistent with any potential impact of reduced growth on SWB
being relatively muted. To the extent that religious practices affect individual preferences, it is less
surprising that negative effects on growth could co-exist with a net positive effect on subjective
well-being, in spite of the generally positive correlation between the latter and the former.


                                                   3
     Second, and just as important, that the effect is not driven simply by the impact of fasting on
productivity suggests that it is not specific to Ramadan, but rather an indication of the potential
effects of religious practices in general. In short, what we find are not the effects of fasting per se
(reduction in nutritional intake affecting productivity), but rather that more intense practicing of
religion has an impact on individual beliefs and values that reduce labor supply. More generally,
this is consistent with the view of religious practices as an input into the production of beliefs and
values (Barro and McCleary 2003), such as attitudes towards work, thrift, trust, etc., which can
enduringly and significantly affect economically relevant decisions. By changing them, religious
practices can thus have a substantial aggregate impact, such as that which our estimation detects.
     To be sure, neither our results nor those of the extant literature should be interpreted as im-
plying that religion, broadly understood, necessarily causes poor economic performance. Just as
importantly, we focus on religious practices, and other aspects of religion could have much differ-
ent effects.4
     Besides the aforementioned literature studying religion and income and growth, and religion
and SWB, our paper also relates to a number of additional strands. Some have studied the effects of
adherence to different religions on a number of economic and political outcomes (Barro 1997, La
Porta et al 1999), or used survey evidence to study the connection between religiosity and economic
attitudes (Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales 2003).5 We differ in that we focus on a specific example
of religious practice, which lets us deal with the issue of identifying a causal effect and considering
specific mechanisms. More broadly, we build on the by now vast literature documenting the effects
of culture – of which religion is certainly a very important component – on a number of economic
outcomes (see Guiso Sapienza and Zingales 2006 for an early survey and Nunn 2012 for a more
recent discussion).
     Our use of micro evidence to study the impact of religion on individual economic decisions also
puts us in line with a recent and growing literature, which looks at specific topics such as work
ethic (Spenkuch 2011), entrepreneurship (Audretsch, Boente, and Tamvada 2007), loan repayment
decisions (Baele, Farooq, and Ongena 2011), social trust (Berggren and Bjornskov 2011), and
human capital accumulation (Becker and Woessmann 2009), among others. Within this literature,
our paper is closest to Clingingsmith, Khwaja, and Kremer (2009), who study the impact of the
Hajj. Consistent with our evidence, they also find an important impact of this practice on individual
views and beliefs.
   4 For  instance, Barro and McCleary (2003) and McCleary and Barro (2006) find a positive relationship between
economic growth and religious beliefs such as belief in hell. For skeptical takes on this result, see Durlauf, Kourtellos,
and Tan (2012) and Young (2009).
    5 In particular, those studies tend to find a negative coefficient for Muslim adherence in regressions focusing on

growth or institutional development. Our results do not speak directly to that, since we focus on one specific aspect of
Islam. Kuran (2004) provides an extensive discussion of possible economic implications of Islamic institutions.



                                                            4
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 lays out some background on
Ramadan practices, their potential effects, and how they relate to our source of variation. Section
3 provides a motivating conceptual discussion, and Section 4 describes the data and empirical
strategy. Section 5 presents the results, which we then discuss in Section 6. Section 7 concludes.


2     Background
Ramadan is the ninth month of the Islamic (Hijri) calendar, and is considered sacred as the month
in which the Prophet Muhammad first received revelations. Fasting (sawm) during that month
is one of the Five Pillars of Islam – the five basic acts that are considered an obligation for all
believers, and the foundation of Muslim life. The fasting encompasses abstention from food and
drink, as well as smoking and sexual activities, between dawn and sunset during the entire month.6
    Ramadan fasting entails obvious physiological consequences because of the constraints it places
on the ingestion of food and liquids, and these have been extensively studied in the medical lit-
erature. Not surprisingly, the literature has consistently found body weight loss and significant
metabolic changes (e.g. Hallak and Nomani 1988, Ziaee et al 2006). In addition, Leiper, Molla,
and Molla (2003) summarize the research as finding symptoms such as irritability, headaches, sleep
deprivation, and lassitude being commonly reported – although with few major health problems.
    More broadly, it stands to reason that these effects would have potential implications for pro-
ductivity at work. Indeed, research has found significant prevalence of individuals reporting tired-
ness and unwillingness to work, as well as reduced levels of activity and concentration ability,
during the month of Ramadan (Afifi 1997, Karaagaoglu and Yucecan 2000).7 More specific stud-
ies focusing on worker productivity in heavy labor activities have also found “evidence of [...]
substantial health hazard to Islamic workers in such situations,” going as far as “strongly [urging]
employers to refrain from assigning Islamic workers to heat work or heavy daytime work during
Ramadan” (Schmahl and Metzler 1991). In short, there is strong indication that Ramadan fasting
affects followers in ways that affect their productivity at work, although any negative effects seem
unlikely to persist beyond the fasting period (Toda and Morimoto 2004). Consistent with that, a
recent survey on the impact of Ramadan on productivity (Dinar Standard 2011) finds that up to one
in four Muslim professionals admits to not maintaing the same level of productivity as compared
with other months.
    No less important are the broader effects of Ramadan on individual lifestyle and social life
during the holy month (Maqsood 2007, Marshall Cavendish Corporation 2010). The daily rou-
   6 There are exemptions from the obligation, typically for children, the ill and the elderly, travelers, and breastfeeding

women.
   7 Recent research by economists has focused on the effects of Ramadan fasting on fetal health, and its potential

long-term consequences (Almond and Mazumder 2011, Van Ewijk 2011).

                                                             5
tine incorporates major pre-dawn (suhur) and fast-breaking (iftar) meals, which are social events
involving family, friends and acquaintances, and co-workers – turning iftar in particular into a
“unique opportunity for socializing” (Chenar 2011). Iftar events often take place in mosques,
which, more broadly, typically hold many special events throughout the month. As a result of this,
and of the additional tarawih prayers that are meant to be performed on Ramadan days (beyond the
five daily prayers that are another Pillar of Islam), increased mosque-going is an important feature
of the period. Major festivities also mark the end of the month, with the fast-breaking festival of
Eid al-Fitr. While there is substantial variation across countries regarding the specifics of these
and other Ramadan practices, social activities and increased interaction with fellow believers are
common themes.
     Not all Ramadan practices are of a social nature, of course. Indeed, the (optional) ritual of
i’tekaf (“staying in on place”) is a traditional part of the last ten days of the month, and reading
the Qur’an is also strongly encouraged. Consistent with that, for instance, Afifi (1997) reports that
fasting individuals tend to get more involved in “stress reducing” (such as watching TV, listening
to radio or visiting friends) and “spiritual” activities (such as praying and reading the Qur’an).
     Given all of these unique features and practices that take place during the holy month, one
might expect that the intensity of Ramadan engagement would affect social interactions in ways
that impact economic decisions and the formation of economically relevant beliefs. First, although
it could also be the case that enhanced networking opportunities might increase productivity, the
fact remains that those practices obviously compete for time with regular work activities. In fact,
the aforementioned survey by Dinar Standard (2011) estimates that reduced Ramadan working
hours could have a substantial impact on production during the month, of up to 4% per weekday
working hour lost. In addition, the salience of religiosity and familiy life during that month could
certainly have an effect on individual beliefs and attitudes towards work, family, savings, and so
on. These could in turn extend the impact of Ramadan far beyond the month itself.
     Needless to say, observance of each specific Ramadan practice will vary tremendously across
individuals and countries, and is very hard to observe on a systematic basis. However, our empirical
strategy will take advantage of factors that will exogenously shock that intensity of engagement to
identify its impact on our outcomes of interest.
     Our strategy, as we will later on discuss in greater detail, is based on the fact that the Islamic
calendar is lunar, so that months correspond to lunar cycles (around 29.5 days). As a result, the year
is ten to eleven days shorter than the solar year, and months rotate over the seasons accordingly, in
cycles of roughly 33 years. This means that the number of hours of daily fasting – corresponding
to the period between sunrise and sunset – will vary depending on the time of the year in which
Ramadan happens to fall in any given year, and also on latitude. Simply put, our basic idea revolves
around the effect of a longer daily fasting period – as is the case when Ramadan occurs during the


                                                  6
summer, and particularly so at greater latitudes – and our central assumption is that the intensity
of engagement increases with those extra hours.
    The longer hours obviously amplify the physiological impact of going without food and drink
– especially under conditions of heat and humidity – and of the fewer hours of sleep that come
from having to wake up for pre-dawn meals. Just as importantly, dealing with that impact requires
changes in daily routines and activities that affect the broader lifestyle changes we have discussed.
Indeed, it is not hard to find reports underscoring that point: summer Ramadans seem to entail more
time spent with family, in worship, and in contemplative activities, as well as a general “slowdown”
in daily activities so as to conserve energy and avoid the ill effects of heat and humidity.8 More
directly, summer Ramadans also seem associated with a greater crowding out of work activities,
as “the working day shortens by two or three hours” (The Economist Aug 12, 2010).
    In sum, the anecdotal evidence corroborates the idea that summer Ramadans and its longer
fasting hours constitute a particularly challenging and intense experience, which is likely to have
stronger effects on individual views and behavior. This justifies our use of the length of fasting
hours as the key source of variation in the intensity of Ramadan practices.


3      Conceptual Framework
Religious practices in general, and Ramadan in particular, could in principle affect many different
economic outcomes in many different ways. As such, it is important to very briefly motivate our
empirical investigation in terms of the variables we will focus on, and of some of the most natural
potential channels of impact associated with them.


3.1         Economic Growth
When it comes to economic growth, it is easiest to start with reference to an aggregate production
function. Consider a standard Cobb-Douglas neoclassical production function Y = ( AL)α K1−α ,
with standard designations for output, capital and labor inputs, and the productivity of labor, and
α ∈ (0, 1) corresponding to the share of labor in total output. We can write output growth as
follows:

(1)                                   gY = αg A + αg L + (1 − α) gK ,
    8 Forinstance, a Canadian report (Hamilton Spectator, July 17, 2013) quotes individuals stating that to withstand
the long fasting hours of summer Ramadans they tend to “ [spend] time with [...] family at the mosque where they read
from the Koran”, to “read more of the Koran”, to “[stay] busy helping out at home and being involved in [community
programs], and to “spend more time in active worship and prayer [to take their] mind off it”. The impact is not felt
only at higher latitudes, however, as exemplified by reports on challenging summer Ramadans in Egypt (“a fast to test
all our willpower”, The National (UAE) Aug 7, 2010) or Saudi Arabia (Arab News Jul 11, 2013).


                                                         7
where g j is the growth rate of j. It follows that there are essentially two different ways in which
religious practices could have a direct impact on growth. First, they might affect the evolution of
input supply decisions, L and K; second, they might affect the evolution of productivity, A.
    When it comes to inputs, religious practices impose an immediate trade-off, to the extent that
they require time and resources that are then unavailable for producing output. Similarly, those
practices could affect productivity as well: from facilitating or limiting social interactions with
correligionists and outsiders (Iannaccone 1992) to purely physiological effects (e.g. dietary re-
strictions).
    In the case of Ramadan, we have argued that the holy month involves a number of activities
that evidently fit that pattern of competing for time and resources, thereby potentially affecting
input supply. By the same token, there are the physiological costs associated with fasting. While
this could be mitigated by a positive effect on productivity arising from increased networking and
socialization, it is natural to posit that more intense Ramadan fasting would have a negative direct
impact on labor productivity. Both of these channels would lead us to expect a negative effect of
more intense fasting on economic activity during the month of Ramadan itself, consistent with the
anecdotal perception of a general slowdown.
    There remains the question, however, of whether this immediate impact would translate into
a negative effect that could be picked up over the longer horizons for which one would typically
measure macroeconomic aggregates. In particular, would we expect to find an effect for the yearly
GDP numbers that we will consider in our empirical analysis?
    The answer could be no: individuals could well choose to compensate a month of especially
intense Ramadan fasting by increasing economic activity over the rest of the year. This would be
all the more plausible in light of the fact that the variation in Ramadan fasting hours is entirely
predictable.
    Alternatively, there could be an effect in yearly growth rates, for instance, in the absence of
such compensation. In that case, the slowdown during the month of Ramadan would translate
into lower measured economic activity over the year – albeit, of course, at only one-twelfth of the
monthly rate.
    Moreover, yearly rates could be affected because a more intense Ramadan might also have
an impact beyond the month itself. Broadly speaking, religious practices could have important
indirect implications for economic activity, by affecting preferences, beliefs, and values (Barro and
McCleary 2003). These might certainly include individual input-supply decisions, for instance by
affecting preferences for work versus other endeavors, and might also affect the path of A, say
via occupational choice between activities or sectors with distinct productivity growth profiles. It
is quite clear that the intensity of the Ramadan experience, with its salient religious and social
dimensions, could very well affect this channel, thus opening the door for a more persistent effect.


                                                 8
3.2       Subjective Well-Being
As for SWB, one might expect both positive and negative effects of religious practices in general,
and of Ramadan in particular. On the positive side, there could be an impact through religious en-
gagement fostering socialization (Argyle 2003, p.366), or through its instilling a sense of meaning
and purpose (Myers 2000). Either way, our previous discussion would lead us to expect Ramadan
to activate those channels, in light of the intense socialization and general exposure to religious
content that it entails.
     These forces, however, pertain to the partial effect of a shock to religious involvement. Sur-
vey responses to questions on happiness and life satisfaction, however, will inevitably capture the
total impact. This is important because, to the extent that income and individual SWB tend to be
strongly positively correlated, one might expect that the negative effect on output growth would
work towards a negative net impact on the SWB of the average individual. In addition, the poten-
tial repercussions on beliefs, values, and economic decisions would also likely affect individual
perceptions of happiness and life satisfaction, quite possibly in durable ways as well.
     As such, the overall impact of more intense Ramadan fasting would be ambiguous from an ex
ante perspective.


3.3       Mechanism
Our discussion concerning the possible impact of Ramadan fasting on economic growth has high-
lighted a few different channels, and it is worth discussing how we could assess their presence and
relative importance. When it comes to the distinction between the direct productivity and input-
supply channels, the key is in the behavior of labor markets. Needless to say, religious practices
could also affect the long-run accumulation of capital, of both the physical and human varieties.
We will leave these aside, since our empirical strategy will necessarily focus on short-to medium-
run variation. Within this horizon, it makes sense to take the capital stock as essentially fixed and
instead focus attention on what happens to the supply and demand of labor.9
    It turns out that those two channels would have distinct implications when it comes to labor
markets. The labor-supply mechanism would naturally represent a movement of the labor sup-
ply, as individuals choose to work less for the benefit of religious engagement. The productivity
mechanism would in turn operate via labor demand, as a decrease in the marginal productivity of
labor. From basic economic theory, we would expect the labor-supply effect to be associated with
slower employment growth but faster wage growth, while the labor-demand channel would imply
the former, but not the latter.
   9 Wewill later show evidence that the yearly growth rate of the capital stock indeed does not seem to be affected
by Ramadan fasting.


                                                         9
    This is easiest to see again with reference to the aggregate production function, now leaving
aside the role of capital. With perfectly competitive markets, the wage rate (w) is equal to the
marginal productivity of labor, and we can write wage growth as:

(2)                                          gw = αg A − (1 − α) g L .

It immediately follows that a decrease in labor supply will be associated with rising wages, whereas
declining productivity will be associated with falling wages. We will therefore look into the effects
of Ramadan fasting on labor markets as a way of disentangling these different channels.
    Our discussion also highlighted the indirect channel via beliefs and values. The simplest way
to get at the empirical relevance of this indirect channel is to use direct evidence on how individuals
value work and material rewards relative to other aspects of their lives. We can couple that evidence
with information on individual occupational choice decisions in order to paint a more precise
picture of the ultimate impact of those individual preferences on labor supply and productivity,
and of how this may help us understand the connections between the effects of Ramadan fasting
on economic activity and SWB.


4       Empirical Framework

4.1         Data
Our first key variable is the number of stipulated fasting hours during Ramadan. To calculate that,
we collect data from the Astronomical Applications Department of the U.S. Naval Observatory.
Their online data service provides sunrise and sunset times for any geographic coordinate on earth,
at any given date in the Gregorian calendar. To map historical Ramadan dates from the Islamic
calendar to the Gregorian calendar, we use data from Islamic Philosophy Online.10 For each
Ramadan since 1950, we calculate the average daily daylight hours during Ramadan, in every
country and year.11
    We then match the data on Ramadan fasting hours with various datasets. For data on the
Muslim share of a country’s population, we use a time invariant measure from Miller (2009). Data
on economic growth comes from the Penn World Tables 8.0 (PWT8.0) (Feenstra, Inklaar, and
    10 Availableat http://www.muslimphilosophy.com/ip/hijri.htm.
    11 To keep things simple, we use a country’s capital as the coordinates of interest, downloaded from
www.cepii.fr/anglaisgraph/bdd/distances.htm. This obviously induces some measurement error in our data. Simi-
larly, the Qur’an specifies that fasting should start at dawn (first light), while we measure the start exactly at sunrise,
and this subtle difference may therefore introduce some minor measurement error. Moreover, in some Muslim soci-
eties fasting does not start until the new crescent moon of Ramadan has been sighted. The sunrise and sunset patterns
of Mecca is also sometimes followed. Since these deviations are likely idiosyncratic, measurement error is likely to
be classical and would lead to attenuation bias in our estimates.

                                                           10
Timmer 2013), resulting in an unbalanced panel of 167 countries between 1950-2011. Our main
outcomes of interest are data from the national accounts on real GDP growth, real GDP growth per
capita, and real GDP growth per worker, all in constant 2005 prices. Note that, since the variation
in fasting hours that we use is at a yearly level, we will focus on year-on-year growth.
    To asses whether Ramadan affects subjective well-being (SWB), we use data from all waves of
the World Values Survey (WVS). The surveys were conducted from 1981 to 2008 in 87 countries,
totaling more than 256,000 interviews. We use the two key standard measures of SWB. First,
“Feeling of Happiness” is a hedonic measure taken from the answer to the question: “Taking
all things together, would you say you are: not at all happy, not very happy, quite happy, very
happy?”. We construct the standard indicator variable equal to one if the respondent answers
”quite happy” or ”very happy”, and zero otherwise. The second measure, “Life Satisfaction”, is
more evaluative, based on the question: ”How satisfied are you with your life as a whole these
days?” (on a numerical 10-point scale). We construct an indicator variable equal to one if the
answer is above 5, and also present results using the raw number. The survey also contains data
on employment status, work-related preferences (whether work is more important than religion in
one’s life; preferences for whether good hours is important in a job; preferences whether a high
income is the most important aspect when searching for a job), and a number of socio-economic
characteristics. Finally, it provides information on religiosity, or “religious values” (Norris and
Inglehart 2011) (whether religion is very important in one’s life).
    Yearly data on wages and employment in the manufacturing sector comes from INDSTAT2
2013 edition, which is available for 166 countries for the 1963-2010 period.12 The data are ar-
ranged at the 2-digit level of the International Standard Industrial Classification of All Economic
Activities (ISIC) Revision 3, pertaining to the manufacturing sector, which comprises 23 indus-
tries. The data is based on surveys of establishments with at least 5-10 employees (the cut-off
varies by country). It includes the total number of persons employed in each sector, and the wages
paid to those persons.13 Since our variation in Ramadan hours is at the country-year level, we
aggregate the sector data to the country-year level, resulting in an unbalanced panel dataset on
employment (number of workers) and wage (annual wages per worker) growth.14
  12 Version  8.0 of the Penn World Tables contains, for the first time, data on employment. However, the data for
Africa and the Middle East is actually refering to the labor force, thus conflating the employed and the unemployed
(Inklaar and Timmer 2013) and rendering it inappropriate for our purposes.
   13 The wage data is comprised of all payments paid to employees each year, including bonuses and housing al-

lowances.
   14 The data for Azerbaijan in 1992 shows an arguably implausible wage growth of more than 2500 percent, or about

1200 standard deviations above the mean. We exclude this observation as it is an extreme outlier.




                                                        11
4.2    Identification Strategy and Specifications
Our identification strategy exploits the fact that the number of daylight hours during Ramadan will
vary differentially across countries over time, because the Islamic calendar follows the lunar cycle.
There are two key factors that interact to give rise to arguably idiosyncratic and exogenous variation
in Ramadan fasting hours. First, the timing of the start of Ramadan is a factor: in years when
Ramadan is held during summer months, the sun is up for longer, and fasting hours as stipulated
by the Qur’an increase accordingly. Second, the geographical location of the country, and more
specifically its latitude, also matters: it is the primary determinant of sunrise and sunset times
at any given date. During summer Ramadan the hours will be longer the further away from the
Equator, while during winter Ramadan the relationship is reversed as the hours are short the further
away from the Equator. As long as we control for year and country fixed effects, we automatically
control for any possible independent effects of Ramadan timing and country latitude. We are then
left with the variation due to the interaction of the two factors, and this is what we exploit.
     To illustrate the nature of that variation, we first show, in Figure 1, a map highlighting the
32 Muslim countries in the PWT8.0 sample, defined as those where more than 75 percent of the
population are Muslim. We can see that there is substantial variation in latitude within that sub-
sample, in spite of there being no Muslim countries in very high latitudes.15

                                           [FIGURE 1 HERE]

    Figure 2 then illustrates the way latitude and timing interact in affecting stipulated fasting,
to provide visual intuition for the variation we use for identification. It plots for every year the
average daily fasting hours for three countries, namely Bangladesh, Indonesia, and Turkey. There is
within-country variation over time, but most important is the fact that the time variation is different
across the three countries. Compare first Bangladesh, which is roughly at the average latitude
for the sub-sample of Muslim countries, to Turkey, which has one of the highest latitudes in that
sample. Bangladesh has shorter fasting hours when Ramadan falls during the Northern Hemisphere
summer (as in the early 1950s and 1980s), and the opposite happens when it falls in the winter
months (as in the mid 1960s or late 1990s/early 2000s). Indonesia in turn illustrates yet another
source of idiosyncratic variation, coming from the fact that seasons are reversed in the Southern
Hemisphere.16 Note also that the farther from the Equator, the greater the amplitude of variation.

                                           [FIGURE 2 HERE]
  15 Note that some Muslim-majority countries, such as Algeria or Libya, are not highlighted in the map. This is
because they are not included in the PWT8.0 sample.
  16 Note that all curves cross when Ramadan falls around the vernal or autumnal equinoxes, when days and nights

are of equal length.



                                                      12
    Finally, Figure 3 shows the implications when we take the sample of Muslim countries as a
whole: the average daily length of Ramadan fasting fluctuates according to the Northern Hemi-
sphere seasons, since that is where the vast majority of Muslim countries are, and the variation
around the average (as measured by the lines marking the 20th and 80th percentiles of the hours
distribution bands) peaks on December and June Ramadans.

                                              [FIGURE 3 HERE]

      We implement this identification strategy by estimating the following equation:

(3)                          gct = β ∗ log RamadanHoursct + δc + µt + ε ct ,

where g is an outcome (real GDP growth, real GDP per capita growth, etc.) in country c in year
t, RamadanHours is the average daily number of fasting hours during Ramadan, and δ and µ
capture country and year fixed effects, respectively. Our basic hypothesis that Ramadan has a
negative effect on economic growth would thus translate into β < 0.17
    The country fixed effects account for all time-invariant differences across countries, such as
geography or cultural factors that do not vary over time. The year fixed effects in turn control
for factors that vary across time but are constant across countries, such as global business cycles
or the time of the year when Ramadan happens to be held. Put together, they let us focus on the
idiosyncractic variation we have described.18 We will also present results controlling for pop-
ulation growth, although by assumption this would not be necessary since population growth is
uncorrelated to Ramadan fasting. Still, this may reduce residual variation, leading to more precise
estimates. We do not control for other economic factors because they may be endogenous to Ra-
madan fasting. Finally, we estimate the model on our Muslim country sub-sample only.19 This is
because we would expect Ramadan to meaningfully affect economic growth only in countries that
have a substantial Muslim population.
    This latter feature also presents us with the possibility of further enhancing our identification
strategy. A priori, there is no obvious reason why one would expect the variation in fasting hours
to be endogenous to other determinants of economic growth, such as technological shocks, human
capital growth, saving rates, etc. Nevertheless, to account for this possibility, we complement
(3) with an alternative (differences-in-differences) specification that makes use of the fact that
  17 We   should stress that what we estimate, as indicated by (3), is the marginal effect of increasing the number of
Ramadan fasting hours. We cannot estimate an effect against a counterfactual where Ramadan is absent – a linear
extrapolation to zero hours would be patently absurd.
  18 It is worth noting that there is meaningful residual variation in Ramadan fasting hours: the fixed effects account

for 36 percent of the variation across all countries and years.
  19 In the Appendix we show that the results are robust to varying the 75-percent threshold, and to including linear

country trends.


                                                         13
Ramadan fasting hours should not affect economic growth in countries that have very small Muslim
populations. Specifically, we estimate:

(4) gct = β log RamadanHoursct × Muslimc + λ log RamadanHoursct + δc + µt + γct + ε ct ,

where Muslim is a dummy equal to one if Muslims make up at least 75 percent of the population,
and zero if there are less than 25 percent Muslims. This specification also allows us to include
Muslim-country-by-year fixed effects, γct , which control for any yearly shocks that might differ-
entially affect Muslim countries. If Ramadan fasting truly affects economic outcomes, we would
expect λ = 0 and β < 0.
    We leave aside the small group of countries in the intermediate range of the share of Muslims,
namely those where Muslims are a large minority or small majority, for the simple reason that
these counties would be an evidently improper “control” group.20 Note that, as depicted in Figure
4, the variation over time in average Ramadan hours in Muslim and non-Muslim countries is very
similar, indicating that the non-Muslim countries indeed provide a suitable comparison.21

                                               [FIGURE 4 HERE]

    Still in the realm of cross-country panel data, we will estimate the impact of Ramadan on labor
markets. We will reproduce specification (3) and (4), with employment and wage growth in the
manufacturing sector as our dependent variables of interest. A negative effect of Ramadan fasting
on employment growth, β < 0, would be consistent with a decrease in labor demand due to lower
labor productivity, or a decrease in labor supply, or both. Estimating the effects on wages helps
us separate between the two possible mechanisms. A decrease in wage growth (β < 0) would be
consistent with a decrease in labor demand predominating over any negative labor supply effects,
whereas an increase in wage growth (β > 0) would be consistent with the opposite pattern.
    When it comes to individual survey data, on SWB, labor market status, and beliefs regarding
work and religion, we implement our identification strategy with the following specification:

(5)                    yict = β ∗ log RamadanHoursict + δc + µt + Xict γ0 + ε ict ,

where subscript i denotes individual i living in country c surveyed in year t, and Xict is a vector of
  20 The  results are not sensitive to the specific cutoffs. In any case, the average Muslim share of population in coun-
tries is estimated at around 25 percent, so that the 25 percent cutoff characterizes as “non-Muslims” those countries
that have a below-average Muslim population.
   21 This is tantamount to saying that the average latitude for the two groups are very similar. We also use as an

alternative comparison group the sub-sample of non-Muslim countries such that all of them are within the range of
latitudes covered by the Muslim sample, and the results are essentially identical.




                                                          14
demographic controls.22
     We estimate this equation on the sample of individuals who are presumably “treated” by Ra-
madan fasting: those who self-identify in the survey as religious Muslims. Excluding non-religious
Muslims reduces compliance issues, since these are more likely not to fast during Ramadan.23 Of
course, religious Muslims may still not perfectly comply with the formal fasting hours. In this
case, what we estimate is the reduced form effects of formal fasting hours, leading to underesti-
mates of the true effects of Ramadan fasting. We will henceforth use the terms religious Muslim
and Muslim interchangeably, in the context of the individual survey data.
     This focus on Muslim individuals, rather than countries, also means that we can actually use
information from a broader set of countries. In particular, we now have additional variation in
latitude at our disposal, as can be readily seen from Figure 5, depicting the size of samples coming
from each country.

                                               [FIGURE 5 HERE]

    Another important factor to keep in mind when interpreting our results is that, since the survey
takes place throughout the calendar year, the vast majority of the data points (presumably 11/12,
and most likely more) will lie outside of the month of Ramadan. As exact interview dates are not
recorded in the data, we define RamadanHours as the number of fasting hours during the most
recent Ramadan preceding the survey year.24
    Finally, we note that all of our specifications will report standard errors clustered at the country
level, to allow for the possibility that the error term might be correlated for different observation
within a country – particularly since fasting hours vary smoothly from one year to the next. Tables
A3 and A7 in the Appendix show that the results are robust to two-way clustering by country and
by year (Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller 2011).


4.3     Placebo Regressions
We have discussed the two contributing factors that lead to the within-country variation in Ramadan
fasting hours, and our identifying assumption is that this variation is idiosyncratic and uncorrelated
with other determinants of our outcome variables. This assumption would be violated and lead to
spurious results if, for example, countries located further away from the Equator were, for some
  22 The controls are: gender dummy, second-order polynomial in age, marital status dummies, number of children,
and education dummies.
  23 According to survey evidence from Dinar Standard (2011), from five Muslim countries (Malaysia, Saudi Arabia,

Egypt, Pakistan, UAE) and five countries where Muslims are a minority (USA, UK, Canada, India, Australia), 98% of
Muslims report fasting during Ramadan.
  24 The results are essentially identical if we use the hours in the survey year itself (results available upon request).




                                                           15
reason unrelated to Ramadan, systematically less (or more) productive in years when fasting hours
are longer, compared to countries located closer to the Equator.
    We can provide some evidence to assess this possibility, again making use of the fact that we
would expect Ramadan to have no effect in countries with small Muslim populations, nor on the
individual behavior of non-Muslims in those countries. We can thus run “placebo” versions of (3)
and (5), restricted to those sub-samples. Were we to find any effects, these would most likely be
spurious, and indicate that our identification assumption is somehow violated.25
    Table 1 presents the results from the placebo regressions for all of our main dependent variables
of interest. There is no evidence of spurious results. Not only are all the coefficients insignificant
at conventional levels, they are also quantitatively very small, indicating that the lack of signifi-
cance is not due to imprecision. In short, Ramadan fasting hours are uncorrelated with economic
growth, employment and wage growth, unemployment or self-reported well-being in non-Muslim
countries. This lends credibility to our identification strategy.

                                               [TABLE 1 HERE]


5      Results
We first present our main results on the effect of Ramadan on economic growth and SWB. We then
examine the implications for the labor market, to understand some of the mechanisms behind those
results.


5.1         Effects on Economic Growth
Table 2 presents the results on economic growth. We start by showing a simple regression of real
per capita GDP growth on (log) Ramadan fasting hours, in Column (1). The estimate is negative
and statistically significant, implying that country-year pairs with long fasting hours tend to have on
average lower growth rates. Column (2) then includes country fixed effects, to control for factors
that affect growth and also covary with country latitude. We see a similar negative coefficient,
implying that, for a given country, years with summer Ramadan display on average lower growth.
Column (3) includes year fixed effects instead, to control for growth correlates that also covary with
the timing of Ramadan. Here the estimate implies that, in any given year (and thus conditional on
when Ramadan occurs), countries with longer fasting hours grow more slowly on average.26
    25 Wedo not include non-Muslims in Muslim countries for the simple reason that the hypothesis under investigation
is that Ramadan affects the entire economy of a country, which implies general equilibrium effects.
   26 The stability of the coefficient across the specifications with year and country fixed effects suggests that the

variation in temperature during the month of Ramadan, which naturally correlates with prescribed hours of fasting and



                                                         16
                                                [TABLE 2 HERE]

    Column (4) then displays our benchmark specification, including both year and country fixed
effects. The estimate is again statistically significant (β=-0.099, p=0.013), very similar in magni-
tude, and shows that Ramadan fasting has a negative effect on real GDP growth, consistent with
our stated hypothesis. Column (5) shows that controlling for population growth does not affect the
point estimate. Quantitatively, the last line in Table 2 shows that a one standard deviation increase
(in the sample of Muslim countries) in Ramadan fasting hours, of roughly 10 percent, induces a
decrease in economic growth of around one-ninth of a standard deviation.
    We then present the differences-in-differences estimate, in Column (6). It is also statistically
significant (p=0.020) and again similar in magnitude (β=-0.091). Importantly, the estimate on
Ramadan Hours captures the estimated effect on non-Muslim countries and is very close to zero,
as expected, confirming the message from Table 1.
    Columns (7)-(12) in turn present results for GDP growth, as opposed to per capita GDP, using
the same permutations of specifications and samples as Columns (1)-(6). These estimates are
qualitatively and quantitatively similar.27
    Our results are robust to a wide variety of checks, which we report in the Appendix. Table A3
shows that the estimates are robust to the inclusion of country-specific linear time trends: they are
significant at conventional levels and, if anything, increase in magnitude when the country trends
are included. The table also shows that the estimates are statistically significant when using a
lower %-Muslims sample inclusion threshold. The coefficient generally decreases in magnitude as
the threshold is lowered, which is unsurprising given that countries where a smaller share of the
population are fasting are gradually included.
    The results are not driven by outliers either. Figure A1 in the Appendix makes that point
visually by showing the outcome residuals plotted against log Ramadan hours residuals from the
baseline specification. Alternatively, Figure A2 shows that the results are unchanged when we
drop each Muslim country from the sample, one at a time: the coefficients are very stable, and
statistically significant. By the same token, the log specification does not seem to matter: Table A4
shows that the results are very similar in specifications with Ramadan fasting hours in levels.
    Our next step is to consider the possibility that results could be somehow affected by conver-
gence or mean-reversion. To deal with that, we include lagged (log) income on the right-hand side
of our specifications, to account for convergence. Since there are substantial econometric chal-
lenges in estimating the rate of convergence, especially in the presence of country fixed effects,
also affects the intensity of Ramadan practice, does not explain much of the effect we find. After all, the variation in
temperature should be more important in the contrast between summer and winter Ramadans within a country than in
the comparison between different Muslim countries in a given season.
   27 Table A2 in the Appendix shows the results for GDP per worker (for which there is less data available), which are

very similar, with a slightly larger estimated effect that nevertheless cannot be statistically distinguished.

                                                          17
we control for lagged income while imposing that it falls within the confines established by the
growth literature (Barro 2012). Specifically, we allow for the rate of convergence to be right at
the level of the “iron law of convergence” (2% per year), or at the lower and upper bounds (1.7%
and 2.4% respectively). In addition, following standard practice in the growth literature, we also
collapse our data in blocks of five years (and also two, three, or four) so as to filter out noise in the
yearly variation. In our case, most of the within-country variation in Ramadan fasting comes from
comparing blocks of years (e.g. summer versus winter Ramadans), which is another reason to con-
sider the results with the collapsed data.28 Table A5 shows that the results are robust to different
combinations of these procedures, both in the statistical significance and quantitative senses, as we
can see by comparison with the baseline estimates that are reported in the first column.
    Finally, we also consider robustness to the possibility of terms of trade shocks. We control
for measures of export and import prices (from the Penn World Tables 8.0), in order to account
comprehensively for the possibility that the evolution of terms of trade – encompassing commodity
price shocks or similar developments – could confound our results. Table A6 shows that the results
are indeed robust, with coefficient sizes again very much in line with our baseline results.
    We thus find robust evidence of a causal effect of longer Ramadan fasting on economic growth.
Quite importantly, the estimated magnitudes are also robust, and quantitatively meaningful. To
translate them into a more concrete example, consider a thought experiment whereby the average
daily Ramadan fasting were to increase to 13 hours, instead of the actual mean of 12 hours. This is
about one standard deviation of the variation experienced over the Ramadan cycle by the average
Muslim country in our sample, corresponding roughly to the latitude of Bangladesh. Our range
of estimates implies that output growth would then be lower by roughly between 0.6 and 0.9
percentage point. (For the sake of comparison with the pre-existing literature on religious practices
and growth, Barro and McCleary (2003) find that a one-standard-deviation increase in monthly
church attendance is associated with a decrease of about 1.1 percentage point in the growth rate.)
Alternatively, the magnitudes imply that the average growth rate in Bangladesh at the height of
the (Northern) summer Ramadan cycle would be about 1 percentage point greater than that of
Turkey, which has longer summer fasting hours. In contrast, growth in Bangladesh would be about
1 percentage point lower than in Turkey over the winter Ramadan years.


5.2     Effects on Subjective Well-Being
We now turn to the SWB results. Table 3 presents the results on the two key self-reported mea-
sures, happiness and life satisfaction. When estimating the effects on the first measure for all
   28 To avoid needlessly throwing away relevant variation, we define the blocks so as to minimize the variation in

fasting hours within them. We have checked the results for blocks of up to eight years, and they are robust. We do not
report these results for the sake of keeping tables relatively uncluttered, but they are available upon request.


                                                         18
Muslims in the sample (Columns (1) and (2)), the coefficients are positive and highly statistically
significant (p=0.001-0.003), indicating that Ramadan fasting increases measured SWB for Muslim
individuals.

                                        [TABLE 3 HERE]

    Columns (3) and (4) then estimate the effects separately for men and women. The coefficients
are significant and positive for both genders, with a larger effect for women. Column (5) restricts
the sample to countries where more than 75 percent of the population are Muslim. It shows that the
effect is significant (p=0.028), and with a larger estimated coefficient, though the standard error is
naturally larger as a result of substantially less variation in fasting hours and the estimates cannot
be statistically distinguished. Column (6) in turn shows that the results are robust to running an
ordered logit regression where the dependent variable is the four-category answer to the happiness
question.
    Columns (7)-(12) then present the results for the same exercise, using life satisfaction as the
dependent variable. We see results that are qualitatively very similar to those for happiness, though
the effect is generally larger from a quantitative perspective. In Table A7 of the Appendix, we show
that the results are robust to two-way clustering of the standard errors and controls for country-
specific trends, and Figure A3 and A4 in the Appendix shows that the estimates are not driven
by outlier observations or individual countries. Finally, Table A8 establishes that the results are
essentially the same if we use Ramadan fasting hours in levels rather than logs.
    The quantitative implications of the SWB results are also meaningful, as was the case with
GDP. The estimates imply that our aforementioned thought experiment of increasing average fast-
ing hours from 12 to 13 increases the likelihood that a Muslim is happy by about 4 percentage
points, corresponding to a standardized effect that is roughly similar to what we found for GDP.
The same exercise increases the likelihood that a Muslim is satisfied with life by approximately 9
percentage points, which translates into a standardized effect that is slightly larger.
    In short, while Ramadan fasting has an important material cost in Muslim countries, it is asso-
ciated with Muslims feeling significantly happier and more satisfied with their lives.


5.3    Mechanisms
We now turn our attention to the question of what mechanisms drive these effects. A number of
channels are possible but, as discussed in Section 3, we approach this challenge by looking at the
distinct implications for what is a first-order arena: the labor market.




                                                 19
5.3.1   Effects on the Labor Market: Employment and Wages

Table 4 presents results on labor market outcomes using data from the manufacturing sector. Note
that, since the manufacturing sector is disproportionately concentrated in the formal sector, and
particularly so in developing countries such as most of the Muslim world, we should interpret this
data as more indicative of equilibrium outcomes in the formal economy.

                                         [TABLE 4 HERE]

     The first four columns report results on employment growth. The point estimate in Column (1)
is negative and statistically significant (p=0.065), with similar estimates and standard errors when
controlling for population growth (Column (2)), country trends (Column (3)), or when running
the differences-in-differences specification (Column (4)). The point estimate of 0.21 implies that
a one standard deviation in fasting hours leads to approximately a 2 percentage point decrease in
yearly employment growth, and corresponds to a standardized effect of -0.17. The evidence thus
indicates that Ramadan fasting leads to fewer workers in the formal manufacturing sector.
     This negative effect on employment is consistent with a decrease in labor demand, with a de-
crease in labor supply, or possibly both. To further understand the mechanisms, and whether there
are demand or supply shifts in the labor market, Columns (5)-(8) present estimates on the evolu-
tion of wages in the manufacturing sector. The point estimates are similar across specifications
(β=0.49-0.61), statistically significant (p=0.006-0.011), and show that the decrease in employment
growth is accompanied by an increase in wage growth. These effects are also quantitatively mean-
ingful. A one standard deviation increase in Ramadan fasting is estimated to cause a 4 percentage
point increase in wage growth (the mean growth rate in Muslim countries is 8.5 percent yearly), or
a 0.23 standardized effect.
     The evidence thus suggests that Ramadan has a negative impact on labor supply. Moreover, it
indicates that, to the extent that there is any decrease in labor demand driven by lower productivity,
it is being dominated by the labor supply effects. A natural question is therefore whether the GDP
growth effects can be explained solely explained by a shift in labor supply. A simple back-of-the-
envelope calculation suggests that labor supply is a key explanatory factor, but that it is unlikely to
fully explain how the GDP effects arise. To see this, let the marginal effect on employment growth
of Ramadan be -0.2 (from Table 4) and assume a standard labor share of income of 2/3, then we
would expect the predicted marginal GDP growth effect in equation (1) to be 0.13. This is certainly
in the ball park of the estimates found in Table 2 (0.9-0.10), but taken literally it suggests that the
GDP effects would have been even larger, unless in the unlikely case that Ramadan increases labor
productivity.
     There are two important limitations to this calculation, however. First, the estimate on employ-
ment growth only reflects changes in the formal manufacturing sectors, and labor supply in other

                                                  20
sectors may be less affected by Ramadan. Second, the observed employment decrease in manu-
facturing does not imply that the marginal workers stop working altogether, but may reflect that
workers choose to engage in productive activities outside of manufacturing (e.g., self-employment
or agriculture). In other words, Ramadan may also influence occupational choice, in addition to
how much to work.
    Our next step is thus to complement the results from Table 4 with survey-level evidence, using
the WVS. This allows for a more granular analysis of the labor market, and lets us investigate
employment status more broadly. Since there is no a priori reason why Muslims in some countries
would differentially shift their labor supply decisions, we use data from all countries in the dataset.
As formal labor force participation by Muslim women is very low, we focus on the sample of
Muslim men.29
    The results are in Table 5. The estimates in Columns (1)-(4) confirm that employment de-
creases, but clarify that the effects seem primarily driven by a decrease in part-time, rather than
full-time, employment: the point estimates on part-time employment, in Columns (3) and (4), are
negative and statistically significant, while the estimates on full-time employment in Columns (1)
and (2) are substantially smaller in magnitude and insignificant. This is perhaps not that surpris-
ing, given that part-time workers are arguably more likely to be closer to the extensive margin
in the formal sector. Quantitatively, a one standard deviation increase in fasting hours decreases
the likelihood that a Muslim is employed part time by 2.9 percentage points.30 When scaled by
the standard deviation of the outcome among Muslims, this corresponds to a negative 0.10-0.12
standardized effect.

                                                [TABLE 5 HERE]

    In contrast, there is no evidence that Ramadan affects unemployment (Columns (7)-(8)). In-
stead, Columns (5)-(6) show that Ramadan fasting affects the likelihood of being self-employed.
The implied effect suggests that a one standard deviation increase in fasting hours increases the
likelihood that a Muslim is self-employed by 2.5 percentage points, or a 0.07-0.09 standardized ef-
fect. Furthermore, despite the decrease in formal employment and the increase in self-employment,
Columns (9)-(10) show that individuals report a greater satisfaction with their financial situation,
consistent with a voluntary reduction in labor supply.
    At this point it is worth restating that the individuals in the WVS dataset are surveyed through-
out the year. The dataset does not record information on the date of each interview, but if we
assume a uniform distribution then we would expect only approximately 1/12 of individuals to be
  29 We   present results on labor market outcomes for women in Table A10 in the Appendix.
  30 Our data contains the full sample of all adult Muslim men, and therefore also includes retired persons and students.

25 percent of the individuals are employed full time.


                                                          21
surveyed during the month of Ramadan. (This is probably an overstatement, since in practice it is
relatively unlikely that many interviews would be conducted at that time.) Given the magnitude of
the effects, it is arguably implausible that the estimates solely reflect effects during the month of
Ramadan. Instead, they suggest that there is a shift in labor supply that stretches beyond the holy
month itself.
    Together, the evidence in Tables 4 and 5 shows that Ramadan fasting has an economically sub-
stantial effect on the labor market, which helps explain the mechanisms driving lower economic
growth. The results show that Ramadan fasting leads to lower labor supply in the manufacturing
sector, suggesting a shift of workers out of formal employment and into self-employment. The
magnitude of the effects indicate that Ramadan affects Muslim country economies beyond the
month of Ramadan itself. Since self-employment in developing countries is generally associated
with informality and lower productivity (La Porta and Shleifer, 2008), it thus seems that the neg-
ative effect on GDP growth is at least in part driven by voluntary occupational choice into the
informal sector.31

5.3.2   Effects on the Labor Market: Preferences and Values

A long tradition in the social sciences that has held that religion in general, and religious practices
in particular, can affect preferences and values that in turn influence individual behavior in mar-
kets. It is thus natural to wonder whether the documented effect of Ramadan on labor supply and
occupational choice is partly due to shifts in labor-related preferences and values. We now turn to
this question.
    Table 6 presents the results from the WVS dataset and shows that Ramadan affects values and
preferences related to work and priorities in life among Muslims. First, Columns (1)-(2) show
that longer Ramadan fasting leads to a statistically significant (p = 0.009) increase in self-reported
religiosity. There is no statistically significant effect on the self-reported, absolute, importance
of work (Columns (3)-(4)), but when comparing the relative importance of work versus religion
(Columns (5)-(6)), i.e. their relative rank about what is important in life, the estimates imply that a
one standard deviation decreases the likelihood that work is viewed as more important than religion
by approximately 2.9 percentage points, corresponding to a -0.09 standardized effect. To put this
in perspective, this is approximately equivalent to the difference in views between Muslims that
have completed high school versus those that have a college degree. Alternatively, 11 percent of
Muslim men in the sample view work as more important than religion, compared to 50 percent
  31 Another possible interpretation is that the shift towards the informal sector reduces measured GDP, as distinct
from actual output. Still, GDP is the best measure we have, and the two possibilities are not mutually exclusive: it
is reasonable to think that part of the GDP reduction corresponds to actual output lost to lower productivity, while
measurement issues make up another portion of it.



                                                        22
among non-Muslim men, and the estimate implies a decrease of approximately 26 percent in the
number of Muslim men viewing work as relatively more important.

                                        [TABLE 6 HERE]

     The regressions in Columns (7)-(10) provide further evidence that preferences related to labor
markets and job search are affected by Ramadan fasting. When asked about whether a high income
is the most important aspect when searching for a job, Muslims are significantly less likely to report
that a good income is the first priority (as compared to finding a job where you work with people
you like, doing an important job, getting a safe job, or doing something for the community). This
indicates that Ramadan reduces material, or monetary, preferences, at least when it comes to job
search. Moreover, Ramadan fasting affects preferences about what a ”good job” entails, as longer
fasting hours are significantly associated with preferences for good hours in a job. The estimated
effect of 1.00-1.08 in Columns (9)-(10) implies that a one standard deviation increase in fasting
hours increases the share of Muslim men that view good hours as important by 12-13 percent. This
suggests that preferences for jobs with fewer hours, or more flexible hours, are affected.
     This result is in fact broadly consistent with survey evidence of Muslims interviewed in ten
countries (DinarStandard, 2011), when asked about work-related issues pertaining to Ramadan
fasting in particular. A key finding of the study was that employees in the formal sector would like
employers to increase work flexibility in order to be able to conduct the religious practices good
Muslims are supposed to, such as prayer or reading of the Qur’an, during the month of Ramadan.
42 percent of the respondents would also like employers to set special Ramadan hours.
     The results in Tables 5 and 6 therefore provide evidence that an underlying reason for the
decrease in labor supply in the formal sector, and shifting of workers into self-employment, is
that Muslims voluntary choose to work less – and that this decrease in formal employment is, at
least in part, due to changes in work-related preferences and values. That is, the religious practice
of Ramadan makes Muslims more religious, less likely to consider work as more important than
religion, and less interested in job characteristics associated with jobs in the formal sector, namely
relatively good wages but less flexible work hours (Maloney, 2004).


6    Discussion
Our central results are very clear. First, longer Ramadan fasting has a robust, statistically signifi-
cant, and quantitatively important negative effect on economic growth in Muslim countries. This
is very much in line with the correlation patterns previously found in the literature that has looked
at the links between religious practices and economic growth, though quantitatively our estimates


                                                 23
imply an effect of religious practices that is somewhat smaller than what is found for instance in
Barro and McCleary (2003).
    Second, longer Ramadan fasting has a robust, statistically significant, and quantitatively im-
portant positive effect on the subjective well-being of Muslim individuals. This seems consistent
with the extant literature on religion and happiness, but is in fact in tension with the previous result
on growth: since what we measure is a net effect on SWB, our evidence indicates that Muslims
are happier in spite of being poorer. Any negative effect of reduced GDP growth and material
living standards on SWB are therefore trumped by the non-pecuniary benefits of a longer, or more
intense, prescribed religious practice.
    How can we understand the underlying mechanisms driving these results, and what explains
the diverging effects on GDP and SWB? It is here that our evidence on labor markets and work-
related preferences, by shedding light on the mechanisms behind the effect on economic growth,
is especially useful.
    The first step comes from the recognition that direct effects from Ramadan on economic growth
could come from its impact on labor supply decisions and/or from its impact on productivity. The
second step is to note that these different channels have different implications for labor markets.
Our results indicate that labor supply decisions are the most important factor in practice: we find
that Ramadan negatively affects employment growth in the manufacturing sector, but has a positive
impact on wage growth, consistent with a shock to labor supply. The survey evidence then shows
that workers seem to shift from (mostly part-time) formal employment, and into self-employment,
most likely in the informal sector
    The evidence thus suggests that, rather than a direct effect on productivity due to fasting, what
matters most are the changes in labor supply decisions and occupational choice, towards a lower
productivity sector. The more important productivity losses are, so to speak, an indirect conse-
quence of Ramadan fasting, via shifts in individual decisions.
    This begs the question of what lies behind these shifts. Ramadan certainly demands time and
involvement that compete with work activities, and our central result rejects the hypothesis that the
intensity of those demands is compensated for over the rest of the year. Still, the results point at
deeper, more durable changes. First of all, not only do they not seem driven by direct productivity
losses due to fasting, but also the magnitudes involved suggest that the effect we document is not
limited to lost working hours during the month itself: when it comes to output, employment or
wages, the effects in yearly data seem too large to be ascribed to a one-month slowdown. This
suggests that the intensity of Ramadan fasting entails longer-lasting effects that spill over beyond
the month.
    Moreover, the survey data provide direct support for that conclusion, especially since the vast
majority of responses, in all likelihood, do not come from the month of Ramadan. First, those data


                                                  24
show causal evidence of an effect of Ramadan fasting on labor market status, as discussed above. In
addition, there also is causal evidence that Ramadan influences what Muslims view as important in
life: they report caring relatively less about work and material rewards, when compared to religion
or, more prosaically, things like job flexibility. This suggests that the changes in labor supply
decisions are at least partly associated with relatively persistent changes in preferences and values.
    This evidence also helps assuage the apparent contrast between the material cost of the practice
and the increased self-reported happiness and life satisfaction that result from it. It suggests that
SWB increased not only due to possible direct benefits of the practices itself (socialization, time
devoted to prayer and reflection, time spent with family and friends), but also to a reduced focus
on the material and monetary aspects in life and work. In light of such a possibility, it may not be
that puzzling that longer Ramadan fasting makes people “poorer, but happier”.
    These facts open up interesting questions of external validity and the extent to which other
religious practices would have similar effects, qualitatively or quantitatively. Needless to say, our
regression estimates obviously cannot be directly extrapolated to other practices – Islamic or non-
Islamic – but given that many of them share common elements, it seems reasonable to expect that
they could put in motion similar mechanisms to the ones our evidence highlights.
    In that regard, our finding that the impact of Ramadan cannot be mainly attributable to the direct
physiological consequences of nutritional intake during the month of Ramadan itself is important.
Had we found otherwise, one would have had fewer reasons to believe similar effects might arise
from other religious practices, given that most of them do not directly prescribe rules of behavior
related to fasting.
    It is also important to note that nothing in what we find is indicative that the effects regarding
labor supply and occupational choice come about due to doctrinal aspects of Islam – in fact, the
Qur’an and Islamic doctrine place substantial emphasis on the importance of work (e.g. Ali 2005,
ch.4). Therefore, changes in work-related beliefs and values could well be driven by non-doctrinal
behavioral mechanisms associated with Ramadan – say, because social interactions among family
members and friends influence beliefs through various peer effects, or because spiritual experiences
induce reflection on what behavior and choices increase happiness and life satisfaction. Many
other kinds of non-Islamic religious practices that do not involve fasting, such as the Shabbath,
Christmas, or Diwali, are nevertheless similar to Ramadan in key dimensions that could put such
mechanisms in motion: they foster time-consuming social interactions and spiritual activities, in
a coordinated fashion among members of the religious community. This underscores that the
Ramadan context may very well exemplify a more wide-ranging phenomenon.
    To push this logic even further, one may speculate whether secular mechanisms, such as statu-
tory vacations, holidays, festivals, and civic celebrations, could have similar effects as well. While
our results on views regarding the importance of religion do indicate that there is something about


                                                 25
religious content behind the impact of religious practices, it is certainly possible that changes in
behavior and subjective well-being are in part triggered by their more generalizable features.
    Ultimately, however, the extent to which other religious practices and holidays affect work-
related beliefs and values, reduce labor supply and economic growth – while simultaneously in-
creasing subjective well-being – is an empirical question that only future research can answer.


7       Concluding Remarks
Using idiosyncratic variation induced by the rotating Islamic calendar, we have established causal
evidence for a negative effect of Ramadan fasting on economic growth in Muslim countries. We
have also established, however, that this is accompanied by an increase in the levels of self-reported
happiness and life satisfaction among Muslims. We have argued that these are primarily associated
with labor supply and occupational choice decisions of Muslim individuals, rather than through
direct productivity decreases due to the fasting itself. We have also shown that part of the effect is
associated with changes in the way those individuals value work and material rewards.
    Based on these results, we can speculate over the possible functional roles played by religion
and some puzzling questions that naturally arise. First, the fact that we identify that a costly
religious practice can increase subjective well-being is consistent with people having a demand for
religious practices. Understanding the deeper determinants of this demand, what type of practices
that that are sustained over time and why, are interesting avenues for future research. Second, and
related, our results arguably give rise to a few questions about individual decisions, particularly
to the extent that one could interpret the measures of reported SWB as indicative of welfare in
a broader sense.32 If people are happier when they are exogenously induced to fast longer, why
were they not fasting longer to begin with? Similarly, if the increased happiness comes from
working less, why had they not chosen to do so without the extra inducement? These puzzles
seem to suggest that religious practices could improve outcomes, say, by playing roles as devices
for providing self-control (e.g. McCullough and Willoughby 2009) or coordination (e.g. Carvalho
2010). For instance, people may be willing to fast longer or work less, but only as long as others
are also fasting longer or working less (perhaps due to stiff competition in the labor market). In that
case, religious practices may provide a way to coordinate around that presumably better outcome.
    Last but not least, our paper also provide some new insights for the ongoing debate regarding
how to assess the effects of policy interventions on welfare. Our results identify circumstances in
which GDP growth and SWB are pushed in different directions, and in doing so they substantiate
calls for considering measures of SWB as important indicators, in addition to standard measures
such as GDP (Stiglitz, Sen and Fitoussi 2009).
    32 For   a discussion of that extent, see Benjamin et al. (2012).

                                                               26
8   References
Afifi, Z.E.M.. 1997. “Daily Practices, Study Performance and Health during the Ramadan Fast.”
     Perspectives in Public Health 117(4): 231-235.
Ali, Abbas. 2005. Islamic Perspectives on Management and Organization. Edward Elgar Pub-
     lishing.
Almond, Douglas and Bhashkar A. Mazumder. 2011. “Health Capital and the Prenatal En-
   vironment: The Effect of Ramadan Observance During Pregnancy.” American Economic
   Journal: Applied Economics 3(4): 56-85.
Arab News. 2013. “Holy Month Comes in Hottest Weather and Longest Days.” July 11, 2013,
    retrieved from: http://www.arabnews.com/news/457681.
Argyle, Michael. 2003. “Causes and Correlates of Happiness.” In: Daniel Kahneman, Edward
    Diener, and Norbert Schwarz (eds.), Well-Being: The Foundations of Hedonic Psychology.
    Russell Sage Foundation.
Audretsch, David B., Werner Bonte, and Jagannadha Pawan Tamvada. 2007. “Religion and
   Entrepreneurship.” CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP6378.
Baele, Lieve, Moazzam Farooq, and Steven Ongena. 2011. “Of Religion and Redemption:
    Evidence from Default on Islamic Loans.” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 8504.
Barro, Robert J.. 1997. Determinants of Economic Growth: A Cross-Country Empirical Study.
    Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Barro, Robert J.. 2012. “Convergence and Modernization Revisited.” NBER Working Paper
    No. 18295.
Barro, Robert J. and Rachel M. McCleary. 2003. “Religion and Economic Growth across
    Countries.” American Sociological Review 68(5): 760-781.
Becker, Sascha O. and Ludger Woessman. 2009. “Was Weber Wrong? A Human Capital
    Theory of Protestant Economic History.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(2): 531-596.
Benjamin, Daniel J., Miles S. Kimball, Ori Heffetz, and Alex Rees-Jones. 2012. “What Do
    You Think Would Make You Happier? What Do You Think You Would Choose?” American
    Economic Review 102(5): 20832110.
Berggren, Niclas and Christian Bjornskov. 2011. “Is the Importance of Religion in Daily Life
    Related to Social Trust? Cross-country and Cross-state Comparisons.” Journal of Economic
    Behavior and Organization 80(3): 459-480.
Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah B. Gelbach, and Douglas L. Miller. 2011. “Robust Inference With
   Multiway Clustering.” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 29(2): 238-249.
Carvalho, Jean-Paul. 2010. “Coordination and Culture.” UC Irvine (unpublished).
Chenar, Ali. 2011. “Ramadan: A Time for Networking.” Tehran Bureau, Aug 21, 2011, retrieved
   from: http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/tehranbureau/2011/08/ramadan-a-time-for-
   networking.html.
Clingingsmith, David, Asim Ijaz Khwaja, and Michael Kremer. 2009. “Estimating the Impact
    of The Hajj: Religion and Tolerance in Islam’s Global Gathering.” Quarterly Journal of
    Economics 124(3): 1133-1170.

                                            27
Deaton, Angus and Arthur A. Stone. 2013. “Two Happiness Puzzles.” American Economic
    Review Papers & Proceedings 103(3): 91-97.
Dinar Standard. 2011. “2011 Productivity in Ramadan Report.” Retrieved from:
    http://dinarstandard.com/new-site/wp-content/uploads/2011/08/2011-Productivity-in-Ramadan-
    Report.pdf
Dolan, Paul, Tessa Peasgood, and Mathew White. 2008. “Do We Really Know What Makes
    Us Happy? A Review of the Economic Literature on the Factors Associated with Subjective
    Well-Being.” Journal of Economic Psychology 29: 94-122.
Durlauf, Steven N., Andros Kortellos, and Chih Ming Tan. 2012. “Is God in the Details? A
    Reexamination of the Role of Religion in Economic Growth.” Journal of Applied Econo-
    metrics 27(7): 1059-1075.
Easterlin, Richard A.. 1974. “Does Economic Growth Improve the Human Lot? Some Empir-
    ical Evidence.” In: Paul A. David and Melvin W. Reder (eds.), Nations and Households in
    Economic Growth: Essays in Honor of Moses Abramovitz. New York: Academic Press.
Feenstra, Robert C., Robert Inklaar and Marcel P. Timmer. 2013. “The Next Generation of
    the Penn World Table’.’ Available for download at www.ggdc.net/pwt
Francis, Leslie. 2010. “Religion and Happiness: Perspectives from the Psychology of Reli-
    gion, Positive Psychology and Empirical Theology.” In: Ian Steedman, John R Atherton,
    and Elaine Graham (eds.), The Practices of Happiness: Political Economy, Religion and
    Wellbeing. Taylor & Francis.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. 2003. “People’s Opium? Religion and
    Economic Attitudes.” Journal of Monetary Economics 50: 225-282.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. 2006 “Does Culture Affect Economic Out-
    comes?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 20(2): 23-48.
Hallak, M.H. and M.Z. Nomani. 1988. “Body Weight Loss and Changes in Blood Lipid Lev-
    els in Normal Men on Hypocaloric Diets during Ramadan Fasting.” American Journal of
    Clinical Nutrition 48(5): 1197-1210.
Hamilton Spectator. 2013. “Summer Ramadan Tests Willpower for Food, Drink.” July 17,
   2013, retrieved from: http://www.thespec.com/news-story/3894962-summer-ramadan-tests-
   willpower-for-food-drink/
Hinde, Robert A.. 2009. Why Gods Persist: A Scientific Approach to Religion. Taylor and
    Francis.
Iannaccone, Laurence R.. 1992. “Sacrifice and Stigma: Reducing Free-riding in Cults, Com-
    munes, and Other Collectives.” Journal of Political Economy 100(2): 271-291.
Inklaar, Robert and Marcel Timmer. 2013. “Capital, Labor and TFP in PWT8.0.” University
    of Groningen (unpublished).
Karaagaoglu, Nilgun and Sevinc Yucecan. 2000. “Some Behavioural Changes Observed
   among Fasting Subjects, Their Nutritional Habits and Energy Expenditure in Ramadan.”
   International Journal of Food Sciences and Nutrition 51(2): 125-134.
Kuran, Timur. 2004. “Why the Middle East Is Economically Underdeveloped.” Journal of
   Economic Perspectives 18(3): 71-90.


                                           28
La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer and R. Vishny. 1999. “The Quality of Govern-
    ment,” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 15, April: 222-279.
La Porta, Rafael and Andrei Shleifer. 2008. “The Unofficial Economy and Economic Devel-
    opment.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Fall 2008: 275-352.
Leiper, J.B., A.M. Molla, and A.M. Molla. 2003. “Effects on Health of Fluid Restriction during
    Fasting in Ramadan.” European Journal of Clinical Nutrition 57(Suppl 2): S30-S38.
Maloney, William F.. 2004. “Informality Revisited.” World Development 32(7): 1159-1178.
Maqsood, Ruqaiyyah Waris. 2007. Teach Yourself Islam. McGraw-Hill.
Marshall Cavendish Corporation. 2010. Islamic Beliefs, Practices, and Cultures. Marshall
   Cavendish.
McCleary, Rachel M. and Robert J. Barro. 2006. “Religion and Economy.” Journal of Eco-
   nomic Perspectives 20(2): 49-72.
McCullough, Michael E. and Brian L.B. Willoughby. 2009. “Religion, Self-Regulation, and
   Self-Control: Associations, Explanations, and Implications.” Psychological Bulletin 135(1):
   69-93.
Miller, T.. 2009. Mapping the Global Muslim Population: A Report on the Size and Distribution
    of the World’s Muslim Population. Washington, DC: Pew Research Center.
Myers, David G.. 2000. “The Funds, Friends, and Faith of Happy People.” American Psychology
   55(1): 56-67.
North, Douglass C. 1991. “Institutions.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 5(1): 97-112.
Norris, Pippa and Ronald Inglehart. 2011. Sacred and Secular: Religion and Politics World-
    wide. Cambridge University Press.
Nunn, Nathan. 2012. “Culture and the Historical Process.” Economic History of Developing
   Regions. 2;27(S1):108-126
Persson, Torsten, and Guido E. Tabellini. 2003. The Economic Effects of Constitutions. MIT
    Press.
Plante, Thomas G. and Allen C. Sherman (eds.). 2001. Faith and Health: Psychological
    Perspectives. Guilford Press.
Schmahl, F.W. and B. Metzler. 1991. “The Health Risks of Occupational Stress in Islamic
   Industrial Workers during the Ramadan Fasting Period.” Polish Journal of Occupational
   Medicine and Environmental Health 4(3): 219-228.
Spenkuch, Jorg. 2011. “The Protestant Ethic and Work: Micro Evidence from Contemporary
    Germany.” Kellog School of Management (unpublished).
Stevenson, Betsey and Justin Wolfers. 2008. “Economic Growth and Subjective Well-Being:
    Reassessing the Easterlin Paradox.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Spring 2008:
    1-87.
Stiglitz, Joseph E., Amartya Sen, and Jean-Paul Fitoussi. 2009. “Report by the Commis-
     sion on the Measurement of Economic Performance and Social Progress.” Available at:
     http://www.stiglitz-sen-fitoussi.fr/documents/rapport anglais.pdf

                                             29
The Economist. 2010. “Ramadan in the Summer Heat: When Everything Slows Down.” August
    12, 2010.
The National (UAE). 2010. “Taking the Temperature of My First Summer Ramadan.” August
    7, 2010, retrieved from http://www.thenational.ae/news/taking-the-temperature-of-my-first-
    summer-ramadan/
Toda, Masahiro and Kanehisa Morimoto. 2004. “Ramadan Fasting: Effect on Healthy Mus-
    lims.” Social Behavior and Personality 32(1): 13-18.
Van Ewijk, Reyn. 2011. “Long-Term Health Effects on the Next Generation of Ramadan Fasting
    during Pregnancy.” Journal of Health Economics 30(6): 12461260.
Weber, Max. 1905 [1930]. The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism. London: Allen &
   Unwin.
Young, Cristobal. 2009. “Model Uncertainty in Sociological Research: An Application to
    Religion and Economic Growth.” American Sociological Review 74(3): 380-397.
Ziaee, V., M. Razaei, Z. Ahmadinejad, H. Shaikh, R. Youse, L. Yarmohammadi, F. Bozorgi,
    and M.J. Behjati. 2006. “The Changes of Metabolic Profile and Weight during Ramadan
    Fasting.” Singapore Medical Journal 47(5): 409-414.




                                             30
Figure 1. Muslim Countries Sample, PWT




Note: The map indicates (in red) the 32 sampled Muslim countries (>75% Muslim population)
in the Penn World Tables dataset.




Figure 2. Daily Ramadan Fasting Hours, 3 countries example




Note: Each line represents the average daily number of sunrise-to-sunset hours during the
month of Ramadan in each year, measured in each country’s capital.
Figure 3. Daily Ramadan Fasting Hours in Muslim Countries, PWT




Note: Each line represents the average daily number of sunrise-to-sunset hours during the
month of Ramadan in each year, for different parts of the distribution among Muslim countries.
The red line is the mean, while the dashed lines represent the 20th and 80th percentiles. The
boxes at the top indicate which month Ramadan starts in. The graph shows that most of the
within-year variation in fasting hours occurs during summer and winter Ramadan (June and
December), while there is no variation when Ramadan is held in equinox months (March and
September).


Figure 4. Daily Ramadan Fasting Hours in Muslim and Non-Muslim Countries, PWT




Note: Each line represents the average daily number of sunrise-to-sunset hours during the
month of Ramadan in each year, for Muslim countries (>75% Muslim population) and non-
Muslim countries (<25% Muslim population) in the Penn World Tables dataset.
Figure 5. Surveyed Muslims, WVS Sample




Note: The map shows the 69 countries with surveyed Muslims in the World Values
Survey dataset, during 1981-2008. Black color indicates nobody was sampled, yellow
indicates up to 100 individuals, orange indicates up to 500, and red indicates more
than 500 sampled individuals. There is a total of approximately 40’000 surveyed
Muslims in the sample.
Table 1. Placebo Tests, Non-Muslim Countries
                                               Country-Level Data                                          Individual-level Survey Data
                                GDP per GDP per Capital             Employ-                                                               Life
                          GDP    Capita Worker  Stock                ment   Wage        Employed Employed     Self   Unemploy- Happine- Satisfact-
                         Growth Growth Growth Growth                Growth Growth       Full Time Part Time Employed    ed       ss        ion
                           (1)    (2)     (3)    (4)                  (5)    (6)           (7)       (8)      (9)      (10)     (11)      (12)

Ramadan Hours, Log         -0.009    -0.007      -0.005    -0.006    0.011     0.007      0.065       -0.035      -0.016     0.045         -0.026    -0.016
                          (0.007)   (0.006)     (0.006)   (0.006)   (0.022)   (0.022)    (0.048)     (0.023)     (0.039)    (0.049)       (0.023)   (0.049)

Observations                 6021      6021    5153     5973      2537        2537       158848       158848       158848      158848 160649 163817
R-squared                    0.17       0.16   0.16     0.29      0.19        0.19          0.05       0.02         0.09        0.05      0.10      0.17
Country FE                    Yes       Yes     Yes      Yes       Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes       Yes       Yes
Year FE                       Yes       Yes     Yes      Yes       Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes       Yes       Yes
Dataset                      PWT       PWT     PWT      PWT INDSTAT INDSTAT                WVS         WVS          WVS         WVS      WVS        WVS
P-value                      0.15       0.25   0.39     0.32      0.24        0.62          0.17       0.17         0.66        0.37      0.27      0.75
Note: Ramadan hours is the average number of sunrise to sunset hours during the month of Ramadan, measured in the country's capital. All samples
consist of non-Muslim countries (less than 25 percent Muslim population). In the individual-level survey data all individuals are non-Muslims, and the
dependent variables are dummy variables. See section 4.1 for a description of the datasets. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the
country level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




Table 2. The Effects of Ramadan on Economic Growth in Muslim Countries

                                                            Real GDP per Capita Growth                                             Real GDP Growth
                                                 (1)      (2)      (3)      (4)       (5)          (6)           (7)       (8)       (9)     (10)             (11)    (12)

Ramadan Hours, Log                            -0.087*** -0.092*** -0.099*** -0.099** -0.099**    -0.008        -0.052** -0.067** -0.084** -0.101** -0.101**           -0.007
                                               (0.026) (0.026) (0.032) (0.040) (0.038)          (0.006)         (0.023) (0.025) (0.032) (0.039) (0.039)              (0.007)
Muslim Country*Ramadan Hours, Log                                                               -0.091**                                                             -0.093**
                                                                                                 (0.039)                                                              (0.040)

Observations                                1416      1416       1416      1416       1416       7437          1416  1416     1416      1416     1416      7437
R-squared                                   0.01      0.06       0.08      0.13       0.15       0.15           0.00 0.05      0.08     0.12     0.12      0.17
Sample Countries                          Muslim Muslim Muslim Muslim Muslim                      All        Muslim Muslim Muslim Muslim Muslim             All
Country FE                                   No        Yes        No        Yes        Yes        Yes            No   Yes       No       Yes      Yes       Yes
Year FE                                      No        No         Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes            No   No       Yes       Yes      Yes       Yes
Population Growth Control                    No        No         No        No         Yes        Yes            No   No        No       No       Yes       Yes
Year-by-Muslim-Country FE                    No        No         No        No         No         Yes            No   No        No       No        No       Yes
Standardized Effect                         -0.11     -0.11      -0.12     -0.12      -0.12      -0.11         -0.06 -0.08    -0.10     -0.13    -0.13     -0.12
Note: Country-year panel data from Penn World Tables 8.0, 1950-2011. All outcome variables are in constant 2005 prices. Ramadan hours is the average number of
sunrise to sunset hours during the month of Ramadan, measured in the country's capital. A Muslim country is defined as having more than 75 percent of the
population of Muslim denomination. The sample in columns (6) and (12) includes non-Muslim countries, defined as having a Muslim population of less than 25
percent. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the country level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Table 3. The Effects of Ramadan on Subjective Well-Being Among Muslims
                                           Happiness                                                     Life Satisfaction
                         Dummy Dummy Dummy Dummy Dummy Likert, Ologit                       Dummy Dummy Dummy Dummy Dummy 10p scale
                           (1)   (2)   (3)       (4) (5)    (6)                               (7)   (8)    (9)       (10)  (11) (12)

Ramadan Hours, Log      0.462*** 0.521*** 0.340** 0.747*** 1.155**          1.350***        0.965*** 1.149*** 1.197*** 1.207*** 4.167 6.991***
                         (0.152) (0.145) (0.158) (0.179) (0.524)            (0.293)          (0.308) (0.310) (0.314) (0.342) (3.306) (1.647)

Observations               39636     37821    18456      19365    30830       37821            39490      37689     18411     19278 30712   37689
R-squared                   0.09      0.10     0.11       0.11     0.10        0.13             0.09       0.10      0.10      0.10  0.09    0.11
Sample Countries              All      All      All        All   Muslim         All              All        All       All       All Muslim    All
Sample Individuals            All      All    Males Females         All         All              All        All     Males Females     All     All
Country FE                   Yes      Yes      Yes        Yes      Yes         Yes              Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes   Yes     Yes
Year FE                      Yes      Yes      Yes        Yes      Yes         Yes              Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes   Yes     Yes
Controls                     No       Yes      Yes        Yes      Yes         Yes               No        Yes       Yes       Yes   Yes     Yes
Standardized Effect         0.10      0.12     0.07       0.17     0.24        N/A              0.17       0.21      0.21      0.22  0.69    0.24
Note: Individual-level outcome data from the World Values Survey, 1981-2008. All individuals in the sample are Muslims. Ramadan hours is the
average number of sunrise to sunset hours during the month of Ramadan in the year preceding the survey, in the country's capital. The controls are:
age, age squared, number of children, marital status dummies, education level dummies, and a gender dummy. A Muslim country (column (5) and
(11)), is defined as before. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the country level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




Table 4. The Effects of Ramadan on Employment and Wage Growth in Muslim Countries, Country-Level

                                         Employment Growth, Number of Workers                Wage Growth, Average Wages
Sample Countries                         Muslim   Muslim     Muslim     All              Muslim   Muslim    Muslim      All
                                           (1)      (2)       (3)       (4)               (5)      (6)        (7)       (8)

Ramadan Hours, Log                        -0.207*    -0.210*   -0.200**    -0.015        0.500**    0.498**    0.605***     0.012
                                          (0.107)    (0.117)    (0.079)    (0.014)       (0.182)    (0.179)     (0.213)    (0.022)

Muslim Country * Ramadan Hours, Log                                        -0.195*                                        0.487***
                                                                           (0.111)                                         (0.174)

Observations                                   581         581        581     3,118           581       581         581       3,118
R-squared                                      0.22        0.23       0.28     0.17           0.17      0.17        0.19       0.18
Sample Countries                             Muslim     Muslim      Muslim      All         Muslim     Muslim    Muslim         All
Country FE                                     Yes         Yes        Yes      Yes            Yes       Yes         Yes        Yes
Year FE                                        Yes         Yes        Yes      Yes            Yes       Yes         Yes        Yes
Population Growth Control                       No         Yes        Yes      Yes             No       Yes         Yes        Yes
Country Trends                                  No          No        Yes       No             No        No         Yes         No
Year-by-Muslim-Country FE                       No          No         No      Yes             No        No          No        Yes
Standardized Effect                           -0.17       -0.17      -0.16    -0.16           0.23      0.23       0.23       0.22
Note: Country-year unbalanced panel data on employment and average wages from UNIDO INDSTAT manufacturing dataset, 1963-
2010. All variables are defined as before. The full sample consists of 166 countries, of which 26 are Muslim countries. Standard
errors clustered at the country level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Table 5. The Effects of Ramadan on Employment Among Muslims, Individual-Level Survey Data
                                                                                                                           Satisfaction with
                                                                                                                         Financial Situation of
                             Employed Full Time      Employed Part Time          Selfemployed          Unemployed             Household
                               (1)        (2)          (3)       (4)             (5)       (6)        (7)      (8)          (9)         (10)

Ramadan Hours, Log             -0.119     -0.160     -0.295**    -0.363***     0.404**    0.311**   -0.022     -0.081     8.16***     8.97***
                              (0.334)     (0.283)     (0.119)     (0.123)      (0.190)    (0.137)   (0.135)    (0.134)    (1.24)      (1.05)

Observations                  18720       17968       18720       17968       18720      17968      18720       17968      19338       18417
R-squared                       0.09        0.21        0.03        0.04       0.07       0.12        0.05        0.10      0.11        0.13
Sample Countries                 All         All         All         All        All        All         All         All       All         All
Country FE                      Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes       Yes         Yes
Year FE                         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes       Yes         Yes
Controls                         No         Yes          No         Yes         No        Yes          No         Yes        No         Yes
Standardized Effect            -0.02       -0.03       -0.10       -0.12       0.09       0.07       -0.01       -0.02      0.28        0.31
Note: Individual-level outcome data from World Values Survey, 1981-2008. The sampled individuals are Muslim men. Ramadan hours is
the average daily number of sunrise to sunset hours during the month of Ramadan in the year preceding the survey, measured in the
country's capital. All dependent variables are indicator variables, except Financial Satisfaction which is given on a 10-point scale. The
controls are the same as in Table 3. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the country level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




Table 6. The Effects of Ramadan on Religiosity and Labor-Related Preferences Among Muslims, Survey Data
                                                                              Important in Life:    Important for Job
                            Important in Life:       Important in Life:      Work more Important     Choice: A Good        Important in a Job:
                                 Religion                 Work                  than Religion            Income               Good Hours
                             (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)       (7)          (8)        (9)         (10)

Ramadan Hours, Log         0.143**      0.139**      -0.035      -0.052      -0.299***   -0.263**   -0.625*   -0.865**     1.00***     1.08**
                           (0.055)      (0.057)     (0.079)     (0.103)       (0.110)     (0.101)   (0.316)    (0.343)      (0.35)     (0.47)

Observations                19475      18544       19438       18505       19375       18448       19598       18651        10888        10414
R-squared                    0.08       0.08         0.03        0.05       0.17        0.18        0.17         0.17        0.19         0.19
Sample Countries              All        All          All         All        All         All         All          All         All          All
Country FE                   Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes
Year FE                      Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes
Controls                      No        Yes           No         Yes         No         Yes          No          Yes          No          Yes
Standardized Effect          0.07       0.07        -0.02       -0.03      -0.09       -0.08       -0.16        -0.22        0.18         0.19
Note: Individual-level outcome data from World Values Survey, 1981-2008. Ramadan hours is the average daily number of sunrise to sunset
hours during the month of Ramadan in the year preceding the survey, measured in the country's capital. The sampled individuals are Muslim
men. All dependent variables are indicator variables. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the country level. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                                           APPENDIX

Figure A1. The Effect of Ramadan on GDP Growth in Muslim Countries, Residuals




Note: Each graph plots the residuals from the baseline specification (regressions from Table 2, columns
(5) and (11), respectively). The red line indicates the estimated slope, with associated coefficients and p-
values below. The figure shows that outliers do not drive the negative coefficient estimates.




Figure A2. GDP Estimates when Dropping Countries One-by-One




Note: The red vertical line in each graph corresponds to the baseline specification point estimate (from
Table 2, columns (5) and (11), respectively) and the distribution of estimates when countries are
dropped one-by-one from the sample. The figure shows that a particular country does not drive the
estimates.
Figure A3. The Effect of Ramadan on SWB Among Muslims, Residuals




Note: Each graph plots the residuals from the baseline specification (regressions from Table 3, columns
(2) and (8), respectively). The red line indicates the estimated slope, with associated coefficients and p-
values below. The figure shows that outliers do not drive the positive coefficient estimates.




Figure A4. SWB Estimates when Dropping Countries One-by-One




Note: Each graph plots the distribution of point estimates from the baseline specification (country and
year fixed effects) when countries are dropped one-by-one from the sample. The red vertical line
corresponds to the baseline specification estimate when no country is dropped. The figure shows that a
particular country does not drive the estimates.
   Table A1. Summary Statistics
                                                                                 Full Sample                 Muslim Countries
   Country-Level Data, PWT 8.0, 1950-2011                                  N        Mean Std. Dev.          N     Mean Std. Dev.
   Real GDP Growth, 2005 Constant USD                                     8107      0.041    0.065         1416   0.045 0.079
   Real GDP per Capita Growth, 2005 Constant USD                          8107      0.022    0.064         1416   0.017 0.078
   Real GDP per Worker Growth, 2005 Constant USD                          6992      0.019    0.063         1274   0.013 0.081
   Population Growth                                                      8111      0.018    0.015         1416   0.028 0.019
   Capital Stock Growth                                                   8059      0.043    0.038         1416   0.047 0.039
   Muslim Population Share                                                8107      0.234    0.355         1416   0.938 0.613
   Ramadan Hours                                                          8107      12.05    1.553         1416   12.00 1.164
   Country-Level Data, INDSTAT2, 1963-2010
   Employment Growth, Number of Workers                                   3301      0.024    0.122          581      0.050      0.147
   Wage Growth, Average Wages                                             3301      0.081    0.196          581      0.085      0.257
   Population Growth                                                      3301      0.016    0.019          581      0.027      0.035
   Muslim Population Share                                                3301      0.222    0.353          581      0.947      0.536
   Ramadan Hours                                                          3301      11.88    1.865          581      11.89      1.413

                                                                            Full Sample                      Muslim Individuals
   Individual-Level Survey Data, WVS, 1981-2008                         N      Mean Std. Dev.                N     Mean Std. Dev.
   Ramadan Hours                                                      230759 11.33      1.492              40027 10.93 0.975
   Non-Muslim                                                         230759 0.783      0.412              40027 0.000 0.000
   Feeling of Happines, Dummy                                         223931 0.790      0.407              39636 0.800 0.400
   Feeling of Happines, Likert Scale                                  223931 2.027      0.756              39636 2.012 0.758
   Life Satisfaction, Above 5 Dummy                                   226169 0.648      0.478              39490 0.551 0.497
   Life Satisfaction, 10-point Scale                                  226169 6.489      2.520              39490 5.992 2.605
   Employed, Full Time                                                220475 0.344      0.475              38235 0.252 0.434
   Employed, Part Time                                                220475 0.074      0.261              38235 0.064 0.244
   Selfemployed                                                       220475 0.111      0.314              38235 0.139 0.346
   Unemployed                                                         220475 0.097      0.295              38235 0.106 0.308
   Satisfaction with Financial Situation, Dummy                       219975 5.534      2.636              39443 5.344 2.565
   Important in Life: Religion                                        213375 0.751      0.432              39716 0.971 0.167
   Important in Life: Work                                            213715 0.925      0.264              39537 0.927 0.260
   Important in Life: Work more Important than Religion               211465 0.366      0.482              39425 0.092 0.289
   Important for Job Choice: A Good Income                            230759 0.762      0.426              40027 0.850 0.357
   Important in a Job: Good Hours                                     145470 0.517      0.500              21529 0.659 0.474

   Note: See section 4.1 for a description of data sources and variable constructions. A Muslim country is defined as having more than
   75 percent Muslim population.
                                                                                                                                         	  
	  
	  
	  
   Table A2. The Effects of Ramadan on Economic Growth in Muslim Countries, GDP per Worker

                                                                           Real GDP per Worker Growth
                                                       (1)          (2)          (3)        (4)       (5)               (6)

   Ramadan Hours, Log                               -0.099***    -0.098***       -0.143***   -0.146***   -0.140***     -0.006
                                                     (0.031)      (0.031)         (0.034)     (0.036)     (0.036)     (0.006)

   Muslim Country*Ramadan Hours, Log                                                                                 -0.138***
                                                                                                                      (0.035)

   Observations                                    1274        1274         1274        1274         1274          6427
   R-squared                                       0.02        0.07         0.09        0.15         0.19          0.16
   Sample Countries                               Muslim      Muslim      Muslim       Muslim       Muslim           All
   Year FE                                          No          No           Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
   Country FE                                       No          Yes          No          Yes          Yes           Yes
   Population Growth Control                        No          No           No          No           Yes           Yes
   Year-by-Muslim-Country FE                        No          No           No          No           No            Yes
   Standardized Effect                             -0.12       -0.12        -0.18       -0.18        -0.17         -0.17
   Note: Same note as in Table 2 applies. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the country level. ***
   p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                                                                                                                                 	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
   Table A3. Robustness: Sample Restrictions, Country Trends, and Two-Way Clustered Standard Errors                                                            	  
                                               Baseline Specification                      Baseline Specification + Country Trends                             	  
                                                   S.E.         S.E.                                    S.E.         S.E.           N-                         	  
                                         Coeff   Baseline Two-way             R2            Coeff     Baseline Two-way        R2 Countries N-Obs.
                                                                                                                                                               	  
   Dep. Var.: GDP per Capita Growth
   >75% Muslims                          -0.099    (0.040)**   (0.040)**      0.13          -0.134   (0.044)***   (0.045)***    0.23        32       1416
                                                                                                                                                               	  
   >70% Muslims                          -0.095    (0.037)**   (0.039)**      0.14          -0.130   (0.043)***   (0.045)***    0.22        34       1507      	  
   >60% Muslims                          -0.081    (0.035)**   (0.037)**      0.14          -0.110   (0.042)**    (0.044)**     0.22        36       1604
   >50% Muslims                          -0.069    (0.032)**   (0.034)**      0.11          -0.106   (0.040)**    (0.041)***    0.17        41       1830      	  
   Dep. Var.: GDP Growth
                                                                                                                                                               	  
   >75% Muslims                          -0.101    (0.039)**   (0.040)**      0.12          -0.136   (0.045)***   (0.046)***    0.21        32       1416      	  
   >70% Muslims                          -0.096    (0.038)**   (0.040)**      0.12          -0.131   (0.044)***   (0.046)***    0.20        34       1507
   >60% Muslims                          -0.082    (0.036)**   (0.038)**      0.12          -0.112   (0.043)**    (0.045)**     0.20        36       1604      	  
   >50% Muslims                          -0.070    (0.033)**   (0.034)**      0.09          -0.106   (0.040)**    (0.041)***    0.16        41       1830
                                                                                                                                                               	  
   Note: Each estimate comes from a separate regression of economic growth on Log(Ramadan Hours), as specified in equation 1. For each                         	  
   point estimate, two standard errors are reported: S.E. Baseline clusters the standard errors by country, while S.E. Two-way clusters the
   standard errors by country and by year (Cameron, Gelbach and Miller, 2006). The baseline specification includes country fixed effect, year fixed            	  
   effects, and population growth control. Country trends allows for a linear trend for each country. Each row corresponds to the %-Muslims
   sample inclusion restriction. N-countries is the number of countries in the sample, and N-Obs is the number of observations. *** p<0.01, **
                                                                                                                                                               	  
   p<0.05, * p<0.1.                                                                                                                                            	  
                                                                                                                                                               	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
   Table A4. The Effects of Ramadan on Economic Growth in Muslim Countries, Ramadan Hours in Levels
                                          Real GDP per Capita Growth                         Real GDP Growth                            Real GDP per Worker Growth
                                        (1)      (2)      (3)       (4)              (5)       (6)      (7)          (8)          (9)         (10)      (11)       (12)

   Ramadan Hours                    -0.0078*** -0.0081** -0.0080** -0.0005      -0.0056** -0.0081** -0.0081** -0.0005          -0.0082*** -0.0120*** -0.0113*** -0.0004
                                     (0.0022) (0.0034) (0.0032) (0.0005)         (0.0021) (0.0033) (0.0033) (0.0006)            (0.0026) (0.0031) (0.0030) (0.0005)

   Muslim Country*Ramadan Hours                                   -0.0076**                                       -0.0077**                                           -0.0113***
                                                                   (0.0033)                                        (0.0034)                                            (0.0030)

   Observations                         1416      1416     1416       7437         1416       1416       1416      7437      1274      1274       1274        6427
   R-squared                            0.06      0.13     0.15       0.15          0.05      0.12       0.12      0.17       0.07      0.15       0.19        0.16
   Sample Countries                    Muslim Muslim Muslim            All       Muslim Muslim Muslim               All    Muslim     Muslim     Muslim         All
   Country FE                            Yes       Yes      Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes
   Year FE                               No        Yes      Yes        Yes           No        Yes        Yes       Yes        No       Yes        Yes         Yes
   Population Growth Control             No        No       Yes        Yes           No        No         Yes       Yes        No        No        Yes         Yes
   Year-by-Muslim-Country FE             No        No       No         Yes           No        No         No        Yes        No        No         No         Yes
   Standardized Effect                  -0.12     -0.12    -0.12      -0.11        -0.08      -0.12      -0.12     -0.12     -0.12     -0.18      -0.17       -0.17
   Note: Country-year panel data from Penn World Tables 8.0, 1950-2011. All outcome variables are in constant 2005 prices. Ramadan hours is the average number
   of sunrise to sunset hours during the month of Ramadan, measured in the country's capital. A Muslim country is defined as having more than 75 percent of the
   population of Muslim denomination. The sample in columns (4), (8) and (12)) includes non-Muslim countries, defined as having a Muslim population of less than 25
   percent. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the country level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.



	  
	  
Table A5. Robustness: Collapsed Growth Data and Controls for Beta-Convergence
                                                            Baseline + "Iron law" Beta-    Baseline + Barro Lower-Bound        Baseline + Barro Upper-Bound
                               Baseline Specification          Convergence (2%)              Beta-Convergence (1.7%)             Beta-Convergence (2.4%)
                              Coeff     S.E.         N        Coeff    S.E.         N         Coeff    S.E.              N       Coeff    S.E.           N

GDP per Capita Growth
Yearly data                   -0.099    (0.040)** 1416       -0.084     (0.036)** 1416       -0.086    (0.036)**    1416        -0.081    (0.036)**     1416
2-year periods data           -0.101    (0.041)** 722        -0.087     (0.038)** 694        -0.090    (0.038)**     694        -0.084    (0.037)**      694
3-year periods data           -0.097    (0.040)** 480        -0.081     (0.034)** 463        -0.084    (0.035)**     463        -0.078    (0.034)**      463
4-year periods data           -0.101    (0.045)** 371        -0.081     (0.037)** 342        -0.083    (0.038)**     342        -0.078    (0.037)**      342
5-year periods data           -0.116    (0.049)** 308        -0.094     (0.044)** 276        -0.096    (0.045)**     276        -0.090    (0.043)**      276

GDP Growth
Yearly data                   -0.101    (0.039)** 1416       -0.082     (0.037)** 1416       -0.085    (0.037)**    1416        -0.079    (0.036)**     1416
2-year periods data           -0.103    (0.042)** 722        -0.086     (0.038)** 694        -0.088    (0.039)**     694        -0.082    (0.038)**      694
3-year periods data           -0.099    (0.041)** 480        -0.079     (0.035)** 463        -0.083    (0.035)**     463        -0.075    (0.035)**      463
4-year periods data           -0.102    (0.047)** 371        -0.079     (0.038)** 342        -0.082    (0.039)**     342        -0.076    (0.038)**      342
5-year periods data           -0.117    (0.050)** 308        -0.092     (0.045)** 276        -0.094    (0.046)**     276        -0.088    (0.045)**      276

Note: Each estimate comes from a separate regression of economic growth on Log(Ramadan Hours) in Muslim countries. The baseline specification
estimates from Table 2 are reproduced for each outcome, followed by rows of regressions with data averaged over various period lengths. The baseline
specification includes country fixed effect, year fixed effects, and population growth control. Additional columns correspond to regressions that control for
Beta-convergence, where the rate of convergence (2%, 1.7% and 2.4%, respectively) enters the regression as a constraint on the coefficient for the one-
period lagged logged income (GDP per Capita and GDP, respectively), acquired from Barro (2012). *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

!
!
!
!




                                                                                                                     !
!
!
!
!
!
!                                              !
    !
!
!
!




!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
    !
!
!
!




!
!
!
