                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




THE EFFECT OF U.S. HEALTH INSURANCE EXPANSIONS ON MEDICAL INNOVATION

                                           Jeffrey Clemens

                                        Working Paper 19761
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19761


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2013




I thank John Shoven, Greg Rosston, Gopi Shah Goda, and the rest of the SIEPR team for their feedback
during working-group meetings. I also thank Loren Baker, Prashant Bharadwaj, Kate Bundorf, Ken
Chay, Julie Berry Cullen, David Cutler, Gordon Dahl, Liran Einav, Andrew Foster, Vic Fuchs, Joshua
Gottlieb, Karthik Muralidharan, Sean Nicholson, Josh Schwartzstein, Heidi Williams, Gui Woolston,
seminar participants at Brown, IU, Stanford, UC Davis, UIUC, and at the 2012 Annual Health Economics
Conference for helpful comments. I owe special thanks to Chad Jones and Petra Moser for their insights
into the broad themes of health, growth, and innovation and into the analysis of these themes using
patent data. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Jeffrey Clemens. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
The Effect of U.S. Health Insurance Expansions on Medical Innovation
Jeffrey Clemens
NBER Working Paper No. 19761
December 2013
JEL No. H51,H57,I1,I13,O3,O31

                                             ABSTRACT

I study the channels through which health insurance influences medical innovation. Following Medicare
and Medicaid's passage, I find that U.S.-based medical-equipment patenting rose by 40 to 50 percent
relative to both other U.S. patenting and foreign medical-equipment patenting. Within the United
States, increases in medical-equipment patenting were most dramatic in states where the Great Society
insurance expansions were largest and in which there were large baseline numbers of physicians per
resident. Consistent with historical case studies, Medical innovation's determinants extend beyond
the potential revenues associated with global market size; a physician driven process of innovation-
while-doing appears to play a central role. An extrapolation of the evidence suggests that the last half
century's U.S. insurance expansions have driven 25 percent of recent global medical-equipment innovation.
In a standard decomposition of health spending growth, this insurance-induced innovation accounts
for 15 percent of the long run rise in U.S. health spending in hospitals, physicians' offices, and other
clinical settings.


Jeffrey Clemens
Department of Economics
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive #0508
La Jolla, CA 92093
and NBER
jeffclemens@ucsd.edu
“It is naturally to be expected, therefore, that some one or other of those who are employed in each
particular branch of labour should soon find out easier and readier methods of performing their
own particular work, whenever the nature of it admits of such improvement.”
    -Adam Smith (1776)

“Learning is the product of experience. Learning can only take place through the attempt to solve
a problem and therefore only takes place during activity.”
    -Kenneth Arrow (1962)


    The advance of medical technology underlies both the costs (Newhouse, 1992; Chan-
dra and Skinner, 2012) and benefits (Cutler and McClellan, 2001; Cutler, Rosen, and
Vijan, 2006; Murphy and Topel, 2003) of modern medicine. The economics literature
says little, however, about the processes through which these advances occur. Research
on medical equipment and devices speaks more directly to the causes of diffusion across
providers than to the sources of development.1 Studies of medical innovation’s causes
have focused primarily on pharmaceuticals.2
    The development of medical equipment is conceptually quite distinct from the de-
velopment of pharmaceuticals. Pharmaceuticals are associated with the labors of large
enterprises attuned to global markets. By contrast, much medical-equipment innovation

   1 Several   recent papers address the responsiveness of technology adoption to the incentives created by
insurance arrangement (Acemoglu and Finkelstein, 2008; Clemens and Gottlieb, Forthcoming; Freedman,
Lin, and Simon, 2012). Baicker and Goldman (2011) provide an overview of equally relevant research on
the demand side effects of insurance, which includes notable papers by Manning et al. (1987), Finkelstein
et al. (2012), and Finkelstein (2007).
   2 In the tradition of directed technical change (Acemoglu, 1998), several interesting sources of vari-
ation in potential market size have been linked to research and development efforts in the context of
pharmaceuticals. These sources include inoculation policy (Finkelstein, 2004), shifts in population demo-
graphics (Acemoglu and Linn, 2004), variation in willingness to pay (De Mouzon, Dubois, Scott Morton,
and Seabright, 2011), the introduction of Medicare Part D (Blume-Kohout and Sood, 2008), and variation
in effective patent life driven by the difficulty of establishing a treatment’s efficacy (Budish, Roin, and
Williams, 2013). In the environmental context, several studies have linked increases in energy prices to
quickened development of energy-saving innovations (Jaffe, Trajtenberg, and Romer, 2005; Popp, 2002;
Aghion, Dechezleprêtre, Hemous, Martin, and Van Reenen, 2012).

                                                    2
has local foundations. While patients self administer most medications, medical equip-
ment must integrate into procedures performed by practitioners. Historical case studies
find that these practitioners are essential to the innovative process (Roberts, 1988).
   In Section 2 I model the empirically relevant content of medical innovation’s dis-
tinguishing characteristics. The model first emphasizes that capitalizing on innovation
requires clearing regulatory barriers and integrating into existing styles of medical prac-
tice. These hurdles point to a role for national markets; familiarity with regulators
and physicians’ practice norms improves an innovator’s odds of successfully integrat-
ing into a market. Second, I emphasize the importance of local patient demand. In the
spirit of Arrow (1962), the productivity of innovative effort depends on physicians’ ex-
perience working with technologies at the existing frontier. This innovating-while-doing
phenomenon links innovation to local flows of comprehensively insured patients. All
factors considered, the model shows how insurance arrangements may influence inno-
vation through global, national, and relatively local channels.
   I investigate medical innovation’s determinants by estimating the effect of the Great
Society health programs on patenting activity. I first find that, following Medicare and
Medicaid’s introduction, U.S.-based medical-equipment patenting increased by 40 to 50
percent more than both other U.S. patenting and foreign medical-equipment patenting
(see Section 4). The occurrence of such a large, differential increase in patenting activity
implies central roles for medical innovation’s national and local determinants. This core
result is robust to a range of methods for controlling for more general, U.S.-specific
trends towards health-sector innovation.3


   3 In addition to standard robustness exercises, this includes confirmation of Acemoglu, Cutler, Finkel-
stein, and Linn’s (2006) finding that Medicare and Medicaid had no effect on pharmaceutical innovation.
Medicare and Medicaid’s coverage of pharmaceuticals was limited in these programs’ early years, al-
lowing estimates of their effect on pharmaceutical patenting to function as placebo test. Ordinary least
squares regression models, count models, and a synthetic control framework (Abadie and Gardeazabal,
2003; Abadie and Hainmueller, 2010) deliver consistent results.

                                                    3
    I assess the relevance of relatively local factors by analyzing variation in the increases
in medical innovation that occurred within the United States. The evidence points to
an important role for innovation-while-doing. I find that expansions in U.S. medical-
equipment patenting were largest where there were large baseline numbers of physi-
cians per capita and large Medicare- and Medicaid-induced insurance expansions (see
Section 5). Furthermore, these local factors most strongly predict increases in patents
for which innovation-while-doing is most plausibly relevant. This most prominently
includes patents associated with surgery, a vocation in which mastery is tightly linked
to experience (Chandra and Staiger, 2007). Local factors do not predict shifts towards
patenting in diagnostic imaging equipment, which is more closely linked to the efforts
of large-scale manufacturers.4
    The paper’s remaining analysis considers the influence of U.S. insurance expansions
on long-run trends in innovation and health expenditures. By quantifying local and na-
tional mechanisms through which insurance expansions operate, the analysis can place
a lower bound on the total effect of insurance expansions on medical innovation.5 The
distance between the estimated bound and the total impact depends primarily on the
extent to which foreign innovators responded to the markets created by Medicare and
Medicaid. The evolution of health-sector patenting across sub-groups of foreign coun-
tries provides suggestive evidence on the importance of foreign-innovator responses.
I find that the spread between the growth of U.S.-based medical-equipment patenting
and foreign medical-equipment patenting becomes increasingly large as I restrict the
sample of foreign countries to those more culturally removed from the United States.
Health-sector patenting in non-European, non-English speaking countries may provide

   4I   thank Loren Baker for suggesting this division of the data.
   5 Movement   of physicians across countries could shift the bound in the opposite direction; if relevant,
the observed expansion in U.S.-based medical innovation would capture substitution across space in ad-
dition to any aggregate increase. This seems unlikely, however, on the horizon over which the observed
effects unfold.

                                                      4
the most reasonable counterfactual for estimating the total effect of U.S. insurance ex-
pansions. Extrapolating to more recent years, I estimate that U.S. insurance expansions
increased U.S.-based medical-equipment patenting by around 50 percent. This increase
accounts for 25 percent of recent global medical-equipment innovation.
    Accounting decompositions of health spending typically attribute two-thirds of long
run growth to the development of new technologies (Newhouse, 1992; Chandra and
Skinner, 2012). I conclude by using my estimates to decompose technology’s contribu-
tion into an insurance-induced component and a counterfactual component. Weisbrod
(1991) emphasizes that insurance can create incentives for innovation focused primarily
on either quality enhancement (without regard for cost) or on cost reduction (at a given
level of quality). The predominance of fee-for-service reimbursements over the time pe-
riod under study makes insurance-induced innovation a potentially important driver of
rising costs. I estimate that the effect of U.S. insurance arrangements on medical innova-
tion accounts for around 15 percent of the rise in U.S. spending in hospitals, physicians’
offices and other clinical settings over the last half century.



1    U.S. Insurance Expansions and the Markets for Medical

     Technologies

    This section characterizes the effect of the mid-to-late 20th century rise of U.S. health
insurance on consumer exposure to out-of-pocket costs. With the insurance of this era
primarily involving cost-plus, fee-for-service reimbursement for providers, these expan-
sions can be viewed as unambiguous increases in the ranks of comprehensively insured
patients and in the size of U.S. markets for new health care technologies. As empha-
sized in the following section, it is particularly relevant that U.S. physicians are well
reimbursed for engaging with treatments at the technological frontier.

                                              5
                      Changes in the Markets for Drugs and Medical Equipment
                                 Panel A: Hospital and Physicians' Office Payments                                                        Panel B: Payments for Pharmaceuticals




                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                                                           0




                    .6     .45
                                                                                                                             .85




                                                                                                      -.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.25




                    .3
                                                                                                                      .7




                                                                                               -.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                  -.5




           .15
                                                                                                             .55




                                                                                        -.75
                                                                                                                                                                                           -.75




           Out of Pocket Share
                                                                                                             Out of Pocket Share


                                                                                        % Change from 1960
                                                                                                                                                                                           % Change from 1960




                    0
                                                                                                                       .4




                                                                                        -1
                                                                                                                                                                                           -1




                                 1960       1965          1970          1975     1980                                              1960        1965          1970          1975     1980
                                                          Year                                                                                               Year


                                 Panel C: Hospital and Physicians' Office Payments                                                        Panel D: Payments for Pharmaceuticals




                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                                                                                           0




                    .6
                                                                                                                       .8




6
                           .45
                                                                                                                             .65




                                                                                                      -.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.25




                    .3
                                                                                                                      .5




                                                                                               -.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                  -.5




           .15
                                                                                                             .35




                                                                                        -.75
                                                                                                                                                                                           -.75




           Out of Pocket Share
                                                                                                             Out of Pocket Share


                                                                                        % Change from 1980
                                                                                                                                                                                           % Change from 1980




                    0
                                                                                                                       .2




                                                                                        -1
                                                                                                                                                                                           -1




                                 1980     1985     1990          1995     2000   2005                                              1980      1985     1990          1995     2000   2005
                                                          Year                                                                                               Year



                                                                          Out of Pocket Share
                                                                          % Change in Out of Pocket Share

    Figure 1: Declines in Exposure to Out of Pocket Medical Costs: All series were constructed by the author using the historical Na-
    tional Health Expenditure data reported by the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). Percent changes are calculated as
       Current Year - Base Year
    (Current Year + Base Year)/2 , with 1960 serving as the base year in Panels A and B and 1980 serving as the base year in Panels C and D.
   In parallel with the later empirical analysis, I consider consumer exposure to the
costs associated with hospitals and physicians’ offices separately from their exposure to
the cost of prescription drugs. Panel A of Figure 1 shows the fraction of spending at
hospitals and physicians’ offices that consumers paid out of pocket from 1960 to 1980.6
It also reports the percentage change in this share from 1960 to each of the subsequent
years. The implementation of Medicare and Medicaid resulted in a large, nearly imme-
diate decline in this share, by 40 percent, from 1965 to 1967. By 1970 it had declined by
more than 50 percent. Declines continued over subsequent years, approaching 90 per-
cent by 1980, in part reflecting the expansion of Medicaid to the disabled and to those
on Supplemental Security Income in 1972.
   Panel B reports series similar to those in Panel A, but for consumer exposure to the
cost of prescription drugs. The percent change in the out-of-pocket share for prescription
drugs is much smaller than it was for spending at hospitals and in physicians’ offices.
The change approaches a 25 percent reduction by 1980, with a reduction of less than
15 percent from 1960 to 1970. By as late as 1980, consumers remained exposed to an
average of 70 percent of the cost of their prescription drugs.
   Panels C and D report the same series as Panels A and B, but for the period extending
from 1980 to 2005. This period saw substantial declines, in percent terms, in exposure
to the cost of health spending in both of the relevant environments. The out-of-pocket
share for spending in hospitals and physicians’ offices declined from an already low
base of 15 cents on the dollar to roughly 5 cents on the dollar. For prescription drugs,
the out-of-pocket share declined from around 70 cents on the dollar to 25 cents on the
dollar, with the most dramatic movement taking place during the early 1990s.



   6 Thissection’s figures were constructed using data on total and out-of-pocket health spending from
the National Health Expenditure accounts reported by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
(CMS).

                                                  7
2     Implications of Market Size and Innovation-While-Doing

      for Medical Innovation

2.1        What We Know About Medical Innovation

    This section presents a model of medical innovation that both motivates and is ex-
plored by the later empirical analysis. The model draws on an existing literature on the
innovative process in the medical-equipment sector. Highlighting crucial distinctions
between medical-equipment and pharmaceutical innovation, Roberts (1988) summarizes
the relevant literature as follows:


       [My] personal experience, supported by the few relevant studies on inno-
       vation, indicates that... innovation in medical devices is usually based on
       engineering problem solving by individuals or small firms, is often incremen-
       tal rather than radical, seldom depends on the results of long-term research
       in the basic sciences, and generally does not reflect the recent generation of
       fundamental new knowledge. It is a very different endeavor from drug inno-
       vation, indeed.


    The research referenced by Roberts includes several studies by Shaw (1985, 1986,
1991). In a sample of 34 medical-equipment innovations, Shaw finds that just over half
(18) stemmed from physician-produced prototypes while an additional third (11) in-
volved direct transfer of an initial idea from a physician to a manufacturer.7 Shaw (1986)
further reports that two-thirds of these innovations were ultimately developed through
a process of “multiple and continuous user-manufacturer interaction.” The extensive-
ness of local insurance coverage, which determines physicians’ incentives to work at

    7 In
       these studies, physicians were thus at minimum responsible for idea generation in more than 80
percent of the innovations.

                                                 8
the frontier of existing technologies, thus exerts significant influence over the innovative
process.
   Von Hippel (1976) finds a similar phenomenon of “user dominated innovation” in
studies of innovation in scientific instruments. His analysis considered major innovations
in Gas Chromatography, Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectrometry, Ultraviolet Spec-
trophotometry, and Transmission Electron Microscopes. Across these areas, Von Hippel
(1976) finds that 80 percent of major innovations were due predominantly to the efforts of
practitioners rather than manufacturers.8 For present purposes, innovation in scientific
instruments speaks most directly to innovation in diagnostic imaging equipment. While
the presence of patients is less central here than in the context of surgical equipment,
national market factors remain quite relevant.



2.2    A Model of Innovation by Entrepreneurial Physicians

   Suppose that devotion of effort towards innovation involves a binary choice on the
part of physicians. They differ in terms of a physician-specific cost of engaging in such
effort, ci , distributed according to pdf g(c) with full support on the interval [c, c̄]. The
benefit of attempting to innovate depends on the size of the markets new innovations
can reach and on their probability of successfully reaching them. Market size is driven
by the number of comprehensively insured patients, D, and by the potential revenues
associated with each patient, R.
   The probability of successful innovation has two components. First, the physician
must have a potentially patentable idea. To capture the importance of “innovation while
doing,” the arrival rate for patentable ideas, θ, is an increasing, concave, differentiable


   8 Recent  case studies of “radical innovation projects” in medical equipment technology by Lettl, Her-
statt, and Gemuenden (2006) find a similar pattern of practitioner dominance. Other recent studies in the
relevant literature include Chatterji, Fabrizio, Mitchell, and Schulman (2008) and Chatterji and Fabrizio
(2011).

                                                   9
                                                                            Ds
function of the number of well-insured patients per physician,              Ns ,   where N is the number
of physicians and the subscript s is associated with a particular state (or other geographic
region).9 Second, after an idea arrives it must be successfully brought to market. This
process faces multiple hurdles, including country-specific regulators like the FDA and
the need for the idea to successfully integrate into physicians’ practice styles. These
issues point to potential differences in the probability that innovations by U.S.-based
and foreign physicians will successfully reach U.S. markets. I describe these probabilities
as λUS,US and λ F,US , with λUS,US > λ F,US indicating that U.S.-based innovators have a
higher probability of successfully tapping U.S. markets than do foreign innovators.
   Bringing the above factors together, the expected benefit of innovation to a U.S.-based
physician in state s is θ ( D s
                            Ns )W, where W = λ
                                                US,US DUS RUS + λUS,F D F R F . Physician i

                                                                               R c∗
attempts innovation if ci < c∗ = θ ( D s
                                      Ns )W, which is true for fraction p = c g ( c ) dc of

physicians. Expected innovation in state s, normalized into per capita terms, is thus:


                                                  ps Ns θ ( D s
                                                            Ns )
                                           Is =                    .                                 (1)
                                                     Pop.s

   This paper is primarily concerned with the effect of U.S. insurance expansions on the
course of medical innovation. A U.S. insurance expansion can be described by a differ-
ential change in DUS of which fraction ρs occurs in state s. The effect of the insurance
expansion on expected innovation in state s is:


                   dIs      dps Ns    Ds                           Ns 0 Ds ρs
                     US
                        =     US
                                    θ( ) +                     ps       θ( ) ,                       (2)
                  dD      dD Pop.s Ns                             Pop.s    Ns Ns
                          |      {z      }                     |        {z      }
                            New Entry Into Innovation     Change in Incumbent Productivity



   9 Regarding   the concavity of the innovation-while-doing curve, Arrow (1962) writes “A second gen-
eralization that can be gleaned from many of the classic learning experiments is that learning associated
with repetition of essentially the same problem is subject to sharply diminishing returns.” The relevance
of patient flows creates a conceptual link between this paper’s emphasis on innovation-while-doing and
Malani and Philipson’s (2011) analysis of the availability of participants in clinical trials.

                                                    10
         dps
where   dDUS
               = g[θ ( D s
                       Ns ) λ
                              US,US RUS + θ 0 ( Ds ) ρs W ].10 The change in innovation can be writ-
                                                Ns Ns

ten more completely as:


                     dIs                 Ns 2                  gθ 0 ρs Wθ   ps θ 0 ρs
                       US
                          = gλUS,US RUS       θ +                         +           .                (3)
                    dD                  Pop.s                    Pop.s      Pop.s
                            |        {z        }               |        {z           }
                                  Market Size Effect         Innovation-While-Doing Effect

The first term of the above expression can be characterized as a pure market-size effect;
higher potential revenues induce more entry into innovation. The latter two terms reflect
changes associated with innovation-while-doing. The first of these captures the portion
of entry into innovation that is driven by the rise in productivity associated with the
increase in the number of well-insured patients per physician. The second piece captures
a rise in the productivity of incumbent physician innovators.
   To compare changes in the United States to those abroad, note first that ρs = 0 for
foreign physicians. For ease of comparison, momentarily consider a U.S. state and for-
eign country for which baseline Ns , population, θ ( D s
                                                     Ns ), and the local value of the density,

g, are the same. This simplifies the differential effect of a U.S. insurance expansion on
innovation in U.S. state s relative to the foreign country f to:


                                                Ns 2               gθ 0 ρs Wθ   ps θ 0 ρs
               ∆s, f = [λUS,US − λ F,US ] gRUS       θ +                      +           .            (4)
                                               Pop.s                 Pop.s      Pop.s
                       |             {z               }            |        {z           }
                           Differential Market Size Effect       Innovation-While-Doing Effect

The differential has two components. First, it includes a differential market-size effect
driven by differences in the probability of successfully reaching U.S. markets (the λ
terms). Second, the differential includes the entire innovation-while-doing effect. Sec-
tion 4 presents estimates of this differential effect of U.S. insurance expansions on U.S.
medical innovation relative to foreign medical innovation.


  10 The  analysis implicitly takes place within a short-to-medium run over which the supply of physicians,
N, is fixed.

                                                       11
    The model also has implications for variation in the size of the effect of U.S. insurance
expansions on innovation across regions of the United States. Looking back to equation
(3), there are two comparative statics of interest. First, changes in medical-equipment
innovation are unambiguously increasing in the extent to which an insurance expansion
                                       d2 Is
affects coverage in each state:      dDUS dρs
                                                > 0. The local impact of the insurance expansion,
ρs , matters exclusively through the innovation-while-doing effect. This factor should
be particularly important for innovation associated with surgery, where experience is
tightly linked with mastery of the relevant devices and techniques (Chandra and Staiger,
2007). It should be of limited importance for the development of new diagnostic imaging
equipment, which is more closely tied to the efforts of large-scale manufacturers.
    Second, shifts in innovation are likely, though not necessarily, increasing in the num-
                                     Ns
ber of physicians per capita,       Pop.s .   Note first that physicians per capita enters directly
into the market size effect. This reflects the fact that a given increase in the fraction of
                                               dp
physicians attempting innovation,             dDUS
                                                     from equation (2), results in a larger increase in
per capita innovation when there is a larger base of physicians. The innovation-while-
doing curve creates an additional force pointing towards a positive cross-partial with
respect to the baseline number of physicians per capita. More specifically, a low baseline
number of patients per physician places the state on a steeper portion of the innovation-
while-doing curve.11 Arrow’s (1962) summary of existing evidence points to the learning
curve’s sharp concavity as one of its most notable characteristics.




   11 While  the cross-partial is ultimately of indeterminate sign, the factors suggesting a positive cross-
partial are likely to dominate. For example, the local value of the density, g, could be smaller, larger, or
the same size in regions with high and low baseline numbers of physicians per capita. A priori, there are
no obvious reasons why this and other relevant factors would work in the direction of a negative cross
partial between baseline physicians per capita and increases in medical innovation.

                                                       12
3     A Framework for Estimating the Effects of Medicare and

      Medicaid’s Origins on Medical Innovation

    This section describes my empirical approach for using the origins of the Great Soci-
ety health programs to estimate the effect of U.S. health insurance expansions on medical
innovation. Exposition of the estimation framework is facilitated by first describing the
data set used in the analysis.



3.1   The NBER Patent Database

    The analysis utilizes the NBER Patent Database, which contains several relevant
pieces of information on all patents granted by the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office
(USPTO) from 1963 to 1999 (Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg, 2001). The first relates to the
classification of each patent to technological categories and sub-categories. The patents
are grouped into 6 broad technological categories, of which category 3 encompasses
most health-sector patents, and 36 technological sub-categories. The sub-categories are
sufficiently narrow to allow health-sector patents to be divided into those related to pre-
scription drugs and those related to the medical equipment underlying the practice of
medicine in hospitals and independent outpatient settings.
    Throughout the analysis, I group sub-categories 31 and 33, which contain Drug and
Biotechnology patents respectively, to characterize patenting associated with pharma-
ceutical innovation. I group sub-categories 32, 39, and 44 to characterize patenting as-
sociated with innovation in medical equipment. Sub-category 32 contains all Surgical
Equipment patents, including historic developments associated with arterial catheter-
ization and stent technology (Fogarty, 1969; Palmaz, 1988; Wall, 1993). Sub-category
39 is a relatively small category of Miscellaneous Drugs & Medicine patents associated
with dentistry, optometry, and prosthetic devices. Although sub-category 44, Nuclear

                                            13
& X-rays, is not included in the broader Drugs and Medical technological category, it
contains innovations involving magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scanners, computed
tomography (CT) scanners, and a variety of advances in X-ray technology (Damadian,
1974; Ledley, 1975).12
    The NBER Patent Database also reports the location of each patent’s primary filer.
When the primary filer is located in the United States, the database reports his or her
state of residence; when located abroad, it reports his or her country of residence. Table 1
presents summary statistics describing the patenting activity of U.S.- and foreign-based
patenters as I group them for subsequent regression analysis. I have aggregated rela-
tively small U.S. states on the basis of census regions, leaving a total of 32 geographic
units in the United States.13 The aggregation reduces the noise associated with proxying
for the relative intensity of innovative effort on the basis of small samples of patents.
It further allows me to construct a balanced panel of regions without losing data when
taking logarithms or expressing the intensity of medical innovation relative to other in-
novation using shares.
    The years referenced in Table 1 describe the year in which each patent was granted.
The NBER Patent Database reports information on the application year for all patents
starting with those granted in 1967. This is unfortunate because the application year
clearly comes closer than the grant year to representing the time at which each innova-
tion occurred. I use the later years of the database to estimate the average lag between
filing years and grant years. This lag averages 2.3 years for health-sector patents and is


   12 It
       also includes relatively exotic cost drivers including a series of patents related to the systems of
proton beam therapy discussed by Baicker and Chandra (2011).
   13 The  aggregate of small Western states, for example, joins Alaska, Hawaii, Idaho, Montana, Nevada,
New Mexico, and Wyoming, while leaving California, Colorado, Oregon, and Washington as distinct
entities. In addition to four region-specific aggregates of small U.S. states, I have created two aggregates
of relatively small foreign countries. These aggregates are not included in most specifications because I
do not have reliable data for constructing a control for GDP per capita across these countries. Inclusion of
these aggregates has essentially no effect on specifications that leave out this control variable.

                                                    14
                Table 1: Patent Distributions and Other Summary Statistics

                                                                   (1)                  (2)
                                                           Foreign Countries        US States
         Fraction Med. Equipment                                 0.0245               0.0300
                                                               (0.00856)             (0.0100)
         Fraction Phamaceutical                                  0.0297               0.0137
                                                               (0.00928)            (0.00926)
         Fraction Chemicals                                       0.269                0.219
                                                                (0.0645)              (0.112)
         Fraction Computing And Electric                          0.190                0.188
                                                                (0.0496)             (0.0725)
         Fraction Mechanical                                      0.272                0.261
                                                                (0.0324)             (0.0612)
         Fraction Other                                           0.214                0.288
                                                                (0.0524)             (0.0624)
         GDP Per Capita (10000s)                                  1.788                2.107
                                                                 (0.404)              (0.254)
         Uninsured Elderly                                         NA                  0.746
                                                                                      (0.119)
         Physicians Per 1000 Res. (1965)                            NA                 1.408
                                                                                      (0.312)
         Change in State Gov. Health Spending                       NA                 141.2
                                                                                      (81.05)
         Observations                                                6                   32
Note: All patent shares were constructed by the author using the NBER Patent Database for years 1963
through 1979. Following the classification system described by Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg (2001), medical
patents include technological category 3 and sub-category 44. I decompose this into pharmaceutical
patents, which include sub-categories 31 and 33 (Drugs and Biotechnology), and Medical Equipment
patents, which include sub-categories 32, 39, and 44 (Surgical Equipment, Miscellaneous Drugs & Medical,
and Nuclear & X-rays). Chemicals corresponds to technological category 1, Computing to category 2,
Electronics to all sub-categories of category 4 but sub-category 44, Mechanical to category 5, and Other
to technological category 6. GDP per capita comes from the Penn World Tables and regional accounts
of the Bureau of Economic Analysis. Uninsured Elderly comes from Finkelstein (2007). Physicians per
1,000 state residents in 1965 comes from the 1967 Statistical Abstract of the United States. The change in
state government health spending (taken from 1962 to 1972) comes from the Census of Governments. The
32 US state units include four regional aggregates, namely Small Western (MT, ID, WY, HI, AK, NV, and
NM), Small Northeastern (ME, VT, NH, RI, DC, WV, and US territories), Small Central (ND, SD, KS, NE,
UT), and Small Southern (AR, AL, MS, KY, and SC). The foreign countries are Canada, the UK, France,
Switzerland, the Netherlands, and Japan.




                                                    15
relatively stable within the years covered by the database.14 Significant impacts of Medi-
care and Medicaid on the patents appearing in the database would thus be expected no
earlier than with those granted around 1968.
   In most of the analysis presented below, I aggregate groups of years to further reduce
the noise associated with observations based on small numbers of patents. Accounting
for the lag between patent filing and granting, I typically treat the period running from
1963 to 1968 as the pre-Great Society period, with 1969 to 1974 describing the short- to
medium-run post-Great Society period and 1975-1980 describing the post-Great Society
long run.



3.2    Estimation Framework

   In my initial analysis, the estimating equations take the following basic form:


                     Health Shares,t = β 1 Post Great Societyt × US States

                                       + β 2s States + β 3t Periodt + Xs,t γ + ε s,t ,                (5)


where US States is an indicator equal to one for all observations associated with U.S.
states, States is a state- or country-specific fixed effect, Periodt is a time effect, and Xs,t is
a vector of time varying controls, typically including a measure of each area’s per capita
income. Health Shares,t , the outcome of interest, is the fraction of all patents filed in state
s during period t that are associated with a particular portion of the health sector. β 1 is
an estimate of the differential change in this health-sector share in the U.S. states relative
to foreign countries. All standard error estimates allow for arbitrary serial correlation
across the errors associated with each geographic unit. The standard error estimates

  14 Popp,  Juhl, and Johnson (2004) note that, more generally, the lag between patent filing and granting
can vary substantially due, among other factors, to the volume of patents submitted to the USPTO at any
given time.

                                                   16
change little, declining slightly, when I allow further for arbitrary correlation across the
errors associated with each country at each point in time.15 For inference purposes,
the assumption that observations associated with different U.S. states are statistically
independent thus proves to be innocuous.
   It is known that, for several reasons, patent counts can be poor measures of dif-
ferences in levels of innovative activity across time, sectors, and countries (Trajtenberg,
1990a). The number of patentable ideas generated by a given amount of research ef-
fort may, for example, may vary due to the number of innovations on the horizon of
a sector’s technological frontier or to sector-specific changes in patent law. The finan-
cial motivation for patenting any given innovation can also vary with the nature of a
sector’s technical frontier.16 Such developments are accounted for by the inclusion of
time effects since they apply with equal weight to foreign and domestic innovators. Also
relevant is that there has been a secular increase in the share of total USPTO-granted
patents that are filed by foreigners (see Panel A of Appendix Figure A.1).17 Analysis of
within-state and within-country patent shares eliminates this secular trend. Equation (5)
is motivated by the fact that, in spite of these challenges, changes in the health-sector
share of patents by U.S.-based innovators net of changes in the health-sector share of
patents by foreign innovators can nonetheless capture relative changes in the direction
of innovative activity.

  15 The  latter adjustment allows for correlation across the errors associated with the US states at each
point in time. I implemented two-way clustering using Stata’s “cluster2” command, which was devel-
oped for the analysis in Petersen (2009). The cluster2 command could only be implemented using an
unweighted version of the baseline specification. The claim regarding the relative sizes of the standard
errors associated with two- and one-way clustering holds whether the specifications are run using annual
observations or observations aggregated in multi-year time periods.
  16 Moser   (2011), for example, finds that patenting became relatively popular in the late 19th century
chemicals industry when the publication of the periodic table made secrecy a poor means of restricting
access to intellectual property.
  17 International patent filing has long been common practice, as highlighted elsewhere by Moser and
Voena (2012) and (Moser, Bilir, and Talis, 2011). Patent-granting has had some degree of standardization
across countries as far back as the signing of the Paris Convention in 1883.

                                                   17
   I also estimate the effect of Medicare and Medicaid on patent counts using log-linear,
poisson, and negative binomial count models. When estimating count models, the issues
discussed in the previous paragraph are controlled for using a triple-difference method-
ology. The log-linear model of patent counts appears below:


    ln(Patent Count)c,s,t = γ1 Post Great Societyt × US States × Medical Equipmentc

                         + γ2s,t States × Periodt + γ3t,c Periodt × Categoryc

                         + γ4s,c States × Categoryc + Xs,t θ + ε c,s,t .                  (6)


Patent Countc,s,t describes the number of patents granted in technological category c, in
state s, during period t. The coefficient γ1 is an estimate of the differential evolution
of U.S. medical-equipment patenting relative to other U.S.-based patenting net of any
changes in foreign medical-equipment patenting relative to other foreign patenting. I
present results aggregating the patent categories into Medical Equipment and All Other
patents. The analysis yields similar results when I aggregate more finely to the 36 tech-
nology sub-categories.
   The origins of Medicare and Medicaid provide a compelling natural experiment in
part because there was little impact on incentives for the invention of new pharmaceu-
ticals. Consequently, they resulted in a substantial change in incentives for one type of
health-sector innovation and not for another. I thus estimate equations (5) and (6) sep-
arately for medical equipment and pharmaceutical patents, using the estimated effect
on pharmaceutical patenting as a falsification test. I also run specifications in which I
include the pharmaceutical share as an element of the vector of control variables. This
can be interpreted as a direct control for any state- or country-specific shifts in patenting
towards the health sector broadly construed.
   An issue that affects the interpretation of the estimates is the extent to which foreign


                                               18
innovators joined U.S. innovators in responding to changes in the size of U.S. health care
markets. Some foreign response is surely expected, since innovations are marketable
on a world-wide basis. β 1 captures the innovation-while-doing and differential market
size effects characterized in equation (4) in section 2. It is, quite literally, an estimate
of the differential change in health-sector patenting as a share of total patenting among
residents of U.S. states relative to residents of foreign countries. I further consider the
difference between Medicare and Medicaid’s differential and total impacts in Section 7.



4    Effects of Medicare and Medicaid on Innovation in the

     United States Relative to Foreign Countries

    Panels A and B of Figure 2 present the patent data underlying subsequent estimates
of equation (5); the panels of Appendix Figure A.1 do the same for equation (6). The
figure shows the evolution of medical-equipment and pharmaceutical patents as shares
of total patents, plotting separate series for U.S.-based innovators and foreign innovators.
Panel A shows that, during the early-to-mid 1960s, medical-equipment patents made up
a modestly smaller share of total patents by U.S.-based innovators than of those by
foreign innovators. While the foreign share is stable through the early 1970s, the U.S.
share rises by around 1 percentage point (from a base of just over 2 percentage points)
from 1966 to 1970, surpassing the foreign share for the first time in 1969. The U.S. share
stabilizes at between 0.6 and 1.0 percentage point higher than the foreign share from
1970 through 1980. As noted previously, there is, on average, a 2.3 year lag between
health-sector patent filing and granting during the years of the NBER patent database
for which both of these pieces data are available. The late 1960s surge in U.S.-based
medical equipment patenting thus occurs when one would expect an initial Medicare-



                                            19
and Medicaid-induced change in patenting activity to reveal itself in the data.18 Panel A
of Figure 3 shows that neither this basic pattern nor the magnitude of the relative shift
in U.S. medical-equipment patenting are affected by re-weighting the foreign countries
to more closely match the pre-Great Society level of the U.S. share. A more complete
synthetic control analysis can be found in Appendix 2.
   Panel B of Figure 2 shows the evolution of pharmaceutical patenting, for which in-
centives were not directly affected by Medicare and Medicaid. The pharmaceutical share
of patents granted to U.S.-based and foreign innovators move similarly over most of the
relevant time period. The surge in U.S.-based medical equipment patenting thus does
not appear to have been associated with a more general increase in health-sector innova-
tion in the United States. If anything, it appears that foreign patenters were faster than
their U.S.-based counterparts to participate in the surge in pharmaceutical patenting that
began during the late 1970s. Panel B of Figure 3 shows that, like the medical equipment
result, this placebo result continues to hold when the synthetic control procedure is
applied.



4.1    Difference-in-Differences Estimates of the Effect of Medicare and

       Medicaid on Medical-Equipment Patenting

   Table 2 presents estimates of equation (5) in which observations are weighted accord-
ing to each state or country’s share of all USPTO-granted patents over the sample period.
The results indicate an increase in U.S. medical-equipment patenting relative to foreign
medical-equipment patenting (as shares of total patents) of roughly 1.1 percentage points
over the medium run and 1.5 percentage points over the longer run. The standard errors,


  18 The   timing is consistent with a delay of one to two years during which an initial wave of post-
Medicare innovative efforts translate into patentable ideas, with an additional two to three years between
patent filing and patent granting.

                                                   20
                                     Fraction of Total Patents Directed at the Health Sector
                                          Panel A: Medical Equipment                                             Panel B: Pharmaceuticals




                                                                                            .06




                      .042  .036
                                                                                                  .045




                     .03
                                                                                           .03




             Fraction of Patents
                                                                                   Fraction of Patents




            .024
                                                                                  .015      0




                      .018
                                   1960   1965       1970        1975      1980                          1960   1965       1970        1975   1980
                                                     Year                                                                  Year


                                          Panel C: Medical Equipment                                             Panel D: Pharmaceuticals




                                                                                            .1




                      .085




21
                            .07
                                                                                          .06     .08




            .04    .055
                                                                                  .04




            Fraction of Patents
                                                                                  Fraction of Patents
                                                                                            .02




                      .025
                                   1980   1985       1990        1995      2000                          1980   1985       1990        1995   2000
                                                     Year                                                                  Year



                                                            Fraction of Patents by US Innovators
                                                            Fraction of Patents by All Foreign Innovators

     Figure 2: Fraction of Patents Directed at the Health Sector (U.S. vs Foreign): Series were constructed by the author using data from the
     NBER Patent Database (Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg, 2001). A description of the system for classifying Medical Equipment and Pharmaceutical
     patents can be found in the note to Table 1. The years in the figure refer to the year in which each patent was granted. In later years of the
     patent database, grant years lag filing years by an average of 2.3 years for health-sector patents (roughly 2.0 years for patents more generally).
                          Fraction of Total Patents Directed at the Health Sector
                                 Panel A: Medical Equipment                                        Panel B: Pharmaceuticals
              .042




                                                                                .044
              .036




                                                                                .034
    Fraction of Patents




                                                                      Fraction of Patents
                                                                             .024
            .03
              .024




                                                                                .014
              .018




                                                                                .004




                          1960    1965      1970     1975     1980                          1960   1965      1970     1975    1980
                                            Year                                                             Year



                                         Fraction of Patents by US Innovators
                                         Fraction of Patents by Foreign Innovators (Re-weighted)


Figure 3: Fraction of Patents Directed at Medical Equipment (U.S. vs Foreign): Series were constructed
by the author using data from the NBER Patent Database (Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg, 2001). A description
of the system for classifying Medical Equipment and Pharmaceutical patents can be found in the note to
Table 1. The years in the figure refer to the year in which each patent was granted. In later years of the
patent database, grant years lag filing years by an average of 2.3 years for health-sector patents (roughly
2.0 years for patents more generally). In Panel A, country-level aggregates of foreign patents have been
re-weighted to more closely match the levels and changes in the U.S.’s pre-Medicare medical-equipment
share of total patents using Abadie, Diamond, and Hainmueller’s (2011) “synth” package. Panel B is
similarly constructed, with pharmaceutical patent shares being the outcome of interest. Pharmaceutical
patenting can be viewed as a placebo test because, with few exceptions, pharmaceuticals were not initially
covered by Medicare.




                                                                 22
which allow for arbitrary autocorrelation within each state or country over time, show
these point estimates to be highly statistically distinguishable from 0. In unweighted
versions of these specifications, the standard errors change little, decreasing marginally,
when I further allow for arbitrary correlation patterns across the errors associated either
with each year or with each country at a point in time.19 The confidence interval for the
estimate of the medium-run impact of Medicare and Medicaid on medical-equipment
patenting ranges from 0.60 to 1.5 percentage points.
    The result in column 2 shows column 1 to be robust to controlling for changes in
each state or country’s GDP per capita over time. GDP per capita enters positively, and
at a level that, in this specification, is statistically distinguishable from 0. This result
is consistent with a role for the forces emphasized by Hall and Jones (2007) and Jones
(2011), who argue that demand for life-extending health innovations will rise faster than
demand for innovations in other areas as income increases. Column 3 expresses the
result from column 2 in log terms. The result implies that, controlling for changes in
income per capita, the medical-equipment share of patents in the U.S. states rose by 40
to 50 percent more from the mid-1960s to the 1970s than did the medical-equipment
share of patents by innovators in foreign countries.
    The remaining columns of Table 2 provide evidence that the results discussed above
are not driven by a more general shift in U.S. patenting towards the health sector. Col-
umn 4, which can be interpreted as a falsification test, shows that, relative to foreign
patenting, the share of U.S. patents directed at pharmaceuticals did not change follow-
ing Medicare’s implementation. Over the longer run it appears that, if anything, the U.S.
pharmaceutical share declined relative to the foreign pharmaceutical share, although the


   19 The latter adjustment involves allowing for correlation across the errors associated with the US states
at each point in time. I implemented two-way clustering using Stata’s “cluster2” command, which was
developed for the analysis in Petersen (2009). I only compare the one- and two-way clustered standard
errors for unweighted specifications because cluster2 does not allow for weights.

                                                     23
                    Table 2: Change in Fraction of Patents Directed At Medical Equipment: Post Great Society

                                             (1)               (2)               (3)                 (4)              (5)          (6)
                                        Equip Share       Equip Share       Ln(Eq Share)         Rx Share        Equip Share Equip Net Rx
      US State × 1968 to 1974             0.0106**          0.0114**          0.3812**             0.0029          0.0114**     0.0085**
                                          (0.0023)          (0.0017)          (0.0633)           (0.0028)          (0.0015)     (0.0030)
      US State × 1975 to 1980             0.0152**          0.0164**          0.5473**            -0.0066          0.0165**     0.0230*
                                          (0.0021)          (0.0027)          (0.0746)           (0.0117)          (0.0031)     (0.0112)
      GDP Per Capita (10000s)                               0.0171*            0.2900             -0.0341           0.0176       0.0512
                                                            (0.0082)          (0.2524)           (0.0308)          (0.0107)     (0.0303)
      Fraction Pharmaceutical                                                                                       0.0130
                                                                                                                   (0.1202)
      R2                                   0.931             0.936             0.949              0.838              0.936        0.885
      N                                     114               114               114                114                114          114
      Number of Clusters                     38                38                38                 38                 38           38
      Weighted                              Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes          Yes




24
      Period FE                             Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes          Yes
      State And Country FE                  Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes          Yes
      Base Period                       1963 to 1968      1963 to 1968      1963 to 1968       1963 to 1968      1963 to 1968 1963 to 1968
     Note: **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels respectively. The table reports coefficients from ordinary
     least squares estimates of equation (5). In columns 1, 2, and 5 the dependent variable is the fraction of total patents that are categorized as
     Medical Equipment patents. In column 3 the dependent variable is the natural logarithm of this fraction. In column 4 the dependent variable
     is the fraction of total patents that are categorized Pharmaceutical patents. Finally, in column 6 the dependent variable is the fraction of total
     patents that are categorized as Medical Equipment patents minus the fraction categorized as Pharmaceutical patents. A description of the
     classification system can be found in the note to Table 1. Relatively small U.S. states are grouped into regional aggregates as described in
     the note to Table 1, where readers can also find a list of the foreign countries included in the sample. Observations are weighted according
     to each state or country’s average share of all patents in the database over the sample period. Standard errors, reported beneath each point
     estimate, allow for arbitrary autocorrelation across the errors associated with the observations for each U.S. state or foreign country. The
     standard errors in unweighted versions of these specifications change little, typically decreasing marginally, when I allow further for arbitrary
     correlation patterns across the errors associated with each year or associated with each country at a point in time. Data sources are described
     in the note to Table 1.
relevant coefficient is estimated with low precision. Column 5 shows that controlling
directly for the pharmaceutical share has no impact on the baseline result. The pharma-
ceutical share enters positively, but its coefficient is not estimated precisely. In column 6
the dependent variable is expressed as the medical-equipment share net of the pharma-
ceutical share. The estimated effect of Medicare and Medicaid is, once again, statistically
and economically indistinguishable from the baseline result in column 2. The point esti-
mates are statistically significantly different from 0, but are less precisely estimate than
the result from column 2.



4.2    Robustness within the Shares Estimation Framework

    Results presented in Appendix Tables A.1 through A.4 further explore the robustness
of the baseline estimates. Table A.1 shows that the results in Table 1 are robust to
running each regression without weighting each state or country’s observations for their
contribution to the total count of patents during the sample period. Table A.2 shows
the implications for various weighted and unweighted specifications of utilizing the full
sample available when not controlling for state and country income per capita.20 The
resulting coefficients are moderately smaller than in the baseline. This is most noticeable
for estimates of Medicare and Medicaid’s relatively long run effect, which is just above
0.9 percentage point in the weighted specifications and 1.1 to 1.2 percentage points in
the unweighted specifications.
    Table A.3 shows that the baseline specification from Table 2’s column 2 is not signifi-
cantly altered by shifting the year that separates the base period from the period repre-
senting the medium-run after Medicare and Medicaid’s implementation. The “medium
run” effect becomes moderately smaller as it is made to start closer to 1965. It declines

   20 The additions to the sample include two aggregates of small countries for which there is, individually,
relatively little patent data, as well as Germany, for which the East-West partition resulted in incomplete
income reporting by the Penn World Tables for the 1960s.

                                                     25
monotonically from 1.2 percentage points in the baseline specification, which ends the
base period in 1968, to 0.9 percentage point when the base period ends in 1965. The
results suggest that the full effect of Medicare on the distribution of patents emerges
several years after its implementation, consistent with empirically realistic lags for both
the development of patentable ideas and the granting of patents once they have been
filed.21
   Table A.4 shows that the results in Table 2 are robust to estimating equation (5)
using annual observations rather than observations aggregated to the level of 5 and 6
year periods. Estimation on annual observations allows me to control directly for a
differential U.S.-specific trend towards medical-equipment patenting. Controlling for
such a trend has no appreciable impact on the baseline results. Columns 1 through 3 of
Table A.4 make use of the full sample of annual observations while columns 4 through 6
impose a balanced-panel requirement. Panel balance becomes relatively stringent when
working with annual observations rather than with observations that aggregate patent
data over several years. This restriction only modestly affects the results.



4.3    Robustness to Estimation of Count Models

   Tables 3 and 4 present estimates of count models that take the form of equation
(6). In both tables, the results include a log-linear model of patent counts along with
comparable poisson and negative binomial models. Table 3 presents estimates of the
effect of Medicare and Medicaid on medical-equipment patenting while Table 4 presents
falsification tests for an effect of Medicare and Medicaid on pharmaceutical patenting.
   The results in Table 3 are readily compared with that from column 3 of Table 2, which
showed that Medicare increased the log of medical-equipment’s share of total patents by


  21 SeeRoberts (1988), quoted in some detail earlier in the paper, for a discussion of the short-horizon,
non-revolutionary nature of most medical-equipment innovation.

                                                   26
             Table 3: Changes in Arrival Rates for Medical Equipment Patents

                                                            (1)               (2)          (3)
                                                        Ln(Equip)          Poisson    Neg. Binom.
  US State × Med. Equip. × 1969 to 1974                  0.4268**          0.4229**     0.4229**
                                                         (0.1375)          (0.0559)     (0.0559)
  US State × Med. Equip. × 1975 to 1980                  0.5824**          0.5485**     0.5485**
                                                         (0.1607)          (0.0560)     (0.0560)
  N                                                         228               228          228
  Number of Clusters                                         38                38           38
  Period x Equipment FE                                     Yes               Yes          Yes
  Period x State FE                                         Yes               Yes          Yes
  State x Equipment FE                                      Yes               Yes          Yes
  Base Period                                          1963 to 1968      1963 to 1968 1963 to 1968
Note: **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels respectively. The table
reports coefficients from regressions using the models described in the column headings. Column 1 re-
ports estimates from a log-linear model of patent counts, column 2 from a poisson model, and column
3 from a negative binomial model. For the poisson model, the p-values for the Deviance Pearson tests
of goodness-of-fit are 0.0070 and 0.0052 respectively, suggesting that the data are over-dispersed. Point
estimates and standard errors are stable, however, when replacing the poisson model with the negative
binomial model. The dependent variable in all three specifications consists of patent counts. Observations
have been aggregated at the level of time periods (as in the regressions previously reported) geographic
regions (again as in previous regressions) and patent categories. The patent categories are simply Medical
Equipment and All Other, resulting in twice as many observations as in the regressions reported in pre-
vious tables. Standard errors, reported beneath each point estimate, allow for arbitrary autocorrelation in
the errors associated with the observations for each US state or foreign country. Data sources are described
in the note to Table 1.




                                                      27
                Table 4: Changes in Arrival Rates for Pharmaceutical Patents

                                                         (1)               (2)          (3)
                                                     Ln(Equip)          Poisson    Neg. Binom.
     US State × Pharma × 1969 to 1974                  0.2134            0.0831       0.0545
                                                      (0.2320)          (0.1304)     (0.1325)
     US State × Pharma × 1975 to 1980                  0.0275            0.1864       0.1413
                                                      (0.4819)          (0.3683)     (0.3796)
     N                                                   228               228          228
     Number of Clusters                                   38                38           38
     Period x Pharma FE                                  Yes               Yes          Yes
     Period x State FE                                   Yes               Yes          Yes
     State x Pharma FE                                   Yes               Yes          Yes
     Base Period                                    1963 to 1968      1963 to 1968 1963 to 1968
Note: **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels respectively. The table
reports coefficients from regressions using the models described in the column headings. Column 1
reports estimates from a log-linear model of patent counts, column 2 from a poisson model, and column
3 from a negative binomial model. For the poisson model, the p-values for the Deviance Pearson tests
of goodness-of-fit are 0.0000 and 0.0000 respectively, strongly implying that the data are over-dispersed.
Point estimates change modestly and standard errors are stable when replacing the poisson model with
the negative binomial model. The dependent variable in all three specifications consists of patent counts.
Observations have been aggregated at the level of time periods (as in the regressions previously reported)
geographic regions (again as in previous regressions) and patent categories. The patent categories are
simply Medical Equipment and All Other, resulting in twice as many observations as in the regressions
reported in previous tables. Standard errors, reported beneath each point estimate, allow for arbitrary
autocorrelation in the errors associated with the observations for each US state or foreign country. Data
sources are described in the note to Table 1.




40 to 50 percent. All three of the models presented in Table 3 yield similar results; the ev-
idence implies that Medicare and Medicaid increased the arrival of medical-equipment
innovations within this same range of 40 to 50 percent. The poisson and negative bino-
mial models are estimated with greater precision, reflecting superior fits of the data.
    The results in Table 4 have implications similar to the result from Table 2’s column
4. In no case is there statistically significant evidence for an effect of Medicare and
Medicaid on U.S.-based pharmaceutical patenting. It remains the case, however, that
estimates involving pharmaceutical patenting are sufficiently imprecise that large effects


                                                      28
cannot be ruled out. This is particularly true for estimates of Medicare and Medicaid’s
medium-to-long run effect.



4.4     An Investigation of the Quality of Insurance-Induced Medical-

        Equipment Patents

    The innovation literature highlights a need to use caution when translating observed
shifts in patenting activity into impact-adjusted levels of innovation.22 Best practice
continues to draw on work by Trajtenberg (1990a), who found in the case of patents
associated with computed tomography that there is “a close association between citation-
based patent indices and independent measures of the social value of innovations in that
field.” Evidence on the effect of using citations to adjust for patent quality can be found
in Table 5. The dependent variables in the regressions reported in Table 5 replace the
dependent variables from Table 2 with citation-weighted patent shares. The Medical
Equipment share, for example, is calculated as the sum of all citations received by a
state’s medical-equipment patents divided by the sum of all citations received by all of
that state’s patents. The results in Table 5 are little changed from those in Table 2.
    Table A.5 presents additional evidence on patent quality; its results also describe
Medicare’s impact on patent quality as measured using patent citations. The results
show a moderate, but statistically insignificant, increase in the mean number of cita-
tions associated with U.S.-based medical-equipment patents (relative to foreign medical-
equipment patents). However, there was a moderate decline (on the order of one half of
a standard deviation) in the ratio of mean citations for medical-equipment patents rela-



   22 Forexample, cross-sectional evidence reported by Moser (2011) shows that low quality (or less impor-
tant) innovations are more likely to go unpatented than high quality innovations. It is thus important to
consider the possibility that expansions in the markets for health technologies may, in part, have increased
the rate of patenting for existing innovations rather than increasing total innovation.

                                                    29
                     Table 5: Change in Fraction of Citation-Weighted Patents Directed At Medical Equipment

                                              (1)                (2)                (3)                  (4)              (5)          (6)
                                         Equip Share        Equip Share        Ln(Eq Share)          Rx Share        Equip Share Equip Net Rx
      US State × 1968 to 1974              0.0122**           0.0131**           0.2428*               0.0031          0.0129**     0.0101*
                                           (0.0038)           (0.0044)           (0.0972)            (0.0022)          (0.0041)     (0.0045)
      US State × 1975 to 1980              0.0174*            0.0187*            0.3351*              -0.0059          0.0192*      0.0246**
                                           (0.0066)           (0.0074)           (0.1555)            (0.0091)          (0.0078)     (0.0081)
      GDP Per Capita (10000s)                                  0.0197             -0.0025             -0.0342           0.0223      0.0539*
                                                              (0.0230)           (0.4529)            (0.0223)          (0.0228)     (0.0224)
      Fraction Pharmaceutical                                                                                           0.0757
                                                                                                                       (0.2301)
      R2                                    0.897              0.900              0.923               0.838              0.900        0.887
      N                                      114                114                114                 114                114          114




30
      Number of Clusters                      38                 38                 38                  38                 38           38
      Weighted                               Yes                Yes                Yes                 Yes                Yes          Yes
      Period FE                              Yes                Yes                Yes                 Yes                Yes          Yes
      State And Country FE                   Yes                Yes                Yes                 Yes                Yes          Yes
      Base Period                        1963 to 1968       1963 to 1968       1963 to 1968        1963 to 1968      1963 to 1968 1963 to 1968
     Note: **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels respectively. The table reports coefficients from ordinary least
     squares regressions. The dependent variables differ from those in Table 2 only in that each patent is now weighted by the number of future
     citations it had received as of 1999. For example, the Medical Equipment share is now calculated as the sum off all citations received by an
     area’s medical-equipment patents divided by the sum of all citations received by all of an area’s patents during the relevant time period. A
     description of the classification system can be found in the note to Table 1. Relatively small U.S. states are grouped into regional aggregates as
     described in the note to Table 1, where readers can also find a list of the foreign countries included in the sample. Standard errors, reported
     beneath each point estimate, allow for arbitrary autocorrelation in the errors associated with the observations for each US state or foreign
     country. Data sources are described in the note to Table 1.
tive to all patents.23 As always, caution is warranted when translating shifts in patenting
activity into absolute, impact-adjusted levels of innovation.



5          Within-U.S. Effects of Medicare and Medicaid on Medi-

           cal Innovation

     I next explore predictors of variation in the size of U.S. states’ increases in medical-
equipment patenting. The Great Society programs’ most substantial impact was to al-
ter incentives for health-sector innovation in the United States (as a whole) relative to
foreign markets. At the same time, Section 2 highlighted the importance of local fac-
tors as drivers of medical innovation. Positive relationships between states’ increases
in medical-equipment patenting and proxies for equation (3)’s locally varying factors
can thus contribute to the case that these mechanisms are truly at work. I explore the
strength of the relevant relationships by estimating the following equation:


                     4Health Shares = α0 + α1 Mechanism Intensitys + ε s .                                (7)

I estimate equation (7) on a sample consisting exclusively of the U.S. states. The coeffi-
cient α1 describes the strength of the correlation between the size of states’ expansions
in health-sector patenting and proxies for the strength of the relevant mechanisms (rep-
resented by Mechanism Intensitys ).24

    23 This
          ratio, which proxies for the quality of health-sector patents relative to all patents, would be the
preferred measure if patent-citation norms change differentially across countries over time. Such changes
cannot be distinguished from across the board changes in the relative quality of patents across countries.
    24 I
       refrain from advancing a causal interpretation of the estimates of α1 . However, the apparent sim-
plicity of the estimation framework should not take away from the fact that, in a condensed fashion, it
delivers estimates similar in spirit to those reported by Finkelstein (2007). I do not advance a causal inter-
pretation largely because, as should become clearer below, the mechanisms of interest include features of
the Great Society beyond the Medicare-induced changes in coverage rates for which variation is plausibly
(conditionally) uncorrelated with other relevant factors. Directly relevant, for example, is the fact that the

                                                     31
    I consider several variables that capture the mechanisms emphasized in Section 2.
The first, Physicians Per 1,000, is a measure of physicians per 1,000 state residents in 1965;
it captures the presence of the potential physician innovators emphasized throughout.
The second, Uninsured Elderly, proxies for the size of the insurance expansion associated
with Medicare. I take this measure directly from Finkelstein (2007), who tabulated re-
gional survey estimates of pre-Medicare coverage rates among the elderly. The third,
4State Health Spending, describes the change in health spending (in 1000s of dollars per
capita) by state governments from 1962 to 1972, which was driven primarily by states’
integration into the Medicaid program.25
    Two additional variables involve composites in which the initial three variables have
been made comparable through standard normalization. The first of these, Demand Side
Composite, captures the total size of the Great Society programs’ demand-side impact. It
does so by summing the standard-normalized versions of Uninsured Elderly and 4State
Health Spending. The final variable, Total Composite, is the sum of all three standard-
normalized variables; it is thus a relatively comprehensive measure of the Great Society
programs’ region-specific forces.
    Table 6 reports estimates of α1 when Mechanism Intensitys is represented by the vari-
ables discussed above. Columns 1 through 3 show that Physicians Per 1,000, Uninsured
Elderly, and 4State Health Spending are each positively correlated with the size of states’
shifts towards medical-equipment patenting. For the individual variables the strength
of these correlations is modest.
    Accounting for the potential mechanisms jointly, as in columns 4 and 5, yields sta-

mechanisms are not uncorrelated with one another, making it difficult to advance a causal interpretation
for the coefficient associated with any one of them.
   25 Thechoice of years is driven in part by the relatively detailed information on sub-national government
budgets made available through the Census of Governments, which occurs in years ending with 2 and 7.
Using the change in spending through 1972 helps to fully account for the impact of Medicaid because 1972
was the first year during which states’ Medicaid programs were required to cover individuals receiving
Disability or Supplemental Security Insurance payments through Social Security.

                                                    32
                       Table 6: Change in Fraction of Patents Directed At Medical Equipment: Mechanisms

                                                (1)                  (2)                  (3)                    (4)                 (5)
                                          4 Equip Share         4 Equip Share        4 Equip Share         4 Equip Share        4 Equip Share
        Physicians Per 1,000                0.00553+                                                         0.00602**
                                            (0.00312)                                                        (0.00219)
        Uninsured Elderly                                            0.00687
                                                                    (0.00991)
        4State Health Spending                                                            0.01208
                                                                                         (0.00984)
        Demand Side Composite                                                                                  0.00093**
                                                                                                               (0.00033)
        Total Composite                                                                                                            0.00116**
                                                                                                                                    (0.00026)
        N                                        32                   32                    32                    32                    32
        Number of Clusters                       32                   32                    32                    32                    32




33
        R-Squared                              0.126                0.031                 0.055                 0.225                 0.196
        Weighted                                Yes                  Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes
        Base Period                         1963 to 1968         1963 to 1968          1963 to 1968          1963 to 1968         1963 to 1968
     Note: **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels respectively. The table reports coefficients from ordinary
     least squares estimates of equation (7), which is a cross-sectional specification restricted to the sample of U.S. states. The dependent variable
     in each column is the change in the fraction of total patents that are categorized as Medical Equipment. The change is calculated from
     a pre-Great Society base using patents granted from 1963-1968 to a post-period using patents granted from 1969-1980. Relatively small
     U.S. states are grouped into regional aggregates as described in the note to Table 1. Observations are weighted according to each state’s
     average share of all patents in the database over the full sample period. Standard errors, reported beneath each point estimate, are robust to
     heteroskedasticity. Physicians Per 1,000 residents was taken from the 1967 edition of the Statistical Abstract of the United States; the data apply
     to 1965. Uninsured Elderly was taken directly from Finkelstein (2007) and varies at geographic units that are slightly more dis-aggregated than
     U.S. census divisions. 4State Health Spending is the change in state government spending (in 1000s of dollars per capita) on health (through
     Medicaid and direct spending to subsidize hospitals) as reported by the Census of Governments. Demand Side Composite is the sum of the
     standard-normalized versions of Uninsured Elderly and 4State Health Spending, while Total Composite is the sum of the standard-normalized
     versions of each of the first three variables.
tistically stronger results. In column 4, the composite of the demand-side changes as-
sociated with Medicare and Medicaid has a positive relationship with shifts towards
medical-equipment patenting that is statistically significant at the 0.01 level. The coeffi-
cient implies that a state at the 95th percentile of the Great Society programs’ demand-
side effects experienced a shift towards medical-equipment patenting that exceeded the
shift at the 5th percentile by 0.37 percentage point. This difference is roughly 1/4th of
the baseline estimate from column 2 of Table 2.
   The presence of an additional physician per 1000 residents, corresponding to the
difference between the 5th and 95th percentiles, was associated with a shift towards
medical-equipment patenting of an additional 0.6 percentage point. This amount is
equal to nearly 1/2 of the baseline estimate from column 2 of Table 2. This coefficient is
also statistically differentiable from 0 at the 0.01 level.
   The coefficient on Total Composite has similar implications for the magnitudes of
states’ shifts towards medical-equipment patenting. This final variable predictively ex-
plains 20 percent of the variation in the size of shifts towards medical equipment patent-
ing within the United States.26 Graphical illustrations of the correlation between states’
increases in medical-equipment patenting and the mechanism variables can be found in
Figure A.2 in Appendix 1.
   Table 7 provides further evidence for the relevance of the mechanisms emphasized
above. It reports estimates equivalent to those from Columns 4 and 5 of Table 6, but
separately for the sub-categories of medical-equipment patents. This is motivated by the
fact that imaging equipment is relatively closely linked to the efforts of large-scale man-
ufacturers, while innovation in surgical equipment and other medical devices is more

  26 Itis worth noting that these results are robust to a variety of changes in the manner in which the
variables are constructed. Taking the measure of physicians per 1,000 residents from different years,
making reasonable alterations to the measure of changes in state government health spending, using
Finkelstein’s alternative measure of the size of Medicare’s impact on coverage, and further adjusting for
the elderly’s share of each state’s total population have negligible impacts on the presented results.

                                                   34
                Table 7: Change in Fraction of Patents Directed At Medical Equipment by Category: Mechanisms

                                                (1)               (2)                 (3)               (4)                 (5)             (6)
                                            4 Surgery          4 Surgery           4 Misc.            4 Misc.          4 Imaging         4 Imaging
        Physicians Per 1,000                 0.00354*                             0.00202**                              0.00046
                                            (0.00139)                             (0.00046)                             (0.00137)
        Demand Side Composite               0.00073**                             0.00019**                              0.00001
                                            (0.00020)                             (0.00007)                             (0.00019)
        Total Composite                                        0.00082**                            0.00030**                               0.00004
                                                                (0.00019)                            (0.00007)                             (0.00012)
        N                                       32                  32               32                  32                32                  32
        Number of Clusters                      32                  32               32                  32                32                  32
        R-Squared                             0.175               0.168            0.274               0.184             0.004               0.001
        Weighted                               Yes                 Yes              Yes                 Yes               Yes                 Yes
        Base Period                        1963 to 1968       1963 to 1968      1963 to 1968       1963 to 1968       1963 to 1968       1963 to 1968




35
     Note: **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels respectively. The table reports coefficients from ordinary least
     squares estimates of equation (7), which is a cross-sectional specification restricted to the sample of U.S. states. The dependent variable in each
     column is the change in the fraction of total patents that fall into the sub-category of Medical Equipment patents that appears in the relevant
     column heading (Surgical Equipment, Miscellaneous Medical Equipment, or Diagnostic Imaging Equipment). The change is calculated from
     a pre-Great Society base using patents granted from 1963-1968 to a post-period using patents granted from 1969-1980. Relatively small
     U.S. states are grouped into regional aggregates as described in the note to Table 1. Observations are weighted according to each state’s
     average share of all patents in the database over the full sample period. Standard errors, reported beneath each point estimate, are robust to
     heteroskedasticity. Physicians Per 1,000 residents was taken from the 1967 edition of the Statistical Abstract of the United States; the data apply
     to 1965. Uninsured Elderly was taken directly from Finkelstein (2007) and varies at geographic units that are slightly more dis-aggregated than
     U.S. census divisions. 4State Health Spending is the change in state government spending (in 1000s of dollars per capita) on health (through
     Medicaid and direct spending to subsidize hospitals) as reported by the Census of Governments. Demand Side Composite is the sum of the
     standard-normalized versions of Uninsured Elderly and 4State Health Spending, while Total Composite is the sum of the standard-normalized
     versions of each of the first three variables.
tightly linked to practicing physicians. The latter categories of innovation are better
categorized as the result of innovation-while-doing and thus, as discussed in Section 2,
ought to be more responsive to the local features of insurance expansions. The data are
consistent with this view. Both the baseline number physicians per capita and the impact
of the Great Society health programs on local patient flows have much stronger relation-
ships with surgical equipment and miscellaneous medical devices than with imaging
equipment.



6    Late 20th Century Developments in Medical Innovation

    Panels C and D of Figure 2 show the evolution of health-sector patenting from 1980
to 1999. Recall from Panels C and D of Figure 1 that this was a period during which
consumer exposure to the cost of both pharmaceuticals and care provided in hospi-
tals and physicians’ offices declined substantially. Figure 2 shows that, relative to the
health-sector’s share of foreign patents, U.S. patenting of both medical equipment and
pharmaceuticals rose over this time period. The rise of U.S. pharamceutical patenting
was particularly sharp during the 1990s, reflecting the rise of the U.S. biotechnology
industry. During this period, the U.S. medical-equipment share rose by 2 percentage
points relative to the foreign share and the U.S. pharmaceutical rose by 3.4 percentage
points.
    Appendix Tables A.6 and A.7 shows these late 20th century movements in patent-
ing activity to be statistically differentiable from 0. It is important to emphasize that
there was no sharp natural experiment during this period, only a gradual, continuing
decline in consumer exposure to out-of-pocket costs. Consequently, the estimates can-
not be viewed as causal estimates of the effect of any particular change in insurance
arrangements. Rather, the estimates can be characterized as descriptive summaries of



                                           36
the evolution of patenting in the United States relative to foreign countries. Appendix
Tables A.8 through A.9 provide evidence that these late 20th century increases in U.S.
health-sector patenting did not come at the expense of patent quality.
    As already emphasized, it would be erroneous to describe the results in Tables A.6
and A.7 as causal estimates of the effect of an insurance expansion. Nonetheless, they
contribute additional evidence to the overall argument that U.S. insurance expansions
played an important role in shaping the course of medical innovation. To see why, recall
that the panels of Figure 1 describe 4 episodes in the evolution of cost sharing in U.S.
health-care markets. These panels are mirrored by the panels of Figure 3, which show
the equivalent episodes in the history of health-sector patenting. U.S. patenting shifted
substantially more towards the health sector than did foreign patenting during all 3 of
the episodes during which cost sharing declined substantially. During the 1 episode
during which cost sharing changed little, namely the pharmaceuticals market of the
1960s and 1970s, U.S. and foreign patenting moved nearly in parallel.



7    Cross-Country Breakdowns by Cultural Closeness to the

     United States

    Estimating the total size of the effect of U.S. insurance expansions on health-sector
innovation requires establishing an appropriate counterfactual. As emphasized previ-
ously, the regression estimates have described the differential evolution of U.S. health-
sector patenting relative to foreign health-sector patenting. To the extent to which foreign
patenters have joined U.S. patenters in responding to the incentives associated with U.S.
markets, these estimates constitute a lower bound on the total effect of U.S. insurance
expansions. Figure 4 provides suggestive evidence on the potential importance of the
relevant spillover effects.

                                            37
                                   Fraction of Total Patents Directed at the Health Sector
                                               Panel A: Medical Equipment                                                             Panel B: Pharmaceuticals
                     .09




                                                                                                           .13
                     .07




                                                                                                           .1
           Fraction of Patents




                                                                                                 Fraction of Patents
                                                                                                         .07
                   .05




                                                                                                           .04
                     .03




                                                                                                           .01
                     .01




                                 1960   1965   1970   1975    1980   1985   1990   1995   2000                         1960   1965   1970   1975   1980   1985   1990   1995   2000
                                                              Year                                                                                 Year



                                                             Fraction of Patents by US Innovators
                                                             Fraction of Patents by Other Anglosphere Innovators
                                                             Fraction of Patents by Other European Innovators
                                                             Fraction of Patents by Other Foreign Innovators
                                                             Fraction of Patents by All Foreign Innovators


Figure 4: Fraction of Patents Directed at the Health Sector (U.S. vs Foreign Country Groups): Series
were constructed by the author using data from the NBER Patent Database (Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg,
2001). Patents are classified as coming from the Anglosphere if the patenter lives in Canada, Australia,
Great Britain, or Ireland. “Other European” innovators are those from European countries that are not
included in the Anglosphere. A description of the system for classifying Medical Equipment and Phar-
maceutical patents can be found in the note to Table 1. The years in the figure refer to the year in which
each patent was granted. In later years of the patent database, grant years lag filing years by an average
of 2.3 years for health-sector patents (roughly 2.0 years for patents more generally).



   Figure 4 displays the patent shares seen in Figure 2, but with a finer disaggregation of
foreign patenters. Specifically, I divide foreign patenters into 3 groups: patenters in En-
glish speaking countries (the Anglosphere), patenters in non-English speaking European
countries, and patenters elsewhere in the world (a category dominated by patents filed
by residents of Japan). The categories are meant to roughly capture degrees of cultural
closeness to the United States, which should correlate with each patenter’s inclination
towards, and ease of marketing (or dealing with regulators) in, the United States.27 If

  27 In   the language of the model from section 2, it is natural to expect λUS,US > λ Anglo,US > λ Euro,US >

                                                                                            38
foreign patenters are responding to changes in the size of U.S. markets, such responses
should be largest among the English speakers and smallest among those outside of both
Europe and the Anglosphere.
   The figure shows that health-sector patenting’s share of total patents rose more dra-
matically in English-speaking countries and other countries in Europe than elsewhere in
the world. From the mid-1960s through the late-1990s, the medical-equipment share of
patents rose from roughly 3 percent of all patents to 5 percent of all patents in English-
speaking countries and other countries in Europe (relative to a rise from just above 2
percent to just over 7 percent in the United States). Elsewhere in the world, this share
rose from roughly 2.5 percent to just over 3 percent after peaking at a high of 4 percent
during the late 1980s.
   Patenters in the Anglosphere exceeded U.S.-based patenters in terms of their phar-
maceutical share, which rose from 1 percent to nearly 13 percent relative to an increase
from 1 percent to nearly 9 percent in the United States. Other European patenters have
pharmaceutical shares similar to that in the United States. Innovators elsewhere in the
world had a pharmaceutical share of just over 4 percent during the late 1990s.
   The data are suggestive that the patenting of innovators outside of Europe and the
Anglosphere may provide a reasonable counterfactual for the path of U.S. patenting in
the absence of its insurance expansions. There is, of course, a great deal of uncertainty
associated with establishing this counterfactual. Appendix 3 presents a calibration of
the role of U.S. health insurance expansions as a driver of innovation and health expen-
ditures. The calibration draws on the existing literature and the current paper’s anal-
ysis. While the exercise requires many caveats, my best estimate is that U.S. insurance
expansions are responsible for roughly 25 percent of recent global medical equipment


λOther,US . The potential-market-size effect is declining in cultural distance from the United States. The
differential between U.S.-based patenters and “Other” foreign patenters should thus come relatively close
to characterizing the total effect of U.S. insurance expansions on U.S.-based medical innovation.

                                                   39
innovation. This innovation would have driven roughly 15 percent of the increase in U.S.
health spending in hospitals, physicians’ offices, and other clinical settings from 1960 to
2010.



8      Conclusion

     This paper provides estimates of the effect of insurance on broad aggregates of med-
ical innovation. The evidence suggests that Medicare and Medicaid significantly in-
creased U.S.-based medical-equipment patenting. While extrapolation involves consid-
erable uncertainty, my best estimate is that the effects of U.S. insurance expansions on
innovation account for 25 percent of recent, worldwide medical-equipment patenting.
The forces of directed technical change (Acemoglu, 1998), and thus of government’s
influence as a maker of markets for technologies (Kremer, 2002; Acemoglu, Aghion,
Bursztyn, and Hemous, 2012), appear quite strong in this context.28
     The evidence highlights the importance of medical innovation’s local and regional
determinants. In particular, the relevance of the skills and insights of experienced prac-
titioners (Arrow, 1962) implies a central role for local flows of well-insured patients.
Consequently, medical innovation’s economic determinants extend beyond the potential
revenues associated with global market size.
     The relevance of local factors may be important for predicting the Patient Protection
and Affordable Care Act’s (ACA) implications for innovation. Taxing medical device
manufacturers reduces their profitability, likely discouraging innovation. By increasing
the ranks of insured patients, however, the ACA’s coverage expansions may increase the
productivity of physicians’ innovative efforts. The latter effect depends on both the size

    28 See
         also Glennerster, Kremer, and Williams (2006) and Berndt, Glennerster, Kremer, Lee, Levine,
Weizsäcker, and Williams (2007) for discussions of market making in the context of vaccine policy. The
welfare implications of insurance-induced pharmaceutical innovation are further assessed by Lakdawalla
and Sood (2009) and Gailey, Lakdawalla, and Sood (2010).

                                                  40
of the coverage expansion and the comprehensiveness of the coverage it involves. Gen-
erous payment rates encourage health care providers to adopt and innovate upon new
technologies, while low reimbursements do not (Freedman, Lin, and Simon, 2012). Until
the composition of ACA-induced coverage changes is better known, the law’s implica-
tions for aggregate medical innovation remain highly uncertain.
   In many industries, technological advance is associated with cost-reducing produc-
tivity gains. A striking feature of medical innovation has been its tendency to expand
the frontier of quality rather than reduce cost. Paying providers on a cost-plus basis
encourages innovation of precisely this form. Reforms that shift from fee-for-service
models towards bundled payments will tend to increase the rewards for innovation of
the cost-conscious variety. Medicare reforms may have particularly strong effects on
these incentives as a result of linkages between Medicare and private insurers’ payment
models (Clemens and Gottlieb, 2013). As emphasized by Weisbrod (1991), the structure
of physician payment may be as important as its generosity on this particular score. Esti-
mating the influence of bundled payments and managed care arrangements on medical
innovation’s productivity- and quality-relevant characteristics is a natural priority for
future research.



References

Abadie, A., A. Diamond, and J. Hainmueller (2011): “SYNTH: Stata module to im-
  plement Synthetic Control Methods for Comparative Case Studies,” Statistical Software
  Components.

Abadie, A., and J. Gardeazabal (2003): “The economic costs of conflict: A case study
  of the Basque Country,” American economic review, pp. 113–132.

Abadie, A. Diamond, A., and J. Hainmueller (2010): “Synthetic control methods for

                                           41
  comparative case studies: Estimating the effect of Californias Tobacco Control Pro-
  gram,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 105(490), 493–505.

Acemoglu, D. (1998): “Why do new technologies complement skills? Directed technical
  change and wage inequality,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(4), 1055–1089.

Acemoglu, D., P. Aghion, L. Bursztyn, and D. Hemous (2012): “The Environment and
  Directed Technical Change,” The American Economic Review, 102(1), 131–66.

Acemoglu, D., D. Cutler, A. Finkelstein, and J. Linn (2006): “Did Medicare Induce
  Pharmaceutical Innovation?,” American Economic Review, 96(2), 103–107.

Acemoglu, D., and A. Finkelstein (2008): “Input and Technology Choices in Regulated
  Industries: Evidence from the Health Care Sector,” Journal of Political Economy, 116(5),
  837–880.

Acemoglu, D., and J. Linn (2004): “Market Size in Innovation: Theory and Evidence
  from the Pharmaceutical Industry,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(3), 1049–
  1090.

Aghion, P., A. Dechezleprêtre, D. Hemous, R. Martin, and J. Van Reenen (2012):
  “Carbon taxes, path dependency and directed technical change: evidence from the
  auto industry,” Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Arrow, K. (1962): “The economic implications of learning by doing,” The review of eco-
  nomic studies, 29(3), 155–173.

          (1963): “Uncertainty and the welfare economics of medical care,” The American
  economic review, 53(5), 941–973.

Baicker, K., and A. Chandra (2011): “Aspirin, angioplasty, and proton beam therapy:



                                             42
  the economics of smarter health care spending,” in Prepared for Jackson Hole Economic
  Policy Symposium.

Baicker, K., and D. Goldman (2011): “Patient Cost-Sharing and Health Care Spending
  Growth,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25(2), 47–68.

Berndt, E. R., R. Glennerster, M. R. Kremer, J. Lee, R. Levine, G. Weizsäcker, and
  H. Williams (2007): “Advance market commitments for vaccines against neglected
  diseases: estimating costs and effectiveness,” Health Economics, 16(5), 491–511.

Blume-Kohout, M., and N. Sood (2008): “The Impact of Medicare Part D on Pharma-
  ceutical R&D,” NBER Working Papers 13857, National Bureau of Economic Research,
  Inc.

Budish, E., B. N. Roin, and H. Williams (2013): “Do fixed patent terms distort innova-
  tion? Evidence from cancer clinical trials,” NBER Working Paper, (w19430).

Chandra, A., and J. Skinner (2012): “Technology Growth and Expenditure Growth in
  Health Care,” Journal of Economic Literature.

Chandra, A., and D. O. Staiger (2007): “Productivity Spillovers in Health Care: Evi-
  dence from the Treatment of Heart Attacks,” Journal of Political Economy, 115(1), 103–
  140.

Chatterji, A., and K. Fabrizio (2011): “How do product users influence corporate
  invention?,” Organization Science.

Chatterji, A., K. Fabrizio, W. Mitchell, and K. Schulman (2008): “Physician-industry
  cooperation in the medical device industry,” Health Affairs, 27(6), 1532–1543.

Clemens, J., and J. Gottlieb (2013): “Bargaining in the Shadow of a Giant: Medicare’s



                                            43
  Influence on Private Payment Systems,” NBER Working Papers 19503, National Bu-
  reau of Economic Research, Inc.

Clemens, J., and J. Gottlieb (Forthcoming): “Do Physicians Financial Incentives Affect
  Medical Treatment and Patient Health?,” American Economic Review.

Cutler, D. (2004): Your money or your life: strong medicine for America’s health care system.
  Oxford University Press, USA.

Cutler, D., and M. McClellan (2001): “Is technological change in medicine worth it?,”
  Health affairs, 20(5), 11–29.

Cutler, D., A. Rosen, and S. Vijan (2006): “The value of medical spending in the United
  States, 1960–2000,” New England Journal of Medicine, 355(9), 920–927.

Cutler, D. M., and D. P. Ly (2011): “The (Paper) Work of Medicine: Understanding
  International Medical Costs,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25(2), 3–25.

Damadian, R. (1974): “Apparatus and Method for Detecting Cancer in Tissue,” US
  Patent 3,789,832.

De Mouzon, O., P. Dubois, F. Scott Morton, and P. Seabright (2011): “Market Size
  and Pharmaceutical Innovation,” CEPR Discussion Papers.

Finkelstein, A. (2004): “Static and dynamic effects of health policy: Evidence from the
  vaccine industry,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(2), 527–564.

Finkelstein, A. (2007): “The Aggregate Effects of Health Insurance: Evidence from the
  Introduction of Medicare,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(1), 1–37.

Finkelstein, A., et al. (2012): “The Oregon Health Insurance Experiment: Evidence
  from the First Year,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(3), 1057–1106.


                                             44
Fogarty, T. J. (1969): “EMBOLECTOMY CATHETER,” US Patent 3,435,826.

Freedman, S., H. Lin, and K. Simon (2012): “Public Health Insurance Expansions and
  Hospital Technology Adoption,” Discussion paper.

Gailey, A., D. Lakdawalla, and N. Sood (2010): “Patents, innovation, and the welfare
  effects of Medicare Part D,” Advances in Health Economics and Health Services Research,
  22, 317–344.

Glennerster, R., M. Kremer, and H. Williams (2006): “Creating markets for vaccines,”
  innovations, 1(1), 67–79.

Hall, B., A. Jaffe, and M. Trajtenberg (2001): “The NBER patent citation data file:
  Lessons, insights and methodological tools,” Discussion paper, National Bureau of
  Economic Research.

Hall, R. E., and C. . Jones (2007): “The Value of Life and the Rise in Health Spending,”
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(1), 39–72.

Jaffe, A., M. Trajtenberg, and P. Romer (2005): Patents, citations, and innovations: A
  window on the knowledge economy. The MIT Press.

Jones, C. . (2011): “Life and Growth,” NBER Working Papers 17094, National Bureau of
  Economic Research, Inc.

Kremer, M. (2002): “Pharmaceuticals and the developing world,” The Journal of Economic
  Perspectives, 16(4), 67–90.

Lakdawalla, D., and N. Sood (2009): “Innovation and the welfare effects of public drug
  insurance,” Journal of public economics, 93(3), 541–548.

Ledley, R. (1975): “Diagnostic X-Ray Systems,” US Patent 3,922,552.


                                             45
Lettl, C., C. Herstatt, and H. Gemuenden (2006): “Users’ contributions to radical
  innovation: evidence from four cases in the field of medical equipment technology,”
  R&D Management, 36(3), 251–272.

Malani, A., and T. Philipson (2011): “Can Medical Progress be Sustained? Implications
  of the Link Between Development and Output Markets,” Discussion paper, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

Manning, W., et al. (1987): “Health insurance and the demand for medical care: evi-
  dence from a randomized experiment,” The American Economic Review, pp. 251–277.

Moser, P. (2011): “Innovation Without Patents-Evidence from the Word Fairs,” Working
  Paper.

Moser, P., K. Bilir, and I. Talis (2011): “Do Treaties Encourage Technology Transfer?
  Evidence from the Paris Convention,” .

Moser, P., and A. Voena (2012): “Compulsory Licensing: Evidence from the Trading
  with the Enemy Act,” American Economic Review, 102(1), 396–427.

Murphy, K. M., and R. H. Topel (2003): “The economic value of medical research,”
  Measuring the gains from medical research: An economic approach, 41.

Newhouse, J. (1992): “Medical care costs: how much welfare loss?,” The Journal of Eco-
  nomic Perspectives, 6(3), 3–21.

Palmaz, J. (1988): “Expandable intraluminal graft, and method and apparatus for im-
  planting an expandable intraluminal graft,” US Patent 4,776,337.

Petersen, M. A. (2009): “Estimating standard errors in finance panel data sets: Compar-
  ing approaches,” Review of financial studies, 22(1), 435–480.



                                             46
Popp, D. (2002): “Induced Innovation and Energy Prices,” American economic review, 92(1),
  160–180.

Popp, D., T. Juhl, and D. Johnson (2004): “Time in purgatory: Determinants of the grant
  lag for US patent applications,” Topics in Economic Analysis and Policy, 4(1), 1–43.

Pozen, A., and D. Cutler (2010): “Medical Spending Differences in the United States
  and Canada: The Role of Prices, Procedures, and Administrative Expenses,” Inquiry: a
  journal of medical care organization, provision and financing, 47(2), 124.

Roberts, E. (1988): “Technological innovation and medical devices,” in New Medical De-
  vices: Invention, Development, and Use, ed. by K. Ekelman, pp. 35–51. National Academy
  Press, Washington, DC.

Shaw, B. (1985): “The role of the interaction between the user and the manufacturer in
  medical equipment innovation,” R&D Management, 15(4), 283–292.

        (1986): “The role of the interaction between the manufacturer and the user in the
  technological innovation process,” Unpublished Ph. D. dissertation, University of Sussex.

        (1991): “Developing technological innovations within networks,” Entrepreneur-
  ship & Regional Development, 3(2), 111–128.

Smith, A. (1776): “An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations,”
  Edwin Cannan’s annotated edition.

Trajtenberg, M. (1989): “The Welfare Analysis of Product Innovations, with an Ap-
  plication to Computed Tomography Scanners,” Journal of Political Economy, 97(2), pp.
  444–479.

Trajtenberg, M. (1990a): “A penny for your quotes: patent citations and the value of
  innovations,” The Rand Journal of Economics, pp. 172–187.

                                               47
Trajtenberg, M. (1990b): “Product innovations, price indices and the (mis) measure-
  ment of economic performance,” Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Re-
  search.

Von Hippel, E. (1976): “The dominant role of users in the scientific instrument innova-
  tion process,” Research policy, 5(3), 212–239.

Wall, W. (1993): “Angioplasty stent,” US Patent 5,192,307.

Weisbrod, B. A. (1991): “The Health Care Quadrilemma: An Essay on Technological
  Change, Insurance, Quality of Care, and Cost Containment,” Journal of Economic Liter-
  ature, 29, 523–552.




                                             48
Appendix 1: Supplemental Figures and Tables




                          49
                                                        Patent Counts by Patenter's Country of Residence
                                                                   Panel A: All Patents                                                                              Panel B: Medical Equipment Patents

                                                                                                                                                                                                                            600     900    1200




                        Patent Counts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     300




                                                                                                                                        1100 1350 1600 1850




                     15000 30000 45000 60000
                                                                                                                                       US Med Equip Patents
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Foreign Med. Equip. Patents




                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                 850
                                                 1960       1965           1970           1975                  1980                                          1960       1965       1970       1975       1980
                                                                           Year                                                                                                     Year


                                                         Panel C: Pharmaceutical Patents




                                                                                                                         900    1150




50
                                 800 1000 1200
                                                                                                                   650




                           600
                                                                                                           400




                        Pharmaceutical Patents
                                                                                                         Foreign Pharma Patents




                     400
                                                                                                         150
                                                 1960      1965         1970        1975          1980
                                                                        Year



                                                                                                 Count of US Patents
                                                                                                 Count of Foreign Patents


     Figure A.1: Total and Health Sector Patent Counts (U.S. vs Foreign): Series were constructed by the author using data from the NBER
     Patent Database (Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg, 2001). A description of the system for classifying Medical Equipment and Pharmaceutical
     patents can be found in the note to Table 1. The years in the figure refer to the year in which each patent was granted. In later years of the
     patent database, grant years lag filing years by an average of 2.3 years for health-sector patents (roughly 2.0 years for patents more generally).
                                                                   Mechanisms and Shifts Towards Medical Innovation
                                                               Panel A: Total Composite and Med. Equip. Patents                                                     Panel B: Demand Composite and Med. Equip. Patents




                                               .0175 .025
                                                                                                                                                     .0175 .025




                                         .01
                                                                                                                                               .01




                          Shift Towards Med. Equip. Patents
                                                                                                                                Shift Towards Med. Equip. Patents




                         -.005 .0025
                                                                                                                               -.005 .0025
                                                              -3           -1                 1               3          5                                          -4          -2                  0               2   4
                                                                                Great Society Total Composite                                                                        Great Society Demand Composite


                                                                   Panel C: Physicians and Med. Equip. Patents




                                         .01   .0175 .025




51
                          Shift Towards Med. Equip. Patents
                         -.005 .0025
                                                              .5           1                 1.5              2          2.5
                                                                           Physicians per 1,000 Residents (1965)



                                                                                                                  Change in Med. Equip. Share
                                                                                                                  Fitted values


     Figure A.2: Correlations between Mechanism Proxies and Increases in Medical-Equipment Patenting: The shifts towards medical-
     equipment patenting were constructed by the author using data from the NBER Patent Database (Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg, 2001). A
     description of the system for classifying Medical Equipment patents can be found in the note to Table 1. Observations represent U.S. states
     and state aggregates, again constructed as described in the note to Table 1. The Total Composite, Demand Composite, and Physicians per
     1,000 Residents (in 1965) variables were constructed as described in the note to Table 3. Physicians per 1,000 Residents comes from the 1967
     edition of the statistical abstract of the United States. The Demand Composite is the sum of two standard-normalized variables; the first
     proxies for the state-level impact of the origin of Medicare, while the second proxies for the state-level impact of the origin of Medicaid. The
     Total Composite is the sum of the Demand Composite and a standard-normalized version of the variable describing the number of Physicians
     per 1,000 Residents. Observations are weighted by each state’s contribution to the total number of patents appearing in the database over the
     sample period. R-squared statistics associated with the best fit lines in Panels A, B, and C are 0.196, 0.077, and 0.126 respectively.
              Table A.1: Change in Fraction of Patents Directed At Medical Equipment: Unweighted Regressions

                                              (1)                (2)                (3)                 (4)               (5)          (6)
                                         Equip Share        Equip Share        Ln(Eq Share)          Rx Share        Equip Share Equip Net Rx
      US State × 1968 to 1974              0.0105**           0.0115**           0.4009**             0.0004           0.0114**     0.0110**
                                           (0.0024)           (0.0019)           (0.0994)            (0.0031)          (0.0018)     (0.0027)
      US State × 1975 to 1980              0.0154**           0.0165**           0.5749**            -0.0138+          0.0177**     0.0302**
                                           (0.0024)           (0.0026)           (0.1014)            (0.0077)          (0.0032)     (0.0077)
      GDP Per Capita (10000s)                                 0.0219**            0.1684              -0.0249          0.0241*      0.0467*
                                                              (0.0078)           (0.3060)            (0.0216)          (0.0094)     (0.0221)
      Fraction Pharmaceutical                                                                                           0.0875
                                                                                                                       (0.1161)
      R2                                    0.915              0.921              0.926               0.853              0.923        0.905
      N                                      114                114                114                 114                114          114
      Number of Clusters                      38                 38                 38                  38                 38           38




52
      Weighted                               No                 No                 No                  No                 No           No
      Period FE                              Yes                Yes                Yes                 Yes                Yes          Yes
      State And Country FE                   Yes                Yes                Yes                 Yes                Yes          Yes
      Base Period                        1963 to 1968       1963 to 1968       1963 to 1968        1963 to 1968      1963 to 1968 1963 to 1968
     Note: **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels respectively. The table reports coefficients from ordinary least
     squares regressions. In columns 1, 2, and 5 the dependent variable is the fraction of total patents that are categorized as Medical Equipment
     Patents. In column 3 the dependent variable is the natural logarithm of this fraction. In column 4 the dependent variable is the fraction
     of total patents that are categorized Pharmaceutical Patents. Finally, in column 6 the dependent variable is the fraction of total patents that
     are categorized as Medical Equipment Patents minus the fraction categorized as Pharmaceutical Patents. A description of the classification
     system can be found in the note to Table 1. Relatively small US states are grouped into regional aggregates as described in the note to Table
     1, where readers can also find a list of the foreign countries in included in the sample. Standard errors, reported beneath each point estimate,
     allow for arbitrary autocorrelation in the errors associated with the observations for each US state or foreign country. The standard errors
     change little, decreasing marginally, when I allow further for arbitrary correlation patterns across the errors associated with each year or
     associated with each country at a point in time. Data sources are described in the note to Table 1.
            Table A.2: Change in Fraction of Patents Directed At Medical Equipment: Sample w/o Income Control

                                              (1)                (2)                (3)                 (4)               (5)          (6)
                                         Equip Share        Equip Share        Ln(Eq Share)        Equip Share       Equip Share Ln(Eq Share)
       US State × 1968 to 1974             0.0081**           0.0081**           0.2768**            0.0085**          0.0084**     0.3220**
                                           (0.0022)           (0.0024)           (0.0763)            (0.0022)          (0.0023)     (0.0910)
       US State × 1975 to 1980             0.0091+            0.0091+             0.2938             0.0113**          0.0117**     0.4136**
                                           (0.0049)           (0.0048)           (0.1864)            (0.0034)          (0.0035)     (0.1307)
       Fraction Pharmaceutical                                 0.0110                                                   0.0407
                                                              (0.1237)                                                 (0.1014)
       R2                                   0.908               0.908             0.920               0.904              0.904        0.914
       N                                     123                 123               123                 123                123          123
       Number of Clusters                     41                  41                41                  41                 41           41
       Weighted                              Yes                 Yes               Yes                 No                 No           No
       Period FE                             Yes                 Yes               Yes                 Yes                Yes          Yes




53
       State And Country FE                  Yes                 Yes               Yes                 Yes                Yes          Yes
       Base Period                       1963 to 1968       1963 to 1968       1963 to 1968        1963 to 1968      1963 to 1968 1963 to 1968
     Note: **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels respectively. The table reports coefficients from ordinary least
     squares regressions. In columns 1, 2, 4, and 5 the dependent variable is the fraction of total patents that are categorized as Medical Equipment
     Patents. In column 3 and 6 the dependent variable is the natural logarithm of this fraction. A description of the classification system can be
     found in the note to Table 1. Relatively small US states are grouped into regional aggregates as described in the note to Table 1. The sample
     differs from the sample described in Table 1, and utilized in Table 2 and Table A.1 in that it is not restricted to countries for which there is
     reliable data on income per capita in each period. This adds Germany, which suffers from income-reporting issues during some years of its
     division into East and West, as well as 2 aggregates of small countries for which there is, individually, relatively little patent data. Standard
     errors, reported beneath each point estimate, allow for arbitrary autocorrelation in the errors associated with the observations for each US
     state or foreign country. In the unweighted specifications the standard errors change little, decreasing marginally, when I allow further for
     arbitrary correlation patterns across the errors associated with each year or associated with each country at a point in time. Data sources are
     described in the note to Table 1.
      Table A.3: Change in Fraction of Patents Directed At Medical Equipment: Robustness To Changing Base Period

                                                       (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)
                                                  Equip Share       Equip Share       Equip Share       Equip Share       Equip Share
                US State × Medium Run               0.0089**          0.0108**          0.0115**          0.0121**          0.0120**
                                                    (0.0028)          (0.0027)          (0.0026)          (0.0024)          (0.0022)
                US State × Long Run                 0.0139**          0.0143**          0.0138**          0.0131**          0.0123**
                                                    (0.0030)          (0.0030)          (0.0028)          (0.0025)          (0.0022)
                GDP Per Capita (10000s)             0.0113**          0.0066**           0.0035            0.0022           0.0040*
                                                    (0.0024)          (0.0021)          (0.0021)          (0.0022)          (0.0019)
                R2                                    0.729             0.739             0.751             0.760             0.757
                N                                      656               656               656               656               656
                Number of Clusters                      39                39                39                39                39
                Weighted                               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
                Period FE                              Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes




54
                Year FE                                No                No                No                No                No
                State And Country FE                   Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
                Balanced Panel                         No                No                No                No                No
                Base Period                       1963 to 1965      1963 to 1966      1963 to 1967      1963 to 1968      1963 to 1969
     Note: **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels respectively. The table reports coefficients from ordinary
     least squares regressions. Specifications differ in terms of their specification of the “Medium Run” post-Medicare period. In each column this
     period begins immediately following the base period listed in the table’s final row. The medium run ends in 1974 in all cases. In all columns
     the dependent variable is the fraction of total patents that are categorized as Medical Equipment Patents. A description of the classification
     system can be found in the note to Table 1. Relatively small US states are grouped into regional aggregates as described in the note to Table
     1, where readers can also find a list of the foreign countries included in the sample. Observations are weighted according to each state or
     country’s average share of all patents in the database over the full sample period. Standard errors, reported beneath each point estimate, allow
     for arbitrary autocorrelation in the errors associated with the observations for each US state or foreign country. Data sources are described in
     the note to Table 1.
     Table A.4: Change in Fraction of Patents Directed At Medical Equipment: Annual Observations w/ Trend Controls

                                                (1)               (2)                (3)                (4)                 (5)               (6)
                                           Equip Share       Equip Share        Equip Share        Equip Share        Equip Share        Equip Share
        US State × 1968 to 1974              0.0121**          0.0120**           0.0112**           0.0108**           0.0108**           0.0073**
                                             (0.0024)          (0.0024)           (0.0036)           (0.0023)           (0.0026)           (0.0024)
        US State × 1975 to 1980              0.0131**          0.0131**           0.0114**           0.0154**           0.0152**            0.0090
                                             (0.0025)          (0.0026)           (0.0039)           (0.0021)           (0.0022)           (0.0053)
        GDP Per Capita (10000s)               0.0022            0.0014            0.0079*             0.0009             -0.0015           0.0089*
                                             (0.0022)          (0.0040)           (0.0037)           (0.0022)           (0.0044)           (0.0038)
        Linear Trend                                            0.0001                                                    0.0003
                                                               (0.0003)                                                 (0.0003)
        US-Specific Trend                                                          0.0002                                                   0.0006
                                                                                  (0.0004)                                                 (0.0004)
        R2                                    0.760             0.760              0.786              0.810              0.810              0.843
        N                                      656               656                656                357                357                357
        Number of Clusters                      39                39                 39                 21                 21                 21




55
        Weighted                               Yes               Yes                 Yes               Yes                Yes                 Yes
        Period FE                              Yes               Yes                 No                Yes                Yes                 No
        Year FE                                No                No                  Yes               No                 No                  Yes
        State And Country FE                   Yes               Yes                 Yes               Yes                Yes                 Yes
        Balanced Panel                         No                No                  No                Yes                Yes                 Yes
        Base Period                        1963 to 1968      1963 to 1968       1963 to 1968       1963 to 1968       1963 to 1968       1963 to 1968
     Note: **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels respectively. The table reports coefficients from ordinary least
     squares regressions. The dependent variable is the fraction of total patents that are categorized as Medical Equipment Patents. A description
     of the classification system can be found in the note to Table 1. Relatively small US states are grouped into regional aggregates as described in
     the note to Table 1, where readers can also find a list of the foreign countries included in the sample. Observations are weighted according to
     each state or country’s average share of all patents in the database over the full sample period. Standard errors, reported beneath each point
     estimate, allow for arbitrary autocorrelation in the errors associated with the observations for each US state or foreign country. In unweighted
     versions of these specifications the standard errors change little, decreasing marginally, when I allow further for arbitrary correlation patterns
     across the errors associated with each year or associated with each country at a point in time. Data sources are described in the note to Table
     1.
                         Table A.5: Post Medicare Changes in the Mean Citations of Patents by US Patenters

                                                                 (1)                              (2)                         (3)
                                                       Health Patent Citations           All Patent Citations        Relative Citations
                    US State × 1968 to 1974                    0.5186                           0.2123                   -0.1683+
                                                              (0.3650)                         (0.1659)                   (0.0996)
                    US State × 1975 to 1980                    0.6402                           0.3879                   -0.2828+
                                                              (0.6239)                         (0.3397)                   (0.1421)
                    GDP Per Capita (10000s)                    0.8417                           0.8735                     -0.4197
                                                              (1.9600)                         (0.9527)                   (0.4268)
                    R2                                          0.929                            0.981                      0.728
                    N                                            114                              114                        114
                    Number of Clusters                           38                               38                          38




56
                    Weighted                                     Yes                              Yes                        Yes
                    Period FE                                    Yes                              Yes                        Yes
                    State And Country FE                         Yes                              Yes                        Yes
                    Base Period                             1963 to 1968                     1963 to 1968              1963 to 1968
     Note: **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels respectively. The table reports coefficients from ordinary least
     squares regressions. In column 1 the dependent variable is the mean number of citations associated with each medical-equipment patent. In
     column 2 the dependent variable is the the mean number of citations associated with all patents. In column 3 the dependent variable is ratio
     of the medical-equipment and all-patent citation means. A description of the patent classification system can be found in the note to Table 1.
     Relatively small US states are grouped into regional aggregates as described in the note to Table 1, where readers can also find a list of the
     foreign countries included in the sample. Observations are weighted according to each state or country’s average share of all patents in the
     database over the full sample period. Standard errors, reported beneath each point estimate, allow for arbitrary autocorrelation in the errors
     associated with the observations for each US state or foreign country. Data sources are described in the note to Table 1.
                   Table A.6: Change in Fraction of Patents Directed At Medical Equipment: Late 20th Century

                                                                            (1)                 (2)               (3)
                                                                       Equip Share        Equip Share       Equip Share
                                    US State × 1986 to 1990              0.0061+            0.0061+           0.0064+
                                                                         (0.0034)           (0.0033)          (0.0033)
                                    US State × 1991 to 1995              0.0177**           0.0174**          0.0183**
                                                                         (0.0055)           (0.0057)          (0.0061)
                                    US State × 1996 to 1999              0.0223**           0.0222**          0.0236**
                                                                         (0.0066)           (0.0066)          (0.0064)
                                    GDP Per Capita (10000s)                                  -0.0016           -0.0012
                                                                                            (0.0122)          (0.0133)
                                    R2                                    0.918               0.918             0.918
                                    N                                      152                 152               144




57
                                    Number of Clusters                      38                  38                36
                                    Weighted                               Yes                 Yes               Yes
                                    Period FE                              Yes                 Yes               Yes
                                    State And Country FE                   Yes                 Yes               Yes
                                    Anglosphere?                           Yes                 Yes               No
                                    Base Period                        1980 to 1985       1980 to 1985      1980 to 1985
     Note: **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels respectively. The table reports coefficients from ordinary least
     squares regressions. The dependent variable is the fraction of total patents that are categorized as Medical Equipment patents. A description
     of the classification system can be found in the note to Table 1. Relatively small U.S. states are grouped into regional aggregates as described
     in the note to Table 1, where readers can also find a list of the foreign countries included in the sample. Observations are weighted according
     to each state or country’s average share of all patents in the database over the full sample period. Standard errors, reported beneath each
     point estimate, allow for arbitrary autocorrelation in the errors associated with the observations for each U.S. state or foreign country. Data
     sources are described in the note to Table 1.
                     Table A.7: Change in Fraction of Patents Directed At Pharmaceuticals: Late 20th Century

                                                                       (1)                 (2)                 (3)
                                                                 Pharma Share        Pharma Share        Pharma Share
                               US State × 1986 to 1990             0.0140**             0.0141**            0.0152**
                                                                   (0.0033)             (0.0034)            (0.0034)
                               US State × 1991 to 1995              0.0174*             0.0181+             0.0226*
                                                                   (0.0077)             (0.0093)            (0.0096)
                               US State × 1996 to 1999              0.0373+             0.0375+             0.0467**
                                                                   (0.0201)             (0.0205)            (0.0170)
                               GDP Per Capita (10000s)                                   0.0040              0.0067
                                                                                        (0.0213)            (0.0226)
                               R2                                    0.844                0.844               0.846
                               N                                      152                  152                 144




58
                               Number of Clusters                      38                  38                  36
                               Weighted                               Yes                  Yes                 Yes
                               Period FE                              Yes                  Yes                 Yes
                               State And Country FE                   Yes                  Yes                 Yes
                               Anglosphere?                           Yes                  Yes                 No
                               Base Period                        1980 to 1985        1980 to 1985        1980 to 1985
     Note: **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels respectively. The table reports coefficients from ordinary
     least squares regressions. The dependent variable is the fraction of total patents that are categorized Pharmaceutical patents. A description of
     the classification system can be found in the note to Table 1. Relatively small U.S. states are grouped into regional aggregates as described in
     the note to Table 1, where readers can also find a list of the foreign countries included in the sample. Observations are weighted according to
     each state or country’s average share of all patents in the database over the full sample period. Standard errors, reported beneath each point
     estimate, allow for arbitrary autocorrelation in the errors associated with the observations for each U.S. state or foreign country. Data sources
     are described in the note to Table 1.
                   Table A.8: Change in Fraction of Citation-Weighted Patents Directed At Medical Equipment

                                                                            (1)                 (2)               (3)
                                                                       Equip Share        Equip Share       Equip Share
                                    US State × 1986 to 1990              0.0214*            0.0213*           0.0225*
                                                                         (0.0093)           (0.0092)          (0.0092)
                                    US State × 1991 to 1995              0.0310*            0.0299*           0.0306*
                                                                         (0.0119)           (0.0120)          (0.0134)
                                    US State × 1996 to 1999              0.0195+            0.0193+            0.0190
                                                                         (0.0114)           (0.0111)          (0.0124)
                                    GDP Per Capita (10000s)                                  -0.0062           -0.0063
                                                                                            (0.0191)          (0.0206)
                                    R2                                    0.888               0.888             0.888
                                    N                                      152                 152               144
                                    Number of Clusters                      38                  38                36




59
                                    Weighted                               Yes                 Yes               Yes
                                    Period FE                              Yes                 Yes               Yes
                                    State And Country FE                   Yes                 Yes               Yes
                                    Anglosphere?                           Yes                 Yes               No
                                    Base Period                        1980 to 1985       1980 to 1985      1980 to 1985
     Note: **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels respectively. The table reports coefficients from ordinary least
     squares regressions. The dependent variables differ from those in Table 4 only in that each patent is now weighted by the number of future
     citations it had received as of 1999. For example, the Medical Equipment share is now calculated as the sum off all citations received by an
     area’s medical-equipment patents divided by the sum of all citations received by all of an area’s patents during the relevant time period. A
     description of the classification system can be found in the note to Table 1. Relatively small US states are grouped into regional aggregates as
     described in the note to Table 1, where readers can also find a list of the foreign countries included in the sample. Standard errors, reported
     beneath each point estimate, allow for arbitrary autocorrelation in the errors associated with the observations for each US state or foreign
     country. Data sources are described in the note to Table 1.
                      Table A.9: Change in Fraction of Citation-Weighted Patents Directed At Pharmaceuticals

                                                                        (1)                   (2)                   (3)
                                                                   Pharma Share         Pharma Share          Pharma Share
                                US State × 1986 to 1990              0.0158**              0.0158**              0.0175**
                                                                     (0.0042)              (0.0044)              (0.0040)
                                US State × 1991 to 1995               0.0154                0.0157               0.0205+
                                                                     (0.0101)              (0.0108)              (0.0109)
                                US State × 1996 to 1999               0.0179                0.0179                0.0237
                                                                     (0.0161)              (0.0162)              (0.0147)
                                GDP Per Capita (10000s)                                     0.0014                0.0043
                                                                                           (0.0195)              (0.0206)
                                R2                                      0.865                0.865                 0.862
                                N                                        152                  152                   144
                                Number of Clusters                        38                  38                    36




60
                                Weighted                                 Yes                  Yes                   Yes
                                Period FE                                Yes                  Yes                   Yes
                                State And Country FE                     Yes                  Yes                   Yes
                                Anglosphere?                             Yes                  Yes                   No
                                Base Period                          1980 to 1985        1980 to 1985          1980 to 1985
     Note: **, *, and + indicate statistical significance at the 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels respectively. The table reports coefficients from ordinary least
     squares regressions. The dependent variables differ from those in Table 5 only in that each patent is now weighted by the number of future
     citations it had received as of 1999. For example, the Pharmaceutical share is now calculated as the sum off all citations received by an area’s
     pharmaceutical patents divided by the sum of all citations received by all of an area’s patents during the relevant time period. A description
     of the classification system can be found in the note to Table 1. Relatively small US states are grouped into regional aggregates as described
     in the note to Table 1, where readers can also find a list of the foreign countries included in the sample. Standard errors, reported beneath
     each point estimate, allow for arbitrary autocorrelation in the errors associated with the observations for each US state or foreign country.
     Data sources are described in the note to Table 1.
Appendix 2: Exploration of Synthetic Control Methods

   This appendix presents further results involving the synthetic control method used
for the re-weighting of control units for Figure 3. The appendix includes consideration
of inference in the synthetic control context. It is important to note that inference of the
sort considered below makes inefficient use of the context’s data. One could critique
the empirical context as being a setting in which there is effectively one treated unit,
namely the United States. The data, however, appear to reject this view. This conclusion
is driven by the results obtained when using a two-way clustering procedure to calcu-
late standard errors; allowing for arbitrary correlation across all observations within the
United States at each point in time has no material impact on the estimated standard
errors. Observations across regions of the United States thus appear to be effectively
statistically independent. Collapsing the United States into a single unit fails to make
use of valuable information. Nonetheless, it may be worth exploring practical issues
that arise in the context of synthetic control inference, as these issues may arise in more
general settings.
   The inference problem can be characterized in the following terms. Inference requires
estimating the distribution of shocks to which the treated units would have been subject
had they not additionally been subject to the treatment. If the relevant shocks are small,
then one may be able to reject the hypothesis that moderately sized treatment-effect
estimates arose by chance from the underlying process. This characterization of inference
is particularly apt in settings in which a single sample unit has been subjected to the
treatment. In such settings, inference requires placing the estimated treatment effect on
a counterfactual distribution of shocks constructed using the outcomes associated with
control units.
   Inference is particularly difficult in a synthetic control context like that considered
here because there are relatively few countries from which substantial numbers of patents

                                            61
were filed with the USPTO. This is important because the analysis involves using patent
filings as a proxy for innovative effort. Variation in this proxy, and by extension in its
changes over time, thus involves both true differences in innovative effort and noise as-
sociated with the conversion of innovative effort into patents. A distribution of shocks
estimated using small numbers of patents will thus exhibit greater variance than a dis-
tribution of shocks estimated using large numbers of patents. In the current setting, this
will result in overly conservative inference because far fewer patents are associated with
the control units than with the United States.
   Appendix Figure A.3 displays unadjusted, country-level changes in medical equip-
ment’s share of each country’s USPTO-granted patents. Panel A shows that U.S. patent-
ing shifted towards medical equipment by 1.2 percentage points from its average from
1963-1968 to its average from 1969-1979. This exceeds the increases taking place in any
of the foreign countries, whose patent-weighted average change was just over 0.1 per-
centage point. The remaining panels show that, looking across the technological sub-
categories that contribute to the medical-equipment aggregate, the U.S. had the largest
increase in surgical-equipment patenting, the second largest increase in patenting in di-
agnostic equipment, and is in a pack at the top of the distribution of changes in miscel-
laneous medical-equipment patenting. Because there are only 9 control units, however,
it is difficult to feel confident that their changes fully characterize the distribution of
shocks to which these units were exposed.
   Appendix Figure A.4 shows results from synthetic-control estimation. The figure
shows the distribution of placebo treatment effects obtained when assigning treatment
status to each of the control-group countries/units individually. The true synthetic con-
trol estimate, in which the United States is appropriately declared the treatment unit,
is 1 percentage point. This far exceeds the mean of the 9 placebo estimates, which
is quite close to 0. As with the raw changes shown in Figure A.3, the true estimate


                                            62
                                                  Post-Medicare Changes in Health-Sector Patent Shares
                                                                       Equipment                                                                             Surgery




                                                                                                                        .012




                                   .012
                                                                                                                             .006




                                         .006
                                                                                                                     0




                                 0
                                                                                                          Change in Surgery Share
                                                                                                          -.006




                      -.006
                     Change in Equipment Share
                                   -.012
                                                                                                                        -.012
                                                   CA   CH   DE   FR    GB   IT     JP   SC1   SC2   US                                 CA   CH   DE   FR     GB   IT     JP   SC1   SC2   US


                                                                       Diagnostic                                                                           MiscMedical




                                   .012
                                                                                                                        .012




63
                                          .006
                                                                                                                               .006




                                 0
                                                                                                                       0




                      -.006
                                                                                                           -.006




                     Change in Diagnostic Share
                                                                                                          Change in MiscMedical Share




                                   -.012
                                                                                                                        -.012




                                                   CA   CH   DE   FR    GB   IT     JP   SC1   SC2   US                                 CA   CH   DE   FR     GB   IT     JP   SC1   SC2   US




     Figure A.3: Post-Medicare Changes in Health-Sector Patent Shares: Series were constructed by the author using data from the NBER
     Patent Database (Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg, 2001). Surgery (sub-category 32), Diagnostic (sub-category 44), and MiscMedical (sub-category
     39) sum to Equipment. Changes are constructed as the change in each country’s average medical equipment share from 1963-1968 to 1969-
     1979. CA corresponds to Canada, CH to Switzerland, DE to Germany, FR to France, GB to Great Britain, IT to Italy, JP to Japan, SC1 to an
     aggregate of all countries with fewer than 15,000 patents in the entire database, SC2 to an aggregate of countries with between 15,000 and
     30,000 patents in the entire database, and US to the United States. All patents in the NBER Patent Database over the relevant time period are
     incorporated into the figure.
                   Changes in Health-Sector Patent Shares: Placebo Distribution
                                                                      Equipment                                                                        Surgery




                                                                                                                     .01




                                   .01
                                                                                                                            .005




                                         .005
                                                                                                                    0




                                 0
                                                                                                         -.005
                                                                                                         Change in Surgery Share




                      -.005
                     Change in Equipment Share
                                                                                                                     -.01




                                   -.01
                                                  CA   CH   DE   FR    GB   IT     JP   SC1   SC2   US                             CA   CH   DE   FR   GB   IT   JP   SC1   SC2   US


                                                                      Diagnostic                                                                       Miscmed




                                   .01
                                                                                                                     .01




64
                                          .005
                                                                                                                            .005




                                 0
                                                                                                                    0




                      -.005
                                                                                                         -.005
                                                                                                         Change in Miscmed Share




                     Change in Diagnostic Share
                                   -.01
                                                                                                                     -.01




                                                  CA   CH   DE   FR    GB   IT     JP   SC1   SC2   US                             CA   CH   DE   FR   GB   IT   JP   SC1   SC2   US




     Figure A.4: Synthetic Control Placebo Estimates of Post-Medicare Changes in Health-Sector Patent Shares: Series were constructed by
     the author using data from the NBER Patent Database (Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg, 2001). Each bar presents an estimate of the relative change
     in medical-equipment patents (from 1963-1968 to 1969-1979 for the indicated country relative to other countries. The estimates are, in each
     case, relative to a synthetic control constructed by re-weighting the remaining countries to match the levels and changes in the “treatment”
     country’s pre-Medicare medical-equipment share. Estimates for all countries other than the United States can thus be viewed as placebo
     estimates, while the estimate for the United States is an estimate of the effect of Medicare on Medicaid on patenting by U.S.-based innovators
     relative to foreign innovators. The full list of country acronyms is described in the note to Figure A.3.
exceeds all placebo estimates, in this case by a moderately large margin. Across the
sub-categories of medical equipment, the true synthetic control estimate is the largest
for surgical equipment, second largest for diagnostic equipment and third largest for
miscellaneous medical equipment.29 The economic magnitude of the true estimate con-
tinues to look substantial relative to the placebo estimates. Nonetheless, it remains dif-
ficult to assess what constitutes a reasonable estimate of the underlying distribution of
idiosyncratic shocks to the medical equipment patent share.
    As suggested by Abadie and Hainmueller (2010), I use the panel aspect of the data
to generate a fuller characterization of the relevant distribution of shocks. Specifically, I
construct a distribution that describes changes in the control units’ medical equipment
shares relative to the contemporaneous changes experienced by the remaining sample
units. That is, I characterize the shock associated with country j in period t as


                                                             1
                                                           N − 1 s∑
         Med. Shock j,t = 4Med. Share j,t−(t−1) −                      4Med. Shares,t−(t−1) ,          (8)
                                                                  6= j

where N is the total number of countries in the sample. For the observations used
to construct this distribution to be plausibly independent, their base periods must be
non-overlapping. I thus implement this approach with periods describing changes from
1963-1968 to 1969-1979, 1969-1974 to 1975-1975, from 1975-1979 to 1980-1989, and from
1980-1985 to 1986-1995.
    I report the distribution of Med. Shock j,t in Figure A.5. The true US estimate of
0.0102 is illustrated by the dashed black line. The mean of the distribution of shocks is
-0.001 while the standard deviation is 0.005. Among the 36 shocks in the distribution,
one is marginally larger than the true US estimate. Using the “permutation test” style


  29 Note  that the estimates associated with the sub-categories do not add to one because the synthetic
control procedure is re-run in each case, generating new sets of weights across the potential “donor” units
in the control group.

                                                    65
                                Distribution of Changes Relative to Period Mean



                8
                6
            Frequency
                4
                2
                0




                        -.012       -.008      -.004         0        .004       .008     .012
                                            Relative Change in Equipment Share


Figure A.5: Distribution of Relative Changes in the Medical Equipment Share: The figure shows the
distribution of shocks defined by Medical Equipment Shock j,t = 4Medical Equipment Share j,t−(t−1) −
 1
N −1  ∑s6= j 4Medical Equipment Shares,t−(t−1) . The time periods describe changes from 1963-1968 to 1969-
1979, 1969-1974 to 1975-1975, from 1975-1979 to 1980-1989, and from 1980-1985 to 1986-1995. The true
point estimate of 0.0102, associated with the change in United States from 1963-1968 to 1969-1979, is
illustrated by the vertical, dashed black line.



of inference, the true estimate would be distinguishable from 0 at the conventional 0.05
level. As emphasized above, the shocks in the figure’s distribution are constructed with
far less patent data than the US point estimate. Consequently, the dispersion of the
resulting distribution is overstated relative to the distribution of interest and inference
will tend to be overly conservative.




                                                        66
Appendix 3: Calibrating the Effect of U.S. Insurance Expan-

sions on Health Spending Growth

   This appendix works through a calibration of the effect of insurance-induced tech-
nological development on the growth of U.S. health expenditures. Its first subsection
presents a straightforward accounting framework for decomposing increases in health
expenditures across several contributing forces. Its second subsection presents a calibra-
tion of the role of each force. The calibration draws on the existing literature in addition
to the current paper’s empirical results.


An Accounting Framework for Characterizing the Drivers of Health

Spending Growth

   Real per capita health spending, H, can be described as the product of a per-unit
cost of care, P, and an average quantity of care consumed per person, Q. The average
quantity per person can, in turn, be described illustratively as the product of the fraction
of individuals, f , who can benefit from existing health-care treatments and technologies
and the quantity of care, q, consumed by each of these individuals.
   Our current interest is in the long-run effect of health insurance expansions on health
care spending. This includes both its static impact on desired levels of consumption at
a given state of technology and its dynamic impact on the treatments available at each
point in time. I summarize insurance by the average coinsurance rate, c, faced by health
care consumers. Demand at a point in time is qt = q(ct ). I write the state of the technical
frontier as f t = f (t) + f c̄ (c¯t ), where c¯t = ∑it=0 λi ci is a weighted average of the current
and past coinsurance rates. The term f (t) describes a counterfactual, secular advance of
health-technologies in the absence of changes in insurance arrangements. Establishing
such a counterfactual was a principal aim of this paper’s empirical work. That the re-

                                                67
mainder, insurance’s dynamic effect, depends on the history of coinsurance rates reflects
both that innovation does not occur instantaneously and that past innovations may re-
main relevant to the current technical frontier for some period of time.30 At a point in
time, health spending per capita can thus be expressed as:31


                                      Ht = Pt q(ct )[ f (t) + f c̄ (c¯t )].                                (9)

    Differentiating per capita health expenditures with respect to time yields the follow-
ing expression:


                            dH   dP          0 dc       d f (t)      0 d c¯t
                               =    fq + Pfq      + Pq[         + f c̄ ].                                 (10)
                            dt   dt            dt         dt           dt

In this accounting framework, changes in health expenditures per capita can be decom-
                                        dP
posed into 4 pieces. The first,         dt   f q, reflects changes in input costs and productivity,
                                                               0
including administrative loads. The second, P f qc dc
                                                   dt , is the static effect of insurance ex-



   30 Expectationsof future arrangements are relevant as well, and are implicitly assumed here to be driven
by the past (Weisbrod, 1991).
   31 I
      have assumed away any effects of insurance arrangements on the per unit cost of care. I rule out one
source of such effects to focus attention the long run. Large, short-run declines in coinsurance rates could
drive up the per unit cost of care by increasing demand on a horizon over which the supply of physicians
and nurses does not have time to adjust. I purposefully focus attention on a long run over which the labor
market is in equilibrium. Insurance arrangements could also affect per unit costs by inducing cost-saving
productivity advances. While such advances are clearly important, I follow Weisbrod in emphasizing that
20th century insurance expansions were largely associated with cost-plus financing arrangements, which
do not provide incentives for cost-reducing changes in technology. Developments of this sort have not
been in short supply, but are appropriately considered to be part of the counterfactual evolution of the
per unit cost of care. A striking health-sector example involves the productivity revolution in diagnostic
imaging with CT scanners as analyzed by Trajtenberg (1989, 1990b).
   Given the limited role of consumers in medical decision making (Arrow, 1963) this accounting frame-
work may appear to place an excessive emphasis on the role of demand. The quantity per patient, q(ct ),
need not be viewed solely as a reflection of consumer-driven demand, however; it could also be written as
being a function of the system of provider reimbursements. Reflecting the prevailing reimbursement sys-
tems of the mid-to-late 20th century, I implicitly assume cost-plus reimbursement as a constant feature of
the environment. Importantly, within a stable reimbursement environment, quantities will increase as cost
sharing falls even if one models patients as passively accepting the recommendations their physicians. So
long as physicians act, at least partially, as agents of their patients, their supply curves will have negative
slopes with respect to their patients’ out-of-pocket price.

                                                      68
pansions on demand for care. The remainder of any increases in spending are captured
by the pieces of equation (4) that involve technical advances. This paper’s empirical
work informs a division of this remainder between the secular, counterfactual advance
                                                                  d f (t)
of technology in a stable insurance environment, Pq                 dt ,    and the dynamic effect of in-
                               0
surance expansions, Pq f c̄ ddtc¯t .



Estimating the Dynamic Effect of Insurance Expansions on U.S. Health

Expenditures

    This section uses the above accounting framework to estimate the contribution of
insurance’s dynamic effects to the growth of U.S. health expenditures. Panel A of Ta-
ble A.10 presents the inputs used for my calibration of the effect of non-technological
factors. The total increase in real per capita spending in hospitals, physicians’ offices,
and other clinical settings over the last half century was roughly $4,200 (from a base of
roughly $700 in 1960 to $4900 in 2010). Estimates from Cutler and Ly (2011) and Pozen
and Cutler (2010) suggest that $616 of this increase, or 15 percent, may be attributable to
changes in administrative costs.32 Newhouse (1992) highlights difficulties in attributing
changes in spending to other aspects of per-unit cost like physician salaries. In short, it
is difficult to disentangle prices and quantities since relatively high physician incomes
(both historically and across countries) are also associated with the performance of rela-
tively skill-intensive medical procedures. I follow Newhouse in not attributing spending
growth to such factors.
    I next calibrate the potential role of insurance’s static effect on demand for care. An
initial estimate of $335, or 8 percent, comes quite directly from calculations by Manning

   32 The estimate comes from a comparison of administrative costs in the United States and Canada.
Absent reliable historical information on administrative costs in the United States, I essentially take current
administrative costs in the relatively streamlined Canadian system as an estimate of U.S. administrative
costs prior to the advance of insurance complexity over the last half century.

                                                      69
Table A.10: Calibration of the Dynamic Effect of Insurance on Spending in Hospitals
and Physicians’ Offices

 Total Growth to Explain                       $4,197            National Health Expenditure Data

 Panel A: Non-Technological Factors

 Spending Per Unit of Care                      $616             Cutler and Ly (2011); Pozen and Cut-
                                                                 ler (2010)
 Small Static Demand Effect                     $335             Manning et al. (1987); Finkelstein
                                                                 et al. (2012); Newhouse (1992)
 Large Static Demand Effect                    $1,006            Above plus Finkelstein (2007)
 Panel B: Technology Residual
                                   Small Static Effect             Large Static Effect
 Technology Residual                     $3,246                          $2,576
 Panel C: Scenarios for Allocating Residual between Counterfactual Technological Advance and the
 Dynamic Effect of Insurance

 Counterfactual Scenario                Due to Insurance
                                                      Features of Scenario
 Scenario A:                                  30%     Counterfactual of non-European in-
                                                      novators; only recent innovations
                                                      matter.
 Scenario B:                             17%          Counterfactual of non-European in-
                                                      novators; two decades of innovations
                                                      matter.
 Scenario C:                             25%          Counterfactual of all foreign innova-
                                                      tors; only recent innovations matter.
 Scenario D:                             12%          Counterfactual of all foreign innova-
                                                      tors; two decades of innovations mat-
                                                      ter.
 Panel D: Estimated Contribution of Insurance’s Dynamic Effect

 Counterfactual Scenario                Small Static Effect                  Large Static Effect
 Scenario A:                                  $978                                 $776
 Scenario B:                                  $562                                 $446
 Scenario C:                                  $823                                 $653
 Scenario D:                                  $375                                 $297
Note: Author’s calculations using sources described in the table and results presented earlier in this paper.
Further details of the calibration exercise can be found in the text.




                                                     70
et al. (1987). As summarized by Newhouse (1992), the Rand health insurance experi-
ment found that “the effect of moving from an average coinsurance rate of 33 percent
to a coinsurance rate of zero at a point in time is roughly a 40 to 50 percent increase in
demand.” The described reduction in coinsurance rates is quite similar to the decline
in the out-of-pocket share for spending in hospitals and physicians’ offices from 1960 to
2010, which was from 36 percent to 6 percent.33 The moderate demand elasticities from
the Rand and Oregon health insurance experiments are thus consistent with a modest
role for static demand effects as drivers of increasing health expenditures. Finkelstein
(2007) notes that large-scale insurance expansions may explain a larger share of spend-
ing growth than these estimates imply. Specifically, large scale expansions may have
general equilibrium effects on the way hospitals and physicians organize their practice
of medicine. In an alternative estimate of insurance’s static effect, I allow such general
equilibrium impacts to triple its size to $1,006.34
    The calibration leaves a residual per capita spending increase of either $3,200 or
$2,600 (77 or 61 percent of the total) to be explained by advances in health-care tech-
nology. Consistent with analysis by Newhouse (1992), Cutler (2004), and Chandra and
Skinner (2012), these estimates attribute the lion’s share of the rise in health expenditures
to the advance of health technologies. Panels A and B of Figure A.6 provide suggestive
evidence that such an allocation is reasonable, as they show tight relationships between
expansions in health sector patents as shares of total patents and expansions in health
spending as a share of GDP. Health spending in hospitals, physicians’ offices, and other

   33 Applying  a demand elasticity of -0.2 to the change in price of roughly 180 log points produces a
similar, but somewhat smaller estimate.
   34 Thisis moderately smaller than Finkelstein’s (2007) preferred calculation, which suggests that the
static demand effect may account for as much as half of the increase in hospital spending. While general
equilibrium effects are undoubtedly important, Finkelstein’s estimate are sufficiently larger than all others
that use of an intermediate value may be appropriate. Additionally, and consistent with industry-studies
of medical-equipment innovation, this paper’s results imply a short lag between Medicare’s introduction
and increases in medical-equipment innovation. Finkelstein’s estimates of Medicare’s effect on health
spending through 1970 will thus incorporate, in small part, some effects of insurance-induced innovation.

                                                     71
                                                                    Patents and Health Spending
                                               Panel A: Non-Pharmaceutical                                                                                       Panel B: Pharmaceutical


                     .065




                                                                                                                                      .09




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1.1
                                                                                                      12
                     .0525




                                                                                                                                      .07
                                                                                                      10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .9
           Fraction of Patents




                                                                                                                            Fraction of Patents
                                                                                                      Percent of GDP




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Percent of GDP
                                                                                                                                     .05
                   .04




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .7
                                                                                                            8




                                                                                                                                      .03
                     .0275




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .5
                                                                                                      6




                                                                                                                                      .01
                     .015




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .3
                                                                                                      4




                                 1960   1965    1970    1975    1980    1985    1990    1995   2000                                               1960   1965   1970   1975    1980     1985    1990    1995   2000
                                                                Year                                                                                                           Year

                                                Fraction of All Patents: Medical Equipment                                                                        Fraction of All Patents: Pharmaceuticals
                                                Health As Percent of GDP: Non-Drug Spending                                                                       Health As Percent of GDP: Drug Spending




Figure A.6: US Health Spending and Health-Sector Patenting Over Time: The patent series were
constructed by the author using data from the NBER Patent Database (Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg, 2001).
A description of the system for classifying Medical Equipment and Pharmaceutical patents can be found in
the note to Table 1. The spending series were calculated using the historical National Health Expenditure
data reported by the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). The spending series in Panel A
describes all health spending that takes place in hospitals, physicians’ offices, and other clinical settings.
The spending series in Panel B describes health spending on pharmaceuticals only.



clinical settings moves quite tightly with medical-equipment patenting. Drug spending
escalated significantly during the biotechnology patenting boom of the 1990s.
    Table A.10’s Panel C presents a range of estimates of the fraction of the residual
health-spending growth that can be explained by the dynamic effect of insurance on
incentives for innovation. The range reflects the possibilities implied by permutations
of two coarse assumptions. The assumptions are required for a) estimating the counter-
factual path of U.S. medical-equipment innovation that would have occurred in a world
without its insurance expansions and b) translating this counterfactual path of innova-
tion into current health expenditures.


                                                                                                                       72
   I estimate the counterfactual level of medical-equipment innovation in two ways. The
first takes the counterfactual to be the path of innovation among the non-English speak-
ing, non-European countries. The second, which produces more conservative estimates
of the effect of U.S. insurance expansions, takes the counterfactual to be the path of
innovation among all foreign patenters. In both cases I assume that the United States
accounts for half of global medical-equipment innovation. Worldwide patent data from
the OECD show this to have been the U.S. share of all medical-equipment patents dur-
ing the last years of the 20th century. U.S.-based innovators account for closer to 68
percent of all medical-equipment patents (61 percent of all patents) in the NBER Patent
Database, but not all foreign health innovations are patented with the USPTO.
   I also employ two assumptions for translating counterfactual paths of innovation into
current health expenditures. The first is that only the 5 most recent years of innovation
continue to affect current health expenditures. The second is that innovation from the
prior two decades affect current health expenditures.
   Scenario A takes the counterfactual to be the path innovation among the non-English
speaking, non-European countries. It further assumes that only the last 5 years of in-
novation impact current health spending. In this scenario, I estimate that the dynamic
effect of U.S. insurance expansions increased global medical-equipment innovation by
30 percent. When the static effect of insurance on health-care consumption is assumed
to be relatively small, the results imply that insurance’s dynamic effects explain about
$1,000 of the $4,200 increase (nearly 25 percent) in real per capita spending at hospitals
and physicians’ offices. When the static effect of insurance is allowed to be relatively
large, the dynamic effect can account for nearly $800 of the increase. Replacing the
counterfactual with a counterfactual of patenting in all foreign countries reduces these
estimates by about one sixth.
   Assuming that a full two decades of medical-equipment patenting influence cur-


                                           73
rent health-care spending results in relatively conservative estimates of the dynamic
effect of insurance. This assumption reduces the estimates of U.S. insurance expan-
sions’ contribution to global medical-equipment innovation by roughly 13 percentage
points. Given the tight and nearly contemporaneous tracking of the series for medical-
equipment patenting and spending in hospitals and physicians’ offices (Figure A.6), this
assumption may be less realistic than the assumption that current spending is driven by
relatively recent innovations.
   The estimates in Table A.10 highlight the high level of uncertainty associated with
translating documented shifts in patenting activity into changes in health care spending.
Additional considerations provide plausible arguments for either increasing or decreas-
ing one’s preferred estimate of the effect of U.S. insurance expansions on medical spend-
ing. Concern that the estimated shifts in patenting overstate shifts in impact-adjusted
innovation, for example, would be cause for a downward revision. Concern that the
counterfactuals fail to adequately account for effects of U.S. markets on foreign innova-
tion would be cause for an upward revision.




                                           74
