NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IS SELL-SIDE RESEARCH MORE VALUABLE IN BAD TIMES?
Roger K. Loh
René M. Stulz
Working Paper 19778
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19778
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2014

We thank Marcin Kacperczyk, Oguzhan Karakas, Jeff Kubik, Massimo Massa, Roni Michaely, Jay
Ritter, Stijin Van Nieuwerburgh, Paola Sapienza, Siew Hong Teoh, Mitch Warachka, Kent Womack,
Frank Yu, Jialin Yu, an anonymous associate editor and two anonymous referees, participants at the
AFA 2014 Philadelphia meetings and the 2013 SMU-SUFE Summer Institute of Finance Conference,
and at a seminar at the University of Zurich for helpful comments. Brian Baugh, Andrei Gonçalves,
and David Hauw provided excellent research assistance. Roger thanks the Sing Lun Fellowship and
the Sim Kee Boon Institute for Financial Economics at Singapore Management University for financial
support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Roger K. Loh and René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Is Sell-Side Research More Valuable in Bad Times?
Roger K. Loh and René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 19778
January 2014, Revised November 2016
JEL No. F14,F20,F24
ABSTRACT
Because uncertainty is high in bad times, investors find it harder to assess firm prospects and, hence,
should value analyst output more. However, higher uncertainty makes analysts’ tasks harder so it is
unclear if analyst output is more valuable in bad times. We find that, in bad times, analyst revisions
have a larger stock-price impact, earnings forecast errors per unit of uncertainty fall, reports are more
frequent and longer, and the impact of analyst output increases more for harder-to-value firms. These
results are consistent with analysts working harder and investors relying more on analysts in bad times.
Roger K. Loh
Singapore Management University
Lee Kong Chian School of Business
50 Stamford Rd, #04-01
Singapore 178899
Singapore
rogerloh@smu.edu.sg
René M. Stulz
The Ohio State University
Fisher College of Business
806A Fisher Hall
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
and NBER
stulz@cob.osu.edu

1.

Introduction
Even though there is a large literature on sell-side analysts’ role as information intermediaries, this literature

mostly ignores the issue of whether the state of the economy affects the value of analyst output for investors.1
There are good reasons to believe that the usefulness and performance of sell-side analysts depend on the state
of the economy. It is well-known that in bad times such as recessions and crises, there is greater variation in
outcomes across firms and across time (see, for instance, Bloom (2009)). To the extent that the role of analysts
is to make sense of firms amidst the increased macro uncertainty, their role should be more important in bad
times and, consequently, they should work harder in bad times. At the same time, however, the increased
uncertainty may make it harder for analysts to perform their job. Further, the drop in trading volume and hence
broker profits in bad times may reduce performance rewards, leading to less motivated analysts. Hence, it is not
clear whether analyst output is more valuable in bad times than in good times. In this paper, we find that
analysts are indeed more valuable in bad times. The stock-price impact of their recommendation and earnings
forecast revisions is greater in bad times. We investigate possible explanations for this finding and conclude that
the evidence is consistent with analysts working harder and investors relying more on analysts in bad times.
We conduct our investigation using a sample of I/B/E/S Detail earnings forecasts from 1983-2014 and
recommendations from 1993-2014. We define bad times in multiple ways. The most obvious approach is to use
prominent crises that have occurred in the last two decades, such as the October 1987 crash, the LTCM crisis of
1998, and the credit crisis of 2007-2009. We also define bad times as recession periods marked by the National
Bureau of Economic Research (NBER), and as periods of high uncertainty according to the Baker, Bloom, and
Davis (2016) policy uncertainty index (from www.policyuncertainty.com). Our measure of the value of analyst

1

For example, Womack (1996), Barber, Lehavy, McNichols, and Trueman (2001), Kecskés, Michaely, and Womack
(2016) show that stock prices react to the release of analyst recommendations and a drift follows afterwards. Loh and Stulz
(2011) show that some recommendation changes exert a large noticeable change in the firm’s stock price and these
recommendations can impact the firm’s information environment. Bradley, Clarke, Lee, and Ornthanalai (2014) report that
recommendations are more likely than earnings announcements or company earnings guidance to cause jumps in intraday
stock prices. Others find that analyst coverage reduces information asymmetry, improves visibility (Kelly and Ljungqvist
(2012)), disciplines credit rating agencies (Fong, Hong, Kacperczyk, and Kubik (2014)), and affects corporate policies
(Derrien and Kecskés (2013)).

1

output is the price impact, which shows the extent to which analyst signals affect investors’ assessment of the
value of firms and hence is a measure of how analysts contribute to the information environment of firms.
Using the average two-day abnormal returns to stock recommendation changes, we find that analysts are
more impactful during bad times for both downgrades and upgrades. Further, using the definition of influential
recommendations in Loh and Stulz (2011), which effectively treats recommendation changes as influential if the
stock-price reaction is statistically significant, we find robust evidence that both upgrades and downgrades are
more likely to be influential during bad times compared to good times. We also find that the market reacts more
strongly to earnings forecast revisions during bad times. Our evidence of greater analyst impact during bad
times is robust to controls for firm and analyst characteristics, including analyst fixed effects. We conclude that
analyst output is more useful for investors in bad times in that it moves stock prices more.
We perform several robustness tests for our results. Our focus is on macro instead of firm-specific bad times
because macro bad times are economically important and because they are more likely to be exogenous to
analysts. Prior studies like Frankel, Kothari, and Weber (2006) and Loh and Stulz (2011) show that analyst
reports are more informative when firm-level uncertainty is higher. While we already control for firm-level
uncertainty in our results, we want to be sure that it is macro (i.e. market-level) uncertainty that drives our
results. We decompose a firm’s total stock return volatility into market, industry, and firm-specific components.
We find that the increased impact of recommendation changes in times of high uncertainty is most robust when
the market component is used to define high uncertainty. Second, we investigate whether the market simply
reacts more to all types of firm news in bad times (e.g., Schmalz and Zhuk (2015) find that reactions to earnings
announcements are larger in recessions). Adapting the methodology in Frankel et al. (2006), we regress a
stock’s daily absolute returns on a comprehensive set of dummy variables that represent important firm news
events, namely, recommendation changes, reiterations, earnings announcements, earnings guidance, dividend
announcements, and insider trades. Interacting these news dummies with bad times indicators, we show that not
all firm news events are associated with greater bad times impact. Importantly, the market reacts more to
recommendation changes (and reiterations) in bad times even after all other news events and their interactions

2

with bad times are controlled for. Hence we believe our finding that analysts have greater impact in bad times is
both novel and robust.
We also find that the absolute forecast errors of analysts increase during bad times, which makes it puzzling
that their output would have more impact on prices. We show, however, that the traditional metrics of analyst
precision are not appropriate to compare precision across good and bad times. The relevant measure of precision
for investors is one that takes into account the underlying uncertainty. This is easily seen in a simple Bayesian
model. Consider investors who receive a new signal from analysts. The extent to which that signal will change
their priors depends on the weight that investors put on the new signal and on the weight they put on their prior
(e.g., see Pastor and Veronesi (2009)). As the precision of the signal increases relative to the uncertainty
associated with their prior, they put more weight on the signal. Hence, in bad times, investors will put more
weight on a signal from an analyst if the ratio of the precision of the signal to the uncertainty of the prior
increases. Such an outcome could occur if the precision of the signal is lower in bad times as long as the
precision of the signal falls less than the increase in the uncertainty about the prior. A useful way to put this is
that the relevant measure of forecast error is a measure of forecast error per unit of uncertainty.
Using prior volatility to normalize absolute forecast errors, we find that this adjusted forecast precision
actually increases during bad times (scaling by prior volatility is similar to the approach we used to define
influential recommendation changes). Importantly however, showing that analyst forecast precision increases
when measured against the underlying uncertainty does not mean that analysts automatically become more
useful to investors. Specifically, it could be that investors rely less on analysts in bad times if they have better
alternative sources of information. For instance, Kacperczyk and Seru (2007) show that how much investors rely
on public information depends on the precision of their private information. Hence, in their model, if the analyst
signal is public information, investors would rely less on analysts in bad times if investors themselves have
better private information.
We examine five possible, non-mutually exclusive, reasons why analysts have more impact in bad times.
First, we develop and investigate an analyst reliance hypothesis that builds on Kacperczyk and Seru (2007). Our
analyst reliance hypothesis predicts that investors rely more on analysts for their information during bad times.

3

During bad times, investors have to understand how the macro situation with its attendant uncertainty affects the
prospects of firms. Because of the greater macro uncertainty, possible outcomes are more extreme and,
consequently, have potentially a greater impact on firms than during good times. Everything else equal, we
would expect greater demand for analyst output that helps investors sort out the impact of ongoing macro shocks
during bad times compared to good times. If investors already know much about a stock, analysts have less to
contribute. Consequently, when analyst output is more valuable, it will be especially more valuable for more
opaque stocks. It follows that the cross-sectional implication of the analyst reliance hypothesis is that the extent
to which analyst output becomes more valuable in bad times is inversely related to the quality of the information
environment for a stock and, therefore, the value of analyst output increases relatively more for stocks of more
opaque firms in bad times (namely, stocks with no company guidance, low institutional ownership, high
idiosyncratic risk, small size, no options traded, or low coverage). We find supportive evidence that the
increased impact of analysts in bad times is higher for stocks with a more opaque information environment.
The analyst reliance hypothesis does not assume that analysts change what they do in bad times. Rather,
analysts become more important for investors because investors face challenges that they do not face in good
times and analysts help them deal with these challenges. However, it is plausible that analysts also change what
they do during bad times. The next three hypotheses are about changes in analyst output in bad times. Our
second possible explanation for the increased impact of analysts in bad times is that analysts could be working
harder in bad times because of career concerns. Glode (2011) explains the better performance of mutual funds in
bad times by the fact that investment managers work harder to produce better payoffs because investors have
higher marginal utility in bad times. If the greater uncertainty in bad times causes investors to value analyst
signals more, analysts might also work harder to produce better signals in bad times. 2 However, rewards for
better performance might be limited in bad times when bonus pools shrink and analysts’ employers face
financial difficulties due to reduced profits. As a result of these two opposing forces, there is no clear empirical
prediction as to whether analysts can be expected to work harder in bad times or not. We find that the stock
2

This channel is less direct for analysts compared to fund managers. Investors can directly reward good fund managers
with more inflows or less outflows. Investors instead can only indirectly reward good analysts through the analyst
reputation channel.

4

volatility-adjusted precision of analysts’ earnings forecasts goes up during bad times. This implies that analysts
work harder to produce better forecasts in bad times. To investigate for more tangible evidence of whether they
work harder, we find that analysts indeed revise their earnings forecasts more frequently and write longer
reports in bad times. Further, using regressions that examine analyst attrition, we find evidence that analysts are
more likely to leave the I/B/E/S database during bad times. This attrition risk could provide an incentive for
analysts to work harder during bad times. Since analysts produce better output in industries with more analyst
competition (Merkley, Michaely, and Pacelli (2016)), we would expect analysts to work harder in industries
with more analyst competition in bad times and hence that their impact would increase more in such industries.
We find strong supportive results for downgrades.
Third, we investigate whether analysts use different skills in bad times. Kacperczyk, Van Nieuwerburgh,
and Veldkamp (2014) find that mutual fund managers display more market-timing skills than stock-picking
skills during bad times. It is not clear if analysts also produce more information in bad times that is common
across firms when such common (sector/macro) information is more valued by investors. To investigate this, we
examine if a recommendation revision on a single firm impacts peer firms. This spillover might occur if part of
the information in the revision reflects the analyst’s forecast of the common factor. We find some evidence that
in bad times the spillover effect of downgrades on peer firms is larger than it is during good times. There is no
difference in the spillover effect of upgrades in bad times compared to good times. Hence part of the increased
influence of analysts in bad times, particularly for their downgrades, might come from an increased effort to
collect and produce negative macro/sector information.
Fourth, there has been much work on potential analyst conflicts of interests (for a review of some of the
evidence, see Mehran and Stulz (2007)). If analyst potential conflicts from investment banking are less
important in bad times because of lower deal flow, analyst output might become less distorted and hence more
valuable. To investigate this, we examine if forecast bias (i.e. the signed forecast error) is different in bad times.
If conflicts have less bite in bad times, analysts might be less optimistic in bad times than in good times. We
find little support for this hypothesis as the forecast bias is either no different in bad times, or even more
optimistic. We also explore whether the increased impact of analysts in bad times is related to the type of broker

5

the analyst works for. In particular, we find that the increased influence of analysts in bad times generally holds
for independent brokers as well as for brokers with investment banking business. Overall, we do not find
consistent evidence that the conflicts of interest hypothesis is helpful in explaining our results.
Our final and fifth potential explanation for the greater impact of analysts is that it has nothing to do with
analyst output per se but is the product of overreaction by investors. Overreaction could be more likely in bad
times due to lower liquidity so that trading on analyst revisions causes a temporary price pressure effect when
liquidity providers are less able to accommodate the order flow. Alternatively, arbitrageurs might be more
constrained in bad times, so that they cannot counteract overreaction by some investors as effectively as they
can in good times. We investigate whether stock-price drift after revisions differs in bad times compared to good
times and we find very little difference. Importantly, the stock-price drift after revisions does not exhibit
reversals in good or bad times. Hence, overreaction is an unlikely explanation for our results.
Our paper is not the first to make the point that economic agents find signals more valuable in bad times.
Kacperczyk, Van Nieuwerburgh, and Veldkamp (2015) derive such a result for skilled fund managers, i.e.,
managers who have access to valuable signals. They show that “[b]ecause asset payoffs are more uncertain,
recessions are times when information is more valuable.” In their model, fund managers allocate more attention
to aggregate shocks in bad times because of the increase in aggregate uncertainty. Since the risk premium is
higher in bad times, skilled managers’ greater attention to aggregate shocks in bad times leads them to perform
better in bad times. In good times, when aggregate uncertainty is lower and the risk premium is lower, fund
managers focus more on stock picking and pay more attention to signals about individual stocks. Kacperczyk et
al. (2014) find empirical support for their prediction that skilled managers are better at market timing in bad
times and better at stock selection in good times.
A few papers have examined aspects of the impact of crises on analyst output. However, none of them tests
the hypotheses that we focus on and are as comprehensive in showing that analyst revisions of recommendations
and earnings forecasts are more influential in bad times, or showing that it is the macro nature of bad times that
matters. Arand and Kerl (2012) examine analysts’ earnings forecasts and recommendations around the credit
crisis and find that, although forecast accuracy dropped, investors continued to react to revisions in

6

recommendations. Amiram, Landsman, Owens, and Stubben (2014) examine analyst forecast timeliness during
periods of high market volatility and find that analysts are less timely and underreact to news in those periods.
However, they also find that forecast revisions in these periods actually have more impact in reducing
information asymmetry measured by bid-ask spreads. Hope and Kang (2005) also find that forecast errors are
higher during bad times. While these papers conclude that investors wrongly pay attention to analysts who
appear to be more inaccurate in bad times, we show that, controlling for the underlying uncertainty, analysts are
actually more precise during bad times and investors rightly react more strongly to analyst revisions.
The rest of the study is organized as follows. Section 2 summarizes the hypotheses that we test. Section 3
describes our sample and reports our main results which show that analyst output is more influential in bad
times. Section 4 reports the results of several robustness tests. In Section 5, we examine how forecast precision
differs in good and bad times when we use different measures to scale forecast errors. Section 6 investigates
potential explanations for the greater impact of analyst output in bad times, and Section 7 concludes.

2.

Hypotheses
Our main goal is to investigate whether analyst revisions in bad times have any differential stock-price

impact compared to their impact in good times. We lay out hypotheses that predict a differential impact of
analysts in bad times.
2.1.

Why analysts might have less impact in bad times
There are several reasons why analysts might have less impact in bad times. First, in bad times the

forecasting environment is more difficult and this makes it harder for analysts to make accurate forecasts
(difficult environment hypothesis). For example, Jacob (1997), Chopra (1998), and Hope and Kang (2005) find
that earnings forecasts are less accurate during bad times. Consequently, this hypothesis predicts that analyst
forecasts are more inaccurate and their revisions have a smaller stock-price impact in bad times.
Second, in bad times, there might be limited rewards for analysts who provide better quality output (shirking
hypothesis). This is because investment banking deal flow, equity market capitalizations, trading volume, and

7

brokerage business volume shrink in bad times. If brokerages employing analysts have fewer rewards for good
performance, analysts might be less motivated to provide quality research in bad times. The greater amount of
noise in the information environment also provides a cover for poorer performing analysts, making their lack of
effort or skill less noticeable. This is similar to Bertrand and Mullainathan (2001) describing the difficulty that
investors have in evaluating manager quality when firm performance is driven by bad macro-economic
conditions. This hypothesis also predicts that analyst forecasts are less accurate in bad times and their revisions
have less stock-price impact.
Third, investors could be distracted in bad times, paying less attention so that there is less stock-price impact
to analyst revisions (inattention hypothesis). Hirshleifer, Lim, and Teoh (2009) show that when a lot of news
hits the markets, investors tend to react less to firm news events. In bad times when information uncertainty
increases, there is a lot more news that investors have to digest, and hence investors might underreact to a
specific type of news such as analyst revisions.
2.2.

Why analysts might have more impact in bad times
Kacperczyk et al. (2015) show that information about payoffs with a given precision is more valuable in bad

times because of higher uncertainty. An analyst revision is a signal about firm prospects which investors
incorporate into stock prices based on their existing priors. In bad times, uncertainty about investors’ priors goes
up. If the noise in analyst signals does not go up as much as the noise in the prior, analyst signals become more
valuable, everything else equal. This assumes that analysts have expertise in incorporating into their forecasts
the impact of bad macro conditions on the firms that they cover. Hutton, Lee, and Shu (2012) provide some
evidence that analysts can better incorporate the implications of bad macroeconomic news into their forecasts
than firm managers. The noise of analyst signals relative to prior uncertainty can decrease either because
analysts are able to take steps to make sure that the noise in their signals increases less than the prior
uncertainty, or because the prior uncertainty increases more than the noise of analyst signals because sources of
information for investors, such as private information, dry up in bad times or become much noisier. We now
consider the latter situation for our first hypothesis, and then the former for our second to fourth hypotheses.

8

Investors have multiple sources of information. They look at public information such as analyst signals, but
they may also have access to private information. With opaque firms, public information is limited, but for other
firms investors have access to many public information signals that compete with information provided by
analysts. It follows that when uncertainty increases due to macro shocks, investor demand for analyst output
increases especially for the more opaque firms. However, for analysts to be more valuable to investors in bad
times, it is important that the other sources of information of investors do not become more precise or more
valuable in bad times compared to analyst information. Such a condition follows from the model of Kacperczyk
and Seru (2007). In that model, they evaluate the sensitivity of investors to private and public information when
some investors have access to private information. They find that, if private information becomes noisier,
investors rely more on public information like analyst signals. Hence, in such a setup, investors will rely more
on public information as other sources of information dry up or become noisier. Kacperczyk and Seru (2007)
also offer an alternative interpretation of the model, which is that “private” information can also be the ability to
process public information more accurately. Bad times can be viewed as a regime change, where the advantage
of some investors at processing data may be impaired because they have to adapt to the new regime, or a
situation where changes are more extreme so that processing public information is harder because there is little
experience with similar situations.
The Kacperczyk and Seru (2007) model motivates our investor reliance on analysts hypothesis to explain
the increased impact of analysts in bad times. With this hypothesis, analysts have a greater impact on investors’
priors in bad times because investors’ private information or information processing ability becomes noisier in
bad times. This leads to an increase in uncertainty that makes it harder for investors to assess the consequences
of macro shocks. In good times, uncertainty about macro shocks is limited, so that realizations of macro shocks
have relatively less impact on firms and hence are not as important in assessing the prospects of firms. In bad
times, macro shock realizations are more extreme and have more of an impact on firms. In such a situation,
analyst output becomes more valuable because competing sources of information become less valuable in
enabling investors to assess the impact of shocks precisely when these shocks are more important. The crosssectional prediction of the analyst reliance hypothesis is that the increase in uncertainty about the consequence

9

of macro shocks for firms is most important for the firms that investors have less information about, i.e. the
more opaque firms. For firms that trade in an environment with much information production, there will be
more substitutes for analyst output in bad times than for other firms.
The second hypothesis we investigate is that analysts might work harder in bad times to produce signals that
are of better quality and hence signals that have a higher impact (an analyst effort or incentives hypothesis).
There is existing evidence in Glode (2011) that fund managers perform better in bad times so as to satisfy
investors’ higher marginal utility in bad times. While it is easier for investors to reward fund managers (directly
through flows) than to reward analysts (indirectly through reputation), this incentive might also be at work in
analysts through attrition risk. This hypothesis of greater analyst effort also predicts greater frequency of reports
and greater accuracy of earnings forecasts after accounting for the greater uncertainty in bad times. We would
expect effort to increase more in industries with more analyst competition since the literature shows that more
analyst competition within an industry leads to better analyst output (Merkley, Michaely, and Pacelli (2016)).
The third hypothesis is an analyst expertise hypothesis. If analysts have expertise to help investors
understand the implications of bad times they can employ this expertise only during bad times. For example, in a
separate setting, Kacperczyk et al. (2014) show that fund managers have market-timing skills during bad times
but stock picking skill in good times. If analysts also have such market-timing skills in bad times, their revisions
might contain information for peer firms. This means that the revisions might be more impactful due to them
containing more industry information, consistent with some papers finding that analysts have expertise to
predict industry returns (e.g., Howe, Unlu, and Yan (2009) and Kadan, Madureira, Wang, and Zach (2012)).
Fourth, the conflicts of interest hypothesis predicts that analysts can be more impactful in bad times when
investment banking conflicts decline. To the extent that investment banking conflicts lead analysts to have an
optimistic bias in their research (see, e.g., Michaely and Womack (1999)), this bias might be lower in bad times
when investment banking revenue drops. Specifically, in bad times, analysts in brokers with investment banking
divisions are likely to face less deal-related pressure to bias their research. As a result, their research might be of
higher quality and hence have higher impact. We can investigate if analyst optimistic bias goes down in bad
times and examine how bad times impact brokers with and without investment banking divisions.

10

Finally, we investigate an overreaction hypothesis. In bad times, there is evidence that some types of firm
news see greater reaction, such as earnings announcements (see, e.g. Schmalz and Zhuk (2015)). This
hypothesis predicts that analyst revisions should also see a greater reaction just like all other types of firm news.
We also investigate for any evidence that a greater reaction is in fact an overreaction by looking at the future
drift of stock prices. Overreaction might be more likely to occur in bad times because arbitrageurs are more
constrained in bad times and cannot counteract the inefficient reaction to revisions.

3.
3.1.

Main results
Bad times definitions
We first define bad times and describe our analyst output sample. We have four proxies for bad times. The

first two proxies focus on prominent financial crises. We set the indicator variable Crisis equal to one for the
periods September-November 1987 (1987 crisis), August-December 1998 (LTCM crisis), and July 2007-March
2009 (credit crisis). Second, we define Credit Crisis equal to one for the credit crisis period since this especially
sharp and prolonged crisis warrants a separate investigation. The third definition uses NBER-defined recessions,
which for our analyst sample are the periods July 1990-March 1991, March-November 2001, and December
2007-June 2009. The fourth measure is the Baker et al. (2016) policy uncertainty index. We define a period of
high policy uncertainty (High Uncertainty) as one where the historical index is in the top tercile of available
values (198308-201402). This measure assigns more months as bad times compared to the earlier three
definitions. In our sample, 7.7%, 5.6%, 9.8%, and 33.4% of the months are classified as Crisis, Credit Crisis,
Recession, and High Uncertainty respectively.

11

3.2.

Earnings forecasts and recommendations data
The analyst data are from Thomson Financial’s Institutional Brokers’ Estimate System (I/B/E/S) U.S. Detail

file. 3 Earnings forecasts are one quarter-ahead forecasts made from 198308-201412 and actual earnings
(announced from 198309-201504) are taken from I/B/E/S. We use the unadjusted file to mitigate the rounding
problem in I/B/E/S (see, for instance, Diether, Malloy, and Scherbina (2002)). Using the I/B/E/S splitadjustment factors, we adjust the unadjusted forecast so that it is on the same per-share basis as the reported
unadjusted actual earnings. As is common practice, financial firms are excluded from our main analysis
although we discuss results for this sector in robustness tests (financials are defined as group 29 of the Fama and
French (1997) 30-industry definitions).
Individual analyst stock recommendations are from the I/B/E/S Detail file issued from 1993-2014. We
define upgrades and downgrades using the analyst’s current rating minus the prior rating by the same analyst. A
prior rating is assumed to be outstanding if it has not been stopped (checking the I/B/E/S Stopped file) and is
less than one year old based on the I/B/E/S review date (following Ljungqvist et al. (2009)). We exclude
anonymous analysts, observations with no outstanding prior rating from the same analyst (i.e., analyst initiations
or re-initiations are excluded), and recommendation changes where the lagged stock price is less than one dollar.
We also remove revisions that occur on firm-news days following Loh and Stulz (2011). This step is important
because we do not want recommendations that merely repeat the information contained in firm news releases.
Firm-news days are defined as the three trading days centered around a Compustat earnings announcement date
or a company earnings guidance date (guidance dates are from First Call Guidelines until it was discontinued on
September 29, 2011, and from I/B/E/S Guidance file thereafter), and days with multiple analysts issuing a

3

Ljungqvist, Malloy, and Marston (2009) report that matched records in the I/B/E/S recommendations data were altered
between downloads from 2000 to 2007. Thomson, in response to their paper, fixed the alterations in the recommendation
history file as of February 12, 2007. The dataset we use is dated December 17, 2015 and hence reflects these corrections.
However, there are still some large brokers missing from the current I/B/E/S forecasts and recommendations files. To
reinstate the missing years from these brokers, we use Capital IQ estimates to extract recommendations and earnings
forecasts issued by these missing brokers and splice the collected data into our I/B/E/S sample. Spliced observations make
up about 1.05% of the total observations in the forecasts sample and 0.45% of the observations in the recommendations
sample.

12

recommendation for the firm.4 Similar filters are also used when we examine the stock-price impact of earnings
forecast revisions. Stock returns are from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP).
3.3.

Evidence of large increases in uncertainty during bad times
In this section we examine the variance of investors’ priors during bad times using an ex ante proxy. We

show that there is indeed more uncertainty about the market and about individual stocks in bad times. In Panel A
of Table 1, we report daily estimates of the VIX from CBOE as a proxy for ex ante uncertainty. This data starts
from 1990 and overlaps most of our 1983-2014 sample. The typical daily VIX (quoted as an annualized standard
deviation) in Crisis periods is 31.339, while in good times it is 18.865. The VIX in Crisis periods is therefore
more than 60% greater than in non-Crisis times and this difference is statistically significant. The increase in the
VIX is similar for the Credit Crisis period and Recession periods. The increase in the VIX is smaller for the
High Uncertainty periods but is still sizable. Hence for all our bad times definitions, the ex ante volatility of the
market increases sharply in bad times, which is evidence that investors’ priors become less precise in bad times.
We turn now to the ex ante volatility for the common stock of individual firms at the time of
recommendation changes. Panel B of Table 1 reports the annualized implied volatilities of the stocks five
trading days before they are subject to a recommendation change. The implied volatility data is from Option
Metrics’ Volatility Surface file, using the average of the interpolated implied volatility from puts and calls with
30 days to expiration and a delta of 50. We are able to match 76% of the recommendation changes in our sample
with an implied volatility. Starting with the Crisis definition of bad times for downgrades, we see that the
option-implied volatility is 61.820% in bad times and 47.319% in good times. The difference of 13.501
percentage points is statistically significant. When we turn to upgrades, the differences in implied volatilities are
very similar to what they are for downgrades. For all our definitions of bad times, we find similar results. Hence,
4

One concern with these filters is that if analysts piggyback more on firm news in bad times, a larger fraction of poor
quality recommendations might be removed in bad times, hence making the remaining sample of recommendations appear
“better” in bad times than in good times. However, we find that it is in good times that analysts piggyback more. For
example in non-Crisis periods, 37.7% of downgrades (30.3% of upgrades) are removed by the filters compared to 33.8%
(27.0% of upgrades) in Crisis periods. We also checked if recommendation changes that occur on firm-news days are more
impactful in bad times and we find strong evidence for downgrades (all four definitions of bad times) but mixed evidence
for upgrades (only two of four definitions). Because it is hard to distinguish whether these effects can be attributed to
analysts or to the firm news events themselves, we focus our analysis on the sample that is not contaminated by firm news.

13

there is clear evidence of higher ex ante volatility at the firm level just before recommendation changes in bad
times compared to good times.
3.4.

Stock-price impact of recommendation changes
We now address the question of whether analyst output has a greater stock-price impact in bad times. We

take the view that if analyst output moves stock prices, it means that investors’ priors are changed and hence the
analyst output is valuable to investors. We examine first the stock-price impact of recommendation changes.
Because recommendation levels can be biased, recommendation changes are more reliable than levels as a
setting to evaluate the impact of analysts (e.g., Boni and Womack (2006) show that rating changes contain more
information for returns than rating levels). To estimate the stock-price impact of a recommendation change, we
use the cumulative abnormal return (CAR) from the recommendation date to the following trading day, i.e., a
day [0,1] event window. If the recommendation is issued on a non-trading day or after trading hours, day 0 is
defined as the next trading day. CAR is computed as the cumulative return of the common stock less the
cumulative return on an equally weighted characteristics-matched size, book-to-market (B/M), and momentum
portfolio (following Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers (1997), thereafter DGTW). Panel A of Table 2,
which summarizes our main results, reports the average CAR of recommendation changes, separated into
upgrades and downgrades, issued in bad times and in good times with statistical significance based on standard
errors clustered by calendar day.
We see that downgrades and upgrades have larger impact during bad times. The differences are stark.
Starting with the Crisis definition, we see that the average two-day CAR is -2.678% for a recommendation
downgrade in Crisis periods and is -1.687% in non-Crisis periods. Both CARs are significant at the 1% level
indicating that analysts have impact in both good and bad times. But the significant difference of -0.991% shows
that downgrades have larger impact in bad times. The same is true for upgrades. The CAR for upgrades in Crisis
periods is 2.658%, while in non-Crisis periods it is 2.044%. The difference in these CARs is 0.614% and is

14

again significant at the 1% level. Using other definitions of bad times also shows similar evidence of larger
impact of recommendations in bad times.5
We now examine whether analysts are more influential in bad times using the influential definition in Loh
and Stulz (2011). Loh and Stulz show that it is important to assess whether a recommendation change results in
a stock-price reaction that is noticed by investors, meaning that the rating change results in a reaction that is
significant at the firm level based on the firm’s prior stock-price volatility. 6 Table 2 shows the fraction of
recommendation changes that are influential during bad times compared to good times.
The results are striking. For all definitions of bad times, a recommendation downgrade is significantly more
likely to be influential during bad times than during good times. The difference is especially large when we use
the Crisis definition or the Credit Crisis definition of bad times. For these definitions, a recommendation
downgrade has a probability of being influential that is one third higher during bad times (e.g., 15.278% versus
11.681% for the Crisis definition). The differences are smaller for the Recession and High Uncertainty
definitions of bad times. Turning to recommendation upgrades, we find that they are also significantly more
likely to be influential in bad times for all definitions of bad times. The results for the fraction of influential
recommendations are, therefore, similar to the CAR results.
We plot in Figure 1 the summary of our results in Table 2. We can see that upgrades and downgrades are
both associated with stronger stock-price reactions and are more likely to be influential in bad times compared
to good times.
Thus far we have only shown univariate results. Because recommendation impact can be affected by other
characteristics besides bad times, it is important to examine if our results are robust to controlling for such
5

Using a bad times dummy means that the baseline group is non-bad times, which we term as good times. This
approach is consistent with, say, how the NBER only defines recessions and labels other periods as expansions. In
unreported tests, we use the monthly market returns to sort non-bad times into two groups, normal times and good times.
Using normal times as the baseline group, we continue to find strong evidence of a stronger CAR impact of
recommendation changes in bad times. We find little increased impact on CAR in good times compared to normal times,
except for upgrades, which have slightly larger impact in good times compared to normal times.
6
Specifically, we check if the CAR is in the same direction as the recommendation change and the absolute value CAR
exceeds 1.96 × √2 × 𝜎𝜀 . We multiply by √2 since the CAR is a two-day CAR. 𝜎𝜀 is the standard deviation of residuals
from a daily time-series regression of past three-month (days −69 to −6) firm returns against the Fama and French (1993)
three factors. This measure roughly captures recommendation changes that are associated with noticeable abnormal returns
that can be attributed to the recommendation changes.

15

characteristics. In Table 3, we report estimates of OLS panel regressions where we control for firm, analyst, and
recommendation characteristics.
We use the following control variables that are known to be related to the impact of recommendations. LFR
is the analyst’s prior year leader-follower ratio constructed following Cooper, Day, and Lewis (2001), who show
that reports from leader analysts exert greater stock-price impact. 7 Star Analyst is an indicator variable for
analysts elected to the All-American team (whether as first-, second-, third-team, or runner-up statuses) in the
latest October Institutional Investor annual poll. Fang and Yasuda (2014) show that stars analysts have better
performance. Mikhail, Walther, and Willis (1997) show that analyst experience impacts performance. We define
Relative Experience as the difference between the analyst’s experience (number of quarters since appearance on
I/B/E/S) and the average experience of all analysts covering the same firm. Next, because forecast accuracy can
be a proxy for skill in stock picking (Loh and Mian (2006)), we define Accuracy Quintile as the average forecast
accuracy quintile (relative to other analysts covering the same firm) of the analyst based on the firms covered in
the past year, where the quintile rank is increasing in forecast accuracy. Broker Size is the number of analysts
employed by the broker as a proxy for analyst ability and availability of resources. We also add the following
firm characteristics: # Analysts which is one plus the number of analysts covering the firm, Size is last June’s
market cap, BM is the book-to-market equity ratio (computed and aligned following Fama and French (2006)),
Momentum is the buy-and-hold return from month t-12 to t-2, and Stock Volatility is the standard deviation of
daily stock returns in the prior month. Adding these controls allows us to determine if our univariate results are
robust to controlling for changing firm and analyst characteristics from good to bad times.
The descriptive statistics of these variables are reported in Panel C of Table 1 for the full sample, as well as
separately for one of the bad times definitions—Crisis and non-Crisis periods. These are averages of the
characteristics across all the recommendation change observations within the downgrade or upgrade sample. We
see that most analyst characteristics look similar between good and bad times, except that there appears to be a
7
To compute the LFR, the gaps between the current recommendation and the previous two recommendations from
other brokers are computed and summed. The same is done for the next two recommendations. The leader-follower ratio is
the gap sum of the prior two recommendations divided by the gap sum of the next two recommendations. A ratio larger
than one indicates a leader analyst, since other brokers issue new ratings quickly in response to the analyst’s current
recommendation.

16

smaller fraction of star analysts in bad times. For firm characteristics, we see a decrease in the average Size,
Momentum, BM, and # Analysts per firm in bad times, while Stock Volatility is markedly higher in bad times.
We now turn to the regressions in Table 3 that include these controls. For each definition of bad times, we
estimate the CAR regression first using a constant and an indicator variable for bad times. The coefficient on the
bad times indicator is the univariate additional impact of downgrades in bad times (equivalent to the CAR
difference in Table 2) and the intercept is the good times CAR impact. We then control for firm, analyst, and
forecast characteristics, and add industry fixed effects (Fama-French 30 industry groups). Standard errors are
clustered by calendar day to account for cross-sectional correlation of returns on the same day.8 From models 18 for downgrades, we see that regardless of whether we have control variables, all the indicator variables for bad
times have coefficients that are negative and statistically significant at the 1% level. This shows that analysts’
downgrades have more stock-price impact in bad times compared to good times. To gauge the economic
magnitude of the effect of bad times after the controls are added, we compare the bad times coefficient to the
“Good times 𝑌̂”, which is the predicted CAR when the control variables are at their means and the bad times
indicator is zero. In model 2, the bad times coefficient is -0.998% and the good times predicted CAR is -1.761%,
meaning that bad times increase the CAR impact by about 1.57 times, an effect similar to the case without
controls.
Looking at the coefficients of the controls, we see that recommendations by analysts with a greater leaderfollower ratio have a larger impact. Not surprisingly in light of the earlier literature, we see that recommendation
changes by bigger brokers have a greater impact. So do the downgrades of star analysts. Also in line with the
literature, recommendation changes have less impact when a firm is followed by more analysts or when the firm
is larger. Lastly, the impact of analyst downgrades is greater when the firm’s prior stock volatility is higher.
Turning to recommendation upgrades, we find that with or without controls, upgrades also have a significantly
larger stock-price reaction regardless of the definition of bad times.

8

We also tried clustering the standard errors by firm or by analyst and the results are typically similar or statistically
stronger.

17

Table 4 repeats the analysis in Table 3 by estimating probit models for whether a recommendation change is
influential or not. The marginal effects, which measure the change in probability when changing the variable by
one standard deviation centered around its mean (or a 0 to 1 change for a dummy variable), are reported with zstatistics in parentheses (based on standard errors clustered by calendar day). We see that recommendation
downgrades are more likely to be influential in bad times for all definitions of bad times. Interestingly, the
marginal effects of the bad times indicator variables are higher when we control for analyst, firm, and
recommendation characteristics and industry fixed effects. For example, in regression 1 of Table 4, the marginal
effect on Crisis indicates the univariate increase in influential probability of a downgrade in Crisis periods is
3.6% (compared to the probit’s predicted influential probability of 12.1% in the downgrades sample). When we
add control variables, the coefficient on Crisis goes up to 6.5% (compared to the predicted probability of 11.7%,
labeled “Predicted Prob.” in the table). Turning to recommendation upgrades, we find that upgrades are also
more likely to be influential during bad times for all definitions and the effect also becomes stronger when we
add control variables.
Overall, we find strong evidence that recommendation changes are more impactful during bad times. There
is also no asymmetry in our results in that both upgrades and downgrades have increased impact in bad times.
Some in the literature suggest that the reaction of the market to good and bad news might be asymmetric
depending on whether times are good or bad (e.g. Beber and Brandt (2010) and Veronesi (1999)). We find no
evidence of such an asymmetric reaction to the “news” produced by analysts because the increased impact of
recommendation changes in bad times applies to both upgrades and downgrades.
Overall, the result that analysts have more impact in bad times is inconsistent with the difficult environment
hypothesis, the shirking hypothesis, and the inattention hypothesis, which all predict that analyst research
quality should be reduced in bad times. Instead, our result supports hypotheses that predict better-quality analyst
output in bad times.
A caveat for our results is that the credit crisis overlaps with a sizable fraction of some bad times definitions.
Specifically, 72% and 43% of the Crisis and Recession months respectively occur in the credit crisis. As a
result, when we exclude the credit crisis observations, we find weak and at most mixed evidence that analysts

18

have more impact in Crisis or Recession periods. However, this issue is mitigated for the High Uncertainty
definition of bad times as only 12% of High Uncertainty months occur in the credit crisis. Using the High
Uncertainty definition of bad times, excluding credit crisis observations does not affect the evidence of larger
analyst impact in bad times.
3.5.

Stock-price impact of earnings forecast revisions
Our analysis thus far has looked at stock recommendations, which are essentially the analyst’s summary

measure of the future prospects of investing in the firm’s stock. We now focus on analysts’ forecasts of a
specific measure of fundamentals—earnings. The use of earnings forecast revisions also allows us to control for
the amount of information in the revision by using the forecast revision magnitude. We investigate whether
earnings forecasts are more or less useful to investors during bad times by measuring the impact of forecast
revisions on the firm’s stock price. As before, we use two definitions of impact, the two-day CAR and the
influential likelihood. A forecast revision is defined using the analyst’s own prior forecast of quarterly earnings,
provided that the prior forecast has not been stopped and is still active (less than one year old) using its I/B/E/S
review date. The revision is then scaled by the lagged CRSP stock price and we call this the Forecast Revision.
We remove forecast revisions on dates that coincide with corporate events (namely, the three trading days
around earnings announcements and guidance dates, and multiple-forecast dates) so that we do not falsely give
credit to the analyst for company announcement-driven stock-price changes.
Figure 2 (left two charts) plots the univariate average forecast revision CARs. We see clear evidence that
forecast revisions have more stock-price impact in bad times. Table 5 then estimates regressions with control
variables. An important added control is Forecast Revision itself because one naturally expects larger-magnitude
revisions to be associated with larger stock-price changes. Table 5 reports the regressions of forecast revision
CARs where the standard errors are clustered by calendar day. In regression (1) which has no control variables,
we see that the downward forecast revision CAR is much more negative in Crisis times. The intercept of the
regression is -0.294% while the coefficient on the indicator variable is -0.398% (t=6.50), meaning that the stockprice reaction to a downward revision during bad times is more than double the reaction during good times.

19

Adding the control variables to the regression does not meaningfully change the statistical or economic effect of
bad times (in model 2, the bad times coefficient is -0.384 compared to the good times predicted CAR of -0.230).
The coefficient on Forecast Revision itself is positive and significant meaning that it is not the case that largermagnitude revisions explain the greater CAR impact.9 Similar results hold for the other definitions of bad times.
When we turn to upward revisions, the CAR is significantly higher for the Crisis and Credit Crisis definitions of
bad times, but not for other definitions. Further, the impact of bad times on the CAR is smaller. For the Crisis
definition, the intercept is 0.439% and the estimate of the coefficient on the indicator variable is 0.198%, i.e.
about one-third higher than in bad times, which contrasts with an impact that is more than double in bad times
for downward revisions.
Figure 2 (right two charts) and Table 6 examine whether an earnings forecast revision is more likely to be
influential in bad times. Table 6 estimates probits where the dependent variable is an indicator variable that
equals one when the forecast is deemed to be influential. The results are stronger than in the earlier table with all
the marginal effects being statistically significant, indicating that analysts make more influential earnings
forecast revisions in bad times compared to good times. The economic effect is also large. For example, the
marginal effect for Crisis in model 2 is 0.036, which means that in Crisis times the influential probability of a
downward revision goes up by 3.6%, a big increase from the 4.5% predicted influential probability in the probit
model.
From these results, we conclude that analyst output is indeed more valuable in bad times. Whether we
consider their recommendation changes, which represent their overall assessment of a firm’s prospects, or a
specific change in their forecasts of a firm’s upcoming short-term fundamentals (quarterly earnings), we find
that analysts have a more influential impact on stock prices.

9

When we estimate the bad times regression with only Forecast Revision as a single control in unreported results, the
coefficient on Forecast Revision is much stronger for both the downward and upward revision sample. In the presence of
other control variables, we see from Table 5 that the effect of Forecast Revision is much weaker. If we add an interaction of
Forecast Revision with bad times, the coefficients on such interactions are never significant.

20

4.

Robustness tests
We conduct several robustness tests to examine if our results of greater analyst impact in bad times are new

to the literature and whether they are robust.
4.1.

Does market-wide or firm-specific uncertainty drive our results?
Our definition of bad times is based on changes in aggregate economic activity. We use a market-wide

definition instead of a firm-specific definition because market-wide bad times are more likely to be exogenous
to the analyst and to the industry. Some previous studies have examined how firm-level uncertainty affects
analysts’ output. For example, Frankel et al. (2006) find that analyst reports are more informative when trading
volume and stock return volatility are higher, and Loh and Stulz (2011) find that analyst recommendations are
more influential when firms have higher forecast dispersion. Although our earlier results already control for
firm-specific uncertainty, we explore a different method to see how controlling for the role of firm-specific
uncertainty affects our results.
We first decompose a firm’s prior month total variance of daily stock returns into macro, industry (FamaFrench 30 groups), and residual (firm-specific) components by regressing a firm’s daily returns on market
(CRSP value-weighted) returns and a market-purged industry return. We define high uncertainty as the highest
tercile of the relevant variance component over the firm’s history and show in Panel A of Table 7 the
recommendation change CAR regressed on these three high uncertainty dummies. We see that all three are
related to significantly larger CAR impact in the univariate setting. When we put all three uncertainty dummies
together and add control variables, we see that only the coefficient on the market-wide uncertainty dummy
remains robust and statistically significant across all specifications. Hence, we believe our results are new in that
it is market-wide uncertainty rather than firm-specific uncertainty that drives the higher impact of analysts
during periods of high uncertainty.

21

4.2.

Do reports that reiterate recommendations have more impact?
Although we find that analyst reports containing revisions are more impactful in bad times, it might not

mean that all analyst reports have more impact in bad times if reports that reiterate recommendations are less
informative in bad times. For example, if analysts have less information in bad times, they might choose to just
reiterate old ratings instead of revising them. And if these reiterations have mostly no impact in bad times, we
might overstate the impact of analyst reports in bad times when we exclude reiterations from our sample.
We first examine, in unreported results, the frequency of recommendation changes and reiterations in bad
times. It is well known that I/B/E/S does not record all reiterations (see for example, Brav and Lehavy (2003)).
Besides the recorded reiterations on I/B/E/S, we infer other reiterations by assuming that the most recent
outstanding I/B/E/S rating is reiterated whenever there is a quarterly forecast in the I/B/E/S detail file or a price
target forecast in the I/B/E/S price target file but no corresponding new rating in the recommendation file. As
before, we remove observations that occur together with firm news. We show that in non-Crisis periods, the
average total number of recommendation changes per month for a firm (across all analysts covering it) is 0.183.
In Crisis times, this goes up to 0.238 (a 30% increase). We find across all other bad times definitions that the
number of recommendation changes also goes up in bad times. Hence, there is no evidence that analysts are
more reluctant to revise recommendations in bad times. For reiterations, we find 0.771 reiterations per month in
non-Crisis times and 0.903 in Crisis times (a 17% increase). Across all bad times definitions, we also find
evidence that the number of reiterations goes up. There is also no evidence that the number of reiterations goes
up at the expense of the number of revisions.
We now investigate in Panel B of Table 7 whether these more numerous reiterations in bad times have any
differential impact compared to good times. We show that the impact of unfavorable reiterations (reiterated sell
or hold) is indeed higher in bad times across all specifications, similar to our findings on revisions. Hence
analysts are also more impactful when issuing reiterations in bad times. We find less evidence of this for
favorable reiterations (reiterated buy), with mostly lower impact in bad times. Overall, we conclude that there is

22

no evidence analysts reiterate more in bad times at the expense of revising less. Their bad times reiterations,
especially of unfavorable ratings, are also more informative compared to those in good times.
4.3.

Does the market react more to all types of firm news in bad times?
We now examine if all firm news have a greater impact in bad times. If this were the case, it would suggest

that there is something systematic about how the market reacts to news in bad times and the heightened reaction
to analyst output in bad times can be explained by the fact that the market reacts more to every piece of news
rather than that the market reacts more to analyst output only. This investigation makes sense in light of
Schmalz and Zhuk (2015) who find that the market reacts more to earnings announcements in bad times. We
adapt the methodology in Frankel et al. (2006) by estimating a big panel regression of daily absolute individual
stock returns on a comprehensive set of dummy variables that represent important firm news events, namely,
recommendation changes, reiterations, earnings announcements, earnings guidance, dividend announcements,
insider trade events, and the announcement of insider trades. Following Frankel et al., these dummies are set to
one in day 0 of the event, or day 1 of the event if the announcement occurs after trading hours (when the event
time is available for us to check this). Dividend announcements are taken from the CRSP event file and insider
trades are from the Thomson Insider Form 4 files. The insider trade date is the date when the insider trade
occurs and the filing date is when it is reported to the SEC and hence publicly known.
We expect the coefficient on these firm news dummies to be positive and the recommendation-related
dummies to remain positive in the presence of the other firm news dummies. As controls, we include several
firm characteristics such as size, B/M, momentum, idiosyncratic volatility, etc., and also industry fixed effects.
We add bad times indicators whose coefficients are expected to be positive if the market is in general more
volatile in bad times. We then interact these firm news dummies with bad times indicators and expect such
interactions to be positive if the market reacts more to any news in bad times. Of important interest is whether
the recommendation-related interactions with bad times remain significantly positive in the presence of the other
firm news dummies and their interactions. If so, it will show that the finding of greater reaction to

23

recommendations in bad times is robust to controlling for the market’s differential reaction to news in general in
bad times. The standard errors are clustered by calendar day.
We show in Panel C of Table 7 that the recommendation change and reiteration dummies are always
statistically significant alone and in the presence of other firm news dummies. This shows that both
recommendation changes and reiterations are more informative in bad times, confirming the earlier results.
When including all the interactions with bad times, the coefficient on the recommendation change dummy
interacted with bad times remains positive and significant and often has the largest magnitude (that
recommendations elicit the largest reaction when compared to other firm events is in general also consistent
with Bradley et al. (2014)). This confirms the robustness of our main findings to controlling for the differential
impact of firm news in bad times. We also see that the market does not react more to all types of firm news in
bad times. Earnings announcements do indeed elicit a greater reaction in bad times but guidance announcements
elicit lower reaction. There is also mixed evidence on a greater reaction to dividend announcements and insider
trades and announcements in bad times.
4.4.

Alternative specifications and samples
Differences in analyst characteristics could spuriously explain our results. This could be the case if

somehow analysts are better on average in bad times than in good times. Controlling for analyst characteristics
addresses the concern that the overall quality of the pool of analysts is different in bad times. While it seems
unlikely that the change in the analyst pool can be large enough to explain our findings which already control
for analyst characteristics, we conduct two further tests. First, we identify a set of seasoned analysts who are
present before and after the longest bad times period, i.e. the credit crisis. These are analysts who appear in
I/B/E/S before 2007 and continue to issue reports after March 2009. These seasoned analysts are responsible for
almost half of the recommendations in our sample. We repeat our tests on this subsample to ascertain the
performance differential between good and bad times for this set of analysts. Second, we add analyst fixed
effects when analyzing this subsample. With this approach, the increased impact of analyst recommendations
and forecasts during the credit crisis cannot be explained by a selection effect or unobserved analyst

24

characteristics. In unreported results we show that the impact of recommendation changes continues to be higher
in bad times compared to good times when analyst fixed effects are added. In many cases the results are
stronger. For example, in the model with control variables, the marginal effect of a Crisis period on the
influential probability of a downgrade is 0.059. Adding analyst fixed effects, the marginal effect becomes 0.067.
For upgrades, the increased probability of being influential in Crisis period is 0.043 and this is unchanged when
analyst fixed effects are added.
In a separate and unreported analysis, we control for whether an analyst’s career starts during bad times.
Presumably, analysts who begin careers during bad times have more experience with bad times and might do
better in such periods. Or it could be that brokers hire analysts with special expertise when bad times strike. To
test if this effect drives our results, we define a dummy variable that equals one for an analyst who joined the
profession in any bad times period. We also define another dummy variable for analysts who begin their career
in the credit crisis. Adding these dummy variables to our main regressions, we find that these two coefficients
are mostly statistically insignificant and all our results are unaffected. We conclude that analysts who join
brokers during bad times are unlikely to be the main contributors to our results that analysts produce better
research in bad times.
Finally, we also repeat our analysis on financial firms. We exclude financial firms from our baseline
analysis because many of the macro bad times periods started in the financial sector, e.g. the credit crisis and
most of the recessions. As such, for the financial sector, the periods which we define as macro bad times are
mostly also industry bad times. Industry bad times might also not be as exogenous to analysts as macro bad
times are. Nevertheless, we repeat our analysis on financial firms (group 29 of the Fama-French 30-industry
definitions). We find that recommendation changes made by analysts on financial firms also have significantly
greater CAR impact in bad times. For example, the mean recommendation downgrade CAR in non-Crisis
periods is -1.087% but the downgrade in bad times elicits an additional -2.118% abnormal return. For upgrades,
the non-Crisis CAR is 1.315% but the Crisis CAR is larger by 1.473%. All results are similarly strong for other
bad times definitions and after the addition of controls. For the CAR impact of earnings forecast revisions, the
coefficients on the bad times dummies are mostly insignificant. Hence, while our recommendation change

25

results are robust to firms in the financial industry, the results for forecast revisions are weaker for these firms.
Importantly, it is hard to distinguish for this set of firms whether the results are triggered by industry or macro
bad times
5.

Are analyst signals more precise in bad times?
Having established that our results of analyst output being more influential in bad times is strong and robust,

we now investigate why it is so. We might expect that analysts are more influential because their signals are
more precise in bad times. If analysts have more precise signals in bad times, their forecast errors should be
lower. The literature typically measures forecast errors by the absolute difference between the actual and
forecasted earnings per share, scaled by the absolute value of actual earnings or price to account for firm
heterogeneity. With such a measure of forecast error, it would be surprising if forecast errors were lower in bad
times because in bad times earnings naturally become harder to forecast. Indeed, we find that this traditional
measure of absolute forecast errors shows that analysts are less precise in bad times, consistent with Jacob
(1997), Chopra (1998), and Hope and Kang (2005).
We argue that this traditional measure of forecast errors is not the appropriate measure to understand why
analysts are more influential in bad times. The usefulness of analyst signals of a given precision depends on the
uncertainty that investors face. To wit, if investors face no underlying uncertainty about the prospects of a firm,
analyst signals that have a small amount of noise are useless. Hence, to compare the usefulness of analyst
forecasts over time, the precision of their signals has to be evaluated relative to the uncertainty about the
prospects of the firm. This is similar in spirit to the way which we define influential recommendations by
scaling by the prior volatility of returns. When we use this new approach, we find that analysts are actually more
precise in bad times.
5.1.

Using a traditional measure of forecast error
We first report results using a traditional measure of forecast error. For each analyst, the forecast error is

actual earnings minus the final unrevised one-quarter-ahead forecast. We focus on forecasts that are revisions of

26

prior forecasts since those are the ones which we found earlier to be associated with higher stock-price reactions.
We scale forecast errors by the absolute value of actual earnings instead of stock prices because bad times
periods are by definition associated with lower stock prices, so that forecast errors get magnified when scaled by
stock prices. When scaling forecast errors by the absolute value of actual earnings, denominator values smaller
than $0.25 are set to $0.25 to limit the impact of small denominators. Scaled forecast errors are then winsorized
at the extreme 1% before we take absolute values.10
Models 1-8 in Table 8 formally test whether the traditional measure of absolute forecast error of analysts in
bad times is larger. Standard errors are clustered by industry-quarter where the industry definition is the Fama
and French (1997) 30-industry groupings. We also tried clustering by analyst-quarter or firm-quarter and the
results are usually similar or stronger. We use similar control variables as those in the earlier tables but also add
control variables that are relevant for predicting the accuracy of analyst forecasts from the literature. Lim (2001)
shows that analysts trade off optimism and accuracy because optimism facilitates access to private information
from the covered firm’s management. We add optimism as a control where Optimistic is a dummy variable that
equals one when the forecast is in the top half among all final unrevised forecasts in that quarter. Clement
(1999) stresses the importance of controlling for forecast recency because forecasts closer to the actual earnings
announcement date will obviously be more accurate. Log Days to Annc is the number of days that the forecast
date is before the announcement date of actual earnings and serves as a control for forecast recency. As Bradley,
Jordan, and Ritter (2008) suggest, days with activity from multiple analysts most likely are caused by a
corporate news release. Forecast accuracy may be different when the forecast is made in response to a corporate
news release. Multiple Forecast Day is an indicator variable representing days where the forecast falls on a day
on which more than one analyst issues a forecast on the firm. To control for differences of opinion among
analysts, we include the Dispersion of forecasts measured as the standard deviation of quarterly forecasts
making up the final consensus scaled by the absolute value of the mean estimate.

10

One concern related to using the absolute value of actual earnings as the deflator is that lower earnings in bad times
could artificially inflate forecast errors (although negative earnings might mitigate this concern). In robustness tests, when
estimating the multivariate regressions for the traditional measure of forecast errors, we use unscaled forecast errors while
controlling for the stock price of the firm in addition to all the other control variables. We find that our results are similar.

27

We see in Table 8 that traditional absolute forecast errors are significantly larger in bad times. Model 1
shows that in non-Crisis times the absolute forecast error is 14.835 percent of actual earnings. In Crisis times,
the absolute forecast error is 2.775 percent higher. This increase in the absolute forecast error is also robust after
taking into account analyst, firm, and forecast characteristics. The same results hold for all the other definitions
of bad times, which appear to tell us that analysts are more imprecise during bad times.
5.2.

Absolute forecast errors scaled by stock volatility
We now examine whether analyst forecast errors are larger in bad times after we account for the greater

uncertainty that investors face in bad times. To do this, we normalize the absolute forecast errors by the stock’s
prior month daily stock return volatility (annualized). This new scaling allows us to examine whether the
increase in absolute forecast error can be explained by the increase in the underlying uncertainty surrounding the
firm in bad times. This approach is similar in spirit to our earlier approach of using prior volatility to scale the
return impact of recommendation changes to identify influential revisions. To our knowledge, the literature has
not considered such a measure of forecast precision, which is akin to measuring the forecast error per unit of
uncertainty. Models 9 to 16 in Table 8 show the results of this new measure of adjusted forecast precision. We
see that the intercept of model 9 is 26.852, which can be interpreted as the percentage absolute forecast error per
unit (100%) of stock volatility. Hence, the coefficient on the Crisis variable of -6.667 describes the difference in
the uncertainty-adjusted forecast precision during bad times compared to good times. This number tells us that
−6.667

the analysts’ precision improves by 25% ( 26.852 ) during bad times. Model 2 shows that this percentage
improvement is almost unchanged with the addition of control variables. Across all the bad times definitions, we
see that after the addition of control variables, the finding that the precision of analyst earnings forecasts is
higher in bad times is statistically significant. We also tried using the implied volatility (when available) five
trading days before forecast as a proxy for the uncertainty facing the firm and we find similar results.

28

These results of improved analyst forecast precision during bad times supports our main finding that analyst
revisions have larger stock-price impact in bad times. This larger impact is justified by the higher earnings
forecast precision per unit uncertainty in bad times compared to good times.
6.

Why is analyst output more impactful in bad times?
So far, we have shown that analyst output is more impactful in bad times and that analysts offer more

precise signals during bad times after taking into account the uncertainty facing investors. In this section, we
explore five possible, non-mutually exclusive explanations for these results. We presented these potential
explanations in Section 2. There is clearly no support for the hypotheses in Section 2 which predict that analysts
will be less impactful in bad times. We investigate instead potential explanations for why analysts might be
more impactful in bad times, namely the reliance on analysts hypothesis, the hypothesis that analysts work
harder in bad times, the hypothesis that analyst output reflects different skills in bad times, the hypothesis that
conflicts of interest affect analyst output less in bad times, and the overreaction hypothesis.
6.1.

Reliance on analysts hypothesis
The analyst reliance hypothesis predicts that analyst output becomes more valuable in bad times especially

for more opaque stocks. We use several characteristics to proxy for stocks which are more opaque and might
have more reliance on analysts, namely, stocks with no company guidance, low institutional ownership, high
idiosyncratic volatility to total volatility ratio, small size, no traded options (a proxy for less informed trading),
and low analyst coverage.11
We examine the impact of these characteristics on our main results in a cross-sectional analysis by
interacting the bad times dummies with dummy variables representing these characteristics. NoGuidance equals
11

In the uncertainty literature, an increase in idiosyncratic volatility is a proxy for an increase in uncertainty (Bloom
(2009)). It has also been viewed as evidence of informed trading, e.g. in Roll (1988), as a proxy for skewness (Bali, Cakici,
and Whitelaw (2011)), and as a proxy for illiquidity (Han and Lesmond (2011)). Ultimately, it is an empirical question
whether analysts have more or less impact on high idiosyncratic volatility stocks during bad times. With our discussion in
Section 2 of the analyst reliance hypothesis, if idiosyncratic volatility is a proxy for uncertainty, everything else equal we
would expect analyst output to be more valuable for stocks with higher idiosyncratic volatility provided that the precision
of analyst output decreases less than proportionately when uncertainty increases. Whether this is true or not is an empirical
issue.

29

one when the firm has had no earnings guidance in the last month. For institutional ownership, LowIO equals
one for the lowest quintile of firms sorted by the most recent Thomson 13F-reported fraction of shares owned by
institutions. For idiosyncratic volatility, HighIVOLfrac equals one for the highest quintile of stocks sorted on the
prior quarter fraction of firm-specific daily return volatility over the total volatility (total variance is
decomposed into its market, industry, and residual components as described in the robustness tests earlier).
SmallSize equals one for the lowest quintile rank (NYSE breakpoints) of the prior June market cap. NoOptions
equals one when the firm has no traded options (checking for availability of data in Option Metrics). Finally,
LowCoverage equals one for the lowest analyst coverage quintile based on number of analysts issuing
recommendations in the prior quarter. We use dummy variables for these cross-sectional tests for ease of
interpreting the coefficients but we find similar results if we use the rank (when possible) of the firm
characteristic instead.
In Table 9, we report the coefficient of the bad times dummies, firm characteristics dummies, and their
interactions (for brevity, the coefficients of the control variables are unreported). We see that for most of the
proxies for opacity, greater opacity is associated with a greater impact of recommendation changes in good
times. When the opacity proxies are interacted with bad times, this relation become stronger, which shows a
stronger increase in the impact of analysts in bad times compared to good times for such firms. The strongest
results are for the NoGuidance, SmallSize, and LowCoverage interactions. This evidence is consistent with the
hypothesis that investors rely more on analysts in bad times for stocks that are more opaque.
We also examine in unreported results interactions of analyst characteristics, whether some analysts are
more likely to do better than other analysts in becoming more impactful in bad times. We look at large brokers
(top quintile based on analysts issuing ratings in the prior quarter), current star analyst status, and high
experienced analysts (top quintile based on number of quarters in I/B/E/S as of the current quarter), and highly
influential analysts (top quintile of fraction of influential recommendations in the previous year). There is some
evidence that the last characteristics is associated with greater impact in bad times, but not for the other
characteristics. The highly influential analysts have more impact for downgrades in bad times for the credit
crisis and recession definitions of bad times.

30

6.2.

Analyst effort and incentives
We examine the role of analyst incentives as an explanation for why analysts are more impactful during bad

times. Studies have argued that the higher marginal utility of investors during bad times motivates fund
managers to perform better (e.g. Glode (2011)). If analysts also face such motivations, their effort to produce
better research might go up in bad times. For fund managers, investors can immediately reward the manager
with fund flows. For analysts, this channel is more indirect in that good analysts build their reputation but do not
receive direct rewards from investors. Further, bad times are also periods where analysts might face pressures
about their careers due to attrition risk and shrinking compensation. The higher likelihood of losing their jobs
conditional on effort might motivate them to work harder.
In Table 10, we examine whether analysts are more likely to disappear during bad times using probits of
analyst attrition. For the recommendations sample, Disappear is a dummy variable which equals one for the
analyst-year combination where the analyst makes no recommendation in I/B/E/S across all firms in the next
year. This proxies for the analyst losing her job. Looking over a period of one year minimizes the possibility that
the analyst’s recommendation frequency was temporarily reduced. The bad times indicator equals one if the next
year contains a relevant bad times period. Control variables are averaged for each analyst-year combination.
Standard errors in this table are clustered by analyst.
We see that across the different bad times periods, analysts are 1-4% more likely to disappear from I/B/E/S.
This is a sizable change given that the predicted probability of attrition is about 11-13% in these models. One
important independent variable in the regressions is the probability that an analyst is influential that year
computed as the fraction of the analyst’s recommendation changes that are influential. We see that this
influential likelihood is typically negatively related to analyst attrition—issuing high impact recommendation
changes reduces the chances that the analyst disappears. When we interact this influential probability with bad
times, we see the reduced likelihood of attrition. Together, these results provide the motivation for the analyst to
work harder to avoid attrition in bad times since attrition is more likely in bad times and research impact reduces
attrition likelihood.

31

In unreported results, we estimate the attrition probits on the quarterly earnings forecasts sample. Disappear
now equals one when the analyst made no one quarter-ahead forecast for quarterly earnings on any firm in
I/B/E/S for the next two quarters. The bad times dummy variables are set to one if the next two quarters contain
a relevant bad times period. We find evidence that both the crisis and credit crisis definitions of bad times have
higher attrition likelihood, about 2-3% higher probabilities. We also define the Forecast Accuracy Quintile
variable as the average accuracy quintile (higher quintile number denotes greater accuracy among all analysts
covering the same firm) of the analyst for all the firms covered that quarter. We show that greater accuracy does
indeed reduce attrition likelihood. We then interact accuracy with bad times and find significant coefficients
only for the credit crisis. We conclude that career concerns is a plausible explanation for why analysts would
work harder in bad times and being influential in their recommendation changes seems to be more important
than earnings forecast accuracy in reducing attrition risk. 12
Having established that attrition likelihood is related to performance, we examine two additional measures
of analyst output quantity to examine if there is evidence that the increased impact and precision is accompanied
by more effort in bad times. We already saw evidence that the number of recommendation changes and
reiterations increases. We look now at analyst activity defined as the number of forecasts made by the analyst
for a firm-quarter combination. For each firm, we assume that the period of a particular analyst’s coverage starts
with the first quarter and stops with the last quarter that the analyst features in I/B/E/S for that firm. We then
count the number of forecasts that the analyst makes in each of the coverage quarters. Quarters within the
coverage period with no forecast from the analyst are assigned a forecast activity of zero.
We estimate regressions explaining forecast activity in Table 11 where the dependent variable is the log of
one plus the number of analyst forecasts. The regressions are at the firm-quarter-analyst level. The control
variables are now averages of the characteristic within the analyst-firm-quarter combination. The relevant bad
times indicator variables are set equal to one when any part of a calendar quarter is defined as bad times for that
particular definition. We see from the coefficients on the bad times indicators that there is indeed more analyst
12

In unreported tests, we examine if analysts who leave I/B/E/S are replaced by checking if any of the firms they
covered are now covered by another analyst in the same broker. We find about half of analysts are replaced. Using a
replaced dummy as the dependent variable in the probits, we get weaker results.

32

activity in bad times even after controlling for all other variables. Given the dependent variable is the log of one
plus the analyst activity, a Crisis coefficient of 0.063 with a non-Crisis coefficient of 0.642 in model 1
represents about a 14% increase in analyst activity. This evidence of increased activity holds true regardless of
the definition of bad times or the presence of control variables.13
The second measure of output quantity is the number of pages in the analyst report. We use the number of
pages in the report as a proxy for the amount of information or effort that that analyst spends on the report.
Unfortunately, this information is not recorded by I/B/E/S. From 1994-2014, we therefore hand collect this data
from analyst reports downloadable from Thomson ONE up to September 2011, and from Thomson Eikon from
October 2011 to December 2014 (Thomson recently migrated users of T1.com to Eikon, but both databases
draw from the same source database formerly known as Investext). Without downloading the actual reports, one
can download a spreadsheet of headlines (but restricted to 50 observations at a time) which contains information
on the broker name, covered firm name, report title, date, and the number of pages in the report. To keep the
data collection effort manageable, we download all the headlines for one large broker and hand match the firm
names in the titles of the reports to CRSP. We end up with a large sample of 85,525 reports and we regress the
number of pages in these reports on a bad times dummy and firm-level control variables.14 We add the firm
characteristics market Beta, Size quintile (based on NYSE breakpoints), B/M quintile, Momentum quintile, and
Stock Volatility (standard deviation of last month’s daily returns) as controls. We also add dummy variables
indicating when the report is issued within a trading day of an earnings announcement and an earnings guidance
event. These reports might be of a different length because they contain additional information about the
announcement in addition to the analyst’s own analysis.

13

The increased activity of analysts means that analysts have less time between the earnings forecasts that they issue. If
becoming busier affects the accuracy of their forecasts, it may be important to control for analyst busyness in our forecast
error regressions. In unreported results, we add a new control variable, the log of the number of firms covered by the
analyst. Not only are our results unaffected, this control variable is never statistically significant.
14
This number of reports from just one broker seems large in relation to our full sample because the Thomson research
report databases contain all analyst reports including reiterations while databases such as I/B/E/S and First Call typically
excludes reiterations (see e.g., Brav and Lehavy (2003)). We do not observe in the downloaded spreadsheets whether a
report is a reiteration. However, because reiterations often occur on firm news days, we tried excluding all reports that
occur on earnings announcement dates and earnings guidance dates (about two-thirds of the sample is left) and we get
similar results that reports in bad times are longer.

33

Table 12 reports these results. Looking at model 1, we see that the average report length is 10.237 pages. In
Crisis times however, the report length increases by 1.336 pages, a 13% increase. This shows that a typical
report issued in bad times contains more information. After we add control variables in model 2, the results
remain robust and the report is longer by 1.552 pages (an increase from the good times predicted number of
pages, 10.220). Note that one of the controls is the firm’s recent volatility of daily stock returns, which shows
that the larger number of pages is not due to larger firm-specific volatility but due to the macroeconomic bad
times. For all the other definitions of bad times, except for the Recession definition, we see similar evidence of
longer reports in bad times. The overall evidence of longer reports is consistent with the analyst exerting more
effort in incorporating more information in the report and provides an explanation for why reports have more
impact in bad times.15
In unreported tests, we also looked at the competition faced by analysts. The literature shows that the quality
of analyst output is higher where analysts face more competition (e.g., Hong and Kacperczyk (2010) and
Merkley et al. (2016)). If analysts have incentives to work harder in bad times, this means that competition will
be more intense. This suggests that in bad times analysts will have stronger incentives to improve their output in
industries with more competition. We find strong evidence supporting that hypothesis for downgrades but not
upgrades. For downgrades, competition is associated with a significantly greater impact of downgrades across
all definitions of bad times and irrespective of whether we use controls (including industry fixed effects) or not.
Overall, results in this section show that analysts are more likely to lose their jobs in bad times and analysts
partly react to the increased possibility of losing their job by working harder. Evidence of increased effort comes
from their more frequent forecast revisions, their longer reports, and from the fact that the increased impact is
higher in industries where analysts compete more.

15
Li (2008) finds that managers also provide longer reports in bad times. Longer reports might not always mean better
quality and quantity of information as Loughran and McDonald (2014) show that length might reduce readability of
financial reports. De Franco, Hope, Vyas, and Zhou (2015) also suggest that long analyst reports are less readable although
they do not find that report length is negatively related to price impact. However, our evidence of greater length in the
analyst reports is accompanied by evidence of the increased impact of the reports, which is consistent with better and more
information in the reports.

34

6.3.

Do analysts have different skills in bad times?
Recent work in the mutual fund literature finds that managers use different skills in bad times compared to

good times (see Kacperczyk et al. (2015)). Specifically, in bad times, market-timing skills are more valuable
than stock-picking skills because common factors that affect stock returns are more important for generating
alpha in bad times. If the analysts also follow this change of skill emphasis, they might produce more of the type
of information that is valuable across firms in bad times. There is some evidence that analysts have ability to
predict industry returns (e.g., Howe et al. (2009) and Kadan et al. (2012)) and that analyst coverage at the
industry level has spillover effects to the firm level (Merkley et al. (2016)). A simple way to detect the presence
of common information is to examine whether their recommendation revisions on a firm spills over more to the
other covered firms in bad times compared to good times.
We form for each recommendation change a portfolio of peer firms consisting of firms that the analyst has
issued a recommendation on in the last one year. We then measure the CAR of these peer firms (equally
weighting the CAR for all peers) around the recommendation change, excluding peers that also receive a
recommendation from the same analyst on the same date. A typical recommendation change is associated with
about ten peer firms in our sample. Table 13 reports regressions using this average peer CAR as the dependent
variable. Looking at model 1’s intercept coefficient, we find that downgrades in non-Crisis times are associated
with a CAR of -0.054% (t=3.37) for the peer firms. This shows that revisions do spill over to other firms
covered by the same analyst. We are interested to know whether this spillover effect increases in bad times.
Indeed, we see that the coefficient on Crisis is -0.104% (t=1.78)—evidence of a larger spillover for downgrades
in bad times, albeit significant only at the 10% level. When we estimate a regression with all the relevant
controls and industry fixed effects, the difference remains significant at -0.105% (t=1.71). We get stronger and
more significant results with the Credit Crisis and Recession definitions, which show that there is some
evidence of greater spillover of downgrades to peer firms during bad times. Next we examine upgrades in
models 9-16. We see that although upgrades spill over positively to peer firms in good times (e.g. 0.110% for
the non-Crisis definition of good times), there is no evidence that bad times increase this spillover effect.

35

We find some evidence showing that negative information produced by analysts during bad times contains a
common component. This offers some support for the hypothesis that analysts display different skills in bad
times.
6.4.

Potential analyst conflicts of interests
A possible explanation for the greater impact of analysts is that in bad times potential conflicts of interest

are less important. To investigate this hypothesis, we examine the impact of bad times on an analyst’s optimistic
bias. If bad times reduce investment banking conflicts and if the optimistic bias can be attributed to conflicts of
interest, we should find that analyst forecast optimism goes down in bad times. We estimate a regression with
the dependent variable being the signed forecast error, which is the signed version of our absolute forecast error
regressions in Table 8. We find in unreported results that the forecast error when scaled by the absolute value of
actual earnings, is mostly insignificantly different in bad times compared to good times. When we scale the
forecast error by prior volatility, analysts are actually more optimistic in bad times than in good times. Hence
there is little evidence for the conflicts of interest hypothesis that analysts are less optimistic in bad times.
We also identify the subset of brokers that have no investment banking business and compare the bad times
impact of their analysts to impact of analysts of brokers with underwriting business. Using the I/B/E/S broker
translation file to obtain the broker name, we search for information about the broker online to define a dummy
variable, Underwriter, which equals zero if we find unequivocal information that the broker is an independent
broker with no investment banking business, and one otherwise. We find that independent brokers are
responsible for about only 10% of the recommendation changes in our sample. If the reduction of conflicts of
interests is responsible for the increased impact of analysts in bad times, independent brokers might not
experience an increased impact given that they are not affected by the reduction of conflicts. We interact the bad
times dummies with Underwriter and re-estimate the downgrade and upgrade CAR impact regressions. In
unreported results, we find that in almost all cases, the coefficients on the bad times dummies are still strong and
significant, showing that independent brokers also have more impact during bad times. This is inconsistent with
the conflicts hypothesis. For the interaction terms between the underwriter indicator and bad times, there is some

36

evidence that brokers with underwriting business have a greater bad times impact than independent brokers in
about half of the specifications. While this seems to be supportive of the conflicts story, underwriter brokers also
have more impact in good times than independent brokers. Together, these results imply that brokers with
underwriting business are in general better than independent brokers, perhaps due to their larger size and
resources. Consequently, there seems to be little support for the conflicts of interest hypothesis in explaining
why analysts are more impactful during bad times.
6.5.

Does the market overreact to analysts in bad times?
Another explanation for the seemingly greater impact of analysts in bad times is that analysts are not really

more impactful but investors simply overreact to analysts. Such overreaction might stem from the reduction in
liquidity provision during bad times so that there is a greater price impact when investors trade in response to
recommendations. Or it could stem from arbitrageurs being more constrained in bad times so that they cannot
effectively trade against the overreaction by some investors.
To investigate this, we form daily-rebalanced calendar-time portfolios that buy stocks from trading day 2
following the revision to day 21, i.e. a one-month drift. We follow the standard approach in Barber, Lehavy, and
Trueman (2007) when computing average daily returns, in which one dollar is placed in each revision and the
weight of the revised stock varies from day 2 to day 21 according to its cumulative return since entering the
portfolio. The portfolio’s daily returns are compounded to monthly returns and regressed on the Carhart (1997)
four factors plus a dummy variable for bad times. The bad times dummy is also interacted with each of the four
factors to allow factor exposures to vary according to bad times. Consequently, the intercept measures the
revision drift in good times, and the bad times dummy identifies whether the drift in bad times is statistically
different from the good times drift. For each bad times definition we have four portfolios—recommendation
downgrades, recommendation upgrades, downward forecast revisions, and upward forecast revisions—a total of
16 portfolios.
In unreported results, we find that the intercepts of the regressions are all significantly negative for negative
revisions and significantly positive for positive revisions indicating that there is a stock-price drift to analyst

37

revisions in good times. Of interest is the coefficient on the bad times dummies and we find that this coefficient
is statistically insignificant for almost all portfolios. This is evidence that the drift in bad times is statistically
indistinguishable from the drift in good times. We also add up the intercept and the coefficient on bad times to
measure the stock-price drift of revisions during bad times. In all cases, we do not find any significant drift that
is in the opposite of the direction of the revision. Overall, we do not find evidence that the larger stock-price
impact of analysts in bad times is due to investor overreaction.

7.

Conclusion
We assemble a large sample of analysts’ earnings forecasts and recommendations from 1983-2014 and

examine the value of sell-side equity research in bad times. Using various definitions of bad times, we find that
analysts’ stock recommendation changes and earnings forecast revisions have more impact during bad times
compared to good times. We investigate the precision of analysts’ earnings forecasts and find that while they are
more imprecise using a traditional measure of forecast accuracy, a new measure of forecast accuracy which
adjusts for the increase in uncertainty shows that analysts are actually more precise during bad times. We
investigate various potential hypotheses to explain the increased impact of analysts in bad times and find that
analyst incentives leading to increased effort and a greater reliance of investors on analysts in bad times likely
explain these results. We also show that downgrades by analysts in bad times have an increased negative impact
on peer firms, indicating that analyst downgrades have a larger common sector component in bad times.
Alternative possible explanations hypothesizing reduced conflicts or interests or overreaction of investors to
analysts in bad times cannot account for our results. In sum, we show that analysts’ role in financial markets
increases in importance during bad times because they work harder to have more impact and investors rely more
on them.

38

References
Amiram, Dan, Wayne R. Landsman, Edward Owens, and Stephen R. Stubben, 2014, Analysts' forecasts during
periods of high market uncertainty, Working paper, Columbia University.
Arand, Daniel and Alexander G. Kerl, 2012, Analyst research and investor reactions: Evidence from the 2008
financial crisis, Working paper, University of Giessen.
Baker, Scott R., Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J. Davis, 2016, Measuring economic policy uncertainty, Quarterly
Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
Bali, Turan G., Nusret Cakici, and Robert F. Whitelaw, 2011, Maxing out: Stocks as lotteries and the crosssection of expected returns, Journal of Financial Economics 99, 427-446.
Barber, Brad M., Reuven Lehavy, Maureen McNichols, and Brett Trueman, 2001, Can investors profit from the
prophets? Security analysts' recommendations and stock returns, Journal of Finance 56, 531-563.
Barber, Brad M., Reuven Lehavy, and Brett Trueman, 2007, Comparing the stock recommendation performance
of investment banks and independent research firms, Journal of Financial Economics 85, 490-517.
Beber, Alessandro and Michael W. Brandt, 2010, When it cannot get better or worse: The asymmetric impact of
good and bad news on bond returns in expansions and recessions, Review of Finance 14, 119-155.
Bertrand, Marianne and Sendhil Mullainathan, 2001, Are CEOs rewarded for luck? The ones without principals
are, Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 901-932.
Bloom, Nicholas, 2009, The impact of uncertainty shocks, Econometrica 77, 623-685.
Boni, Leslie and Kent L. Womack, 2006, Analysts, industries, and price momentum, Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis 41, 85-109.
Bradley, Daniel, Jonathan Clarke, Suzanne Lee, and Chayawat Ornthanalai, 2014, Are analysts’
recommendations informative? Intraday evidence on the impact of time stamp delays, Journal of
Finance 69, 645-673.
Bradley, Daniel J., Bradford D. Jordan, and Jay R. Ritter, 2008, Analyst behavior following IPOs: The 'bubble
period' evidence, Review of Financial Studies 21, 101-133.
Brav, Alon and Reuven Lehavy, 2003, An Empirical Analysis of Analysts' Target Prices: Short-term
Informativeness and Long-term Dynamics, The Journal of Finance 58, 1933-1968.
Carhart, Mark M., 1997, On persistence in mutual fund performance, Journal of Finance 52, 57-82.
Chen, Shuping, Dawn Matsumoto, and Shiva Rajgopal, 2011, Is silence golden? An empirical analysis of firms
that stop giving quarterly earnings guidance, Journal of Accounting and Economics 51, 134-150.
Chopra, Vijay Kumar, 1998, Why so much error in analysts' earnings forecasts?, Financial Analysts Journal 54,
35-42.
Clement, Michael B., 1999, Analyst forecast accuracy: Do ability, resources and portfolio complexity matter?,
Journal of Accounting and Economics 27, 285-303.
Cooper, Rick A., Theodore E. Day, and Craig M. Lewis, 2001, Following the leader: A study of individual
analysts' earnings forecasts, Journal of Financial Economics 61, 383-416.
Daniel, Kent, Mark Grinblatt, Sheridan Titman, and Russ Wermers, 1997, Measuring mutual fund performance
with characteristic-based benchmarks, Journal of Finance 52, 1035-1058.
De Franco, Gus, Ole-Kristian Hope, Dushyantkumar Vyas, and Yibin Zhou, 2015, Analyst report readability,
Contemporary Accounting Research 32, 76-104.
Derrien, François and Ambrus Kecskés, 2013, The real effects of financial shocks: Evidence from exogenous
changes in analyst coverage, Journal of Finance 68, 1407–1440.
Diether, Karl B., Christopher J. Malloy, and Anna Scherbina, 2002, Differences of opinion and the cross-section
of stock returns, Journal of Finance 57, 2113-2141.
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns of stocks and bonds, Journal
of Financial Economics 33, 3-56.
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1997, Industry costs of equity, Journal of Financial Economics 43,
153-193.
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 2006, The value premium and the CAPM, Journal of Finance 61,
2163-2185.

39

Fang, Lily H. and Ayako Yasuda, 2014, Are stars' opinions worth more? The relation between analyst reputation
and recommendation values, Journal of Financial Services Research 46, 235-269.
Fong, Kingsley Y. L., Harrison G. Hong, Marcin T. Kacperczyk, and Jeffrey D. Kubik, 2014, Do security
analysts discipline credit rating agencies?, Working paper, Princeton University.
Frankel, Richard, S.P. Kothari, and Joseph Weber, 2006, Determinants of the informativeness of analyst
research, Journal of Accounting and Economics 41, 29-54.
Glode, Vincent, 2011, Why mutual funds “underperform”, Journal of Financial Economics 99, 546-559.
Han, Yufeng and David Lesmond, 2011, Liquidity biases and the pricing of cross-sectional idiosyncratic
volatility, Review of Financial Studies 24, 1590-1629.
Hirshleifer, David, Sonya Lim, and Siew Hong Teoh, 2009, Driven to distraction: Extraneous events and
underreaction to earnings news, Journal of Finance 64, 2289-2325.
Hong, Harrison and Marcin Kacperczyk, 2010, Competition and bias, Quarterly Journal of Economics 125,
1683-1725.
Hope, Ole-Kristian and Tony Kang, 2005, The association between macroeconomic uncertainty and analysts'
forecast accuracy, Journal of International Accounting Research 4, 23-38.
Howe, John S., Emre Unlu, and Xuemin (Sterling) Yan, 2009, The predictive content of aggregate analyst
recommendations, Journal of Accounting Research 47, 799-822.
Hutton, Amy P., Lian Fen Lee, and Susan Z. Shu, 2012, Do managers always know better? The relative
accuracy of management and analyst forecasts, Journal of Accounting Research 50, 1217-1244
Jacob, John, 1997, Discussion of do security analysts improve their performance with experience?, Journal of
Accounting Research 35, 159-166.
Kacperczyk, Marcin and Amit Seru, 2007, Fund manager use of public information: New evidence on
managerial skills, Journal of Finance 62, 485-528.
Kacperczyk, Marcin, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, and Laura Veldkamp, 2014, Time-varying fund manager skill,
Journal of Finance 69, 1455-1484.
Kacperczyk, Marcin, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, and Laura Veldkamp, 2015, A rational theory of mutual funds'
attention allocation, Econometrica, forthcoming.
Kadan, Ohad, Leonardo Madureira, Rong Wang, and Tzachi Zach, 2012, Analysts' industry expertise, Journal
of Accounting and Economics 54, 95-120.
Kecskés, Ambrus, Roni Michaely, and Kent L. Womack, 2016, Do earnings estimates add value to sell-side
analysts' investment recommendations?, Management Science, forthcoming.
Kelly, Bryan and Alexander Ljungqvist, 2012, Testing asymmetric-information asset pricing models, Review of
Financial Studies 25 1366-1413.
Li, Feng, 2008, Annual report readability, current earnings, and earnings persistence, Journal of Accounting and
Economics 45, 221-247.
Lim, Terrence, 2001, Rationality and analysts' forecast bias, Journal of Finance 56, 369-385.
Ljungqvist, Alexander, Christopher J. Malloy, and Felicia C. Marston, 2009, Rewriting history, Journal of
Finance 64, 1935-1960.
Loh, Roger K. and G. Mujtaba Mian, 2006, Do accurate earnings forecasts facilitate superior investment
recommendations?, Journal of Financial Economics 80, 455-483.
Loh, Roger K. and René M. Stulz, 2011, When are analyst recommendation changes influential?, Review of
Financial Studies 24, 593-627.
Loughran, Tim and Bill McDonald, 2014, Measuring readability in financial disclosures, Journal of Finance 69,
1540-6261.
Mehran, Hamid and René M. Stulz, 2007, The economics of conflicts of interest in financial institutions,
Journal of Financial Economics 85, 267-296.
Merkley, Kenneth, Roni Michaely, and Joseph Pacelli, 2016, Does the scope of the sell-side analyst industry
matter? An examination of bias, accuracy, and information content of analyst reports, Journal of
Finance, forthcoming.
Michaely, Roni and Kent L. Womack, 1999, Conflict of interest and the credibility of underwriter analyst
recommendations, Review of Financial Studies 12, 653-686.

40

Mikhail, Michael B., Beverly R. Walther, and Richard H. Willis, 1997, Do security analysts improve their
performance with experience?, Journal of Accounting Research 35, 131-157.
Pastor, Lubos and Pietro Veronesi, 2009, Learning in financial markets, Annual Review of Financial Economics
1, 361-381.
Roll, Richard, 1988, R2, Journal of Finance 43, 1540-6261.
Schmalz, Martin C. and Sergey Zhuk, 2015, Revealing downturns, Working paper, University of Michigan.
Veronesi, Pietro, 1999, Stock market overreactions to bad news in good times: A rational expectations
equilibrium model, Review of Financial Studies 12, 975-1007.
Womack, Kent L., 1996, Do brokerage analysts' recommendations have investment value?, Journal of Finance
51, 137-167.

41

Table 1: Change in uncertainty during bad times and descriptive statistics of recommendation
change sample
Panel A reports the average daily VIX over bad times from 1990-2014. Panel B reports the average annualized implied volatility (Implvol,
from 1996-2014) for the recommendation change sample measured five trading days before the recommendation event. Implied volatility
is from the Option Metrics Volatility Surface file using the average of the interpolated implied volatility from puts and calls with 30 days
to expiration and a delta of 50. A recommendation change is defined as an analyst’s current rating minus her prior outstanding rating
(initiations and reiterations are excluded) and changes made around earnings announcement and guidance days, and on multiplerecommendation days are excluded. Bad times definitions are as follows: Crisis: Sep-Nov 1987 (1987 crisis), Aug-Dec 1998 (LTCM), or
Jul 2007-Mar 2009 (Credit Crisis). Recession represents NBER recessions, namely: Jul 1990-Mar 1991, Mar 2001-Nov 2001, and Dec
2007-Jun 2009. High Uncertainty represents the highest tercile (over the period 1983-2014) of the Baker et al. (2016) uncertainty index.
In parentheses are t-statistics (based on standard errors clustered by calendar day), where *, **, and *** denote statistical significance of
the differences in VIX/implied volatility at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively. Panel C reports the descriptive statistics of the
recommendation change sample by downgrades and upgrades for Crisis and non-Crisis periods. CAR (in percent) is the average day [0,1]
cumulative abnormal return, where the benchmark is the return from a characteristics-matched DGTW portfolio. LFR is the analyst’s
prior-year leader-follower ratio (computed from recommendations), Star Analyst is a dummy indicating the analyst is a star in the most
recent Institutional Investor poll, Experience is the analyst’s experience (in quarters), Accuracy Quintile is the average forecast accuracy
quintile of the analyst’s past-year’s covered firms (quintile 5=most accurate), Broker Size is the number of analysts employed, # Analysts
is the number of analysts covering the firm, Size is last June’s market cap, BM is the book-to-market ratio, and Momentum is the month t12 to t-2 buy-and-hold return, and Stock Volatility is the month t-1 volatility of daily stock returns.
Panel A: VIX
Average daily VIX (%)
Bad times definition
Variable
Difference
Bad times
Good times
Crisis
VIX
31.339
18.865
12.474***(21.56)
#obs
547
5752
Credit Crisis
VIX
31.261
19.096
12.165***(17.39)
#obs
441
5858
Recession
VIX
29.899
18.558
11.341***(26.50)
#obs
772
5527
VIX
High Uncertainty
24.172
17.870
6.302***(27.01)
#obs
2205
3882
Panel B: Implied volatility before recommendation changes
Bad times definition

Rec-change

Variable

Crisis

Downgrade

Implvol
#obs
Implvol
#obs
Implvol
#obs
Implvol
#obs
Implvol
#obs
Implvol
#obs
Implvol
#obs
Implvol
#obs

Upgrade
Credit Crisis

Downgrade
Upgrade

Recession

Downgrade
Upgrade

High Uncertainty

Downgrade
Upgrade

Bad times
61.024
8522
57.961
7828
61.523
7070
58.308
6668
67.361
8634
63.812
7393
55.164
20678
52.432
19319

42

Option-implied volatility in annualized %
Good times
Difference
48.896
12.128***
(12.08)
38218
47.311
10.650***
(11.24)
37990
49.251
12.272***
(10.46)
39670
47.567
10.741***
(9.93)
39150
47.425
19.936***
(22.86)
38106
46.305
17.506***
(21.80)
38425
47.889
7.275***
(11.35)
26062
46.723
5.709***
(10.17)
26499

Table 1 (Cont’d)
Panel C: Descriptive statistics of the recommendations change sample
Mean

Full sample
Stdev

CAR(%)
LFR
Star Analyst
Experience (#qtrs)
Accuracy Quintile
Broker Size (# analysts)
# Analysts per firm
Size ($m)
BM
Momentum
Stock Volatility

-1.822
2.377
0.130
27.33
2.980
50.82
9.642
7,940
0.512
0.132
0.031

6.852
2.880
0.336
20.53
0.429
49.33
6.397
25,124
0.636
0.671
0.022

CAR(%)
LFR
Star Analyst
Experience (#qtrs)
Accuracy Quintile
Broker Size (# analysts)
# Analysts per firm
Size ($m)
BM
Momentum
Stock Volatility

2.123
2.379
0.139
27.89
2.981
51.86
10.083
8,591
0.536
0.201
0.029

6.095
2.771
0.346
20.78
0.417
48.96
6.344
25,266
0.730
0.714
0.020

Variables

Bad times: Crisis periods
#Obs
Mean
Stdev
#Obs
Downgrades sample
71,070
-2.678
9.216
9,648
66,386
2.307
2.930
9,052
71,070
0.109
0.312
9,648
71,070
28.17
20.16
9,648
63,974
2.986
0.401
8,661
71,070
50.93
54.27
9,648
71,070
9.288
5.819
9,648
71,070
9,372
27,443
9,648
71,070
0.454
0.436
9,648
71,070
-0.048
0.530
9,648
71,069
0.041
0.026
9,648
Upgrades sample
67,425
2.658
6.768
8,688
63,493
2.310
2.859
8,203
67,425
0.116
0.320
8,688
67,425
28.57
20.17
8,688
60,759
2.989
0.390
7,838
67,425
50.57
53.28
8,688
67,425
9.640
5.736
8,688
67,425
10,306
28,733
8,688
67,425
0.459
0.387
8,688
67,425
0.047
0.584
8,688
67,424
0.036
0.024
8,688

43

Good times: Non-Crisis periods
Mean
Stdev
#Obs
-1.687
2.388
0.133
27.20
2.979
50.80
9.697
7,716
0.521
0.160
0.029

6.392
2.872
0.340
20.58
0.433
48.51
6.481
24,733
0.661
0.686
0.020

61,422
57,334
61,422
61,422
55,313
61,422
61,422
61,422
61,422
61,422
61,421

2.044
2.389
0.143
27.79
2.980
52.05
10.149
8,337
0.547
0.224
0.027

5.985
2.757
0.350
20.87
0.420
48.29
6.426
24,703
0.767
0.729
0.019

58,737
55,290
58,737
58,737
52,921
58,737
58,737
58,737
58,737
58,737
58,736

Table 2: Recommendation impact and influential likelihood in bad times
Two-day CAR (in percent) is the average day [0,1] cumulative abnormal return and Influential Probability is the percentage of influential
recommendation changes. Influential changes are those whose two-day CARs are in the same direction as the recommendation change
and is 1.96 times larger than expected based on the prior three-month idiosyncratic volatility of the stock (following Loh and Stulz
(2011)). The benchmark return for the CAR is the return from a characteristics-matched DGTW portfolio. The sample is from 1993-2014.
A recommendation change is defined as an analyst’s current rating minus her prior outstanding rating (initiations and reiterations are
excluded) and changes made around earnings announcement and guidance days, and on multiple-recommendation days are excluded.
Bad times definitions are as follows: Crisis: Sep-Nov 1987 (1987 crisis), Aug-Dec 1998 (LTCM), or Jul 2007-Mar 2009 (Credit Crisis).
Recession represents NBER recessions, namely: Jul 1990-Mar 1991, Mar 2001-Nov 2001, and Dec 2007-Jun 2009. High Uncertainty
represents the highest tercile (over the period 1983-2014) of the Baker et al. (2016) uncertainty index. In parentheses are t-statistics based
on standard errors clustered by calendar day, where *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.
Two-day CAR (%)
Influential Probability (%)
Bad times
Rec-changes
Variable
definition
Bad times Good times Difference
Bad times
Good times
Difference
Crisis
Downgrades
Percent
-2.678*** -1.687***
-0.991***
15.278***
11.681***
3.596***
t-stat
(-25.72)
(-55.18)
(-9.14)
(31.72)
(71.51)
(7.08)
#obs
9648
61422
9648
61422
Upgrades
Percent
2.658*** 2.044***
0.614***
16.494***
13.564***
2.930***
t-stat
(27.86)
(68.19)
(6.15)
(24.48)
(77.86)
(4.21)
#obs
8688
58737
8688
58737
Credit Crisis
Downgrades
Percent
-2.925*** -1.686***
-1.239***
16.273***
11.664***
4.609***
t-stat
(-27.79)
(-54.70)
(-11.31)
(30.48)
(72.27)
(8.27)
#obs
7792
63278
7792
63278
Upgrades
Percent
2.804*** 2.041***
0.764***
17.378***
13.527***
3.852***
t-stat
(26.15)
(68.76)
(6.87)
(22.16)
(78.70)
(4.80)
#obs
7262
60163
7262
60163
Recession
Downgrades
Percent
-2.813*** -1.665***
-1.148***
13.589***
11.945***
1.644***
t-stat
(-28.39)
(-54.31)
(-11.08)
(29.72)
(71.91)
(3.38)
#obs
9714
61356
9714
61356
Upgrades
Percent
2.992*** 2.003***
0.989***
14.877***
13.813***
1.064*
t-stat
(23.61)
(72.06)
(7.63)
(24.89)
(76.32)
(1.70)
#obs
8147
59278
8147
59278
High Uncertainty Downgrades
Percent
-2.134*** -1.638***
-0.495***
13.761***
11.073***
2.688***
t-stat
(-38.84)
(-45.55)
(-7.55)
(51.39)
(57.77)
(8.16)
#obs
26292
43059
26292
43059
Upgrades
Percent
2.290*** 2.029***
0.261***
14.989***
13.115***
1.873***
t-stat
(50.47)
(52.86)
(4.40)
(49.25)
(61.10)
(5.03)
#obs
24038
41478
24038
41478

44

Table 3: Panel regression of recommendation CAR in bad times
The panel regressions estimate the effect of bad times on recommendation downgrade and upgrade two-day CARs (in percent) controlling for recommendation, firm, and analyst
characteristics. The benchmark return for the CAR is the return from a characteristics-matched DGTW portfolio. The sample is from 1993-2014. A recommendation change is defined as an
analyst’s current rating minus her prior outstanding rating (initiations and reiterations are excluded) and changes made around earnings announcement and guidance days, and on multiplerecommendation days are excluded. Bad times definitions are as follows: Crisis: Sep-Nov 1987 (1987 crisis), Aug-Dec 1998 (LTCM), or Jul 2007-Mar 2009 (Credit Crisis). Recession
represents NBER recessions, namely: Jul 1990-Mar 1991, Mar 2001-Nov 2001, and Dec 2007-Jun 2009. High Uncertainty represents the highest tercile (over the period 1983-2014) of the
Baker et al. (2016) uncertainty index. LFR is the analyst’s prior-year leader-follower ratio (computed from recommendations), Star Analyst is from the Institutional Investor poll, Relative
Experience is the difference between the analyst’s experience (in quarters) against the average of peers covering the same firm, Accuracy Quintile is the average forecast accuracy quintile of
the analyst’s past-year’s covered firms (quintile 5=most accurate), Broker Size is the number of analysts employed, # Analysts is 1+ the number of analysts covering the firm, Size is last
June’s market cap, BM is the book-to-market ratio, and Momentum is the month t-12 to t-2 buy-and-hold return, and Stock Volatility is the month t-1 volatility of daily stock returns. In
parentheses are t-statistics based on standard errors clustered by calendar day, where *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively. Industry fixed effects
(F.E) rely on the Fama-French 30-industry groupings.
Dependent variable: CAR of downgrades
Dependent variable: CAR of upgrades
Variables
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
Crisis
-0.991***-0.998***
0.614*** 0.639***
(9.14)
(8.01)
(6.15) (5.19)
Credit Crisis
-1.239***-1.383***
0.764*** 0.878***
(11.31) (11.78)
(6.87) (6.23)
Recession
-1.148***-1.018***
0.989*** 0.838***
(11.08) (8.61)
(7.63)
(5.96)
High Uncertainty
-0.495***-0.557***
0.261*** 0.383***
(7.55)
(7.68)
(4.40) (5.86)
LFR
-0.036***
-0.036***
-0.035***
-0.033**
0.026***
0.026***
0.026***
0.025***
(2.81)
(2.82)
(2.75)
(2.54)
(3.19)
(3.18)
(3.15)
(2.99)
Star Analyst
-0.173**
-0.174**
-0.168**
-0.209**
0.048
0.048
0.046
0.082
(2.15)
(2.16)
(2.08)
(2.56)
(0.37)
(0.37)
(0.35)
(0.63)
Relative Experience
-0.007***
-0.007***
-0.007***
-0.007***
0.010***
0.010***
0.010***
0.009***
(4.01)
(3.94)
(3.95)
(3.84)
(6.15)
(6.11)
(6.15)
(5.74)
Accuracy Quintile
-0.234***
-0.234***
-0.239***
-0.222***
0.299***
0.293***
0.298***
0.301***
(3.54)
(3.53)
(3.61)
(3.32)
(4.30)
(4.21)
(4.29)
(4.23)
Log Broker Size
-0.488***
-0.498***
-0.477***
-0.479***
0.523***
0.529***
0.517***
0.520***
(15.18)
(15.73)
(15.05)
(14.80)
(14.97)
(15.00)
(15.19)
(14.88)
Log # Analysts
0.214***
0.201***
0.233***
0.292***
-0.499***
-0.490***
-0.500***
-0.523***
(2.83)
(2.65)
(3.07)
(3.77)
(8.18)
(8.05)
(8.20)
(8.46)
Log Size
0.222***
0.236***
0.226***
0.206***
-0.365***
-0.372***
-0.376***
-0.357***
(8.58)
(9.35)
(8.95)
(8.02)
(15.18)
(15.54)
(14.79)
(14.70)
Log BM
0.135***
0.146***
0.132***
0.162***
0.045
0.041
0.043
0.031
(3.05)
(3.28)
(2.96)
(3.61)
(1.18)
(1.08)
(1.14)
(0.79)
Momentum
-0.126*
-0.131**
-0.155**
-0.094
-0.159***
-0.155***
-0.131**
-0.171***
(1.90)
(1.96)
(2.32)
(1.41)
(2.95)
(2.87)
(2.53)
(3.13)
Stock Volatility
-20.864***
-20.447***
-19.364***
-22.774***
27.134***
26.806***
24.983***
28.953***
(7.92)
(7.87)
(7.23)
(8.70)
(7.75)
(7.70)
(7.59)
(8.13)
Intercept
-1.687***-2.095*** -1.686***-2.219*** -1.665***-2.257*** -1.638***-1.953***
2.044*** 5.007*** 2.041*** 5.087*** 2.003*** 5.234*** 2.029*** 4.829***
(55.18) (5.33)
(54.70) (5.71)
(54.31) (5.79)
(45.55) (5.00)
(68.19) (13.37)
(68.76) (13.60)
(72.06) (13.48)
(52.86) (12.67)
Good times Ŷ -1.687 -1.761
-1.686 -1.745
-1.665 -1.754
-1.638 -1.693
2.044
2.140
2.041
2.127
2.003
2.118
2.029
2.088
#Obs
71070
59511
71070
59511
71070
59511
69351
58163
67425 56901
67425 56901
67425 56901
65516 55395
Adj R-Sq
0.0024 0.0199
0.0032 0.0213
0.0033 0.0199
0.0012 0.0194
0.0011 0.0432
0.0015 0.0439
0.0028 0.0438
0.0004 0.0427
Industry F.E. No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes

45

Table 4: Probit of recommendation influential probability in bad times
The probit regressions estimate the marginal effect (in percent) of bad times on the influential probability of the CAR for recommendation changes controlling for recommendation,
firm, and analyst characteristics. Influential changes are those whose two-day CARs are in the same direction as the recommendation change and is 1.96 times larger than expected
based on the prior three-month idiosyncratic volatility of the stock (following Loh and Stulz (2011)). The sample is from 1993-2014. A recommendation change is defined as an
analyst’s current rating minus her prior outstanding rating (initiations and reiterations are excluded) and changes made around earnings announcement days and on earnings
guidance days, and on multiple-recommendation days are excluded. Bad times definitions are as follows: Crisis: Sep-Nov 1987 (1987 crisis), Aug-Dec 1998 (LTCM), or Jul 2007Mar 2009 (Credit Crisis). Recession represents NBER recessions, namely: Jul 1990-Mar 1991, Mar 2001-Nov 2001, and Dec 2007-Jun 2009. High Uncertainty represents the
highest tercile (over the period 1983-2014) of the Baker et al. (2016) uncertainty index. LFR is the analyst’s prior-year leader-follower ratio (computed from recommendations),
Star Analyst is from the Institutional Investor poll, Relative Experience is the difference between the analyst’s experience (in quarters) against the average of peers covering the
same firm, Accuracy Quintile is the average forecast accuracy quintile of the analyst’s past-year’s covered firms (quintile 5=most accurate), Broker Size is the number of analysts
employed, # Analysts is 1+ the number of analysts covering the firm, Size is last June’s market cap, BM is the book-to-market ratio, and Momentum is the month t-12 to t-2 buyand-hold return, and Stock Volatility is the month t-1 volatility of daily stock returns. In parentheses are z-statistics based on standard errors clustered by calendar day, where *, **,
and *** denote statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively. Industry fixed effects rely on the Fama-French 30-industry groupings.
Dependent variable: Influential dummy for downgrades
Dependent variable: Influential dummy for upgrades
Variables
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
Crisis
0.036***0.065***
0.029*** 0.055***
(7.56) (12.02)
(4.45)
(8.03)
Credit Crisis
0.046***0.079***
0.039*** 0.067***
(9.00) (13.30)
(5.15)
(8.60)
Recession
0.016***0.048***
0.011* 0.042***
(3.49) (8.65)
(1.74) (6.29)
0.027***0.040***
0.019*** 0.032***
High Uncertainty
(8.30) (11.50)
(5.09)
(8.31)
LFR
0.001***
0.001***
0.001***
0.001***
0.001**
0.001**
0.001**
0.001**
(3.42)
(3.42)
(3.35)
(3.02)
(2.50)
(2.47)
(2.46)
(2.27)
Star Analyst
-0.002
-0.002
-0.003
0.000
-0.014***
-0.014***
-0.014***
-0.012***
(0.52)
(0.51)
(0.67)
(0.06)
(3.04)
(3.03)
(3.14)
(2.63)
Relative Experience
0.000***
0.000***
0.000***
0.000***
0.001***
0.001***
0.001***
0.001***
(4.46)
(4.41)
(4.44)
(3.77)
(6.86)
(6.86)
(6.90)
(5.71)
Accuracy Quintile
0.018***
0.018***
0.019***
0.017***
0.015***
0.015***
0.015***
0.016***
(5.56)
(5.58)
(5.65)
(5.19)
(4.20)
(4.12)
(4.25)
(4.49)
Log Broker Size
0.030***
0.030***
0.030***
0.029***
0.034***
0.035***
0.034***
0.034***
(19.61)
(19.85)
(19.14)
(18.76)
(19.73)
(19.82)
(19.48)
(19.71)
Log # Analysts
-0.006***
-0.007***
-0.006***
-0.006***
-0.051***
-0.050***
-0.052***
-0.051***
(5.12)
(5.41)
(4.77)
(4.76)
(15.12)
(15.05)
(15.32)
(15.02)
Log Size
-0.006***
-0.007***
-0.006***
-0.006***
-0.012***
-0.012***
-0.012***
-0.012***
(5.12)
(5.41)
(4.77)
(4.76)
(8.84)
(9.09)
(8.46)
(8.31)
Log BM
-0.005***
-0.005***
-0.005***
-0.007***
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.001
(2.70)
(2.95)
(2.72)
(3.64)
(1.13)
(1.01)
(0.98)
(0.26)
Momentum
0.008***
0.008***
0.008***
0.007***
-0.007**
-0.006**
-0.006**
-0.007***
(3.77)
(3.77)
(3.93)
(3.17)
(2.49)
(2.45)
(2.37)
(2.82)
Stock Volatility
-1.288***
-1.273***
-1.296***
-1.182***
-1.704***
-1.700***
-1.729***
-1.550***
(13.25)
(13.22)
(12.98)
(12.23)
(13.47)
(13.48)
(13.85)
(12.28)
Predicted Prob. 0.121
0.117
0.121
0.117
0.122
0.118
0.120
0.117
0.139
0.134
0.139
0.134
0.139 0.135
0.138
0.134
#Obs
71070 59511
71070 59511
71070 59511
69351 58163
67425
56901
67425
56901
67425 56901
65516
55395
Industry F.E. No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes

46

Table 5: Panel regression of forecast revision CAR in bad times
The panel regressions estimate the effect of bad times on earnings forecast revisions two-day CARs (in percent) controlling for forecast, firm, and analyst characteristics. The
benchmark return for the CAR is the return from a characteristics-matched DGTW portfolio. The sample is from 1983-2014. Forecast Revision is the analyst’s current one-quarterahead earnings forecast minus her prior outstanding forecast (i.e., initiations are excluded) scaled by price and revisions made around earnings announcement and guidance days,
and on multiple-forecast days are excluded. Bad times definitions are as follows: Crisis: Sep-Nov 1987 (1987 crisis), Aug-Dec 1998 (LTCM), or Jul 2007-Mar 2009 (Credit
Crisis). Recession represents NBER recessions, namely: Jul 1990-Mar 1991, Mar 2001-Nov 2001, and Dec 2007-Jun 2009. High Uncertainty represents the highest tercile (over
the period 1983-2014) of the Baker et al. (2016) uncertainty index. Other controls are as defined in Table 3. In parentheses are t-statistics based on standard errors clustered by
calendar day, where *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively. Industry fixed effects (F.E.) rely on the Fama-French 30-industry groupings.
Dependent variable: CAR of downward revisions
Dependent variable: CAR of upward revisions
Variables
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
Crisis
-0.398***-0.384***
0.198*** 0.170**
(6.50)
(5.49)
(2.79) (2.13)
Credit Crisis
-0.525***-0.533***
0.211***0.169*
(7.91)
(7.14)
(2.68) (1.96)
Recession
-0.323***-0.238***
0.108
0.019
(5.87)
(3.50)
(1.55) (0.23)
High Uncertainty
-0.070** -0.095***
0.021
0.013
(2.31)
(2.79)
(0.70) (0.39)
Forecast Revision
6.865*
6.785*
6.855*
6.547*
9.306
9.214
9.548
8.969
(1.81)
(1.79)
(1.81)
(1.72)
(1.18)
(1.17)
(1.21)
(1.12)
LFR
-0.025***
-0.024***
-0.026***
-0.027***
0.040***
0.040***
0.041***
0.042***
(4.31)
(4.17)
(4.56)
(4.61)
(6.05)
(6.03)
(6.12)
(6.18)
Star Analyst
0.025
0.021
0.034
0.035
-0.093***
-0.094***
-0.097***
-0.098***
(0.76)
(0.65)
(1.03)
(1.04)
(2.67)
(2.68)
(2.78)
(2.69)
Relative Experience
-0.001
-0.001
-0.001
-0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
(0.87)
(0.88)
(0.88)
(1.04)
(0.72)
(0.72)
(0.75)
(0.61)
Accuracy Quintile
-0.015
-0.015
-0.014
-0.004
0.040
0.040
0.039
0.037
(0.55)
(0.58)
(0.54)
(0.17)
(1.45)
(1.45)
(1.42)
(1.29)
Log Broker Size
-0.057***
-0.057***
-0.058***
-0.067***
0.052***
0.052***
0.053***
0.050***
(3.30)
(3.32)
(3.38)
(3.75)
(2.86)
(2.86)
(2.92)
(2.68)
Log # Analysts
0.096**
0.092**
0.108***
0.134***
-0.076*
-0.079*
-0.087**
-0.093**
(2.31)
(2.22)
(2.59)
(3.10)
(1.78)
(1.85)
(2.06)
(2.09)
Log Size
0.033**
0.039***
0.028**
0.019
-0.075***
-0.075***
-0.070***
-0.070***
(2.34)
(2.75)
(1.98)
(1.28)
(5.18)
(5.15)
(4.84)
(4.69)
Log BM
-0.019
-0.016
-0.018
-0.019
0.012
0.011
0.010
0.015
(0.85)
(0.73)
(0.81)
(0.83)
(0.53)
(0.51)
(0.43)
(0.63)
Momentum
0.040
0.034
0.043
0.069
0.073**
0.072**
0.067*
0.063*
(0.94)
(0.80)
(0.98)
(1.56)
(2.04)
(2.03)
(1.86)
(1.75)
Stock Volatility
-1.036
-0.438
-1.506
-3.383
4.416*
4.537*
5.057**
5.295**
(0.46)
(0.20)
(0.64)
(1.51)
(1.88)
(1.94)
(2.09)
(2.23)
Intercept
-0.294***-0.646***-0.288***-0.717***-0.296***-0.598***-0.323***-0.465**
0.439*** 1.234*** 0.441***1.231*** 0.447*** 1.184*** 0.453*** 1.205***
(20.46) (3.00)
(20.06) (3.36)
(20.35) (2.76)
(19.78) (2.14)
(31.41) (5.34)
(31.68) (5.33)
(32.34) (5.12)
(24.25) (5.10)
Good times Ŷ -0.294 -0.230 -0.288
-0.220 -0.296 -0.243 -0.323
-0.244
0.439
0.413
0.441
0.415
0.447
0.427
0.453
0.426
#Obs
172482 105097 172482 105097 172482 105097 164257 99663
112149 69773
112149 69773
112149 69773
107047 66470
Adj R-Sq
0.0009 0.0030 0.0013 0.0036 0.0007 0.0024 0.0001 0.0022
0.0002 0.0053 0.0002 0.0052 0.0001 0.0051 -0.0000 0.0051
Industry F.E. No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes

47

Table 6: Probit of forecast revision influential probability in bad times
The probit regressions estimate the marginal effect (in percent) of bad times on the influential probability of the CAR for earnings forecast revisions controlling for forecast, firm,
and analyst characteristics. Influential revisions are those whose two-day CARs are in the same direction as the revision and is 1.96 times larger than expected based on the prior
three-month idiosyncratic volatility of the stock (following Loh and Stulz (2011)). The sample is from 1983-2014. Forecast Revision is the analyst’s current one-quarter-ahead
earnings forecast minus her prior outstanding forecast (i.e., initiations are excluded) scaled by price and revisions made around earnings announcement and guidance days, and on
multiple-forecast days are excluded. Bad times definitions are as follows: Crisis: Sep-Nov 1987 (1987 crisis), Aug-Dec 1998 (LTCM), or Jul 2007-Mar 2009 (Credit Crisis).
Recession represents NBER recessions, namely: Jul 1990-Mar 1991, Mar 2001-Nov 2001, and Dec 2007-Jun 2009. High Uncertainty represents the highest tercile (over the period
1983-2014) of the Baker et al. (2016) uncertainty index. Forecast Revision is analyst’s current forecast minus her prior forecast, scaled by the stock price. Other controls are as
defined in Table 3. In parentheses are z-statistics based on standard errors clustered by calendar day, where *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%
respectively. Industry fixed effects (F.E.) rely on the Fama-French 30-industry groupings.
Dependent variable: Influential dummy for downward revisions
Dependent variable: Influential dummy for upward revisions
Variables
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
Crisis
0.025***0.036***
0.017*** 0.024***
(8.89) (10.96)
(5.85)
(6.57)
Credit Crisis
0.029***0.042***
0.020*** 0.025***
(9.25) (11.51)
(6.28)
(6.43)
Recession
0.016***0.028***
0.005* 0.010***
(6.16) (8.82)
(1.77) (2.63)
High Uncertainty
0.011***0.016***
0.004** 0.006***
(7.00) (9.28)
(2.57) (2.77)
Forecast Revision
-0.340***
-0.334***
-0.338***
-0.321***
0.740***
0.725***
0.746***
0.676**
(4.48)
(4.43)
(4.43)
(4.17)
(2.70)
(2.65)
(2.72)
(2.41)
LFR
0.001***
0.001***
0.001***
0.001***
0.001***
0.001***
0.001***
0.001***
(4.83)
(4.71)
(5.42)
(5.96)
(4.92)
(4.86)
(5.11)
(5.27)
Star Analyst
-0.000
-0.000
-0.001
-0.000
-0.001
-0.001
-0.002
-0.002
(0.17)
(0.13)
(0.61)
(0.05)
(0.61)
(0.60)
(0.83)
(0.67)
Relative Experience
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
(0.60)
(0.64)
(0.58)
(0.69)
(1.19)
(1.20)
(1.25)
(1.33)
Accuracy Quintile
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.001
0.003*
0.003*
0.003*
0.003*
(1.36)
(1.40)
(1.43)
(0.71)
(1.92)
(1.93)
(1.91)
(1.76)
Log Broker Size
0.003***
0.003***
0.003***
0.004***
0.004***
0.004***
0.004***
0.004***
(3.92)
(4.00)
(4.04)
(4.64)
(4.07)
(4.06)
(4.16)
(3.93)
Log # Analysts
-0.001*
-0.001**
-0.001
-0.001
-0.015***
-0.015***
-0.016***
-0.018***
(1.90)
(2.05)
(1.54)
(0.73)
(5.77)
(5.87)
(6.19)
(6.43)
Log Size
-0.001*
-0.001**
-0.001
-0.001
-0.003***
-0.003***
-0.003***
-0.002**
(1.90)
(2.05)
(1.54)
(0.73)
(3.57)
(3.51)
(3.02)
(2.48)
Log BM
-0.001
-0.002*
-0.002
-0.002**
-0.003**
-0.003**
-0.003**
-0.003**
(1.45)
(1.67)
(1.59)
(2.34)
(2.25)
(2.28)
(2.47)
(2.54)
Momentum
0.005***
0.005***
0.005***
0.002
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.000
(3.54)
(3.52)
(3.75)
(1.41)
(0.68)
(0.66)
(0.41)
(0.08)
Stock Volatility
-0.501***
-0.504***
-0.501***
-0.326***
-0.601***
-0.588***
-0.557***
-0.480***
(7.44)
(7.61)
(7.16)
(4.77)
(7.24)
(7.15)
(6.62)
(5.83)
Predicted Prob. 0.049
0.045
0.049
0.045
0.049
0.045
0.048
0.044
0.053
0.050
0.053
0.050
0.053 0.050
0.053 0.051
#Obs
172481 105097 172481 105097 172481 105097 164256 99663
112147 69773
112147 69773
112147 69773
107045 66470
Industry F.E. No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes

48

Table 7: Robustness tests
Panel A estimates the effect of high firm, industry, and market uncertainty on the two-day CAR (in percent) of recommendation changes. Control variables are estimated for even
specifications but not reported (see Table 3 for definitions of controls). A firm’s total variance of daily stock returns in the prior month is decomposed into a market, industry, and firm
part by regressing daily returns on market returns and a market-purged industry return (Fama-French 30 industry groups). High uncertainty equals one when the relevant component is in
the top tercile within the firm’s time-series of monthly variance components. Panel B estimates the effect of bad times on the two-day CARs (in percent) of recommendation reiterations.
The benchmark return for the CAR is the return from a characteristics-matched DGTW portfolio. The sample is from 1993-2014. A recommendation reiteration is either an explicit
reiteration from the I/B/E/S recommendation file, or an assumed reiteration that the analyst’s outstanding rating is reiterated when there is a quarterly earnings or target price forecast
with no new rating issued. Control variables (in even specifications but unreported) are the same as those in Table 3 plus forecast revision over price and target price over current price
when available or zero otherwise. Reiterations made around earnings announcement and guidance days and on multiple-reiteration days are excluded. Bad times definitions are as
follows: Crisis: Sep-Nov 1987 (1987 crisis), Aug-Dec 1998 (LTCM), or Jul 2007-Mar 2009 (Credit Crisis). Recession represents NBER recessions, namely: Jul 1990-Mar 1991, Mar
2001-Nov 2001, and Dec 2007-Jun 2009. High Uncertainty represents the highest tercile (over the period 1983-2014) of the Baker et al. (2016) uncertainty index. Panel C regresses the
daily absolute returns of firms in the CRSP file from 1993-2014 on firm news event dummies and bad times dummies, excluding observations where the lagged price is less than one
dollar. Event dummies equals one for day 0 of the announcement, or day 1 if the announcement occurs after trading hours (checking when we have the time stamps). Earnings
announcement dates are from Compustat and times from I/B/E/S, guidance events are from First Call Guidelines (I/B/E/S Guidance from 2011 onwards), dividend events are from the
CRSP event file, and insider trade events are from the Thomson Insider Form 4 file. Size, BM, and Momentum are as defined in Table 3. Other control variables Lag Return, Idio.
Volatility, Turnover, and Inst. Ownership are measured in the prior month. In parentheses are t-statistics based on standard errors clustered by calendar day, where *, **, and *** denote
statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively. Industry fixed effects (F.E.) rely on the Fama-French 30-industry groupings.
Panel A: Panel regression of recommendation change CAR on different measures of high uncertainty
Dependent variable: CAR of downgrades
Variables
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
High Firm Uncertainty -1.091*** 0.149
-0.932*** 0.061
(11.64) (1.08)
(9.93)
(0.44)
High Ind. Uncertainty
-0.297*** -0.004
0.001
0.012
(5.29)
(0.07)
(0.02)
(0.18)
High Mkt Uncertainty
-0.783*** -0.501*** -0.622*** -0.497***
(13.77) (6.81)
(10.71) (6.63)
Good times Ŷ
-1.590
-1.928 -1.703
-1.895 -1.471
-1.670
-1.345
-1.689
Observations
71067
59510 71067
59510 71067
59510
71067
59510
Adj R-Sq
0.0042
0.0177 0.0004
0.0176 0.0032
0.0187
0.0061
0.0186
Controls, Ind F.E.
No
Yes No
Yes No
Yes
No
Yes

Dependent variable: CAR of upgrades
(9)
(10) (11)
(12) (13)
(14)
(15)
1.707*** 0.266*
1.618***
(16.32) (1.86)
(15.28)
0.143*** 0.020
-0.199***
(2.69)
(0.30)
(3.90)
0.757*** 0.379*** 0.555***
(14.60) (5.01)
(9.90)
1.820
2.176 2.067
2.214 1.786
2.051
1.667
67424
56901 67424
56901 67424
56901
67424
0.0114
0.0422 0.0001 0.0421 0.0038 0.0428
0.0134
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No

Panel B: Panel regression of reiteration CAR in bad times
Dependent variable: CAR of unfavorable recommendation reiterations
Variables
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Crisis
-0.262***-0.173***
(5.72)
(3.78)
Credit Crisis
-0.293***-0.215***
(6.02)
(4.45)
Recession
-0.252***-0.164***
(5.36)
(3.42)
High Uncertainty
-0.090***-0.100***
(3.79)
(4.23)
Non-bad times Ŷ
-0.064
-0.076
-0.064
-0.073
-0.065
-0.077
-0.060
-0.056
Observations
248676 243190 248676 243190 248676 243190 237063 231964
Adj R-Sq
0.0004 0.0024 0.0005 0.0024 0.0004 0.0023 0.0001 0.0023
Controls, Ind. F.E.
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes

Dependent variable: CAR of favorable recommendation reiterations
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
-0.163*** -0.105**
(3.52)
(2.39)
-0.163*** -0.110**
(3.12)
(2.21)
-0.167*** -0.131***
(3.83)
(3.06)
-0.021
(0.91)
0.175
0.166
0.171
0.164
0.178
0.171
0.164
347922
339883 347922
339883 347922
339883
334452
0.0001
0.0023 0.0001
0.0023 0.0001
0.0023
0.0000
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No

49

(16)
0.347**
(2.44)
0.012
(0.19)
0.404***
(5.20)
1.975
56901
0.0430
Yes

(16)

-0.029
(1.29)
0.164
326827
0.0023
Yes

Table 7 (Cont’d)
Panel C: Regression of firm-day absolute returns on firm news events and bad times
Variables
Crisis
0.432***
(15.96)
Recchg Dum
2.020***
(97.96)
Reiteration Dum
0.704***
(91.30)
Earn Annc Dum
1.221***
(80.29)
Guidance Dum
1.730***
(44.26)
Dividend Dum
-0.138***
(17.09)
Insider Trade Dum
-0.099***
(13.88)
Insider File Dum
0.261***
(43.27)
BadTimes×Recchg Dum 0.503*** 0.439***
(6.79)
(6.70)
BadTimes×Reiteration Dum
BadTimes

0.471***
(11.75)
1.656***
(67.10)

BadTimes×Earn Annc Dum
BadTimes×Guidance Dum
BadTimes×Dividend Dum
BadTimes×Insider Trade Dum
BadTimes×Insider File Dum
Log Size
Log BM
Momentum
Lag Return
Idio. Volatility
Turnover
Inst. Ownership
Intercept
# Observations
Ind. F.E.
Adj R-Sq

-0.194***
(117.79)
-0.123***
(54.57)
-0.014***
(2.73)
-1.157***
(41.93)
35.031***
(110.75)
-4.391***
(19.16)
-0.530***
(64.62)
2.381*** 3.865***
(237.99) (139.36)
2.11e+07 2.01e+07
Yes
Yes
0.0158
0.1344

0.411***
(15.19)
2.028***
(98.84)
0.672***
(86.11)
1.191***
(76.37)
1.753***
(41.90)
-0.149***
(18.09)
-0.101***
(13.61)
0.253***
(44.46)
0.370***
(5.96)
0.259***
(8.46)
0.319***
(5.43)
-0.254**
(2.20)
0.113***
(3.27)
0.005
(0.18)
0.081***
(2.61)
-0.194***
(117.83)
-0.123***
(54.61)
-0.014***
(2.72)
-1.156***
(41.94)
35.030***
(110.76)
-4.412***
(19.27)
-0.530***
(64.55)
3.865***
(139.41)
2.01e+07
Yes
0.1344

0.185***
(4.31)
1.652***
(67.90)

0.726***
(9.11)

2.413***
(235.87)
2.11e+07
Yes
0.0144

Dependent variable: Firm-day absolute returns
Bad times definition used
Credit Crisis
Recession
0.380*** 0.353*** 0.517*** 0.416*** 0.395***
(11.83)
(10.98)
(16.24) (15.83)
(15.10)
2.022*** 2.030*** 1.630*** 2.002*** 2.012***
(99.15)
(99.91)
(66.95) (98.71)
(99.69)
0.702*** 0.660***
0.701*** 0.662***
(90.86)
(85.75)
(91.18)
(84.57)
1.220*** 1.197***
1.220*** 1.195***
(79.28)
(75.44)
(79.80)
(75.77)
1.729*** 1.808***
1.726*** 1.746***
(44.18)
(42.41)
(44.31)
(40.76)
-0.138*** -0.155***
-0.136*** -0.140***
(17.17)
(19.05)
(16.85)
(16.96)
-0.101*** -0.104***
-0.094*** -0.099***
(14.03)
(13.88)
(13.03)
(13.20)
0.262*** 0.262***
0.259*** 0.256***
(43.12)
(41.88)
(42.74)
(41.01)
0.516*** 0.430*** 0.712*** 0.592*** 0.509***
(7.20)
(6.38)
(9.49)
(8.69)
(7.82)
0.407***
0.296***
(13.40)
(10.69)
0.367***
0.249***
(5.87)
(4.32)
-0.888***
-0.187*
(10.48)
(1.92)
0.203***
0.043
(5.28)
(1.25)
0.036
0.044
(1.46)
(1.51)
-0.003
0.030
(0.12)
(1.36)
-0.193*** -0.192***
-0.196*** -0.196***
(118.10) (118.12)
(117.40) (117.41)
-0.125*** -0.125***
-0.128*** -0.128***
(55.34)
(55.38)
(58.79)
(58.74)
-0.018*** -0.018***
-0.010** -0.010**
(3.57)
(3.56)
(2.04)
(2.03)
-1.177*** -1.176***
-1.172*** -1.171***
(41.86)
(41.87)
(41.87)
(41.90)
35.324*** 35.317***
34.846*** 34.842***
(110.89) (110.90)
(107.69) (107.74)
-4.548*** -4.573***
-4.248*** -4.277***
(19.96)
(20.08)
(18.59)
(18.76)
-0.533*** -0.533***
-0.520*** -0.520***
(68.99)
(68.85)
(59.34)
(59.31)
3.857*** 3.858*** 2.375*** 3.892*** 3.893***
(138.54) (138.60)
(228.36) (137.57) (137.62)
2.01e+07 2.01e+07 2.11e+07 2.01e+07 2.01e+07
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.1338
0.1339
0.0163
0.1343
0.1344

50

High Uncertainty
-0.179*** 0.098*** 0.090***
(7.78)
(7.30)
(6.67)
1.506*** 1.936*** 1.947***
(50.09)
(75.37)
(76.95)
0.693*** 0.606***
(87.24)
(62.70)
1.227*** 1.190***
(78.59)
(66.90)
1.780*** 2.069***
(44.15)
(35.78)
-0.135*** -0.142***
(16.11)
(14.16)
-0.100*** -0.106***
(13.59)
(11.50)
0.262*** 0.267***
(41.91)
(35.55)
0.575*** 0.353*** 0.320***
(12.11)
(8.48)
(8.06)
0.219***
(12.58)
0.131***
(3.66)
-0.703***
(8.87)
0.020
(1.07)
0.015
(0.95)
-0.016
(1.23)
-0.193*** -0.193***
(115.07) (115.12)
-0.132*** -0.132***
(60.08)
(60.06)
-0.025*** -0.025***
(4.82)
(4.81)
-1.210*** -1.209***
(42.45)
(42.46)
35.788*** 35.787***
(109.44) (109.47)
-4.473*** -4.507***
(18.66)
(18.81)
-0.497*** -0.497***
(54.26)
(54.14)
2.512*** 3.827*** 3.829***
(224.73) (133.76) (133.92)
2.05e+07 1.95e+07 1.95e+07
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.0148
0.1326
0.1327

Table 8: Absolute forecast error in bad times
The panel regressions estimate the effect of bad times on an analyst’s absolute forecast error (in percent). Absolute forecast error is actual minus forecasted earnings, divided by the
absolute value of actual earnings (models 1-8) (denominators less than $0.25 are set to $0.25), or divided by the daily stock return volatility (annualized) in the month before the forecast
(models 9-16). Forecast errors are winsorized at the extreme 1% before taking absolute values. Bad times are as defined in Table 1. Optimistic Forecast is an indicator variable equal to
one if the forecast is above the final consensus, LFR is the analyst’s prior-year leader-follower ratio (computed from forecasts), Star Analyst is from the Institutional Investor poll,
Relative Experience is the difference between the analyst’s experience (in quarters) against the average of peers covering the same firm, Accuracy Quintile is the average forecast
accuracy quintile of the analyst’s past-year’s covered firms (quintile 5=most accurate), Days to Annc is the number of days from the forecast to the earnings announcement date, Multiple
Forecast Day is a dummy indicating that more than one analyst issued a forecast on that day, Broker Size is the number of analysts employed, # Analysts is 1+ the number of analysts
covering the firm, Size is last June’s market cap, BM is the book-to-market ratio, Momentum is the month t-12 to t-2 buy-and-hold return, and Dispersion is the dispersion of forecasts
making up the final consensus. In parentheses are t-statistics based on standard errors clustered by industry-quarter (Fama-French 30 industries), where *, **, and *** denote statistical
significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively. Industry fixed effects (F.E.) rely on the Fama-French 30-industry groupings.
Dependent variable: Absolute forecast error scaled by absolute value of actual earnings
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Crisis
2.775*** 2.952***
(5.11)
(6.96)
Credit Crisis
3.341*** 3.626***
(5.49)
(7.81)
Recession
2.807*** 2.985***
(5.11)
(7.14)
High Uncertainty
1.128*** 0.996***
(4.01)
(4.41)
Optimistic Forecast
-0.090
-0.104
-0.075
-0.064
(0.80)
(0.93)
(0.66)
(0.55)
LFR
-0.209***
-0.212***
-0.203***
-0.196***
(14.17)
(14.39)
(13.75)
(13.03)
Star Analyst
0.793***
0.808***
0.764***
0.868***
(6.72)
(6.85)
(6.47)
(7.20)
Relative Experience
-0.008***
-0.008***
-0.008***
-0.008***
(4.29)
(4.31)
(4.27)
(4.10)
Accuracy Quintile
-0.801***
-0.798***
-0.794***
-0.787***
(11.19)
(11.17)
(11.11)
(10.68)
Log Days to Annc
1.219***
1.232***
1.220***
1.207***
(19.01)
(19.07)
(19.05)
(18.47)
Mutiple Forecast Day
-1.561***
-1.551***
-1.596***
-1.569***
(14.33)
(14.25)
(14.49)
(13.93)
Log Broker Size
-0.305***
-0.300***
-0.316***
-0.335***
(5.12)
(5.07)
(5.20)
(5.29)
Log # Analysts
0.756***
0.752***
0.765***
0.415
(2.95)
(2.94)
(3.00)
(1.50)
Log Size
-1.969***
-1.979***
-1.966***
-1.886***
(27.10)
(27.43)
(27.13)
(24.72)
Log BM
2.579***
2.568***
2.608***
2.530***
(20.09)
(20.04)
(20.37)
(18.64)
Momentum
-2.259***
-2.233***
-2.104***
-2.540***
(10.91)
(10.85)
(10.62)
(11.27)
Dispersion
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
(1.46)
(1.46)
(1.47)
(1.48)
Intercept
14.835*** 45.065*** 14.829*** 45.148*** 14.759*** 44.948*** 14.700*** 44.618***
(104.43) (49.53)
(105.20) (49.77)
(106.84) (49.73)
(90.89)
(48.64)
Good times Ŷ
14.835
13.905
14.829
13.884
14.759
13.826
14.700
13.838
Observations
406644
334974
406644
334974
406644
334974
388570
318887
Adj R-Sq
0.0017
0.0786
0.0022
0.0793
0.0021
0.0789
0.0007
0.0763
Industry F.E.
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Variables

51

Dependent variable: Absolute forecast error scaled by stock volatility
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
-6.667*** -6.705***
(6.87)
(9.21)
-5.417*** -5.590***
(5.05)
(7.15)
-7.933*** -7.234***
(8.44)
(10.02)
0.828
(1.08)
-1.325***
-1.309***
-1.359***
(5.68)
(5.61)
(5.87)
-0.492***
-0.494***
-0.504***
(14.63)
(14.67)
(14.98)
2.620***
2.651***
2.679***
(9.52)
(9.62)
(9.75)
-0.026***
-0.026***
-0.026***
(5.09)
(5.10)
(5.12)
-0.973***
-0.970***
-0.990***
(6.40)
(6.36)
(6.52)
1.052***
1.024***
1.052***
(7.58)
(7.37)
(7.63)
-2.629***
-2.637***
-2.546***
(10.49)
(10.52)
(10.23)
-0.506***
-0.522***
-0.476***
(3.96)
(4.07)
(3.78)
-2.876***
-2.712***
-2.931***
(4.71)
(4.44)
(4.85)
4.107***
4.081***
4.110***
(16.79)
(16.68)
(16.99)
7.164***
7.216***
7.086***
(24.50)
(24.57)
(24.03)
0.775**
0.917**
0.360
(1.99)
(2.33)
(0.99)
-0.000
-0.000
-0.000
(0.35)
(0.32)
(0.36)
26.852*** -16.951*** 26.616*** -17.075*** 27.199*** -16.669*** 25.123***
(63.64)
(6.13)
(63.71)
(6.17)
(65.12)
(6.06)
(53.27)
26.852
26.728
26.616
26.509
27.199
26.971
25.123
406642
334973
406642
334973
406642
334973
388568
0.0025
0.0824
0.0014
0.0814
0.0042
0.0833
0.0001
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No

(16)

-1.015*
(1.82)
-1.196***
(5.16)
-0.498***
(14.44)
2.953***
(10.92)
-0.023***
(4.51)
-0.827***
(5.44)
1.095***
(7.78)
-2.549***
(10.24)
-0.640***
(5.00)
-1.985***
(3.33)
3.630***
(15.46)
7.527***
(24.76)
1.175***
(2.93)
-0.000
(0.30)
-13.060***
(4.78)
25.720
318886
0.0807
Yes

Table 9: Cross-sectional tests of CAR impact of recommendation changes in bad times
The panel regressions add firm characteristics interactions in estimating the effect of bad times on recommendation downgrade (models 1-8) and upgrade (models 9-16) two-day CARs
(in percent) controlling for recommendation, firm, and analyst characteristics. The benchmark return for the CAR is the return from a characteristics-matched DGTW portfolio. The
sample is from 1993-2014. A recommendation change is defined as an analyst’s current rating minus her prior outstanding rating (initiations and reiterations are excluded) and changes
made around earnings announcement and guidance days, and on multiple-recommendation days are excluded. Bad times definitions are as follows: Crisis: Sep-Nov 1987 (1987 crisis),
Aug-Dec 1998 (LTCM), or Jul 2007-Mar 2009 (Credit Crisis). Recession represents NBER recessions, namely: Jul 1990-Mar 1991, Mar 2001-Nov 2001, and Dec 2007-Jun 2009. High
Uncertainty represents the highest tercile (over the period 1983-2014) of the Baker et al. (2016) uncertainty index. The firm characteristics dummies are as follows. NoGuidance (Panel
A) equals one for firms with no earnings guidance in the prior month. LowIO (Panel B) equals one for the lowest quintile 13F-reported fraction of shares owned by institutions.
HighIVOLfrac (Panel C) equals one for the highest quintile of the stocks sorted on the prior month fraction of firm-specific daily return volatility over the total volatility (estimated by
regressing daily returns on market returns and market-purged industry returns). LowSize (Panel D) equals one for the lowest NYSE-breakpoint quintile rank of the prior June market cap.
NoOptions (Panel E, 1996-2014) equals one when the firm has no data in Option Metrics. LowCoverage (Panel F) equals one for the lowest analyst coverage quintile based on number of
analysts issuing recommendations in the prior quarter. Control variables, unreported, are the same as those in Table 3, except that the relevant control is dropped when it is related to the
firm characteristic dummy (e.g. Logsize is dropped in the SmallSize panel). In parentheses are t-statistics based on standard errors clustered by calendar day, where *, **, and *** denote
statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively. Industry fixed effects (F.E.) rely on the Fama-French 30-industry groupings.
Variables
(1)

Crisis
(2)

Bad times

-0.794***
(8.98)
NoGuidance
-0.914***
(9.05)
Bad times×NoGuidance -0.812**
(2.07)
Good times Ŷ
-1.714
#Obs
71087
Adj R-Sq
0.0061

-0.806***
(8.41)
-0.669***
(5.32)
-0.394
(0.87)
-1.787
59524
0.0197

Bad times

-0.965***
(8.92)
-0.241
(0.63)
-3.829*
(1.89)
-1.688
70688
0.0028

-0.980***
(7.86)
0.067
(0.12)
-5.202*
(1.65)
-1.761
59224
0.0202

-0.942***
(8.72)
HighIVOLfrac
-0.293***
(2.62)
Bad times×HighIVOLfrac-1.022*
(1.86)
Good times Ŷ
-1.694
#Obs
71084
Adj R-Sq
0.0028
Controls, Ind. F.E.
No

-1.197***
(9.71)
0.036
(0.28)
-0.987
(1.57)
-1.734
59523
0.0166
Yes

LowIO
Bad times×LowIO
Good times Ŷ
#Obs
Adj R-Sq
Bad times

Dependent variable: CAR of downgrades
Credit Crisis
Recession
High Uncertainty
Crisis
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
Panel A: Low guidance firms interacted with bad times
-0.881*** -0.977*** -0.919*** -0.723*** -0.486*** -0.507***
0.485*** 0.386***
(9.32)
(9.65)
(9.65)
(6.64)
(8.31)
(8.25)
(5.54)
(3.57)
-0.843*** -0.547*** -0.888*** -0.605*** -0.974*** -0.746***
2.030*** 1.440***
(8.04)
(4.20)
(8.56)
(4.71)
(8.99)
(5.61)
(18.06)
(11.11)
-1.624*** -1.344*** -1.520*** -1.262*** -0.249
0.000
0.506*
0.465
(4.15)
(3.11)
(3.76)
(2.82)
(1.00)
(0.00)
(1.69)
(1.34)
-1.725
-1.790
-1.696
-1.796
-1.642
-1.712
2.060
2.172
71087
59524
71087
59524
69368
58176
67436
56908
0.0075
0.0214
0.0078
0.0203
0.0048
0.0194
0.0174
0.0441
Panel B: Low institutional ownership firms interacted with bad times
-1.204*** -1.356*** -1.129*** -1.006*** -0.486*** -0.544***
0.617*** 0.649***
(11.01)
(11.52)
(10.89)
(8.48)
(7.36)
(7.47)
(6.15)
(5.23)
-0.232
0.099
-0.375
-0.061
0.060
0.611
0.183
0.529
(0.62)
(0.19)
(0.97)
(0.11)
(0.17)
(1.15)
(0.32)
(0.51)
-5.472** -7.141* -3.524
-5.814
-1.652
-3.516**
-0.489
-2.660
(2.12)
(1.80)
(1.59)
(1.51)
(1.61)
(2.09)
(0.37)
(1.34)
-1.688
-1.745
-1.665
-1.753
-1.642
-1.697
2.045
2.140
70688
59224
70688
59224
69083
57959
67092
56657
0.0037
0.0218
0.0036
0.0203
0.0013
0.0196
0.0011
0.0433
Panel C: High IVOL fraction firms interacted with bad times
-1.157*** -1.531*** -1.128*** -1.314*** -0.506*** -0.698***
0.562*** 0.861***
(10.84)
(13.19)
(11.29)
(11.87)
(7.68)
(9.46)
(5.76)
(7.50)
-0.279** 0.059
-0.352*** -0.020
-0.375*** -0.102
0.512*** -0.303***
(2.52)
(0.46)
(3.21)
(0.16)
(2.98)
(0.73)
(5.03)
(2.69)
-1.790*** -1.814** -0.694
-0.645
-0.043
0.113
1.004** 0.970*
(2.60)
(2.33)
(1.08)
(0.87)
(0.16)
(0.35)
(2.28)
(1.88)
-1.695
-1.729
-1.667
-1.713
-1.634
-1.640
2.051
2.111
71084
59523
71084
59523
69365
58175
67435
56908
0.0038
0.0182
0.0036
0.0171
0.0014
0.0152
0.0020
0.0376
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes

52

Dependent variable: CAR of upgrades
Credit Crisis
Recession
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)

High Uncertainty
(15)
(16)

0.554***
(5.77)
1.990***
(17.96)
0.920***
(2.84)
2.063
67436
0.0180

0.497***
(4.06)
1.374***
(10.71)
0.996***
(2.64)
2.168
56908
0.0449

0.763***
(8.29)
1.923***
(21.83)
1.900***
(2.92)
2.031
67436
0.0207

0.388***
(3.54)
1.286***
(11.76)
2.213***
(2.81)
2.174
56908
0.0462

0.191***
(3.72)
1.861***
(13.78)
0.732***
(3.39)
2.054
65527
0.0170

0.198***
(3.59)
1.269***
(8.09)
0.699***
(2.74)
2.155
55402
0.0441

0.757***
(6.77)
0.007
(0.01)
1.174
(0.84)
2.043
67092
0.0015

0.879***
(6.20)
0.248
(0.25)
-0.301
(0.14)
2.129
56657
0.0439

0.987***
(7.56)
0.077
(0.14)
0.489
(0.36)
2.006
67092
0.0028

0.840***
(5.93)
0.222
(0.21)
-0.042
(0.02)
2.120
56657
0.0438

0.264***
(4.42)
0.089
(0.11)
0.027
(0.03)
2.030
65265
0.0004

0.384***
(5.84)
0.001
(0.00)
0.551
(0.30)
2.089
55213
0.0427

0.703***
(6.52)
0.519***
(5.17)
1.282**
(2.41)
2.047
67435
0.0025
No

1.073***
(8.19)
-0.305***
(2.73)
1.359**
(2.15)
2.106
56908
0.0385
Yes

0.997***
(7.60)
0.621***
(6.19)
0.170
(0.34)
2.002
67435
0.0036
No

1.202***
(7.91)
-0.238**
(2.18)
0.611
(1.04)
2.073
56908
0.0393
Yes

0.253***
(4.27)
0.510***
(4.37)
0.336
(1.37)
2.031
65526
0.0011
No

0.493***
(7.75)
-0.278**
(2.09)
0.219
(0.86)
2.048
55402
0.0360
Yes

Table 9 (Cont’d)
Variables
(1)
Bad times

Crisis
(2)

-0.781***
(8.75)
-0.897***
(8.95)
-0.790**
(2.02)
-1.705
70312
0.0059

-0.782***
(8.10)
-0.656***
(5.27)
-0.367
(0.82)
-1.780
58885
0.0193

-0.734***
(7.57)
-0.386***
(3.63)
-0.944*
(1.82)
-1.861
63540
0.0027

-0.754***
(7.10)
0.420***
(3.15)
-0.742
(1.15)
-1.957
52969
0.0201

-0.894***
(8.86)
LowCoverage
-0.579***
(2.69)
Bad times×LowCoverage -0.925
(1.23)
Good times Ŷ
-1.621
#Obs
61280
Adj R-Sq
0.0032
Controls, Ind. F.E.
No

-0.926***
(8.36)
-0.081
(0.32)
-1.310
(1.45)
-1.697
51950
0.0220
Yes

SmallSize
Bad times×SmallSize
Good times Ŷ
#Obs
Adj R-Sq
Bad times
NoOptions
Bad times×NoOptions
Good times Ŷ
#Obs
Adj R-Sq
Bad times

Dependent variable: CAR of downgrades
Credit Crisis
Recession
High Uncertainty
Crisis
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
Panel D: Small size firms interacted with bad times
-0.882*** -0.979*** -0.946*** -0.746*** -0.469*** -0.483***
0.430*** 0.318***
(9.28)
(9.58)
(10.42)
(7.07)
(8.07)
(7.93)
(4.97)
(2.97)
-0.826*** -0.538*** -0.893*** -0.609*** -0.932*** -0.711***
1.978*** 1.376***
(7.91)
(4.14)
(8.67)
(4.75)
(8.55)
(5.31)
(17.45)
(10.35)
-1.551*** -1.215*** -1.353*** -1.086** -0.294
-0.068
0.685** 0.673**
(4.02)
(2.87)
(3.31)
(2.41)
(1.18)
(0.23)
(2.34)
(1.98)
-1.714
-1.778
-1.681
-1.782
-1.635
-1.708
2.063
2.176
70312
58885
70312
58885
68610
57550
66865
56433
0.0073
0.0209
0.0075
0.0198
0.0046
0.0189
0.0170
0.0441
Panel E: No options firms interacted with bad times
-0.915*** -1.044*** -0.897*** -0.790*** -0.290*** -0.375***
0.395*** 0.406***
(8.83)
(9.44)
(9.00)
(6.90)
(4.52)
(5.46)
(4.12)
(3.45)
-0.366*** 0.476*** -0.396*** 0.435*** -0.369*** 0.367**
1.091*** -0.160
(3.29)
(3.44)
(3.55)
(3.11)
(3.22)
(2.53)
(8.15)
(0.97)
-2.028*** -2.120*** -0.987** -0.716
-0.414
-0.108
0.609*
0.508
(3.72)
(3.28)
(2.20)
(1.41)
(1.44)
(0.32)
(1.70)
(1.21)
-1.860
-1.945
-1.836
-1.949
-1.862
-1.931
2.245
2.363
63540
52969
63540
52969
61821
51621
60619
50964
0.0041
0.0221
0.0035
0.0202
0.0012
0.0193
0.0046
0.0465
Panel F: Low coverage firms interacted with bad times
-1.047*** -1.176*** -0.961*** -0.848*** -0.478*** -0.547***
0.645*** 0.718***
(9.61)
(9.96)
(9.34)
(7.33)
(7.55)
(8.16)
(6.65)
(6.28)
-0.581*** -0.031
-0.452** 0.070
-0.483** -0.208
1.089*** 0.235
(2.74)
(0.12)
(2.12)
(0.27)
(1.99)
(0.74)
(5.84)
(1.00)
-1.195
-2.050** -1.929** -2.285*** -0.687
-0.366
0.446
1.282**
(1.38)
(1.98)
(2.56)
(2.61)
(1.43)
(0.60)
(0.89)
(2.26)
-1.626
-1.694
-1.609
-1.704
-1.563
-1.622
1.903
1.984
61280
51950
61280
51950
59869
50831
59384
50527
0.0037
0.0232
0.0042
0.0220
0.0020
0.0213
0.0034
0.0460
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes

53

Dependent variable: CAR of upgrades
Credit Crisis
Recession
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)

High Uncertainty
(15)
(16)

0.513***
(5.44)
1.944***
(17.40)
1.066***
(3.39)
2.063
66865
0.0176

0.440***
(3.64)
1.316***
(10.00)
1.167***
(3.19)
2.169
56433
0.0449

0.746***
(8.15)
1.891***
(21.49)
1.916***
(2.97)
2.028
66865
0.0202

0.355***
(3.23)
1.245***
(11.34)
2.203***
(2.83)
2.173
56433
0.0461

0.200***
(3.89)
1.865***
(13.71)
0.665***
(3.08)
2.047
64972
0.0165

0.191***
(3.48)
1.266***
(7.89)
0.660***
(2.59)
2.154
54943
0.0440

0.498***
(4.74)
1.050***
(8.05)
1.516***
(3.56)
2.241
60619
0.0054

0.571***
(4.30)
-0.229
(1.43)
1.699***
(3.36)
2.353
50964
0.0476

0.677***
(6.66)
1.006***
(9.96)
1.738**
(1.96)
2.210
60619
0.0068

0.498***
(4.13)
-0.309**
(2.49)
1.994*
(1.75)
2.353
50964
0.0480

0.030
(0.54)
1.022***
(6.61)
0.410
(1.60)
2.297
58710
0.0039

0.111*
(1.81)
-0.228
(1.18)
0.442
(1.44)
2.387
49458
0.0457

0.764***
(7.24)
1.077***
(5.84)
0.637
(1.20)
1.902
59384
0.0038
No

0.909***
(7.05)
0.230
(0.99)
1.531***
(2.64)
1.979
50527
0.0469
Yes

0.823***
(8.02)
1.058***
(5.83)
0.877
(1.52)
1.884
59384
0.0045
No

0.708***
(6.09)
0.296
(1.27)
1.074*
(1.84)
1.989
50527
0.0456
Yes

0.245***
(4.36)
0.879***
(4.20)
0.826**
(2.15)
1.899
57814
0.0024
No

0.357***
(5.97)
0.063
(0.24)
1.138**
(2.45)
1.952
49264
0.0446
Yes

Table 10: Analyst attrition in bad times
Probits of analyst attrition are estimated for the recommendations sample (1993-2014). In the recommendations sample, variables
are averaged within each analyst-year combination and Disappear equals one when the analyst makes no recommendation in
I/B/E/S in the next year. The bad times indicator=1 if any month in the next year contains the relevant bad times period. Crisis is
defined as the periods Sep-Nov 1987 (1987 crisis), Aug-Dec 1998 (LTCM), or Jul 2007-Mar 2009 (Credit Crisis). Recession
represents NBER recessions, namely: Jul 1990-Mar 1991, Mar 2001-Nov 2001, and Dec 2007-Jun 2009. High Uncertainty
represents the highest tercile (over the period 1983-2014) of the Baker et al. (2016) uncertainty index. Rec Influ Prob is the
fraction of influential recommendation changes made by the analyst that year. Other control variables are as defined in relevant
earlier tables. In parentheses are z-statistics where *, **, and *** denote statistical significance (standard errors clustered by
analyst) at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.
Dependent variable: Recommendations sample, Disappear from I/B/E/S next year
Variables
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Crisis
0.008*
0.010**
(1.81)
(2.18)
Credit Crisis
0.034*** 0.037***
(6.11)
(6.38)
Recession
0.042*** 0.034***
(8.67)
(6.78)
High Uncertainty
0.026*** 0.028***
(5.20)
(5.65)
Rec Influ Prob
-0.030*** -0.020** -0.030*** -0.020** -0.032*** -0.023*** 0.009
0.019
(3.34)
(2.18)
(3.52)
(2.27)
(3.61)
(2.62)
(0.47)
(1.05)
Crisis×Rec Influ Prob
-0.034** -0.034**
(2.01)
(1.97)
Credit Crisis×Rec Influ Prob
-0.055*** -0.056***
(2.93)
(2.91)
Recession×Rec Influ Prob
-0.037** -0.029
(2.14)
(1.62)
High Uncertainty×Rec Influ Prob
-0.058*** -0.058***
(2.88)
(2.90)
LFR
-0.000
-0.000
-0.001
-0.000
(0.67)
(0.73)
(0.92)
(0.75)
Relative Experience
-0.000**
-0.000**
-0.000**
-0.000**
(2.14)
(2.27)
(2.24)
(2.43)
Log Broker Size
-0.012***
-0.012***
-0.013***
-0.012***
(6.80)
(6.78)
(7.09)
(6.95)
Log Size
-0.003**
-0.003**
-0.004***
-0.004***
(2.40)
(2.56)
(2.97)
(3.03)
Log BM
-0.008***
-0.007**
-0.006**
-0.009***
(2.71)
(2.35)
(2.13)
(3.25)
Momentum
-0.024***
-0.023***
-0.025***
-0.024***
(5.58)
(5.40)
(5.93)
(5.66)
Stock Volatility
0.895***
0.973***
0.782***
0.819***
(7.65)
(8.20)
(6.83)
(7.14)
Predicted Prob.
0.128
0.114
0.128
0.114
0.127
0.114
0.128
0.114
#Obs
38546
35508
38546
35508
38546
35508
38546
35508

54

Table 11: Panel regression of analyst activity in bad times
The panel regressions estimate the effect of bad times on analyst forecast activity (1+an analyst’s # of forecasts per firm-quarter)
controlling for forecast, analyst, and firm characteristics. We define the starting and ending quarter of coverage using the first and
last one-quarter-ahead forecast of the analyst-firm-broker combination. We then count the number of quarterly earnings forecasts
per quarter for each calendar quarter. Bad times definitions are as follows: Crisis: Sep-Nov 1987 (1987 crisis), Aug-Dec 1998
(LTCM), or Jul 2007-Mar 2009 (Credit Crisis). Recession represents NBER recessions, namely: Jul 1990-Mar 1991, Mar 2001Nov 2001, and Dec 2007-Jun 2009. High Uncertainty represents the highest tercile (over the period 1983-2014) of the Baker et al.
(2016) uncertainty index. Analyst and forecast characteristics are the averages within the analyst-firm quarter. Optimistic
Forecast is an indicator variable equal to one if the forecast is above the final consensus, LFR is the analyst’s prior-year leaderfollower ratio (computed from forecasts), Star Analyst is from the Institutional Investor poll, Relative Experience is the
difference between the analyst’s experience (in quarters) against the average of peers covering the same firm, Accuracy Quintile
is the average forecast accuracy quintile of the analyst’s past-year’s covered firms (quintile 5=most accurate), Days to Annc is the
number of days from the forecast to the earnings announcement date, Multiple Forecast Day is a dummy indicating that more
than one analyst issued a forecast on that day, Broker Size is the number of analysts employed, # Analysts is 1+ the number of
analysts covering the firm, Size is last June’s market cap, BM is the book-to-market ratio, Momentum is the month t-12 to t-2 buyand-hold return, and Dispersion is the dispersion of forecasts making up the final consensus. In parentheses are t-statistics based
on standard errors clustered by industry-quarter, where *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%
respectively. Industry fixed effects (F.E.) rely on the Fama-French 30-industry groupings.
Variables
Crisis

Dependent variable: Log (1 + # forecasts per firm-quarter)
(1)
0.063***
(6.34)

(2)
0.067***
(10.27)

Credit Crisis

(3)

(4)

0.094***
(8.11)

0.082***
(10.75)

Recession

(5)

(6)

0.069***
(8.21)

0.069***
(11.74)

High Uncertainty
Optimistic Forecast
LFR
Star Analyst
Relative Experience
Accuracy Quintile
Log Days to Annc
Mutiple Forecast Day
Log Broker Size
Log # Analysts
Log Size
Log BM
Momentum
Dispersion
Intercept
Good times Ŷ
Observations
Adj R-Sq
Industry F.E.

0.642***
(194.02)
0.642
1916213
0.0021
No

0.011***
(8.82)
0.002***
(11.27)
-0.028***
(13.72)
0.000***
(5.08)
0.028***
(25.97)
-0.019***
(9.45)
-0.038***
(21.02)
0.037***
(39.39)
0.261***
(61.69)
-0.039***
(32.33)
0.008***
(5.45)
-0.004*
(1.81)
0.018***
(12.72)
0.497***
(28.80)
0.680
1250891
0.1001
Yes

0.641***
(198.10)
0.641
1916213
0.0037
No

0.011***
(8.78)
0.002***
(11.01)
-0.027***
(13.47)
0.000***
(5.01)
0.028***
(25.95)
-0.020***
(9.63)
-0.038***
(21.35)
0.037***
(39.31)
0.260***
(61.77)
-0.038***
(32.31)
0.008***
(5.23)
-0.003
(1.57)
0.018***
(12.72)
0.500***
(29.08)
0.680
1250891
0.1006
Yes

55

0.639***
(189.89)
0.639
1916213
0.0031
No

0.011***
(8.91)
0.002***
(11.11)
-0.029***
(13.98)
0.000***
(5.15)
0.029***
(26.23)
-0.019***
(9.12)
-0.038***
(21.25)
0.037***
(39.23)
0.259***
(62.16)
-0.038***
(32.44)
0.009***
(6.68)
-0.001
(0.53)
0.017***
(12.75)
0.492***
(28.46)
0.678
1250891
0.1007
Yes

(7)

(8)

0.048***
(7.92)

0.030***
(7.16)
0.011***
(8.74)
0.003***
(12.41)
-0.028***
(13.25)
0.000***
(5.78)
0.028***
(25.69)
-0.020***
(9.70)
-0.038***
(20.30)
0.037***
(38.39)
0.258***
(58.63)
-0.039***
(31.81)
0.005***
(3.15)
-0.007***
(3.08)
0.019***
(12.49)
0.501***
(28.86)
0.667
1201285
0.0981
Yes

0.619***
(157.11)
0.619
1850104
0.0035
No

Table 12: Analyst report length in bad times
The list of all U.S. analyst reports issued by one large U.S. broker from 1994-2014 is downloaded from Thomson ONE (up to
Sep 2011) and Thomson Eikon (from Oct 2011 onwards) and the number of pages in each report is regressed against a bad times
dummy and control variables. Bad times definitions are as follows: Crisis: Sep-Nov 1987 (1987 crisis), Aug-Dec 1998 (LTCM),
or Jul 2007-Mar 2009 (Credit Crisis). Recession represents NBER recessions, namely: Jul 1990-Mar 1991, Mar 2001-Nov 2001,
and Dec 2007-Jun 2009. High Uncertainty represents the highest tercile (over the period 1983-2014) of the Baker et al. (2016)
uncertainty index. Beta is the stock’s market beta based on three years of past monthly returns. Size Quintile is based on the
stock’s prior June’s market cap using NYSE breakpoints. Momentum Quintile is based on the month t-12 to t-2 buy-and-hold
stock return sorted as at month t-1. BM Quintile is based on the firm’s book-to-market ratio. Stock Volatility is the month t-1
volatility of daily stock returns. Earnings Annc Dummy (Guidance Dummy) indicates that the analyst report is issued within three
trading days of an earnings announcement (earnings guidance). Earnings announcement dates are from Compustat and guidance
dates are from First Call Guidelines and I/B/E/S Guidance. In parentheses are t-statistics based on standard errors clustered by the
date of the analyst report, where *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively. Industry fixed
effects (F.E.) rely on the Fama-French 30-industry groupings.
Dependent variable: Number of pages in an analyst report
Variables
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Crisis
1.336*** 1.552***
(8.84)
(9.99)
Credit Crisis
1.916*** 1.991***
(13.21)
(12.34)
Recession
-0.928*** -0.098
(5.80)
(0.62)
High Uncertainty
1.429*** 1.356***
(13.61)
(14.35)
Beta
0.386***
0.379***
0.389***
0.396***
(10.41)
(10.24)
(10.37)
(10.35)
Size Quintile
0.091***
0.094***
0.086***
0.100***
(3.68)
(3.79)
(3.43)
(3.94)
Momentum Quintile
-0.172***
-0.171***
-0.150***
-0.152***
(7.92)
(7.89)
(6.81)
(6.86)
BM Quintile
0.072***
0.071***
0.077***
0.093***
(3.14)
(3.08)
(3.34)
(3.94)
Stock Volatility
-68.509***
-68.194***
-66.087***
-66.818***
(26.86)
(26.96)
(24.67)
(26.31)
Earnings Annc Dummy
-0.068
-0.101
-0.023
0.026
(0.77)
(1.13)
(0.26)
(0.29)
Guidance Dummy
0.644***
0.636***
0.644***
0.501***
(8.97)
(8.89)
(8.87)
(6.93)
Intercept
10.237*** 11.305*** 10.215*** 11.296*** 10.433*** 11.292*** 9.678*** 10.626***
(178.98)
(66.07)
(179.86)
(66.18)
(182.87)
(65.83)
(122.69) (58.01)
10.237
10.220
10.215
10.208
10.433
10.345
9.678
9.706
Good times Ŷ
#Obs
85525
84707
85525
84707
85525
84707
81583
80806
Adj R-Sq
0.0024
0.0552
0.0043
0.0566
0.0015
0.0520
0.0097
0.0624
Industry F.E.
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes

56

Table 13: Response of peer firms to recommendation changes in bad times
The panel regressions estimate the effect of recommendation changes on peer firms’ two-day CARs (in percent) during bad times, controlling for recommendation, firm, and analyst
characteristics. Peer firms are firms in the same industry which did not experience a recommendation by the same analyst that day but for which the analyst has issued a recommendation on in
the last one year. The CAR benchmark is a characteristics-matched DGTW portfolio for the peer firm. The sample is from 1993-2014. Recommendation changes are the current rating minus
the individual analyst’s prior outstanding rating (initiations and reiterations are excluded). Recommendation changes made around earnings announcement and guidance days, and on multiplerecommendation days are excluded following Loh and Stulz (2011). Bad times definitions are as follows: Crisis: Sep-Nov 1987 (1987 crisis), Aug-Dec 1998 (LTCM), or Jul 2007-Mar 2009
(Credit Crisis). Recession represents NBER recessions, namely: Jul 1990-Mar 1991, Mar 2001-Nov 2001, and Dec 2007-Jun 2009. High Uncertainty represents the highest tercile (over the
period 1983-2014) of the Baker et al. (2016) uncertainty index. Control variables are as defined in Table 3. In parentheses are t-statistics based on standard errors clustered by calendar day,
where *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively. Industry fixed effects (F.E) rely on the Fama-French 30-industry groupings.
Dependent variable: CAR of peer firms of downgrades
Dependent variable: CAR of peer firms of upgrades
Variables
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
Crisis
-0.104* -0.105*
-0.021
-0.042
(1.78)
(1.71)
(0.36)
(0.73)
Credit Crisis
-0.131** -0.153**
-0.046
-0.077
(2.09)
(2.32)
(0.67)
(1.20)
Recession
-0.163** -0.196**
0.020
-0.052
(2.44)
(2.54)
(0.31)
(0.84)
High Uncertainty
-0.035 -0.019
-0.034
-0.028
(0.96)
(0.47)
(1.10)
(0.92)
LFR
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.000
0.007*
0.007*
0.007*
0.006
(0.19)
(0.19)
(0.21)
(0.07)
(1.69)
(1.69)
(1.70)
(1.57)
Star Analyst
-0.040
-0.040
-0.040
-0.040
0.079**
0.078**
0.079**
0.076**
(0.86)
(0.86)
(0.87)
(0.84)
(2.09)
(2.09)
(2.10)
(1.97)
Relative Experience
-0.001
-0.001
-0.001
-0.001
-0.000
-0.000
-0.000
0.000
(0.78)
(0.76)
(0.72)
(1.08)
(0.08)
(0.07)
(0.08)
(0.15)
Accuracy Quintile
0.005
0.005
0.005
0.001
-0.014
-0.013
-0.014
-0.014
(0.13)
(0.13)
(0.12)
(0.02)
(0.38)
(0.36)
(0.38)
(0.39)
Log Broker Size
-0.041***
-0.042***
-0.040**
-0.041**
0.024*
0.024*
0.025*
0.029**
(2.61)
(2.69)
(2.56)
(2.56)
(1.80)
(1.74)
(1.83)
(2.08)
Log # Analysts
-0.040
-0.042
-0.042
-0.030
0.063**
0.062**
0.064**
0.065**
(1.46)
(1.52)
(1.53)
(1.10)
(2.50)
(2.42)
(2.51)
(2.53)
Log Size
0.000
0.002
0.005
-0.004
-0.000
0.001
0.000
-0.002
(0.04)
(0.19)
(0.41)
(0.37)
(0.04)
(0.08)
(0.02)
(0.19)
Log BM
-0.006
-0.005
-0.006
-0.009
0.017
0.017
0.017
0.017
(0.34)
(0.28)
(0.35)
(0.48)
(1.04)
(1.06)
(1.05)
(1.05)
Momentum
-0.040*
-0.041*
-0.049**
-0.036*
-0.042**
-0.043**
-0.044**
-0.041**
(1.84)
(1.88)
(2.25)
(1.68)
(2.10)
(2.14)
(2.18)
(2.01)
Stock Volatility
-1.190
-1.124
-0.590
-1.634
3.681***
3.761***
3.808***
3.488***
(1.02)
(0.96)
(0.47)
(1.41)
(3.53)
(3.61)
(3.68)
(3.18)
Intercept
-0.054***0.185
-0.053***0.169
-0.045***0.122 -0.059***0.247
0.110*** -0.171
0.112*** -0.183
0.105*** -0.185
0.122*** -0.155
(3.37)
(0.91)
(3.34)
(0.84)
(3.04)
(0.60) (3.68)
(1.19)
(8.74)
(1.08)
(8.92)
(1.15)
(8.50)
(1.17)
(8.20)
(0.96)
0.110
0.120
0.112
0.123
0.105
0.121
0.122
0.127
Good times Ŷ -0.054 -0.066 -0.053 -0.063 -0.045 -0.053 -0.059 -0.077
#Obs
68725
58670
68725
58670
68725
58670 67111
57357
65482
56238
65482
56238
65482
56238
63670
54765
Adj R-Sq
0.0002 0.0017 0.0002 0.0019 0.0005 0.0022 0.0000 0.0017
-0.0000
0.0020
0.0000
0.0021
-0.0000
0.0020
0.0000
0.0020
Industry F.E.
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes

57

Figure 1: Impact of recommendation changes in bad times
The figure plots the mean two-day CAR and the influential probability of recommendation changes (in percent). The benchmark return for the CAR is the return from a
characteristics-matched DGTW portfolio. The sample is from 1993-2014. A recommendation change is defined as an analyst’s current rating minus her prior outstanding rating
(initiations and reiterations are excluded). Changes made around earnings announcement and guidance days, and on multiple-recommendation days are excluded. Influential
changes are those whose two-day CARs are in the same direction as the recommendation change and is 1.96 times larger than expected based on the prior three-month
idiosyncratic volatility of the stock (following Loh and Stulz (2011)). Bad times definitions are as follows: Crisis: Sep-Nov 1987 (1987 crisis), Aug-Dec 1998 (LTCM), or Jul
2007-Mar 2009 (Credit Crisis). Recession represents NBER recessions, namely: Jul 1990-Mar 1991, Mar 2001-Nov 2001, and Dec 2007-Jun 2009. High Uncertainty represents
the highest tercile (over the period 1983-2014) of the Baker et al. (2016) uncertainty index.

58

Figure 2: Impact of earnings forecast revisions in bad times
The figure plots the mean two-day CAR and the influential probability of earnings forecast revisions (in percent). The benchmark return for the CAR is the return from a
characteristics-matched DGTW portfolio. The sample is from 1983-2014. A forecast revision is the analyst’s current one-quarter-ahead earnings forecast minus her prior
outstanding forecast (i.e., initiations are excluded) scaled by price. Revisions made around earnings announcement and guidance days, and on multiple-forecast days are excluded.
Influential revisions are those whose two-day CARs are in the same direction as the revision and is 1.96 times larger than expected based on the prior three-month idiosyncratic
volatility of the stock (following Loh and Stulz (2011)). Bad times definitions are as follows: Crisis: Sep-Nov 1987 (1987 crisis), Aug-Dec 1998 (LTCM), or Jul 2007-Mar 2009
(Credit Crisis). Recession represents NBER recessions, namely: Jul 1990-Mar 1991, Mar 2001-Nov 2001, and Dec 2007-Jun 2009. High Uncertainty represents the highest tercile
(over the period from 1983-2014) of the Baker et al. (2016) uncertainty index.

59

