NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INCENTIVE COMPATIBLE TRADE POLICIES

Robert C. Feenstra

Working Paper No. 1977

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 1986

Financial support from the Ford Foundation is gratefully
acknowledged. To be published in a conference issue of the
Scandanavian Journal of Economics, 1987. The research reported
here is part of the NBER's research program in International
Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

Working Paper #1977
July 1986

Incentive Compatible Trade Policies

ABSTRACT

We consider a two country trade model with production uncertainty.

If

complete contingent markets do not exist, it is desirable for governments to

adopt some trade policies to share the production risk. A full information
policy involves income transfers across countries, which can be achieved by

equal import tariffs and export subsidies. With incomplete information we
consider incentive compatible trade policies, which are designed to be truth

revealing while partially sharing the production risk.

In this case the

tariff in one country may differ from the export subsidy abroad.

Robert C. Feenstra
Department of Economics
University of California

Davis, CA 95616

—1—
I. Introduction

Under international trade laws, the application of import restrictions
often depends on some special conditions in the trading industry. For example,
Article XIX of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), known as the

"escape clause" provision, states that a tariff concession (reduction) can be
withdrawn if "any product is being imported...in such increased quantities and

under such conditions as to cause or threaten serious injury to domestic
producers in that territory of like or directly competitive products" (Sec.
1.(a)). In this case the special conditions are that imports have increased

and that the domestic industry faces actual or potential injury (as often
measured by unemployment or excess capacity). Similiar provisions are made in
section 201 of the U.S. Trade Act of 1974.

The conditional feature of these trade laws is meant to limit their range

of application.

However, such a limitation may be ineffective when one

country cannot actually verify the conditions faced by an industry in the
other country.

Indeed, under this scenario of incomplete information, each

country may be tempted to misrepresent the conditions faced by their own
industries and thereby obtain import protection. We feel that the assumption

of incomplete information is useful in analysing trade negotiations between
countries.

In this paper we shall consider the design of socially optimal

trade policies under incomplete information.

In section II we outline a two good, two country trade model with
production uncertainty at home. A social optimum in this model will generally

require a set of contingent commodity markets, with goods sold contingent on

the state of nature.

In reality an equivalent set of contingent commodity

markets may not exist, but we argue in section III that the social optimum can

be still be achieved by income transfers across countries.

These income

—2—
transfers can occur through a tariff in one country combined with an equal

export subsidy in the other.

These trade policies support the first—best

equilibrium, but are contingent on the state of nature at home.

In section IV we analyse whether the home country has any incentive to
falsely announce the state of nature, and we find that it may wish to do so.

This means that the full information trade policies described above are not
incentive compatible, that is, they do not lead to a true revelation of the

state of nature.

Accordingly, in section V we consider second—best trade

policies which maximize world welfare subject to the constraint of being
incentive compatible. We find that these trade policies may involve a tariff
in one country which differs from the export subsidy abroad, so that consumer

prices are not equalized internationally.
incomplete information.

This distortion is optimal given

Directions for further research are discussed in

section VI.

Our paper is related to those of Eaton and Grossman (1984) and Staiger
and Tabelllni (1986) by examining trade policy under uncertainty. In contrast
to these papers, the markets which are assumed to be absent are international

rather than domestic.

The application of incentive compatibility to trade

policy appears to be new, though it has received substantial attention in the
implicit contracts literature, recently surveyed by Holmstrom and Hart (1985)

and Rosen (1985).

The reader is also referred to the papers in the 1983

Supplement to the Quarterly Journal of Economics, especially Azariadis (1983).

II. Equilibrium with Complete Markets

We shall consider a two good, two country model with production uncertainty at home. We assume that consumers are identical within countries, with

each population then set at unity, but allow for different degrees of risk

—3—
aversion across countries. With the additional assumption that preferences
are homothetic, we write the utility function for the home consumer as U[g(x)]

where x =

(x1,x2)

is the consumption vector; we assume that g is homogeneous

of degree one, concave and increasing in x, with U > 0, Ut, ( 0.

The function

g summarizes the indifference curves of the home consumer, while the concavity

of U determines the degree of risk aversion. We suppose that the foreign
consumer has the same indifference curves as at home, but may differ in risk
aversion, and write the foreign utility function as U*[g(x*)] with U > 0 and
U*'t

0.

We let s =

a,b

output vector y =

denote the two states of nature at home, with the feasible

(y1,y2)

satisfying f(y,s)

0.1 We suppose that the set of

feasible outputs is convex and that production decisions are made ex—post.2

Let z =

(z1,z2)

denote imports into the home country. Then we can summarize

the utility obtained through trading opportunities at home using the trade
utility function, defined as:

h(z,s)

g(x) subject to f(x—z,s)

0 .

(1)

Note that the trade utility function h(z,s) is measured in the same units

as g(x). The actual utility obtained by the home consumer is U[h(z,s)]. From

the first order conditions for (1) we see that the partial derivatives of h
and g are equal, h(z,s) =

g(x).

An analogous trade utility function denoted

by h*(z*) holds for the foreign country, where the production set f*(y*)

0

is not subject to uncertainty. This function is measured in the same units as

g(x*) and actual foreign utility is U*[h*(z*)]. We also have that h(z*) =

g(x*).

—4—
We can now state the equilibrium conditions for the economies under free

trade. We first consider the case of complete contingent commodity markets,

with prices p = (p18,p25) depending on the state of nature s = a,b.
Purchasing good 1 in state a means that the good is delivered only if state a

occurs, while the payment 1a is made regardless of the state.

Using the

condition of balanced trade the home consumer faces the budget constraint

pz5 = 0, where imports z = (z15,z25) are also contingent on the state of
nature, and all vectors are treated as columns unless transposed using a
prime.

Let

denote the probability of state s occurring, s =

a,b.

Then the

home consumer solves the problem:

max

pz5 =

5U[h(z5,s)] subject to

0

,

(2)

with the first order conditions,
=

Ap5

s =

,

a,b.

(3)

The foreign consumer solves a problem analogous to (2), facing the same price
vector p5 under free trade. The first order conditions are:

=

where —z =

z

A*p

,

s =

a,b,

(4)

since home exports are foreign imports.

From (3) and (4) it is immediate that the marginal rates of substitution

between goods are equal in the two countries.

This equality holds when we

compute (A) the ratio of marginal utilities from goods 1 and 2 in a given
state, or (B) the ratio of marginal utilities from good i in states a and b.

—5—
In contrast, the free trade equilibrium which would occur under spot markets

would only satisfy equality of (A) across countries. We illustrate the spot
and contingent market equilibria in Figure 1.

In Figure 1 OF* is the foreign offer curve, while OFa and OFb are the
home offer curves in the two states of nature.

In the case we have shown the

home country desires to trade less at any price ratio in state a, which can
occur if state a has higher productivity in the home import industry.

The

spot market equilibria would be A0 in state a and B0 in state b. At each of

these equilibrium the trade balance is zero. However, with complete contingent markets the trade balance need not be zero within each state: from the
constraint in (2) trade is balanced only when summing across all states. For
example, if PZa < 0 then the home country has a trade surplus in state a, but

an equal trade deficit in state b.

The use of contingent contracts permits

implicit income transfers across countries, which are a means of sharing risk
and raising expected utility.

In general, the following condition holds in the first—best equilibrium,
obtained with complete markets:3

U[h(za,a)1/U[h(zb,b)] =

U*[h*(za)]/U*[h*(_Zb)]

Condition (5) corresponds to optimal risk sharing.

.

(5)

It implies that the

marginal utilities of the countries are perfectly correlated, and therefore,
the utility levels of the countries are positively correlated across states.
We shall use this result repeatedly.

Several examples can illustrate the direction of income transfer.
Suppose that state a has higher productivity in the import industry at home,
as in Figure 1. Then the home consumer has higher utility in state a than in
b (with higher output and a positive terms of trade effect) while the foreign

—6—
consumer has lower utility (due to a negative terms of trade effect).

To

satisfy (5) the home consumer would give an income transfer in state a and
receive it in b.

This would move the equilibrium in state a along a contract

curve towards A1 or A2 in Figure 1.

In state b the equilibrium would move

towards B1 or B2.

Alternatively, suppose that state a has higher productivity in the export

industry at home (not drawn).

There are two possibilities.

First, if the

home country experiences inimiserizing growth then it is worse off in state a,

while the foreign country is better off (due to a positive terms of trade
effect). To satisfy (5) the home country would receive an income transfer in

state a and give it in b.

Second, if the home country does not experience

immiserizing growth in state a then both countries are better off, and the

direction of income transfer will depend on the relative degrees of risk
aversion.

It is possible that (5) could hold by coincidence in the spot

market equilibrium, so the optimal transfer would be zero.

In the complete markets equilibria at least one country must be better
off than with spot markets, even after compensating the other country for any

drop in utility. Under the special assumptions we have made on preferences,

however, we obtain a stronger result:

so long as (5) does not with spot

markets, then both countries are better off under complete contingent markets.

This follows from the assumption that consumers in the two countries have the

same indifference curves, so that any income transfer has no effect on equi-

librium prices. Thus, the price ratio Pls'P2s faced by consumers under spot
or contingent markets are identical, but with spot markets consumers face the

additional constraint that trade must be balanced within each state. There-

fore, utility in each country must be lower if only spot markets are
available.

—7—
III. Full Information Trade Policies

Contingent contracts for commodities are a claim to future output. In

some cases stock markets may serve the same role, as in Helpman and Razin
(1978) who obtain the complete markets equilibrium using stocks.4 However,

there are several reasons why markets for claims to future output may by
imperfect or absent.

In our international setting, consumers in one country

may lack the information needed to make fully diversified stock purchases
abroad. More generally, a firm which has has sold claims to all of it future
output may lack an incentive to produce efficiently —

this

is a moral hazard

problem, often cited as an explanation for missing insurance markets.

Henceforth, we shall suppose that only spot markets for commodities are

available, and investigate government trade policies to improve welfare.
These policies will take the form of international rules on the application of

tariffs and subsidies, as could be negotiated in a GATT forum.

The highest

goal for the policies would be to restore welfare to the first—best, complete

markets equilibrium, which in our model would give both countries higher
utility than with spot markets.

If both governments can observe the state of nature at home then trade

policies can be made contingent on the true state.

Then the first—best

equilibrium can be restored by a system of import tariffs and equal export
subsidies abroad.

The revenue collected from the tariff and lost by the

subsidy is a means of achieving the income transfers discussed in section II
(alternatively, explicit transfers could be used).

For example, if state b

has lower productivity in the import industry at home, the home country would

set an Import tariff matched by an equal subsidy abroad. The level of tariff
and subsidy would be chosen to exactly achieve the income transfer obtained in

the complete markets equilibrium.

Note that consumer prices would be equa-

lized across countries since the tariff and subsidy are equal. In state a the

—8—
foreign country would set an import tariff matched by an equal subsidy at
home, to achieve the reverse income transfer.

It is useful to compare the tariff revenue collected in one state with
that lost in the other.

pbzb

In the contingent market equilibrium we have Pa =

which is not generally zero, reflecting the income transfer. Using (3)

we can compute the corresponding spot market prices as

so that

=

E Uh(z5,s)/A =

Then from the budget constraint in (2),

irPz =

0

(6)

.

The term Pz5 is the trade balance evaluated at international spot prices,

which equals the revenue collected or lost in that state.

Condition (6)

states that tariff revenue weighted by the expected frequency of each state
must sum to zero. Thus, a country which uses a tariff in one state of nature
will have commensurate tariffs levied against it in other states, as measured
by the corresponding revenues.5

IV. Incentive Compatibility

We next consider the case where the foreign government cannot observe
that state of nature at home. Then the home government can choose to announce

that either state has occurred. A policy in which the home government has no

incentive to falsely announce the state is referred to as incentive
tible, and must satisfy the following constraints:

UEh(za,a)1 ) U[h(zb,a)]

,

(7a)

U[h(zb,b)] ) UEh(za,b)1

.

(7b)

Constraint (7a) states that when the true state of nature is a, the home

—9—
country would prefer to announce that a has occurred and receive the trade
bundle Za rather than announcing b and receiving zb. Conversely, (7b) ensures
that when the true state of nature is b the home country has not incentive to
announce that state a has occurred.

We need to determine whether either of the constraints (7) are violated
in the first—best equilibrium.

First, consider the special case where the

home consumer is risk neutral, so that U is a constant. Then from (5) we see

that U* will be equal in the two states, which implies that foreign utility

U is equal across states. This equilibrium is shown as A1, B1 in Figure 1,

with the foreign consumer receiving constant utility of U*.

The home

consumer, who is risk neutral, has absorbed all of the fluctuation in
utility.
(7):

In this case we can see that the first—best equilibrium satisfies

when the true state of nature is a, the home consumer obtains highest

utility at A1 where a home trade—indifference curve is tangent to U* (as
drawn), and similiarly when the true state is b.

Note that this result does

not depend on which industry at home is affected by the uncertainty. Whenever

the home consumer is risk neutral, the equilibrium obtained with full
information trade policy is incentive compatible.6

Now suppose that the home country is risk averse, with U" < 0.

Label

states of nature so that state a has the higher productivity at home (in
either industry).7 Then from (5) both countries will have higher utility in
state a under complete markets. In Figure 1, as the home country becomes more

risk averse the equilibrium must move from A1 towards A2, raising foreign
welfare in state a, and from B1 towards B2 lowering welfare. This will ensure

that the foreign country has higher utility in state a than b, with the same
condition holding at home.

Suppose that the home country is sufficiently risk averse to move the
equilibria to A2, B2. If state a occurs then the home country receives

— 10 —

utility

Ua from the trade bundle A2, as shown by the trade—indifference curve,

but would receive higher utility from the trade bundle B2 (a higher trade—
indifference curve, not drawn, would pass through B2). Thus, the home country

would prefer to falsely announce that state b has occurred, violating constraint (7a).

On the other hand, if state b occurs the home country would

have no incentive to announce otherwise (compare B2 with A2), so constraint
(7b) is always satisfied. In general, given our labelling of states, the only

constraint which can be violated with the full information trade policy is
(7a).8 Henceforth we shall consider only this contraint.

V. Incentive Compatible Trade Policies

In this section we shall construct second—best trade policies which
maximize welfare subject to the constraint (7a). Under such policies the home
country has no incentiVe to falsely announce the state of nature. We consider
solving the problem:

max
zS

L
S

r

subject to,

U[h(za,a)] > U[h(zb,a)] ,

(8)

U'
S

The first constraint in (8) is repeated from (7a), while the second constraint

puts a lower bound on expected utility abroad. Note that if the constraint
(7a) were omitted then the solution to (8) would be a Pareto optimum, and for
suitable choice of U* would yield the first—best equilibrium.

— 11 —

Forming

a Lagrangian with 0

constraint in (8), and $

0 as the multiplier for the first

> 0 as the multiplier for the second, we obtain the

first order conditions:9

aEhz(za,a) — 4U*h(_za)1 + OtYhz(za,a)

b[Uhz(zb,b) —

•U*h(_zb)]

—

OUhZ(zb,a)

= 0

,

(9a)

= 0

.

(9b)

From (9a) it is immediate that marginal rates of substitution are equal across

countries when state a (the good state) occurs. However, when state b occurs

the marginal rates of substitution may not be equalized. Condition (9b) can
be rewritten as,

)

h (z ,b)

h (z ,b)

hi(_zb)

hl(zb,b)

D hl(zb,b)

h (z ,a)
—

—

where D has the same sign as 0:

hl(zb,a)

D = 0 if (7a) is not binding and D > 0

otherwise. The relation between the marginal rates of substitution across
countries depends on the right—most expression in square brackets in (10). We
shall now determine the sign of this expression.

Suppose that good 1 is exported by the home country, and consider Figure

2. We show the home consumption and production points in state b as Xb and
b' respectively, with imports as the difference between them. Note that the
consumption and production points are chosen to maximize utility for the given

import vector zb = Xb —

b'

as in (1).

The expansion path corresponding to

domestic prices in state b is OE, and a parallel line YbE is drawn.
Now suppose that, at the same domestic prices, production in state a lies

on the line YbE. Then consumption would lie on XbE, and this point would be
optimal (satisfy (1)) for the import vector zb.

In this case the marginal

— 12 —

rate

of subtitution would not change across states of nature, so the right-

most expression in (10) is zero.
Alternatively, suppose that at the original domestic prices production in

state a is a' lying above YbE. In this case we shall say that uncertainty
occurs in the import industry.° For given imports zb consumption would be at
Xa, lying above XbE. To satisfy (1), however, it will generally be optimal to

choose other consumption and production points where the marginal rates of
substitution and transformation are equal.

Even after this optimal choice

consumption will lie above XbE. With relatively more of good 2 consumed in
state a than in b, the marginal rate of substitution h2/h1, is lower in state
a.

It follows that the right—most expression in (10) is positive. Finally,

with uncertainty occurring in the export industry as shown by Y, X in Figure
2, the right—most expression in (10) would be negative.

Consider the former case where uncertainty occurs in the import industry

at home. In state b the home country suffers both a production and terms of
trade decline, and would receive an income transfer from abroad under complete
markets.

This income transfer could be achieved under a full information

trade policy by an export subsidy abroad and equal import tariff at home.
However, if the incentive compatibility constraint (7a) is binding then the

full information policy cannot be used.

Instead, with the right—most

expression in (10) positive, the relative price of good 2 abroad will exceed

that at home.
subsidy abroad.

This means that the import tariff at home is less than the

Thus, less than the full amount of the export subsidy is

captured by the home import tariff. This will ensure that when the good state

a occurs, the home country has no incentive to falsely announce that b has
occurred (i.e. (7a) is satisfied).

— 13 —

This incentive compatible policy is illustrated in Figure 3.
consider the equilibrium A3, B3.

First,

The home country is giving an income

transfer in state a (compare A0 with A3) and receiving it in state b. If the

state of nature is a then the home consumer receives Ua from either of the
trade bundles A3 or B3. Thus, the home consumer would be indifferent between
announcing the true or false state when state a occurs, so constraints (7) are
satisfied.

If it happened that condition (5) for optimal risk sharing were

satisfied at A3, B3, then this equilibrium would be the first—best. It could
be implemented even if information were incomplete.

Suppose, however, that to satisfy (5) the home country must give a
greater transfer in state a and receive more in b, as illustrated by A4, B4.

Now when state a occurs the home consumer would receive Ua from the trade
bundle A4 but higher utility from B4, so constraint (7a) is violated.

To

satisfy incentive compatibility, the home consumer could instead receive B4 in

state b. Then the home consumer would again be indifferent between announcing
states a or b and receiving A4 or B4, respectively, when state a occurs. When

state b occurs the home consumer obtains utility of Ub.

Note that the

equilibrium B4 has a greater volume of trade than positions such as B3 where

domestic and foreign consumer prices are equal. This is consistent with our
result above that the home tariff is less than the foreign subsidy in state b.

If instead the uncertainty occurs in the export industry and constraint

(7a) is binding, then from (10) the relative price of good 2 abroad is less
than at home in state b.

Since the productivity fall in the export industry

is accompanied by a terms of trade gain the direction of income transfer is
ambiguous. If the home county is receiving an income transfer in state b then

its import tariff on good 2 will exceed the foreign subsidy. Alternatively,
if the home country is giving an income transfer then its subsidy on good 1 is

— 14 —

less

than the foreign tariff.

In each case the trade volume would shrink

below that achieved with equal consumer prices across countries.

Suniniing up, we have found that the only incentive compatibility
constraint which may be violated in the first—best is (7a):

when the good

state a occurs, the home consumer may prefer to announce that state b
It is possible to design policies which avoid this problem, but

occurred.

they have the feature that in state b consumer prices are not equalized across

countries. This distortion is optimal given the incomplete information. The
exact relation between consumer prices, and the corresponding trade policies,

are sensitive to the industry affected by the uncertainty.

In state a

equality of consumer prices across countries is maintained.

VI. Direction for Research
The result that the incentive compatible trade policies are sensitive to
the industry affected by the uncertainty is disappointing from a policy viewpoint. In practice, it may be difficult to identify the source of uncertainty
and design corresponding trade policies.

In this section we will argue that

in a inultiperiod game between the countries simpler policies may be available

to maximize welfare.

Our results are meant to be suggestive rather than

conclusive.

Recall from section III that with full information trade policy the
expected value of revenue spent or collected is zero.

Consider our model

repeated over many periods, and suppose that over this time horizon the

countries agree that the revenue spent or collected must sum to zero
exactly.

For simplicity suppose that each state is equally likely to occur

and that uncertainty affects the import industry.

— 15 —

In

this setting if the home country ever falsely announces that state b

has occurred, there by receiving rather than giving an income transfer, this
To

will raise its "net indebtedness" as measured by revenue collected.

achieve zero net revenue at the end of the game the home country may have to
forfeit an income transfer, i.e. announce state a, even when state b occurs.

Thus, it appears that the incentive to falsely announce the bad state and

receive an income transfer will be moderated by its effect on revenue
collected, and the subsequent need to transfer income abroad. The critical
element in the choice of which state to announce is the probability

that

after one false announcement is made (to receive income), another false
announcement (giving income) must be made later in the game to achieve zero
net revenue.

< 1, but let us consider the case

We would generally expect that
=

1.11

If the home consumer falsely announces that state b occurs, a

welfare gain of U[h(zb,a)] —

U[h(za,a)]

is obtained.

If a false announcement

of state a must be made later, a welfare loss of U[h(zb,b)1 —

U[h(zab)]

is

obtained. This set of two false annoucements will be taken by the consumer if
and only if,

U[h(zb,a)] —

U[h(z

,afl > U[h(zb,b)] —

U[h(zab)]

> U[h(za,a)] +

U[h(zb,b)]

,

(ha)

or rewriting,

U[h(zb,a)] +

U[h(Zab)]

.

(hib)

Note that whether the home country makes both false announcements or not, the

utility obtained by the foreign country in those two periods would be
unchanged at U*[h*(_za)] +

U*[h*(_zb)].

— 16 —

We

assert that in the first—best equilibrium (11) could never hold. The

reason is that the right side of (lib) is the maximized value of expected

utility with equally probable states, while the left side of (llb) is a
feasible choice of trade bundles for the home consumer. Thus, in the first—
best equilibrium the right side of (llb) must exceed the left.

It follows

that the home consumer would never wish to make the two false announcements.
This means that the first—best equilibrium would always be incentive compat-

ible. Such a strong result is obtained under the artificial assumption that
=

1.

More generally, with 0 < a < 1 in a multi—period model, we could

expect that the first—best equilibrium is more likely to be Incentive compatible than in the one—period model considered in this paper. Establishing such
a result appears to be a useful area for further research.

— 17 —

Footnotes

1. We also assume that the feasible production set in the bad state of nature

is contained within the feasible set in the good state.

This assumption is

needed to ensure that it is feasible for the home country to falsely announce
that the bad state has occurred.

2. By assuming ex—post production decisions and a single consumer in each
country we ensure that there is no need for contingent markets under autarky,

in contrast to Newbery and Stiglitz (1982), Eaton and Grossman (1984) and
Staiger and Tabellini (1986).

3. From (3) and (4) we have (A) h1(z5,s)/h2(z5,s) =

Uhi(za,a)/Uhi(zb,b) =
*
*
.

= g1(x5)/g2(x5).

U*h(_za)/U*h(_zb)•

h(—z5)/h(—z5),

(A) implies that g1(x)/g2(x5)

Since g is homogenous of degree one its first derivatives
*

*

can be written as functions of the ratios x1/x2 and x1/x25.
that these ratios are equal and, therefore, g(x5) =

s = a,b.

and (B)

From (B) we have that U g(x)IU gj(x) =

g(x)

It follows

for i = 1,2 and

*
*
U -gj(x)/U*
g(x),

and

so (5) follows.

4. Newbery and Stiglitz (1982) argue that optimality in the model of Helpman
and Razin (1978) depends on the multiplicative production uncertainty which is
used.

5. Article XIX of the GATT states that if one country withdraws tariff
concessions then the affected parties may withdraw "substantially equivalent
concessions" (sec. 3.(a)), though It is unclear how the equivalence is to be
judged.

6. An analogous result for labor contracts is obtained by Azariadis (1983,
sec. II), when the firm is risk neutral. That result depends on consumption
and leisure being perfect substitutes for the worker.

— 18 —

7. If the productivity shock helps one industry but harms the other, then
label state a as the state where both countries have utility greater than or

equal to state b, in the complete markets equilibrium. Recall that from (5)
the utility levels of the countries must be positively correlated.

8. An analogous result for labor contracts in obtained By Azariadis (1983,
sec. V) and Holmstrom and Hart (1985, sec. 4.3).

That result is sensitive,

however, to the relative risk aversion of firms and workers; see Azariadis and
Stlglitz (1983, sec. V).

9. The Lagrangian is L =

ir5U[h(z,s)]

+ O{—U[h(zb,a)]
+ U[h(za,a)1} + 4{_U* +

U*[h*(_z5) ]}.
10. Findlay and Grubert (1959) analyse the types of production uncertainty
which lead to output changes biased towards one good or the other.
11. Note that since we have assumed the states are equally probable, from (6)

the revenue spent in one state would equal the revenue collected in the
other. Thus, making two false announcements as we consider below would offset
each other in their effect on net revenue.

— 19 —

References
Azariadis, C.: Employment with asymmetric information, Quarterly Journal of
Economics 98, Supplement, 157—172, 1983.

Azariadis, C. and J. E. Stiglitz:

Implicit contracts and fixed—price

equilibria, Quarterly Journal of Economics 98, Supplement, 1—22, 1983.

Eaton, J. and G. M. Grossman:

Tariffs as insurance:

optimal commercial

policy when domestic markets are incomplete, Canadian Journal of
Economics, 1984.

Findlay, R. and H. Grubert:

Factor intensities, technological progress and

the terms of trade, Oxford Economic Papers, 111—121, 1959, reprinted as

Chapter 20 in Jagdish N. Bhagwati, ed.:

International Trade: Selected

Readings. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1981.

Helpman, E. and A. Razin: Welfare aspects of international trade in goods and
securities, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 489—508, 1978.

Holmstom, B. and 0. Hart:

The theory of contracts, presented at the Fifth

World Congress, Econometric Society, August 1985.

Newbery, D.M.G. and J.E. Stiglitz:

The choice of techniques and the

optimality of market equilibrium with rational expectations, Journal of
Political Economy 90(2), 223—246, April 1982.

Rosen, S.:

Implicit contracts, Journal of Economic Literature 23(3), 1144—

1175, September 1985.

Staiger, R. and G. Tabellini:

Discretionary trade policy and excessive

protection, Stanford University, revised May 1986.

Utm
Q)

E

0

Home Export
Figtire 1

X, E

C\J

0

I

E

Y

0

I

I

Good /

Figure 2

F

I

Q)

E

0

Home Export
Figure 3

