                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     THE FISCAL STRESS ARISING FROM STATE AND LOCAL RETIREE HEALTH
                               OBLIGATIONS

                                              Byron Lutz
                                             Louise Sheiner

                                         Working Paper 19779
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19779


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2014




This paper was prepared for the 2013 NBER Conference on State and Local Health Plans for Active
and Retired Public Employees. We thank Anne Burton, Jeff Groesbeck, and Lena Yemelyanov for
truly outstanding research assistance. The paper would not have been feasible without them. We
thank Robert Novy-Marx and Josh Rauh for generously sharing their pension calculations and Michael
Morris of the Social Security Administration for providing us with the Social Security mortality rate
assumptions. We thank Don Boyd, Greg Duffee, Josh Rauh, Kim Rueben, Winthrop Smith and participants
at the 2013 Municipal Finance Conference, the 2013 NBER Conference on State and Local Health
Plans for Active and Retired Public Employees, the Federal Reserve Board Lunchtime Workshop
and the Cleveland Federal Reserve Seminar Series for helpful suggestions. We also thank the numerous
public officials who discussed the details of public sector retiree health care in their state with us. The
analysis and conclusions reached in the paper are the authors’ alone and do not indicate concurrence
by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Byron Lutz and Louise Sheiner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
The Fiscal Stress Arising from State and Local Retiree Health Obligations
Byron Lutz and Louise Sheiner
NBER Working Paper No. 19779
January 2014
JEL No. H0,H53,H72,H75

                                              ABSTRACT

A major factor weighing down the long-term finances of state and local governments is the obligation
to fund retiree benefits. While state and local government pension obligations have been analyzed
in great detail, much less attention has been paid to the costs of the other major retiree benefit provided
by these governments: retiree health insurance. The first portion of the paper uses the information
contained in the annual actuarial reports for public retiree health plans to reverse engineer the cash
flows underlying the liabilities given in the report. Obtaining the cash flows allows us to construct
liability estimates which are consistent across governments in terms of the discount rate, actuarial
method and assumptions concerning medical cost inflation and mortality. We find that the total unfunded
accrued liability of state and local governments for the provision of retiree health care exceeds $1
trillion, or about ⅓ of total state and local government revenue. Relative to pension obligations discounted
at the same rate, we find that unfunded retiree health care liabilities are ½ the size of unfunded pension
obligations. We also find that using assumptions concerning the growth in health care costs that are
arguably more realistic than those employed by most states actually reduces the size of the liability
in most cases. Pushing in the opposite direction, we find that using plausibly more realistic mortality
assumptions increases the size of liability. The second portion of the paper places retiree health care
obligations into context by examining the budget pressures associated with retiree health on a continuing,
largely pay-as-you go basis. We find that much of the projected increase in retiree health obligations
as a share of revenue is the result of health care cost growth. On average, states could put their retiree
health obligations into long-run fiscal balance by contributing an additional ¾ percent of total revenue
toward the benefit each year. There is, however, wide variation across the states, with the majority
of states requiring little in the way of additional financing, but some states requiring a significantly
larger increase.


Byron Lutz
Federal Reserve Board of Governors
Research Division
20th and C Streets, NW
Washington, DC 20551-0001
Byron.F.Lutz@frb.gov

Louise Sheiner
Federal Reserve Board
Research Division
20th and C Streets, NW
Washington, DC 20551-0001
louise.m.sheiner@frb.gov
I. Introduction

Obligations for retiree benefits are among the most important factors behind the long-term fiscal
imbalances of state and local governments (e.g. State Budget Crisis Task Force 2012). Although
state and local pension obligations have been analyzed in great detail, much less attention has
been paid to the costs of health insurance—the other major retiree benefit provided by these
governments. Almost all state and local governments provide this benefit to their former
employees and very few have put away funds with which to honor these obligations. Moreover,
the ever escalating cost of medical care is expected to push up the cost of providing the benefit
over time. This paper seeks to answer two fundamental questions surrounding state and local
government retiree health care liabilities. First, how large are these obligations? Second, are
these benefits fiscally sustainable over the long-term?

Retiree health insurance became prevalent in both the public and private labor markets following
the 1965 introduction of Medicare, which significantly lowered the cost of providing the benefit.
As with any fringe benefit, the coverage formed part of the employee compensation package and
it was also used to encourage early retirement (Blau and Gilleskie 2001; Marton and Woodbury
2006). Initially, both private firms and state and local governments accounted for the cost of the
benefit on an annual, cash basis – i.e. they accounted for only the annual expenditures for current
retirees. This situation changed for firms in 1989 when the Financial Accounting Standards
Board (FASB) required employers to begin accounting for retiree health care on an accrual basis
– i.e. the full expected future cost of promised benefits had to be acknowledged each year. The
accounting statements which followed revealed extremely large liabilities. At least partially in
response, firms began phasing the benefit out: In 1988, 66 percent of employers with 20 or more
employees offered retiree health insurance; by 1993, only 36 percent of firms offered coverage
(Kaiser Trust 2006). The prevalence of retiree health insurance in the private sector has
continued to decline since (Fronstin 2012). 1

In sharp contrast, the significant majority of state and local governments continue to offer their
retirees health coverage. Although there is immense heterogeneity in the provision of the
benefit, full coverage is often provided until the retiree reaches Medicare eligibility at age 65, at
which time the coverage either ends or converts to a supplemental plan. The coverage is usually
explicitly subsidized by the government offering it. In some cases, though, the subsidy is
implicit: the retiree is offered access to an insurance pool which includes both current workers
and retirees. The presence of the younger, current workers reduces the insurance premium for
the retirees (and raises the cost to the government of providing insurance to their current
workforce).

In 2004, the Government Accounting Standards Board (GASB) issued a statement requiring state
and local governments to begin accounting for retiree health benefits on an accrual basis. The

1
    This paragraph draws heavily from Clark and Morrill (2010).

                                                          1
actuarial reports which followed revealed extremely large unfunded liabilities for many
governments. Likely in response to both the acknowledgement of the size of the liabilities, as
well as the escalating cost of the benefit, many state and local governments have begun to pair
back the generosity of the benefit through actions such as increasing the percent of the premium
that must be paid by the retiree and by tightening eligibility standards (e.g. Clark, Morrill, and
Vanderweide 2013, Franzel and Brown 2012). Some governments have even eliminated the
benefit (Franzel and Brown 2013). Going forward, the availability of potentially-subsidized
health insurance through the health care exchanges operating under the Affordable Care Act
(ACA) may lead more governments to curtail their retiree health coverage. 2 Reducing and
eliminating the benefit, though, comes at a cost to governments as it reduces the level of
compensation being provided to its employees. In a competitive labor market, this will require
boosting other forms of compensation or accepting employees of lower quality (Qin and
Chernew 2013).

In order to answer our first question—how large are state and local government liabilities for
retiree health care?—we construct a comprehensive set of projections of these obligations. In
doing so, we build on past work by Clark 2009, 2010, Clark and Morrill 2010, 2011, GAO 2009
and Pew 2012 that has carefully analyzed the stated liabilities in the retiree health care actuarial
reports mandated by GASB. In addition to being the logical starting point for an analysis of
these liabilities, this approach benefits from being transparent (PEW 2010). Moreover, it has
clearly been successful in drawing considerable public policy attention to the issue (e.g. State
Budget Crisis Task Force 2012).

We advance this existing literature in two ways. First, in reporting the present value of future
liabilities, governments have significant latitude in setting the assumptions which underlie the
stated obligation. For instance, they have discretion over the rate at which to discount future
benefit payments, and also differ in their assumptions about underlying inflation and future heath
care cost growth. As a result, comparing the size of stated liabilities across governments is
problematic as it is unclear if differences reflect fundamental budget issues, such as the
generosity of the benefit, or merely reflect different actuarial and economic assumptions. We
address this lack of comparability by harmonizing the assumptions upon which the liability
estimates are based. Our estimates are therefore directly comparable to each other across
governments. Second, much of the past literature relies on the state government actuarial
reports. In some states, local government retirees receive their health insurance from the state
and are therefore captured by the state report. In other cases, local retirees receive the benefit
directly from their former local government employer and are not captured by the state report.
Thus, despite the fact that most local government retirees are eligible for the benefit, there is
significant variation across states in the percent of the local retirees captured by the state

2
  For example, in May of 2013, the city of Chicago announced its intention to terminate its retiree health care
benefit. The city expects that retirees not yet eligible for Medicare will be able to find affordable coverage through
the ACA exchanges being setup by the state of Illinois (Shields 2013).

                                                           2
actuarial reports. The past work which has examined local government obligations has focused
on subsets of local governments. 3 Given that our aim is to assess the total fiscal burden of retiree
health within each state, we need to fully account for all local government liabilities. We
therefore develop a methodology and collect the data required to estimate the size of retiree
health obligations for all local government retirees.

We produce our liability estimates by projecting the annual cash flows upon which the stated
liabilities are based. (The stated liabilities are equal to the present discounted value of the
projected future cash flows needed to fund the benefit.) While such cash flows have been
constructed for retiree pension obligations (Novy-Marx and Rauh, 2011, 2013a), we are the first
to construct them for retiree health insurance. We reverse engineer the cash flows using the
information provided in the retiree health care liability reports mandated by GASB. As
discussed above, many of these reports cover only state employees and we therefore use
supplemental information to gross up these cash flows so that they cover the entire state and
local government sector. Once the statistical machinery is in place to produce the cash flows, we
can alter the assumptions upon which they are based. Specifically, we produce liability estimates
harmonized across three key factors: the discount rate, current and future life expectancy, and
health care cost inflation. Moreover, we impose a common actuarial methodology.

We answer our second question—are retiree health benefits fiscally sustainable over the long-
run—by performing a “current policy” projection. The projection assumes that state and local
government continue to offer retiree health care under the set of policies (e.g. eligibility
requirements) identified in the GASB mandated actuarial reports. A crucial aspect of this
analysis is the need to account for new workers—i.e. those hired in the future—as the liability
analysis only accounts for current workers and retirees. To do so, we develop a methodology for
projecting the flow of new workers and, ultimately, the flow of benefit payments required when
these workers reach retirement. We then add these payments to the payments for current
workers and retirees and assess the overall fiscal burden of the benefit over the long-run.

We find that the total liability of state and local governments for retiree health care equals around
$1.1 trillion dollars, equal to roughly 1/3 of the total annual revenues of the state and local
government sector. There is significant heterogeneity across the states, with several having
liabilities exceeding 80 percent annual revenues. The more thoroughly studied pension liabilities
provide a useful point of comparison. Discounting both pension and retiree health liabilities at
the same rate, we find that unfunded retiree health care liabilities equal around 50 percent of
unfunded pension liabilities. The standard datasets on government finance do not allow for
breaking out expenditures for retiree health care. Our cash flow estimates allow us to fill this
gap: We find that current annual outlays for the benefit equal around $31 billion, equal to about 1

3
  For example, Clark 2010 examines obligations for teachers and GAO 2009 examines obligations for the 39 largest
local governments. We are unaware of any past work which has attempted to account for all retiree health
obligations at the local level in a detailed fashion. There are, however, back-of-the-envelope calculations which
attempt to account for the entirety of the local government sector (e.g. Zion and Varshney 2007).

                                                        3
percent of annual revenues. In terms of fiscal sustainability, we find that state and local
governments could fund their retiree health obligations in perpetuity by annually dedicating an
additional ¾ percent of total revenue toward the benefit. There is significant heterogeneity,
though, with some states requiring a substantially larger funding increase to bring the benefit into
fiscal balance. Finally, we find that health care cost inflation is likely to be the primary driver of
growth in benefit payments.

The paper proceeds as follows. Section II presents the methodology and results for our first
question—how large are the retiree health care liabilities. Section III presents the methodology
and results for our second question—how much fiscal pressure will these liabilities apply to state
and local governments. Section IV concludes.



II. The Present Value of Retiree Health Care Obligations

We estimate the annual cash flows for state and local government retiree health care obligations
in two primary steps. First, we construct the cash flows for state government employees using
detailed information on these liabilities. Second, we scale up the state cash flows to account for
liabilities at the local government level. The scaling is based upon the best available information
on a state-by-state basis.

State Government Employees

For each state, we collected the 2011 fiscal year actuarial report required by GASB statements 43
and 45 which details the liabilities of the state retiree health insurance plan. 4 Henceforth, we
refer to these reports with the shorthand of “GASB reports”. The reports generally provide
enough detail to construct a reasonable projection of the cash flows of the retiree health plan.
Specifically, for each state we collect the following 12 data objects: (1) the age distribution of
current retirees by gender, (2) the age and years of service matrix for the current workforce, (3-5)
expected rates of turnover, disability, and death by age and gender, (6-7) matrices for retirement
and quit/termination probabilities by age, years of service and gender, (8) the eligibility
requirements for retiree health insurance, (9) take up rates for retiree health insurance, (10-11)
employer and retiree costs for retiree health insurance by age and gender, and (12) the assumed
health care cost inflation rate. For many states, some of this information, particularly on
retirement and other termination rates, was available only in the state government or state
employee pension fund Comprehensive Annual Financial Reports (CAFRs) or the actuarial
statement for the pension plan rather than in the GASB reports directly. In other states, some of
the necessary information was not included in either the health care actuarial report or in any of
the above sources, including data elements such as the age distribution or gender mix of current

4
 In some cases we obtained the 2012 report or the 2010 report. In these cases we adjust our cash flow estimates to
place them on a 2011 fiscal year basis.

                                                         4
retirees or current workers; for these states, we used information from supplemental sources or
information from an adjacent state with a similar retiree health plan.

Some states issue multiple reports for different types of employees. For example, state
university employees often are covered in a report distinct from the report for general state
employees. Our state reports are the single report in each state which includes general state
employees. In many cases this report also covers some or all of the local government workers in
a state.

We collected numerous additional state reports and these are used in the process of grossing up
the state reports (see below). The general employee report for New York City (NYC) reveals
liabilities larger than any single state save New Jersey. We therefore, in addition to the states,
also calculate the cash flows for NYC. Finally, neither Nebraska nor Oklahoma declared any
liabilities for retiree health care in 2011 and, as a result, we do not calculate cash flows for these
states.

We use this information to construct the future cash flows required under two actuarial liability
concepts – the PVB and the AAL. These concepts only account for liabilities associated with
current workers and current retirees. They do no capture liabilities associated with employees
hired in the future (after 2011). We do, though, account for such workers in the analysis
presented in section III.



Present Value of Benefits (PVB)

The present value of benefits (PVB) is a liability measure which includes both obligations
already accrued, as well as obligations associated with the future service of current employees
(who are assumed to retire according to actuarial assumptions). The methodology used to
construct these cash flows is straightforward. For current retirees, we simply use the mortality
tables to age the population each year, and use the information on current employer retiree health
insurance costs, cost sharing and expected medical inflation to calculate the state government
cost for all surviving retirees over time. For current workers, the procedure is considerably more
cumbersome in practice but not more difficult conceptually. We age the workforce each year
(incrementing years of service as well as age) and use the probabilities of retirement, disability,
death, and quits/termination by age and years of service to create a matrix of newly-retired
workers by year. We then use information on take-up rates, cost sharing, and health cost
inflation to calculate the retiree health obligations for future retirees by year.

Actuarially Accrued Liabilities (AAL)

The Actuarially Accrued Liability (AAL) is a narrower liability concept as it only captures
liabilities accrued to date by current workers and retirees (i.e. it does not account for the future


                                                   5
accruals of current workers). GASB allows states and localities to use a variety of methods to
calculate the AAL, the two most common being the Projected Unit Credit (PUC) method and the
Entry Age Normal (EAN) method. We calculate both concepts for each state. Under the PUC
method, the share of benefits already accrued is equal to the ratio of the years of service already
completed to the years of service that will be completed by retirement. 5

Following Novy-Marx and Rauh (2011), we note that, for an employee age a with y years of
service who will retire in T years, with a present value of benefits equal to PVBa , y ,T , the PUC
measure of the AAL is just:
                                                           y 
                                            PUCa , y ,T =       PVBa , y ,T                                        (1)
                                                           y+T 

The EAN uses a different method to accrue benefits over time. It is based on the idea that
employers invest a fixed fraction of an employee’s compensation each year so that the
retiree health benefits will be fully funded at the time of retirement. The AAL under this
methodology is simply the value of such an account at any given time. It depends on the rate
of salary growth and the discount rate, as well as on the likelihood that workers stay
employed long enough to receive a benefit. Let p be salary growth and r be the discount
                      (1 + p )
rate, and define φ =           . Also define S a − y ,t as the probability of remaining employed
                      (1 + r )
from entry age (a-y) to time t. Then, the EAN measure of the AAL is:

                                                         y i             
                                                         ∑ φ Sa − y ,i   
                                        EANa , y ,T   =  yi =+T1          PVB                                      (2)
                                                                             a , y ,T

                                                         ∑ φ Sa − y ,i
                                                                  i
                                                                          
                                                         i =1            

If the rate of salary growth is equal to the discount rate (so that ϕ =1) and if every worker who is
hired stays long enough to receive a health benefit (so that S a − y ,t = 1 for all i), then the PUC is
equal to the EAN. But if the rate of salary growth is smaller than the discount rate and/or many
employees leave before they are eligible for a benefit, then the EAN is larger than the PUC. 6 In
most states, an employee has to retire from the job in order to receive a health benefit (unlike
pensions, there is not much accruing of benefits for workers who leave before retirement), and so




5
  States differ in how they define the years of service at retirement—some states base it on the years of service that
will have been completed at the time a worker is first eligible to retire with benefits, whereas others base it on years
that will have been completed when the employee actually retires. When replicating the states’ calculations, we use
whichever method the state specified.
6
  Essentially, the contributions to the “account” made on behalf of employees who leave before becoming eligible
are used to fund the benefits of those who remain.

                                                              6
the EAN tends to be larger than the PUC. 7 Because the majority of states use the EAN for both
retiree health and pension reporting, we use it as our measure of accrued liabilities for all states
(except for calibration purposes). Using the PUC instead would reduce our estimates by an
average of about 8 percent.


Calibration

Our cash flows inevitably contain some error, primarily due to incomplete data in many of the
reports which required the use of assumptions or data from neighboring states. For instance, in
some states retirees can choose between several different health insurance plans. The GASB
reports, however, do not always provide information on the percent of retirees choosing a given
plan and we are forced to make assumptions about the percentages. Similarly, the reports do not
always contain information about the age distribution of their retirees or their workforces. To
address these and other sources of measurement error, we compare the present value of our
projected cash flows to the present value for these flows given in the GASB report. We then
calibrate our projected cash flows such that we match the stated present value calculated with the
state-chosen discount rate. Following Novy-Marx and Rauh (2009, 2011) we calibrate using a
geometric series that starts at one:
                                            Ctcal ,m Ctm *(1 + λ m )t −1
                                            =                                                                   (3)

where Ctm is our cash flow estimate, Ctcal ,m is the calibrated cash flow estimate, 𝜆 is the calibration
parameter, t indexes year and m indexes the three actuarial methodologies underlying the cash
flows: PVB, EAN and PUC. 𝜆 is chosen to satisfy
                                           ∞     (1 + λ m )t −1 Ctm
                                           ∑
                                           t=1     (1 + rstated )
                                                                          m
                                                                      = PVstated                                (4)

        m
Where PVstated is the present value of the retiree health care liability given in the GASB actuarial
report.

The calibration uses state-level variation in the stated present values to proxy for unobserved
variation in other variables, holding constant the year t liabilities. The geometric series is
appealing because it implicitly assumes that any errors due to unobserved data accumulate and
intensify over time—a possibility we view as likely.

We calibrate our retiree and active worker cash flow streams separately. All states report a
present value for either the EAN or PUC methodology. Some states provide the PVB present

7
  On the other hand, although wage growth for the economy at large tends to be lower than the discount rate, wage
growth over an employee’s tenure, which is the appropriate measure for the EAN calculation, tends to be higher
than the discount rate. We use the average salary growth over the first 10 years of tenure by state.

                                                             7
value, others do not. When available, we calibrate directly to the stated present value based on
the methodology upon which the cash flow is based — i.e. we calibrate the PVB stream to the
stated PVB present value. When the report does not contain the present value corresponding to
the methodology underlying a given cash flow, we use the EAN or PUC to calculate the
calibration factor (depending on which AAL measure is provided in the report). 8

We calculate the calibration factors using state-chosen values for medical cost inflation,
mortality and other projections. Once we have generated the calibration factors, however, we
can produce alternative cash flows based on different underlying assumptions, by recalculating
the retiree health obligations under the different assumption (i.e. different medical cost inflation)
and then applying the calibration factor.

Our uncalibrated estimates are, on average, fairly accurate and the calibration therefore does not
play a large role in the present value liabilities we report for the U.S as a whole. Our average
error for the total AAL liabilities (using the state-chosen actuarial method) is 6 percent. The
mean absolute error is a bit larger at 11 percent. For the PVB liabilities, our average error is
negative 1 percent and the mean absolute error is 5 percent (calculated over the 33 states and
NYC which report a PVB).

Local Governments

The provision of public sector retiree health care to local government workers varies both by
state and by type of local government worker (Clark 2010, Clark and Morrill 2010). In some
cases there is centralized provision at the state level. This is often the case for K-12 teachers and
other local education employees. In other cases, the benefit is provided directly by the local
government—e.g. municipality, county, school district, etc.—that had employed the retiree. In
at least a few instances (Pennsylvania, for example), there is hybrid provision with retirees
simultaneously receiving both centralized provision and local provision.

Collecting and processing the GASB OPEB reports for local governments in the manner done for
the state reports is infeasible. To cite two admittedly extreme examples, Massachusetts and
Pennsylvania have 87 and 1,422 entities, respectively, which potentially provide retiree health
care. Instead, we collect information on the aggregate state AALs for the two principal types of
local government workers: K-12 education and other. The first step is determining who provides
retiree health care to these workers. We use the state GASB reports as a starting point. In
practice, though, the reports are often insufficient or misleading in determining who covers the
two types of local workers. 9 We therefore rely on additional sources of information, such as

8
  For example, if the state does not provide the PVB present value, we calibrate the PVB cash stream using the AAL
calibration factor.
9
  Several state GASB reports contain significant amounts of actuarial information for teachers which might be
construed as suggesting that teachers are covered by the state retiree health plan. Further research, however, reveals
that the state plan covers only the negligible number of teachers employed directly by the state (or grandfathered
into the state plan) while the vast majority of teachers in the state are not covered by the state plan.

                                                          8
publications and web sources addressed to recipients of retiree health care and Chapter 6 of
Clark and Morrill (2010). In many instances, we contacted public officials to collect the
information.

The second step involves obtaining the information on the aggregate local AALs for the two
classes of workers. Our preferred sources of this information are GASB OPEB reports (covering
local workers), state government CAFRs and pension fund CAFRs. These sources, though, are
generally only useful for states in which the provision of local retiree health care is centralized or
for very large local governments such as central cities or large counties. For non-centralized
states and states for which we failed to locate the above reports, we rely on the best source of
information available. Many decentralized provision states have commissioned reports which
provide the aggregate AAL across the localities within the state. In other cases, non-government
actors have produced similar reports.

Once we have obtained the aggregate AALs, we gross up the state government cash flows to
reflect the local obligations. Specifically, we multiply the state government cash flow at all
points in time by (1+s) where s is the local scaling factor: s= se + so, se=(aggregate local
education AAL / state AAL), and so=(aggregate local non-education AAL / state AAL). For
instance, if the aggregate AAL for local education workers plus the aggregate AAL for other
local workers sums to 100 percent of the state reported AAL, then s=1. By grossing up in this
manner, we are assuming that the state workers provide a reliable proxy for the local workers in
terms of the factors such as the age-service distribution of active workers and the mortality of
retirees that determine the contour, or slope, of the retiree health care cash flows. We are also
implicitly assuming that aspects of the retiree health plan that influence the contour, such as the
relative generosity of the pre and post-Medicare benefit, are similar across state and local
governments.

For some states, we were unable to locate any information on AALs for education and/or other
local workers. (In many of these cases public officials in the state confirmed that no systematic
collection of information has occurred on local OPEB obligations.) In these instances, we use
Census Bureau counts of local government education and non-education employment and similar
counts of state government employment. Specifically, we set the scale factor s equal to the ratio
of the count of local employees in question (education or non-education) to the count of
employees covered in the state GASB report. For example, if we are lacking information on the
aggregate AAL for non-education workers and the state GASB report covers only state workers,
we set so equal to the number of local workers divided by the number of state workers. As
before, we are assuming that the state workers provide a reliable proxy for the local workers in
terms of factors which determine the contour of the cash flows. In addition, though, we are
further assuming that the per-active worker generosity of the program can be proxied for by the
state cash flows. The validity of this assumption rests on the fact that state and local
governments must compete for workers in the same labor market. We acknowledge, though, that
the procedure is imperfect.
                                                  9
We handle state government employees not covered in the primary state GASB in an analogous
fashion to our treatment of local workers. When we are able to obtain an AAL liability for the
group, we base s on this. Otherwise, we rely on the ratio of the number of state government
employees in the relevant category—e.g. higher education—to the number of workers covered
by the general state report.

We often use both the aggregate AAL method and the worker count method simultaneously. For
instance, for the state of Illinois, we obtained the AAL retiree health liability for the City of
Chicago and for Cook County (from their GASB reports) and scale up the stated liabilities based
on these. For the remainder of local government employees in the state, we scale using the
worker count method.

Appendix Table A1 contains the scaling factors for all of the states as well as detailed
information on the sources of information underlying these scaling factors. The table also covers
a few cases in which the state retiree health plan covers some, but not all, of one of the local
worker categories. (This typically arises when localities have the choice of opting into the state
retiree health program.) These situations are handled on a case-by-case basis as discussed on
Table A1. In all cases, we have sought to obtain the best estimates possible for a given state, as
opposed to enforcing uniformity in the method at which these estimates are derived across the
states.



Results

Figure 1 presents some simple plots of the nominal liabilities for retiree health that we calculate
from the GASB reports. Panel A shows the total annual PVB and the AAL (using the EAN
methodology) for the entire United States, and Panel B decomposes these into a set of
projections for retirees and current workers (actives). As would be expected, the liabilities for
the existing retirees fade over time. (Only one estimate is shown for retirees because the PVB
equals the AAL for this group as all obligations for retirees are fully accrued.) Liabilities for
current active workers rise over time, driven by actives moving into retirement and the increase
in the cost of providing medical care. The nominal obligations peak somewhere around 2040 for
most states. At this point, mortality begins to dominate medical cost inflation and the annual
liability begins to fall. The fact that costs for Medicare-eligible retirees (age 65+) are generally
less than costs for pre-Medicare retirees also plays a role.

Table 1 reports the AALs and PVBs of the retiree health insurance obligations for our estimate of
the joint retiree health obligations of state and local governments, using the EAN method to
calculate the AAL and imposing a uniform discount rate of 5 percent across the states. The
5 percent discount rate is equal to the rounded average of the state-chosen discount rates.



                                                 10
Column (1) of the table reports the scaling factor that we used to gross up the state obligations
and assets to capture the retiree health obligations of local governments. For some states, like
Delaware, New Jersey, and Hawaii, all local workers receive their retiree health benefits through
the state plan, and no grossing up is necessary. In other states, like Minnesota and Florida, the
state retiree health plan covers only a small fraction of the state and local workers who receive
retiree health insurance.

As shown in the row at the bottom of the second page of Table 1, labeled “U.S.”, the scaling
factor s equals 1.2 for the nation as a whole. 10 The scaling factor can be decomposed into the
portion based on the reported retiree health liabilities of local governments (as well as reported
state liabilities outside the primary plan) and the portion due to inflating based on census public
employee counts: The portion due to stated liabilities is 0.67 and the portion due to employee
counts is 0.49. Thus, for the U.S. as whole, 46 percent of the state and local government cash
flow is based directly on our reverse engineering of the state reports, 31 percent is based on
scaling up the estimated cash flows on the basis of reported local government liabilities, and the
remaining 23 percent is based on scaling up on the basis of employee counts. The 23 percent
due to employee count scaling is clearly the portion of our estimates subject to the most
uncertainty. In order to assess the likely accuracy of the employee count scaling, we examine the
9 states for which we account for local education liabilities by scaling up on the basis of stated
liabilities in CAFRs or local education GASB reports. For these states, we recalculate the local
education liabilities using the employee count method. The results are encouraging as the
employee count scaling method produces an aggregate accrual liability equal to 91 percent of the
aggregate liability produced using the local liability scaling method. On average, the employee
count method appears to produce a reasonable scaling factor. 11

For the U.S. as a whole, we estimate that accrued state and local government retiree health care
liabilities equal roughly $1.1 trillion dollars. Governments could address this liability by raising
additional revenue and/or reducing expenditures. The total annual revenue of state and local
governments roughly equals their total annual expenditure, as these governments operate under
balanced budget requirements. Total annual revenue is therefore a useful metric for assessing
the magnitude of the overall fiscal adjustment on both the spending and revenue side of the
budget required to address retiree health care underfunding. Our liability estimate is equal to
approximately 34 percent of total annual revenues. However, states and localities do not have
the ability to adjust all elements of their revenue stream. For instance, around 20 percent of total
revenues come from grants from the federal government and these grants cannot be adjusted

10
   The 1.2 scaling factor for the U.S. can be calculated as the weighted average of the scaling factors across the
states, with the weights equal to each state’s AAL liability. The scaling factor is extremely similar if the weights are
instead set equal to each state’s PVB liability.
11
   The 9 states are the states for which we account for the local education liabilities in isolation – i.e. not as part of a
general scaling up including more than just local education. See Appendix Table 1. Unfortunately, the manner in
which we collected the non-education local scaling factor makes conducting this exercise for the non-education local
liabilities cumbersome.

                                                            11
upward by state and local governments to address retiree health care funding. If governments
wish to address these liabilities solely through revenue side adjustments, they would most likely
need to increase general own source revenue – basically taxes and fees. Our retiree health care
liability estimate is equal to roughly 60 percent of these revenues.

In contrast to our estimate of $1.1 trillion estimate, focusing only on state-administered plans and
utilizing the state chosen discount rate and actuarial methodology, PEW (2012) estimates
accrued liabilities of $660 billion. Most retiree health plans are largely unfunded, so there are
generally only modest differences between the AALs and the unfunded AALs (UAALs), defined
as the AAL less the assets in a dedicated trust fund. Specifically, we estimate that for the U.S. as
a whole, retiree health benefits are 97 percent unfunded, although Ohio, Arizona, and Oregon are
only about 60 to 70 percent unfunded. 12 Similarly, PEW (2012), focusing on state-run plans,
estimated that they were 95 percent unfunded. Turning to the right-hand side of Table 1, using
the broader PVB concept, which incorporates liabilities associated with the future accruals of
current workers, results in a liability estimate of about $1.5 trillion.

Retiree health obligations for state and local workers vary tremendously across the states, with
the present value of accrued actuarial benefits ranging from a low of nearly 0 percent of state and
local revenue (Idaho) to a high of 91 percent (Hawaii and Illinois). Figure 2 shows the
distribution of the PVBs and UAALs across the states. More than half of our states have PVBs
that are less than 50 percent of 2011 revenues, but a number of states have PVBs approaching or
exceeding 100 percent of revenues. A similar pattern is found with the unfunded accrued
liabilities (UAALs): many states have seemingly small obligations, but there are a few states
with more significant unfunded liabilities.

Expenditures for retiree health care are not available in any of the standard datasets covering
state and local government budgets produced by the Census Bureau. (The expenditures are
lumped together with a variety of other types of expenditures.) Thus, our estimates of these
annual expenditures are of substantial interest. We find that in 2011, total outlays—including
any deposits or withdrawals from trust funds—equaled around $31 billion, equal to roughly 1
percent of total state and local government revenue.

One way of gauging the severity of the fiscal stress associated with retiree health obligations is to
compare them with the much more thoroughly studied obligations of state and local pension
plans as measured in Novy-Marx and Rauh (2013a). The benefits provided by retiree health
plans are typically much smaller than those provided by pension plans, both because the average
retiree pension is larger than average health expenditures and because the cost of retiree health


12
  In most cases we do not observe assets associated with local workers who are not covered by the primary state
plan. In these instances we assume the percent unfunded is equal to percent unfunded in the primary state plan.
This likely overstates the level of assets at the local level as local plans appear to generally hold lower level of assets
than state plans. In any case, the level of funding is sufficiently low that assumptions over local asset levels are
unlikely to significantly influence the results.

                                                            12
insurance falls sharply at age 65 once retirees become eligible for Medicare. On the other hand,
continuing rapid growth in health costs mean that retiree health expenditures rise at a faster pace
than pension benefits.

In order to place the pension and retiree health and pension benefits on the same footing, we
discount both types of streams using a 5 percent discount rate. (Below we explore variations in
the discount rate.) On average across the states, the present value of retiree health benefits is
22 percent of the present value of pension benefits. However, as shown in the top panel of
Figure 3, there is a wide variation across the states. In 21 states, the retiree health PVB is less
than 10 percent of the pension PVB; in 6 states, the retiree health PVB is 50 percent or more of
the pension PVB.

But most state and local pension plans are significantly better funded than the retiree health
plans. Comparing the unfunded liabilities, we find that the retiree health UAAL is 49 percent of
the pension UAAL. As shown in the bottom panel of Figure 3, in 10 states the retiree health
UAAL is 75 percent or more of the pension UAAL. Thus, while the fiscal strains associated
with retiree health obligations are, on average and for almost all states, smaller than those
associated with pensions, they are not insignificant. Furthermore, Figure 4 shows that there is
some correlation between the size of the unfunded pension liability and the size of the unfunded
retiree health liability, with states like Illinois, New Jersey, Connecticut, Hawaii and Michigan
all showing sizable unfunded liabilities as a share of revenue for both types of employee post-
retirement benefits. On the other hand, a number of the states with large unfunded pension
liabilities have relatively small unfunded retiree health liabilities, including Virginia, Colorado,
and Ohio.

PEW (2012) finds a much greater relative importance of retiree health obligations. While we
find that unfunded accrued retiree health care liabilities amount to around 50 percent of unfunded
accrued pension liabilities, they estimate a ratio of nearly 85 percent. The difference is
potentially accounted for by a number of factors. On one hand, PEW only considers state-run
retiree plans. As pensions have a higher propensity to be state run than do retiree health plans,
this difference works to make our ratio larger than PEW’s and therefore cannot explain the
discrepancy. On the other hand, PEW’s liability estimates are based on the state-chosen discount
rate. As states typically use a substantially higher discount rate for their pension obligations than
for their retiree health care obligations, using the state-chosen rate works to raise PEW’s estimate
of the ratio of health to pension benefits relative to our estimates (which hold the discount rate
constant across the two types of liabilities).



Alternate Assumptions

As noted above, once we have projected the cash flows for each state and calibrated them, we
can easily adjust any of the input assumptions, recalculate the liability and then apply the

                                                 13
calibration factor. We proceed by first varying the key assumptions one-by-one in order to
assess their importance. We then harmonize all of the assumptions simultaneously in order to
produce liability estimates which can be cleanly compared across governments.

The first assumption we explore is the discount rate. The choice of discount rate has been a
contentious issue in evaluating the size of pension liabilities. Governments have traditionally
discounted at the expected rate of return on their pension assets – often around 8 percent.
Financial economics, though, argues that liabilities should be discounted at a rate that reflects
their risk. Pensions have strong legal protections and there are historical examples of
municipalities defaulting on debt obligations while preserving their pension obligations (Brown
and Wilcox 2009). These facts argue for discounting public pensions at a risk-free rate (Novy-
Marx and Rauh 2009, 2011).

The situation is much less clear cut for retiree health care obligations. These obligations have
substantially weaker legal protections than do pension promises and numerous states and
localities have reduced the generosity of, or even eliminated, the benefit in recent years (Clark
2009, Franzel and Brown 2013). 13 It is thus not clear that these employee benefits should be
viewed as a promise that will be fulfilled in all states of the world. If retiree health insurance is
viewed as a benefit provided at the discretion of the government in question, as opposed to as a
guaranteed benefit, a discount rate in excess of the risk free rate should be used. 14



13
   Some governments, though, do have limits on their ability to alter retiree health care benefits due to collective
bargaining agreements and other factors. Moreover, benefit changes are sometimes challenged in court. For
example, a court recently overturned the freezing of retiree health benefits for certain employees of Los Angeles,
CA (Chin 2013).
14
   There are many other uncertainties beyond default risk that have implications for the choice of discount rates,
including uncertainty surrounding employee turnover and retirement rates, mortality, take-up rates, and medical cost
inflation. (Some of these, like employee turnover, retirement, and mortality also apply to pensions, whereas
others—like take-up rates and medical cost inflation, do not.) The implications of these sources of uncertainty
depend on the correlation between the realizations of these variables and the marginal utility of income for the
ultimate payer of retiree health care obligations – the taxpayer – in the same state of the world. Consider medical
costs. Suppose medical costs are pushed up by new technologies that boost the cost of health insurance but also have
important medical benefits. In this case, the taxpayer may have a high marginal utility of income given the need to
fund her own unexpectedly high health insurance costs. She will simultaneously have an unexpectedly large
obligation for retiree health care. This positive correlation points toward a lower discount rate and a higher
valuation of the retiree health care liability. Intuitively, because the retiree health obligation is relatively large in
states of the world where the income needed to fund the obligation is particularly valuable, the obligation is more
onerous – i.e. larger in size. An increase in life expectancy would have similar implications – it would push up the
size of retiree health liabilities and simultaneously push up the marginal value of income for the taxpayer who now
needs to finance consumption over more years of life. Again, the positive correlation points toward a relatively
lower discount rate. Alternatively, medical costs may be pushed higher by robust economic growth and the resulting
increase in demand for medical services. In this state of the world, retiree health care costs are high, but the
marginal value of income likely low because the economic growth has increased the income and asset values of the
taxpayer. In this case, the negative correlation between retiree health care costs and the marginal utility of income
suggests that the discount rate should be relatively higher and the size of the liability lower. Given the ambiguous
implications of the uncertainty around medical cost inflation and other determinants of retiree health for the discount
rate, we do not address it directly and instead focus solely on default risk.

                                                           14
Ideally, we would discount by the return on a financial asset which defaults in exactly the same
states of the world as those in which the government in question defaults on its retiree health care
obligation. We are unaware of any such asset and therefore present several different possible
discount rates on Table 2. The first row again displays the results for the U.S. using a 5 percent
rate. The next row uses the federal government borrowing rate—the zero-coupon Treasury yield
curve—to discount the cash flows. 15 The Treasury yield curve produces a PVB that is 12%
higher than the liability produced by the 5 percent discount rate. This risk-free discounting can
be viewed as expressing the size of the liability under the hypothetical assumption that
governments view these benefits as having iron-clad guarantees. The next row shows the
liabilities using the state-chosen discount rates, which, on average, shows only a slightly lower
liability from the Treasury yield curve. In the final row, we employ the relatively high, and
admittedly somewhat arbitrary, discount rate of 7 percent. The PVB liability is 30 percent lower
than the baseline 5 percent discounting. The sensitivity of the AALs to the discount rate is just a
bit less than the PVBs, reflecting the fact that the AALs are more heavily weighted toward
current benefits (as many of the far off future benefits are as yet unaccrued).

Overall, we view the 7 percent discount rate as not unreasonable given the ease with which
benefits can be adjusted. Nonetheless, for our fully harmonized runs presented below, we
employ the more conservative 5 percent discount rate.

Table 3 examines the sensitivity of the retiree health benefit liabilities to the assumption about
health care cost growth. The assumptions underlying the GASB reports almost universally
assume that health care costs will slow over time, but often to a rate that continues to exceed
inflation and compensation growth. In contrast, both CBO and the Center for Medicare and
Medicaid Services (CMS) assume that private-sector health cost growth will slow over time to a
rate in line with per capita GDP growth. For example, in their 2001 Long-Term Budget Outlook,
CBO assumed that the “excess cost growth” in private insurance premiums—defined as the
excess of health cost growth per beneficiary over GDP per capita—would decline from 1.7
percent in 2011 to 0 percent by 2085. 16 In addition to differences in “excess” cost assumptions,
states also differ in their assumptions about general long-term inflation, which likely also
contributes to differences in expected health inflation. 17

Applying the CBO’s assumptions for medical cost inflation to the retiree health liabilities allows
us to compare the cash flows across the states on a consistent basis. Doing so lowers our
measure of the PVB and AAL for state and local retiree health liabilities by an average of about
5 percent, although the effects varies significantly across the states. In six states (Ohio,

15
   The zero-coupon treasury yield is estimated as of June 30, 2011 – the end of the 2011 fiscal year for most state
governments. It is estimated using the methodology of Gurkaynak, Sack and Wright (2006).
16
   See The 2011 Long-Term Budget Outlook and the accompanying Data Underlying Scenarios and Figures
available at the CBO website (CBO, 2011).
17
   Of course, states vary in how they determine health cost inflation and it is not clear if they would adjust their
expected health cost inflation one-for-one with differences in their long-term inflation rates.

                                                          15
Michigan, Arkansas, Maryland, Delaware, and Rhode Island) the CBO health cost assumption
boosts the PVBs. In the remainder of the states the PVBs are unchanged or decline. The decline
is at least 20 percent in three states (Idaho, North Dakota, and New Mexico.)

Many state projections of retiree health obligations assume that life expectancy remains constant
over the forecast horizon—an assumption at odds with historical experience and with the
methodology used by the actuaries for the Social Security Administration and CBO. 18 Table 4
reports the effect of allowing life expectancy to increase over time. We use mortality tables by
age and sex for healthy white collar annuitants as the starting point, and then allow mortality
rates to decline over time according to the rate of decline assumed in each of the three sets of
assumptions used by Social Security (low, intermediate, and high—where low assumes the
smallest increase in life expectancy, and high the largest). 19 Allowing life expectancy to increase
raises the present value of the retiree health obligations. Assuming that life expectancy increases
according to Social Security’s intermediate assumptions boosts the average AAL and PVB by
about 7 percent; this increase rises to 13 percent under the assumption of faster life expectancy
increase. 20

Table 5 reports our preferred estimates of the present value of retiree health obligations, using
the EAN methodology, CBO excess cost growth, the intermediate assumptions for life
expectancy, and a 5 percent discount rate. As can be seen from the last line of the table, our
preferred UAAL estimate is equal to $1.1 trillion and our preferred PVB estimate is $1.5 trillion.
The full harmonization result in a slightly lower estimate of the retiree health obligations than
that implied by the assumptions in the state reports—with the unfunded accrued liability
3 percent lower, and the present value of benefits 8 percent lower. However, the table reveals
significant heterogeneity across states: Harmonization increases the unfunded AAL by 30
percent or more in 9 states, while it decreases it by 15 percent or more in 8 states.

Figure 5 provides a useful summary of the heterogeneity across the states; the states with the
largest accrued retiree health obligations as a share of total revenue are in red, while those with
the lowest liabilities are in yellow.




18
   Roughly one-half of the states make some adjustment for future life expectancy increases, either by using a lower
mortality rate throughout (a “static” approach) or by allowing mortality rates to decline over time (a “generational”
approach.)
19
   Our starting mortality rates can be found in the Society of Actuaries RP-2000 Tables. The Social Security annual
mortality changes, which are the rates underlying the 2011 Trustees Report, were provided to us by Michael Morris
from the Social Security Administration.
20
   Many experts argue that Social Security’s intermediate projection underestimates the likely increase in life
expectancy (e.g. National Research Council 2012).

                                                         16
III. The Sustainability of Retiree Health Care Benefits

The existence of unfunded accrued liabilities tells us little about the sustainability of retiree
health benefits or about the fiscal pressures associated with them. To a large extent, states and
localities operate their retiree health insurance as a pay-as-you-go program, and all programs
with a pay-as-you-go component—including Social Security and Medicare—have unfunded
accrued liabilities. But these programs are only unsustainable if their costs rise at a faster pace
than the underlying stream of revenue with which they are funded. 21 Programs can become
unsustainable if (1) there are demographic changes that increase the growth in outlays and/or
lower the growth of revenues (2) benefits rise faster than the underlying source of revenue
because of increasing benefits promised over time or (3) a program that had been fully or partly
financed experiences a drop in the value of the assets (thus increasing the size of the unfunded
portion).

The aging of the baby boom appears to play a surprisingly small role in the increase in retiree
health outlays over time, at least on average. Figure 6 plots the sum of the annual retiree health
obligations across the states for current workers and retirees as a share of national GDP (as
projected by CBO). The figure uses our harmonized discount rate and mortality assumptions,
but compares a variety of health care cost assumptions. The red line shows the trajectory of
retiree health obligations under the assumption of no excess health costs—health costs per
beneficiary simply rise with GDP per worker. Under that assumption, retiree health obligations
decline a bit as a share of GDP between now and 2030; in contrast, social security obligations as
a share of GDP rise about 20 percent (from 5 percent of GDP to 6 percent of GDP) in that same
time period. 22 Outlays for retiree health care rise much more rapidly under both the excess cost
assumptions employed by the CBO—the blue line—and the assumption that excess cost growth
continues at its current pace—the green line.

These graphs are based on the cash flows that we estimated from the GASB report, and do not
account for the future benefits of any employees hired after 2011. In order to assess the fiscal
pressure retiree health obligations are likely to impose in the long run, it is necessary to construct
a projection that includes these workers, and it is also necessary to construct a projection of state
GDP and tax revenues. We do this by (1) projecting population by state; (2) using these
population projections to construct projections of GDP and state and local employment; (3) using
the projections of total state and local employment to create a stream of new state and local
government workers, and feeding these workers through our machinery to predict future retiree
health benefits.
21
   In other words, although states have an unfunded liability, they also have an asset equal to the present value of
revenues less the present value of other expenditures. The issue of risk and the appropriate discount rate could be
brought into this analysis by determining the proper discount rate for “government taxes less other expenditures”
and comparing it to the proper discount rate for retiree health liabilities.
22
   The annual pension outlays of state and local governments calculated by Novy-Marx and Rauh 2013a, which are
based on very similar demographic data as the retiree health projections, also do not rise significantly as a share of
CBO’s projected GDP over the next decade or two.

                                                          17
Population Projections

We use the Census Bureau’s most recent set of state population projections from 2000-2030 by
age and sex, which were based on the 2000 census and released in 2005, and extrapolate them
beyond 2030. Unfortunately, the Census Bureau has stopped producing these estimates, and thus
our estimates are somewhat dated. Nonetheless, the basic population dynamics, which are
summarized in Table 6, are not likely to have changed for most states. For the country as a
whole, the adult share of the population declines by 5 percentage points by 2030, the kid share of
the population declines by 1 percentage point, and the aged share of the population—the share of
population aged 65 or greater—increases by 6 percentage points. The aged dependency ratio—
the ratio of the aged population to the working age population—rises 14 percentage points for
the country as a whole, from 23 percent in 2011 to 37 percent. There is some variation across
the states, although most exhibit this basic pattern. Figure 7 plots the distribution across the
states in the change in the adult population (top panel) and the change in the aged dependency
ratio (bottom panel). Almost half the states show an increase in the aged dependency ratio of
between 12 and 15 percentage points, but some states (Utah and Texas, for example) have
somewhat smaller increases, while other states (Montana, Wyoming, and New Mexico) show
much larger increases.

Our calculations beyond 2030 assume a gradual convergence (over 55 years) between each
state’s age-specific population growth rates and the national ones produced by the Social
Security Administration (Board of Trustees, 2011). Specifically, we calculate the percentage
difference between each state’s growth rates for kids, adults, and the elderly and the national
growth rates for these groups from 2025 to 2030, and assume that this difference dissipates at a
constant rate between 2030 and 2085, so that, by 2085, all states have the same growth rates for
kids, adults, and the elderly. We then add up the total population of kids, adults, and elderly, and
apply a multiplicative calibration factor to adjust each year’s population so that the totals match
the Social Security total population.

State GDP Projections

We use the population projections to develop our baseline state GDP projection. Our
methodology is as follows. We take CBO’s projection of nominal national GDP by year and
divide it by our projection of the population aged 20 to 64 to get a measure of GDP per adult
population, which, assuming no changes in adult labor force participation, should be proportional
to GDP per worker. For each state, the growth rate of GDP per year is assumed to be equal to
the growth rate of the adult population, taken from our population projections, plus the growth
rate of GDP per worker, which we assume does not vary across the states. Thus, we assume that
there is no convergence or divergence in state rates of productivity growth, and deviations in the
growth rate of GDP across states stem only from differences in demographics. States with more

                                                18
slowly growing working age populations are expected to grow more slowly than other states. As
shown in Table 7, using this methodology results in an average nominal GDP growth rate of 4½
percent per year, with estimates by state ranging from lows of around 3 percent (West Virginia)
to highs of around 6 percent (Arizona and Nevada). Figure 8 shows the distribution of our
projected GDP growth rates across the states.

We acknowledge the significant uncertainty surrounding our state GDP estimates. Unforeseen
events can alter the trajectory of growth in a given state. For instance, our estimates suggest that,
among the 50 states, North Dakota will have the lowest average rate of GDP growth going
forward. However, the recent and rapid growth in the state due to the boom in shale oil raises
the possibility that this prediction will be incorrect. More generally, although both our
assumption about the rate of convergence between the state-specific Census population growth
rates and the national ones and the assumption of no convergence or further divergence of
productivity growth across regions seem reasonable to us as a baseline projection, they are
nonetheless ad hoc and worthy of further study.



Projecting New State and Local Government Workers

Once we have our state population and GDP projections, the methodology to create new workers
is straightforward. We assume that state and local payroll rises with projected state GDP. Under
the assumption that wage growth in the state and local government sector rises with productivity
growth in the general economy, we can then calculate the total workforce of the sector by state,
which is just equal to the existing workforce covered by retiree health insurance in 2011
multiplied by the growth rate of the adult population. To create new entrants to the workforce,
we simply add employees to the remaining 2011 workforce year by year in order to hit this total
target workforce. We assume that new employees enter the workforce at the same ages as the
existing workforce—that is, we use the age distribution of those with less than 1 year of service
from the GASB reports to determine the age distribution of new workers. Once these workers
are added to the stock of existing workers, we simply assume that they flow through the work
years with the same termination, disability, mortality, and retirement probabilities as the existing
workforce. 23

Figure 9 shows our projection of the state and local labor force for the workers covered by the
state GASB reports. The top panel shows our workforce projection. The total workforce (the
solid blue line) rises slowly over time in step with our projected rise in the adult population by
state. Over time, the existing workers quit or move into retirement, and are replaced by newly
hired workers. The bottom panel of the figure shows the streams for retirees. Given the GASB
23
  To calibrate the cash flows associated with future workers, we multiply by the average error between our liability
estimate for existing workers and the corresponding stated liability in the GASB report. Because the liabilities
associated with future workers continue indefinitely, proportional calibration makes more sense than the geometric
calibration used for the existing workforce.

                                                         19
report assumptions on employee turnover and eligibility, the share of current workers eventually
receiving retiree health benefits is quite low. Even including retirees from newly-hired workers,
there is no large bulge in the population of retirees, despite the significant increases in the share
of the elderly population in all the states.

The top panel of Figure 10 compares the ratio of retirees to workers in our projections to those
projected by Social Security, where the Social Security line reports the ratio of beneficiaries to
covered workers over time. 24 The figure shows a large difference between the effect of
demographic change on Social Security versus the effect on state and local retiree health
insurance. Of course, the age of eligibility for Social Security benefits is, on average, later than
the age of eligibility for state and local retirement benefits. 25 Thus, the aging of the population
may have pushed up the ratio of retiree health beneficiaries to workers in the years prior to the
2011 start of our data. The bottom panel of Figure 10 uses the Census population projections
(summed across the states and available only through 2030) to get a sense of the importance of
this difference in retirement age. In particular, it plots the projected ratios of retiree-age to
working-age population using two different definitions of retirement age: The long-dashed green
line uses a “retirement age” of 55, whereas the short-dashed red line uses a “retirement age” of
65. Although the ratio of retirement-age to working-age population rises less when age 55 is
treated as the retirement age, there still is a much larger rise in that ratio than in the one we
project for state and local retiree health insurance—the solid blue line.

There are several possible explanations for this remaining difference between our retiree health
demographics and those for the population as a whole. First, it is clear that many states and
localities have already taken measures to lower the costs of their retiree health benefits: these
include eliminating the programs for newly-hired workers, increasing the years of service
required to qualify, and increasing employee contributions (which lowers projected take-up, thus
lowering our projection of future beneficiaries.) Second, it is possible that more general changes
in the labor market have had an impact on retiree health benefits. For example, increased labor
mobility over time may have lowered the probability that a given worker will be eligible for
retiree health insurance and the increase in two-worker households may have lowered the
probability that retirees elect spousal coverage. Finally, states may be systematically
overestimating quit and firing probabilities or underestimating take-up. We find the lack of a
demographic bulge puzzling and think it is worthy of further study.

Retiree Health Financing over the Long Run

With our projections of flows into retirement from newly-hired workers, we can now project
retiree health costs on an on-going basis. It is unclear whether excess cost growth should be

24
   The line plotted is the ratio of Old-Age and Survivors Insurance (OASI) beneficiaries to covered workers under
the Intermediate set of assumptions (Table IV.B.2. Board of Trustees (2011)).
25
   Social Security early retirement age is 62 and full retirement age is currently 66 and moving to 67 by 2027. Many
state and local plans allow early retirement at 50 or 55, often with full access to the retiree health insurance benefit.

                                                           20
considered a factor over the long run, because the answer depends on the incidence of these
costs. In a perfectly competitive labor market, workers would be paid their marginal product,
and changes in excess cost growth would affect the mix of compensation, but not the total
amount. Of course, even under this assumption, excess cost growth for existing retirees, and to a
lesser extent, existing workers, needs to be taken into account, as it might have already been
“paid for” in the form of lower wages during the working years and, in any case, it is an
obligation that the state and local governments have already accrued. But the effect of excess
health costs on future workers is more difficult to pin down. Although there is a substantial
literature suggesting that private-sector workers bear the cost of their employer-provided health
insurance, there is only limited evidence on the incidence of such insurance in the public sector,
which may be quite different (Qin and Chernew, 2013.) One recent study (Clemens and Cutler,
2013) found that public sector employees bear little of the cost of their current health insurance.
Almost no empirical evidence exists about the incidence of health insurance that is provided after
retirement, which seems even less likely to be borne by workers, because it hard to value and is
not guaranteed.

If public sector workers do not bear the cost of retiree health insurance, then increases in health
costs represent a burden for the state. If, on the other hand, the incidence of retiree health
insurance is on workers, then total future compensation would be invariant to excess health costs,
and so any increase in retiree health benefits would be offset by lower compensation
elsewhere. 26 Given the uncertainty about the incidence of these benefits, our projections of
annual retiree health insurance costs should be viewed as upper limits on the total fiscal stress
associated with retiree health liabilities.

Figure 11 presents our estimate of national retiree health costs over the long run as a share of
total revenue of the state and local government sector, where total revenues are assumed to rise
with state GDP. The solid blue line displays 2012 outlays for retiree health (including any
contributions to trust funds). The long-dashed red, short-dashed green, and dashed-dot orange
lines represent the projected retiree health costs under three different assumptions about excess
health costs: our baseline, which uses CBO health cost growth, an alternative in which health
costs grow with wages and there is no excess cost growth, or a third alternative in which excess
cost growth is a constant 1.7 percentage points up until 2100 (the CBO value for 2012) and then
0 thereafter. 27 Retiree health care outlays reach around 1.8 percent of total annual revenues by
2060 under our baseline and about 2 percent of total revenues under our constant excess cost
growth assumption. In the absence of excess cost growth, these outlays consume less than 1
percent of revenues by 2060.

One way to concisely summarize the imbalances represented in the figure is to calculate the
percentage change in revenues that would be required to set the present value of costs equal to
26
   For example, health insurance costs for current workers also rise with excess costs, yet we do not model payroll
costs as rising over time because of this factor.
27
   Health costs have to eventually slow to the rate of GDP growth or they will end up comprising 100% of GDP.

                                                         21
the present value of revenues. Call the present value of state j’s revenues
          ∞      Rev j ,t                                                            ∞     Costs j ,t
 PVR j = ∑             t − 2012
                                , the present value of retiree health costs PVC   = ∑             t − 2012
                                                                                                           , the
         2012 (1 + r )                                                              2012 (1 + r )
                                                                                j


current spending on retiree health benefits as a share of revenues as c j , and the assets held in a
retiree trust fund Aj . Then, k j , the constant change in revenues or expenditures as a share of total
revenues that would put the retiree health program into long-run balance satisfies:

                                           (k j + c j ) PVR j + Aj =
                                                                   PVC j                                            (5)

or

                                                     PVC j − Aj
                                      =kj                          − cj.                                            (6)
                                                        PVR j



The value we choose for c j is quite important, as we are calculating fiscal stress as the excess
needed over what is currently being contributed. Our current methodology is to set the
contribution, c j , equal to the value in 2011. This may be somewhat problematic as 2011 was an
unusual year both in terms of state contributions to trust funds and in terms of the level of state
and local revenues. However, the contribution was, if anything, lower than average, biasing
upward our estimates of rj . The discussion of the appropriate discount rate, r matters for these
calculations as well. We are using path of federal borrowing rates that CBO projected in their
June 2011 Long-Term Budget Outlook, which average about 5.5 percent. 28

Table 8 tabulates the required increases in total revenues by state under the three assumptions
about excess cost growth. Nationally, we calculate that a 0.7 percentage point increase in total
revenues, starting in 2012, would, under the CBO health cost assumption, produce enough
revenues such that retiree health expenditures would be financed in perpetuity. Without excess
cost growth, our calculations suggest that no adjustment would be necessary—a reflection of the
lack of demographic bulge discussed earlier. With continued excess cost growth (and assuming
that the value of future retiree health benefits rises as health costs rise and other compensation
does not decline), the adjustment would be much larger, about 1.5 percent of total revenues.
There is, of course, considerable heterogeneity across the states, with the states experiencing the
greatest increases in expenditures requiring an adjustment of 1 percent to 3 percent of total
28
   CBO projected that borrowing rates would rise from their unusually low levels of 3.3 percent (nominal) in 2011 to
a long-run average of 5.5 percent (3 percent real and 2.5 percent inflation). By using the federal government
borrowing rate, we are implicitly projecting a risk-adjusted budget that assumes that (1) states and localities will not
default on their retiree health obligations and that the risks associated with mortality, health costs, and other
parameters are uncorrelated with taxpayer marginal utility (see footnote 13), and (2) any increments to the federal
rate received by states and localities on their investment represent a return for holding risk.

                                                          22
revenue. Because expenditures and revenues are very similar at the state level, these estimates
can also be interpreted as the cut in spending that would be required to offset the costs of
increasing retiree health insurance costs.

Appendix Table A2 presents analogous calculations using general own source revenue. Using
this measure, we calculate that, under our CBO excess cost assumption, a 1.3 percentage point
increase in own revenues would be required to finance retiree health expenditures on average,
with the states with the largest burden having to raise own revenues by up to 5.2 percentage
points.

These calculations represent only one possible way in which states could manage these costs.
For example, if states wanted to move toward full funding, the increase in revenues necessary
would be greater at first, but lower later. States may wish to prefund for a number of reasons.
For instance, the benefit may be viewed as less risky, and hence more valuable, by current
workers if it is pre-funded. If so, states may be able to pay lower wages if they pre-fund (Novy-
Marx and Rauh 2013b). On the other hand, if states do continue to finance these programs on a
mostly pay-as-you-go basis, they could simply allow expenditures on retiree health to increase
over time, financing them with additional revenues or cuts in other state and local spending. In
any case, these statistics present a useful way of comparing the size of the problem across the
states. In addition, they take into account the different expected growth rates of states (which is
reflected in the present value of revenues).

Conclusion

Obligations for retiree benefits are an important factor in the long-run fiscal imbalances of state
and local governments. While pension benefits have been widely studied, obligations for retiree
health care have received much less attention. We examine the costs of these benefits to state and
local governments in two ways. First, we calculate the present value of the health insurance
benefits already accrued by state and local retirees and workers. Second, we examine the burden
to state and local governments of continuing to provide these benefits in to the future.

Using a 5 percent discount rate, we estimate that accrued state and local government retiree
health care liabilities equal around 1.1 trillion dollars, roughly ½ of the value of accrued pension
obligations. However, states and localities have far more leeway to cut back the health insurance
benefits of existing retirees and workers than they do the pension benefits, suggesting that a
higher discount rate might be warranted. In that case, the already-accrued liability associated
with retiree health obligations may be significantly less than ½ that of pensions.

We also calculate the annual costs of these benefits and assume that states and localities continue
to provide the same level of health insurance to future retirees. Surprisingly, our calculations
suggest that there will be no significant rise in the ratio of state and local government retirees
receiving health insurance to state and local government workers, so that the expected increase in
expenditures for retiree health insurance as a share of GDP stems mostly from excess cost

                                                23
growth in health care rather than demographic change. We attempt to convey the variation
across the states in the burden of these benefits by calculating what changes in revenue, if begun
immediately and maintained forever, would be sufficient to fund these benefits in perpetuity.
We find that states would have to increase revenues or cut spending by an amount equal to about
¾ percentage point of total revenues, on average. However, the burden is negative or close to
zero for many states, but much larger–up to 3 percent–for others.




                                                24
References


Blau, David and Donna Gilleskie, “Retiree Health Insurance and the Labor Force Behavior of
Older Men in the 1990s” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2001.

Board of Trustees, Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance and Federal Disability Insurance
Trust Funds, “The 2011 Annual Report of the Board of Trustees of the Federal Old-Age and
Survivors Insurance and Federal Disability Insurance Trust Funds,” May 13, 2011.


Brown, Jeffrey and David Wilcox, “Discounting State and Local Pension Liabilities.”
American Economic Review, 2009

Burson, Jean, John Carlson, Emre Ergungor and Patricia Waiwood, “Do Public Pension
Obligations Affect State Funding Costs?” working paper, January 14, 2013.

Census Bureau, Population Projections by State, 2000-2030.

Chin, Tonya, “Fitch: California OPEB Ruling Could be Credit Negative”, Bond Buyer, October
3, 2013.

Clark, Robert, “Will Public Sector Retiree Health Benefit Plans Survive? Economic and
Policy Implications of Unfunded Liabilities,” American Economic Review 99(2), 533-37, 2009.

Clark, Robert, “Retiree Health Plans for Public School Teachers after GASB 43 and 45,”
Education Finance and Policy, 438-462, Fall 2010.

Clark, Robert and Melinda Morrill. Retiree Health Plans in the Public Sector: Is There a Funding
Crisis? Northhampton, MA: Edward Elgar Publishing, 2010.

Clark, Robert and Melinda Morrill, “The Funding Status of Retiree Health Plans in the Public
Sector,” Journal of Pension Economics and Finance, pp 291-314, April 2011.

Clark, Robert, Melinda Morrill, and David Vanderweide, “The Effect of Retiree Health
Insurance Plan Characteristics on Retirees’ Choice and Employers’ Costs”, working paper, 2013.

Clemens, Jeffrey and David Cutler, “Who Pays for Public Employee Health Costs?”, working
paper, 2013.

Congressional Budget Office, Long-Term Budget Outlook, June 2011.
http://www.cbo.gov/publication/41486, accessed October 15, 2013.

Fitzpatrick, Maria, “Retiree Health Insurance for Public School Employees: Does it Affect
Retirement and Mobility?” working paper, 2013.



                                                 25
Franzel, Joshua and Alex Brown, “Retiree health care benefits for state employees in 2013”,
Center for State and Local Government Excellence, 2013.

Franzel, Josh and Alexander Brown, “Understanding finances and changes in retiree health
care.” Government Finance Review, 2012.

Fronstin, Paul, “Implications of Health Reform for Retiree Health Benefits”, Employee Benefit
Research Institute Brief # 338, 2010.

GAO, “State and Local Government Retiree Health Benefits”. Report to the Chairman, Special
Committee on Agine, U.S. Senate, GAO-10-61, November 2009.

Gurkaynak, Refet S., Brian Sack, and Jonathan H. Wright, “The U.S. Treasury Yield Curve:
1961 to the Present,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series #2006-28, Federal Reserve
Board, 2008.

Marton, James and Stephen A. Woodbury, “Retiree Health Benefits and Retirement”, Staff
Working Paper 06-128, W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, 2006.

National Research Conference (of the National Academies), Aging and the Macroeconomy:
Long-Term Implications of an Older Population, National Academies Press, 2012.

National Conference of State Legislatures, “NCSL Fiscal Brief: State Balanced Budget
Provisions,” Fiscal Brief, October 2010.

Novy-Marx, Robert, and Joshua Rauh, “The Liabilities and Risks of State-Sponsored Pension
Plans,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Fall 2009.

Novy-Marx, Robert, and Joshua Rauh, “Public Pension Liabilities: How Big Are They and What
Are They Worth?” Journal of Finance, 66(4), 1207-1245, 2011.

Novy-Marx, Robert, and Joshua Rauh, “Revenue Demands of Public Employee Pension
Promises,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, forthcoming 2013a.

Novy-Marx, Robert, and Joshua Rauh, “Funding Soft Liabilities”, working paper, March 2013b.

Pew Center on the States, “The Trillion Dollar Gap”, February 2010.

Pew Center on the States, “The Widening Gap Update”, Issue Brief, June 2012.

Poterba, James, “State Responses to Fiscal Crises: The Effects of Budgetary Institutions and
Politics”, Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 102, No. 4, 1994.

Qin, Paige and Michael Chernew, “Compensating Wage Differentials and the Impact of Health
Insurance in the Public Sector on Wages and Salary”, working paper, 2013.



                                               26
Shields, Yvette, “Chicago Makes Move to Cut Retiree Health Care Costs”, Bond Buyer, May 20
2013.

Society of Actuaries, RP-2000 Mortality Tables, http://www.soa.org/research/experience-
study/pension/research-rp-2000-mortality-tables.aspx, last accessed October 15, 2013.

Shoven, and John B. and Sita Nataraj Slavov, “The Role of Retiree Health Insurance in the Early
Retirement of Public Sector Employees,” working paper, 2013.

Zion, David and Amit Varshney, “Your Dropped on Bomb on Me, GASB”, Credit Suisse,
Equity Research Note, March 22, 2007.




                                              27
                                                              Figure 1

                                       Panel A: Total Retiree Health Care Liabilites, by Year



                  50
                  40
          Billions of $
          20      10
                  0 30




                             2010    2020      2030      2040      2050      2060      2070     2080      2090
                                                                   year

                                                                PVB              AAL




                              Panel B: Retiree Health Care Liabilites for Actives and Retirees, by Year
                  40    30
          Billions of $
               20 10
                  0




                             2010    2020      2030      2040      2050      2060      2070     2080      2090
                                                                   year

                                                   Retirees                       AAL for Actives
                                                   PVB for Actives



Note. The panels display cash flows for state government retiree health care obligations. The cash flows are
calibrated to match the discounted value of the cash flows stated in the state GASB report. See the text for
additional information. The AAL liabilites are calculated under the EAN methodology.
                                                                                 Figure 2

                                         Panel A: Distribution of PVB as a Share of State and Local Revenue



                                    15


                                                 ID
                                                 ND
                                                 OR
                                                 WY
                                    10
                 Number of states




                                                 MS
                                                 SD
                                                 IN
                                                 CO
                                                 AZ
                                                 KS
                                                 VA
                                                 UT
                                                 IA
                                                         MT       LA
                                    5




                                                 WI
                                                 TN      WA       WV
                                                 RI      AR       GA
                                                         MN       ME
                                                         MO       NM       OH
                                                         FL       VT       CA
                                                         NV       KY                AL       MD                         NJ         NH
                                                                           PA       TX       MI                         IL         CT
                                                                           SC       DE       MA                         AK         HI
                                                                                                      NC         NY
                                    0




                                          0                 20              40              60              80            100
                                                     PVB Retiree Health Liabilities as a Share of Total State and Local Revenues




                                         Panel B: Distribution of UAAL as a share of State and Local Revenue
                               20
                               15




                                                ID
                                                ND
            Number of states




                                                OR
                                                MS
                                                SD
                                                IN
                               10




                                                WY
                                                AZ
                                                CO
                                                KS
                                                IA
                                                VA       MT
                                                UT       MN       KY
                                                WI       AR
                               5




                                                                  NM
                                                TN       NV       LA
                                                RI       MO       ME
                                                WA       FL       GA                TX       NC                                    AK
                                                         WV       VT                AL       NY                                    CT
                                                         OH       CA       SC       DE       MI                                    HI
                                                                           PA       MD       MA                                    IL
                                                                                                      NJ                NH
                               0




                                          0                      20                40                  60                  80
                                              UAAL Unfunded Retiree Health Liabilities as a Share of Total State and Local Revenues



All values are for the 2011 fiscal year and are produced using a 5% discount rate. For some states the GASB
report upon which the liabilities are based pertain to the 2010 or 2012 fiscal years. In these cases, the
liabilities are adjusted so as to be on a 2011 fiscal year basis. The UAAL liabilities are produced using the EAN
methodology.
                                                             Figure 3

                      Panel A: Comparison Between PVBs - Retiree Health and Pensions



          15



                           ID
               10
 Number of States




                           OR
                           ND
                           MS
                           CO
                           WY
                           SD
                           VA       RI
                           UT       MO
                           IN       MT
                           WI
5




                                    TN
                           AZ       MN
                           KS       WA
                           IA       AR     NM                  MI
                                    NV     LA    GA            AL
                                    FL     CA    ME            MD
                                           OH                  TX   MA
                                                 KY                 NY
                                           WV    PA    VT      IL        CT              AK
                                                       SC           NJ   DE              NH
                                                                              HI    NC
          0




                      0                       20                40              60            80
                                         PVB Retiree Health as a Share of PVB Pensions


                      Panel B: Comparison Between UAALs - Retiree Health and Pensions
          20




                          ID
                 15




                          OR
                          ND
                          CO
Number of States




                          MS
                          AZ
                          VA
                          WY
     10




                          KS
                          IN
                          UT   TN
                          RI   NV
                          IA   AR
                          MN   NM
                          SD   KY
                          MT   WA   VT
          5




                          MO   WV   MI
                          WI   LA   FL     GA
                          OH   CA   NJ     MD
                               SC   AL     NY
                               PA   ME     TX
                                    IL     MA        HI
                                                CT   NH AK                          DE NC
          0




                      0                   100               200             300               400
                                     UAAL Retiree Health as a Share of UAAL Pensions
                                                                           Figure 4

                                                        Unfunded Retiree Health and Pension Liabilities




                                              100
Retiree Health UAAL as a Percent of S&L Revenues                                              HI                       IL
                                                                                    AK                  CT
                                      80
                                                                                    NH



                                                                                                                  NJ
                            60




                                                                                      MA
                                                                                                         MI
                                                                                    NY
                                                        NC
                                                        DE                      MD       AL
                  40




                                                                          TX
                                                                                            PA
                                                                                           SC
                                                                                             CA
                                                                   GAME   VT
         20




                                                                                         LA
                                                                                          NM
                                                                                          KY       OH
                                                                               WV
                                                              FL                    MO
                                                                           NV
                                                                    WA AR      MT MN               RI
                                                                 TN
                                                                 WI   IA UT KS        VA                     CO
                                                                        AZ
                                                         SD   ND IN WY
                                                              ID
                                                                              MS   OR
0




                                                    0                  50                     100                       150
                                                               Pension UAAL as a Percent of S&L Revenues
                     Figure 5
Distribution of UAAL as a Share of Total Revenue
                                                   Figure 6
                          Retiree Health Obligations Existing Workers and Retirees




        .3
        .25
Share of GDP (%)
 .1    .15
        .05
        0    .2




                   2012     2022       2032       2042          2052   2062          2072   2082
                                                         year

                                   CBO Excess Cost                      No Excess Cost
                                   Continued Excess Cost
                                                        Figure 7
                                              Demographic Projections
                                 Panel A: Distribution of Changes in Adult Population


            20


                                               MT
                   15



                                               RI
                                               CT
                                               VT
  Number of States




                                               MI
                                               MA
                                               KS
                                               LA
       10




                                               WI
                                               MS
                                  ND           AL
                                  WV           IL
                                  WY           KY         AR
                                  SD           HI         SC
                                  IA           IN         NH
                                  NM           MO         MN
            5




                                  ME           OK         TN          CA
                                  PA           DE         MD          GA
                                  OH           NJ         CO          OR
                                  NY                      AK          NC
                                  NE                                  ID          TX
                                                          VA                      UT
                                                                      WA                       NV
                                                                                  FL           AZ
            0




                        -20                      0                     20                           40
                              Cumulative Percent Change in Adult Population from 2011-2030



                               Panel B: Variation in Population Aging Across the States
          20




                                          GA
                                          MD
                                          IL
                                          IN
                 15




                                          NC
Number of States




                                          CO
                                          WA
                                          CA
                                          OK
                                          ID
                                          NJ
    10




                                          TN        OH
                                          AR        LA
                                          VA        KS
                                          AK        MA
                                          NY        CT
                                          MI        AL
                                          NV        MS
          5




                                          MO        RI
                                          MN        NE         HI
                                          KY        PA         NH
                                                    IA                 DE
                                UT                             SC      SD        ND
                                                    WI         AZ
                                TX                                     VT        ME       WY
                                OR                             WV      FL        MT       NM
          0




                                10              15              20           25                     30
                                       Percentage Point Change in Aged Dependency
                                                   Figure 8
                           Distribution of Nominal GDP Growth Rates, 2011-2030




          20     15

                                     NM
                                     ME
                                     PA
Number of States




                                     OH
                                     NY
                                     NE
                                     MT
     10




                                     RI
                                     CT
                                     VT
                                     MI
                                     MA        KY
                                     KS        HI
                                     LA        IN       NH
                                     WI        MO
          5




                                                        MN        CA
                                     MS        OK
                            ND       AL                 TN        GA
                                               DE       MD
                            WV        IL       NJ                 OR
                            WY                          CO        NC
                                               AR       AK                  TX
                            SD                 SC                 ID
                                                        VA        WA        UT   NV
                            IA                                              FL   AZ
          0




                      3                    4                    5                     6
                          Average Annual Nominal GDP Growth Rate from 2011 to 2030
                                       Figure 9
Panel A: Current Active and Newly Hired State and Local Government Workers, All States



                                        1.2
Number relative to total actives in 2011
   .2     .4      .6     0.8      1




                                                  2010     2020              2030          2040          2050           2060
                                                                                    year

                                                             Total Workers                           Existing Workers
                                                             Workers hired after 2011




                                                                     Panel B: Retirees, All States
                                            1.2
   Number relative to total retirees in 2011
      .2     .4      .6  0    .8      1




                                                  2010      2020             2030          2040          2050           2060
                                                                                    year

                                                         Total Retirees               Retirees from Existing Active Workers
                                                         Existing Retirees            Retirees from Newly-Hired Workers
                                                         Figure 10
                                 Panel A: Demographic Change: Retiree Health vs Social Security




            1.6     1.4
Ratio relative to 2011
1         1.2
            .8




                          2010       2020     2030     2040     2050      2060     2070     2080   2090
                                                                year

                                                     RHI Beneficiaries/S&L Gov. Workers
                                                     Social Security Retirees/Workers




            Panel B: Demographic Change: Retiree Health vs Census Population Projections
               1.6
   Ratio relative to 2011
    1.2        1 1.4




                            2010              2015               2020              2025            2030
                                                                 year

                                                     RHI Beneficiaries/S&L Gov. Workers
                                                     65+ Population/20-64 Population
                                                     55+ Population/20-54 Population
                                                       Figure 11
                              Retiree Health Obligations as a Share of Total S&L Revenue




         2
Share of Revenue (%)
         1.5
         1




                       2010         2020           2030           2040           2050          2060
                                                           year

                                 Current OPEB Expenditures               CBO Excess Cost Growth
                                 No Excess Cost Growth                   Continued Exc. Cost Growth
                                                                  Table 1
                                               State and Local Retiree Health Care Liabilities
                                              Actuarial Accrued Liability (AAL)                               Present Value of Benefits

                 Local Scaling                                      % of State and Local                                      % of State and Local
  State                                        $ millions                                                $ millions
                    Factor                                                Revenue                                                   Revenue

                        (1)                       (2)                          (3)                           (4)                        (5)
   AK                   0.4                     $16,491                       87%                         $18,868                      99%
   AL                   3.8                     $17,365                       44%                         $20,263                      51%
   AR                   0.7                     $3,033                        11%                          $3,909                      14%
   AZ                   0.3                     $3,012                         5%                          $3,053                       5%
   CA                   1.5                    $142,009                       26%                         $195,270                     36%
   CO                   0.0                     $2,318                         4%                          $2,493                       5%
   CT                   0.8                     $37,176                       88%                         $44,488                      105%
   DE                   0.0                     $4,972                        44%                          $6,250                      56%
   FL                   3.9                     $26,477                       14%                         $30,631                      16%
   GA                   3.8                     $21,195                       24%                         $23,875                      27%
   HI                   0.0                     $14,918                       91%                         $18,750                      114%
   IA                   3.2                     $1,532                         4%                          $2,185                       6%
   ID                   0.0                       $94                          0%                           $50                         0%
   IL                   2.9                    $126,063                       91%                         $135,965                     98%
   IN                   3.6                     $1,477                         2%                          $1,993                       3%
   KS                   3.6                     $1,188                         4%                          $1,651                       6%
   KY                   2.2                     $10,532                       25%                         $14,612                      34%
   LA                   0.5                     $10,074                       20%                         $11,622                      24%
   MA                   1.8                     $47,560                       56%                         $57,156                      67%
   MD                   2.5                     $28,948                       45%                         $37,709                      59%
   ME                   0.3                     $3,445                        24%                          $4,064                      28%
   MI                   2.8                     $47,140                       52%                         $56,873                       62%
   MN                   8.4                      $6,370                       10%                          $9,218                       14%
   MO                   2.7                      $7,310                       13%                          $8,313                       14%
   MS                   0.1                       $691                        2%                            $839                        3%
Note. All values are for the 2011 fiscal year and are produced using a 5% discount rate. For some states the GASB report upon which the
liabilities are based pertain to the 2010 or 2012 fiscal years. In these cases, the liabilities are adjusted so as to be on a 2011 fiscal year basis.
                                                                Table 1 (cont.)
                                                State and Local Retiree Health Care Liabilities
                                               Actuarial Accrued Liability (AAL)                              Present Value of Benefits

                  Local Scaling                                      % of State and Local                                      % of State and Local
   State                                       $ millions                                                 $ millions
                     Factor                                                Revenue                                                   Revenue

                        (1)                        (2)                         (3)                           (4)                        (5)
   MT                   1.9                       $985                        10%                          $1,298                      13%
   NC                   0.5                      $45,464                      48%                         $65,128                      69%
   ND                   0.0                        $78                         1%                           $122                        1%
   NH                   2.9                      $9,751                       80%                         $12,634                      103%
   NJ                   0.0                      $67,333                      63%                         $101,928                     96%
   NM                   0.4                      $5,058                       20%                          $7,385                      30%
   NV                   3.0                      $3,528                       12%                          $5,679                      20%
   NY                   1.0                     $168,984                      51%                         $263,965                     80%
   OH                   0.3                      $39,651                      29%                         $48,117                      35%
   OR                   0.1                       $799                         2%                           $927                        2%
   PA                   1.8                      $44,938                      33%                         $53,702                      39%
   RI                   0.3                      $1,211                        9%                          $1,495                      11%
   SC                   0.4                      $14,887                      32%                         $19,527                      42%
   SD                   2.2                       $211                         2%                           $244                        3%
   TN                   1.8                      $4,284                        7%                          $5,791                       9%
   TX                   2.7                      $86,662                      37%                         $128,750                     55%
   UT                   1.7                      $1,416                        6%                          $1,451                       6%
   VA                   0.4                      $3,728                        5%                          $4,369                       6%
   VT                   1.1                      $1,829                       24%                          $2,527                      33%
   WA                   0.0                      $7,469                        9%                         $10,370                      13%
   WI                   3.2                      $3,623                        6%                          $4,854                       8%
   WV                   0.0                      $3,583                       19%                          $4,507                       24%
   WY                   0.0                       $249                         2%                            $258                        3%
    US                  1.2                    $1,097,051                     32%                        $1,455,125                     42%
Note. All values are for the 2011 fiscal year and are produced using a 5% discount rate. For some states the GASB report upon which the
liabilities are based pertain to the 2010 or 2012 fiscal years. In these cases, the liabilities are adjusted so as to be on a 2011 fiscal year basis.
                                                       Table 2
               State and Local Retiree Health Care Liabilities under Various Discount Rates ($ millions)
                                                           Actuarial Accrued Liability               Present Value of Benefits
                                                                     (AAL)                                    (PVB)

                     5 Percent                                       $1,097,051                              $1,455,125

              Treasury Yield Curve                                   $1,209,444                              $1,629,510

         States' Chosen Discount Rate                                $1,188,063                              $1,615,902

                     7 Percent                                        $829,576                               $1,022,988

Note. All values are U.S. total liabilities for the 2011 fiscal year. For some states the GASB report upon which the liabilities are
based pertain to the 2010 or 2012 fiscal years. In these cases, the liabilities are adjusted so as to be on a 2011 fiscal year basis.
The AAL liabilities are produced using the EAN methodology. The Treasury Yield Curve is the zero-coupon Treasury yield curve
as of June 30, 2011 (the end of the 2011 state government fiscal year in most states.)
 .
                                                                            Table 3
                               State and Local Retiree Health Care Liabilities Under CBO's Medical Cost Growth Assumptions
                                Actuarial Accrued Liability (AAL)                                       Present Value of Benefits (PVB)

               State Medical Cost      CBO Medical Cost        Percent Difference          State Medical Cost      CBO Medical Cost        Percent Difference
  State
              Growth Assumptions       Growth Assumption       Between (2) and (1)        Growth Assumptions       Growth Assumption       Between (5) and (4)
                        (1)                     (2)                     (3)                         (4)                     (5)                     (6)

                                                                            A. National Estimates
   US              $1,097,051               $1,048,910                  -4%                  $1,455,264                 $1,385,658                  -5%

                                                                   B. Smallest Percent Differences in PVB
  ID                   $33                     $27                     -20%                       $50                      $39                     -22%
  ND                   $78                     $64                     -18%                      $122                      $98                     -20%
  NM                  $5,058                  $4,228                   -16%                     $7,385                    $5,924                   -20%
  FL                 $26,477                 $21,783                   -18%                    $30,631                   $24,784                   -19%
  PA                 $44,938                 $36,623                   -19%                    $53,702                   $43,779                   -18%

                                                                    C. Largest Percent Differences in PVB
  MD                 $28,948                 $30,912                    7%                      $37,709                  $38,836                   3%
  AR                  $3,033                  $3,199                    5%                       $3,909                   $4,091                    5%
  MI                 $47,140                 $50,364                    7%                      $56,873                  $64,217                   13%
  OH                 $39,651                 $43,307                    9%                      $48,117                  $54,420                   13%


Note. All values are for the 2011 fiscal year and are produced using a 5% discount rate. For some states the GASB report upon which the liabilities are
based pertain to the 2010 or 2012 fiscal years. In these cases, the liabilities are adjusted so as to be on a 2011 fiscal year basis. The AAL liabilities are
produced using the EAN methodology.
                                                                             Table 4
                                      State and Local Retiree Health Care Liabilities Under Differing Mortality Assumptions
                                     Actuarial Accrued Liability (AAL)                                          Present Value of Benefits (PVB)
                                                       S.S. Mortality   S.S. Mortality                                            S.S. Mortality                     S.S. Mortality
                     State Mortality S.S. Mortality                                          State Mortality S.S. Mortality
     State                                              Assumption        Assumption                                               Assumption                         Assumption
                      Assumptions Assumption Low                                              Assumptions Assumption Low
                                                           Middle            High                                                    Middle                               High
                           (1)             (2)               (3)              (4)                   (5)              (6)               (7)                                 (8)

                                                                                        A. National Estimates
      US               $1,097,051          $1,137,054          $1,179,380          $1,234,621          $1,455,264              $1,500,513          $1,563,638          $1,646,014

Percent Difference                            104%                108%                113%                                        103%                107%                113%

                                                        B. Smallest Percent Differences Between State PVB and Middle S.S. Assumption
      CO                  $2,346               92%                94%               96%                $2,493          92%                             94%                 97%
      WI                  $3,537               99%                99%               99%                $4,854          98%                             99%                 99%
      IA                  $1,519               99%                99%               99%                $2,185          99%                             99%                 99%
      HI                 $15,080               96%               101%              106%               $18,750          95%                             99%                105%
      MS                   $709               103%               103%              103%                 $839           99%                            100%                100%

                                                         B. Largest Percent Differences Between State PVB and Middle S.S. Assumption
     NJ                  $66,657              108%               113%              119%              $101,928          109%                           115%                122%
     MT                    $971               106%               114%              123%                $1,298          107%                           115%                127%
     NV                   $3,476              110%               114%              119%                $5,679          111%                           116%                123%
     ME                   $3,529              113%               119%              126%                $4,064          111%                           116%                124%
     WY                    $259               124%               127%              130%                 $258           122%                           124%                127%

Note. All values are for the 2011 fiscal year and are produced using a 5% discount rate. For some states the GASB report upon which the liabilities are based pertain to the
2010 or 2012 fiscal years. In these cases, the liabilities are adjusted so as to be on a 2011 fiscal year basis. The AAL liabilities are produced using the EAN methodology. S.S.
in the column headers refers to the Social Security Administration.
                                                                       Table 5
                                                Harmonized State and Local Retiree Health Care Liabilities
                           Unfunded Actuarial Accrued Liability (UAAL)                                     Present Value of Benefits
                                              Harmonized                                                                        Harmonized
  State          State Assumptions                                  (2) as a percent of (1)        State Assumptions                                  (2) as a percent of (1)
                                              Assumptions                                                                       Assumptions
                          (1)                       (2)                                                     (4)                       (5)                        (6)
   AK                  $10,475                   $16,188                     155%                        $11,394                   $18,454                     162%
   AL                  $15,504                   $17,938                     116%                        $20,263                   $21,648                     107%
   AR                   $3,195                    $3,564                     112%                         $4,551                    $4,566                     100%
   AZ                    $393                    $1,547                      394%                        $2,110                    $3,101                      147%
   CA                 $153,317                  $147,298                      96%                       $216,555                  $208,157                      96%
   CO                   $1,429                    $1,895                     133%                         $1,791                    $2,347                     131%
   CT                  $31,408                   $38,325                     122%                        $39,159                   $46,045                     118%
   DE                   $5,584                    $5,401                      97%                         $7,180                    $6,886                      96%
   FL                  $31,320                   $23,380                      75%                        $37,476                   $26,719                      71%
   GA                  $20,816                   $22,532                     108%                        $26,159                   $25,418                      97%
   HI                  $16,358                   $13,170                      81%                        $23,465                   $16,469                      70%
   IA                   $1,591                    $1,325                      83%                         $2,324                    $1,876                      81%
   ID                     $31                      $27                        87%                          $58                       $39                       67%
   IL                 $130,185                  $125,100                      96%                       $147,417                  $134,455                      91%
   IN                   $1,287                    $1,425                     111%                         $1,890                    $2,001                     106%
   KS                   $1,255                    $1,014                      81%                         $1,962                    $1,415                      72%
   KY                   $8,836                    $8,605                      97%                        $14,841                   $14,577                      98%
   LA                  $10,380                   $10,130                      98%                        $13,810                   $11,723                      85%
   MA                  $44,883                   $46,286                     103%                        $63,326                   $56,649                      89%
   MD                  $32,857                   $31,383                      96%                        $43,470                   $40,629                      93%
   ME                   $2,240                    $3,834                     171%                         $2,683                    $4,627                     172%
   MI                  $54,241                   $56,254                     104%                        $68,860                   $72,649                     106%
   MN                  $6,496                     $5,412                     83%                         $9,498                     $7,762                     82%
   MO                  $5,563                     $7,213                     130%                        $6,486                     $8,551                     132%
   MS                    $752                      $686                      91%                           $897                      $808                      90%
Note. All values are for the 2011 fiscal year. For some states the GASB report upon which the liabilities are based pertain to the 2010 or 2012 fiscal years. In these cases,
the liabilities are adjusted so as to be on a 2011 fiscal year basis.
                                                                      Table 5 (cont.)
                                                 Harmonized State and Local Retiree Health Care Liabilities
                            Unfunded Actuarial Accrued Liability (UAAL)                                     Present Value of Benefits

                                               Harmonized                                                                        Harmonized
  State          State Assumptions                                  (2) as a percent of (1)        State Assumptions                                  (2) as a percent of (1)
                                               Assumptions                                                                       Assumptions

                          (1)                        (2)                       (3)                          (4)                        (5)                       (6)
   MT                    $974                       $974                     100%                        $1,566                     $1,303                      83%
   NC                  $45,078                    $44,585                     99%                        $76,139                    $65,992                     87%
   ND                     $65                        $64                      98%                          $122                        $98                      80%
   NH                   $9,637                    $10,321                    107%                        $13,938                    $13,458                     97%
   NJ                  $71,372                    $71,626                    100%                       $115,116                   $110,313                     96%
   NM                   $4,925                     $3,895                     79%                         $7,385                     $5,930                     80%
   NV                   $3,753                     $3,363                     90%                         $7,008                     $5,693                     81%
   NY                 $207,693                   $171,223                     82%                       $348,367                   $270,121                     78%
   OH                  $24,829                    $31,768                    128%                        $48,117                    $58,931                    122%
   OR                    $283                       $563                     199%                          $658                       $960                     146%
   PA                  $42,189                    $39,165                     93%                        $55,931                    $47,571                     85%
   RI                   $1,184                     $1,200                    101%                         $1,495                     $1,551                    104%
   SC                  $14,695                    $14,619                     99%                        $19,527                    $20,104                    103%
   SD                    $212                       $211                     100%                          $285                       $234                     82%
   TN                   $4,073                     $3,824                     94%                         $6,649                     $5,170                     78%
   TX                  $80,536                    $80,188                    100%                       $116,784                   $117,504                    101%
   UT                   $1,028                     $1,126                    110%                         $1,553                     $1,452                     93%
   VA                   $2,665                     $3,502                    131%                         $3,292                     $4,441                    135%
   VT                   $2,077                     $2,031                     98%                         $2,962                     $2,796                     94%
   WA                   $6,936                     $5,645                     81%                        $11,764                     $7,534                     64%
   WI                   $3,961                     $3,417                     86%                         $5,594                     $4,556                     81%
   WV                   $2,649                    $5,034                     190%                         $3,768                    $7,569                     201%
   WY                    $219                      $315                      144%                          $258                      $444                      172%
   US                $1,121,429                 $1,088,593                   97%                       $1,615,902                $1,491,297                    92%
Note. All values are for the 2011 fiscal year. For some states the GASB report upon which the liabilities are based pertain to the 2010 or 2012 fiscal years. In these cases,
the liabilities are adjusted so as to be on a 2011 fiscal year basis.
                                          Table 6
                               Projected Demographic Change
                 Percentage Point Change in Population Shares from 2011-2030
           (1)     (2)              (3)                                 (1)      (2)     (3)
         Kids    Adults            Aged                               Kids     Adults   Aged
    AK    8%       0%               5%               MT                -7%      0%       4%
    AL    -4%      0%               4%               NC               17%       1%       5%
    AR    3%       0%               4%               ND               -17%      -1%      3%
    AZ   40%       2%               6%               NE                -8%      0%       4%
    CA   12%       1%               5%               NH                4%       0%       4%
    CO    8%       0%               5%               NJ                0%       0%       4%
    CT    -7%      0%               4%               NM               -10%      -1%      4%
    DE     0%      0%               4%               NV               40%       2%       6%
    FL   28%       1%               6%               NY                -8%      0%       4%
    GA   14%       1%               5%               OH                -9%       0%      4%
    HI    -2%      0%               4%               OK                -1%       0%      4%
    IA   -11%     -1%               4%               OR                16%       1%      5%
    ID    19%      1%               5%               PA                -9%       0%      4%
    IL    -4%      0%               4%               RI                -7%       0%      4%
    IN    -2%      0%               4%               SC                 3%       0%      4%
    KS    -5%      0%               4%               SD               -12%      -1%      3%
    KY    -2%      0%               4%               TN                 6%      0%       4%
    LA    -5%      0%               4%               TX               25%       1%       5%
    MA    -5%      0%               4%               UT               27%       1%       5%
    MD    8%       0%               5%               VA               10%       1%       5%
    ME   -10%     -1%               4%               VT                -6%      0%       4%
    MI    -6%      0%               4%               WA               20%       1%       5%
    MN    4%       0%               4%               WI                -4%      0%       4%
    MO    -1%      0%               4%               WV               -15%      -1%      3%
    MS    -4%      0%               4%               WY               -13%      -1%      3%
TOTAL    -1%      -5%               6%
                                                        Table 7
                                  Changes in the Adult Population and Projected GDP

         Cumulative     Average Annual    Average Annual                 Cumulative     Average Annual    Average Annual
      Percent Change in Growth Rate of     Nominal GDP                Percent Change in Growth Rate of     Nominal GDP
      Adult Population Adult Population    Growth Rate                Adult Population Adult Population    Growth Rate
         2011-2030        2011-2030         2011-2030                    2011-2030        2011-2030         2011-2030
              (1)             (2)               (3)                           (1)             (2)               (3)
 AK          8%              0%                5%             MT             -7%             0%                4%
  AL         -4%             0%                4%             NC            17%              1%                5%
  AR         3%              0%                4%             ND            -17%             -1%               3%
  AZ        40%              2%                6%             NE             -8%             0%                4%
  CA        12%              1%                5%             NH             4%              0%                4%
 CO          8%              0%                5%             NJ             0%              0%                4%
  CT         -7%             0%                4%             NM            -10%             -1%               4%
  DE          0%              0%               4%             NV             40%              2%               6%
  FL        28%               1%               6%             NY             -8%              0%               4%
 GA         14%               1%               5%             OH             -9%              0%               4%
  HI         -2%              0%               4%             OK             -1%              0%               4%
  IA        -11%             -1%               4%             OR             16%              1%               5%
  ID        19%               1%               5%             PA             -9%              0%               4%
  IL         -4%              0%               4%             RI             -7%              0%               4%
  IN         -2%              0%               4%             SC              3%              0%               4%
  KS         -5%              0%               4%             SD            -12%             -1%               3%
 KY          -2%             0%                4%             TN             6%              0%                4%
  LA         -5%             0%                4%             TX            25%              1%                5%
 MA          -5%             0%                4%             UT            27%              1%                5%
 MD          8%              0%                5%             VA            10%              1%                5%
 ME         -10%             -1%               4%             VT             -6%             0%                4%
  MI         -6%             0%                4%             WA            20%              1%                5%
 MN          4%              0%                4%             WI             -4%             0%                4%
 MO          -1%             0%                4%             WV            -15%             -1%               3%
 MS          -4%             0%                4%             WY            -13%             -1%               3%
TOTAL        7%             0.3%              4.5%
                                                 Table 8
               Retiree Health Obligations: Increase in Revenues to Balance Over Perpetuity
          Excess Cost Growth Assumption                                          Excess Cost Growth Assumption
     CBO               None            Continued                            CBO               None         Continued
      (1)               (2)                (3)                               (4)               (5)             (6)

NY   3.0%            1.1%              5.2%              MO              0.2%              0.0%             0.4%
CT   2.9%            0.7%              5.1%              MN              0.1%              0.1%             0.1%
NH   2.7%            0.6%              5.0%              WI              0.1%               0.0%             0.3%
NJ   2.4%             0.6%             4.3%              FL               0.1%              0.0%             0.3%
TX   2.2%             0.8%             3.9%              ME               0.1%             -0.3%             0.5%
NC   1.8%             0.4%             3.4%              WA               0.1%              0.0%             0.3%
WV   1.3%             1.3%             1.3%              SD               0.1%              0.0%             0.2%
IL   1.2%             0.3%             2.2%              IA               0.1%              0.0%             0.2%
MI   1.0%            -0.2%             2.3%              ND               0.0%              0.0%             0.0%
HI   0.9%            -0.6%             2.5%              MS               0.0%              0.0%             0.0%
VT   0.9%             0.2%             1.6%              IN               0.0%              0.0%             0.0%
MA   0.8%            -0.2%             1.9%              ID               0.0%              0.0%             0.0%
AL   0.8%             0.0%             1.6%              OR              -0.1%             -0.1%             0.0%
CA   0.7%             0.1%             1.4%              AZ              -0.1%             -0.1%            -0.1%
DE   0.6%            -0.4%             1.6%              MD              -0.1%             -1.4%            -0.3%
OH   0.5%             0.0%             1.1%              CO              -0.1%             -0.1%            -0.1%
SC   0.5%            -0.2%             1.2%              RI              -0.2%             -0.3%            -0.1%
AK   0.5%            -0.6%             1.7%              PA              -0.2%             -0.6%            0.2%
MT   0.4%            0.1%              0.7%              VA              -0.2%             -0.2%            -0.2%
AR   0.4%            0.1%              0.7%              KS              -0.2%             -0.3%            -0.2%
WY   0.3%            0.3%              0.3%              KY              -0.3%             -0.8%            0.2%
NM   0.3%            -0.2%             0.7%              GA              -0.4%             -0.6%            -0.2%
NV   0.2%            -0.2%             0.7%              LA              -0.4%             -0.9%             0.1%
TN   0.2%             0.1%             0.3%              UT              -0.4%             -0.5%            -0.4%
US   0.7%            0.0%              1.5%
                                                    Table A1: Scaling for State and Local Employees not Covered in Primary State Report

         State GASB Report
                                                       Scaling
              Captures

                                 teacher:
                                                 teacher:   local non-ed.                                                                                             Notes
                     non-        based on                                   general:
                                                based on      : based on
                   education   liabilities in                               based on
State   teachers                                  census        census
                     local        teacher                                 supplememt
                                                employee      employee
                   employees   OPEB report                                 al sources
                                                  counts        counts
                                 or CAFR

                                                                                        The 2011 AAL for teacher retiree health care is equal to 9,081,334,485, compared to a state reported retiree health care AAL of 3,369,896,864: ratio of
                                                                                        2.7. The state report is for the State Employee's Health Insurance Plan (SEHIP). The state also has a Local Government Health Insurance Plan (LGHIP).
 AL                                2.69                          x
                                                                                         The LGHIP website states that it provides retiree health coverage in some cases: "An active employee who retires from a unit that allows retirees to
                                                                                                 continue coverage has the option of electing retiree coverage or COBRA." https://www.alseib.org/healthinsurance/lghip/FAQ.aspx

                                                                                        The state report captures all state workers and the vast majority of non-education local workers. The Teacher's Retirement Systemt (TRS) CAFR gives
                                                                                         an AAL of $3,076,288,000 for workers hired before 2006. For those hired after 2006, and whom are on a different retiree health care plan, the AAL
 AK                    x           0.41
                                                                                        equals $2,809,000. Thus, the total AAL for retiree health care is $3,079,097,000. Given the state AAL of $7,428,905,000, this implies a scaling factor of
                                                                                                                                                                  0.41.
                                                                                        The state GASB report captures the bulk of state and local government employees (including both local ed. and non-ed.). The report only misses a few
                                                                                          workers in 3 small state pension plans and 3 local plans. The workers in the 3 state plans are offered retiree health care from the state (Clark and
 AZ        x           x                                                     0.27
                                                                                        Morrill 2010). The Census pension data indicates that these 6 plans have total active membership of 56, 539, equal to 27 percent of the 208,939 actives
                                                                                                                                                   captued in the state GASB report.
                                                                                           State GASB repot covers state employees and some local workers, including some school district employees. It does not cover any teachers. State
                                                                                         retiree health care is linked to receipt of a pension from the state pension system (PERS). PERS had 45,200 active members actives in 2011 relative to
 AR                                                                          0.67
                                                                                        134,995 active members for all the state's pension plans according to the Census Bureau. Thus, we use an overall scaling factor of (134, 995 - 45, 200) /
                                                                                                                                                               134, 995 = 0.67.

                                                                                        State GASB report captures most state employees (although excludes higher-ed. employees outside of CSU system -- e.g. the UC system and community
                                                                                         colleges are excluded). Supplemental Source for general scaling: "Funding Pensions & Retiree Health Care for Public Employees: A Report of the Public
                                                                                        Employee Post-Employee Benefits Commision," State of California, 2008. The report (table 3) calculates the UAAL for all retiree health liabilities in the
 CA                                                                          1.50         state. The calculations suggest that the State GASB report captures 40 percent of total state and local government retiree health liabilities. A scaling
                                                                                         factor of 1.5 (=(total liability - state liability) / state liability =( 118, 126,505,346- 47,880,000,000)/47,880,000,000 = )is therefore applied to the liability
                                                                                          streams calculated from the state GASB report. (Table 6 of the report shows that only 14 percent of total state and local retiree health liabiliteis are
                                                                                                                                 pre-funded, making the UAAL based scaling factor a reasonable approximation.)

                                                                                           The state GASB report captures most state and local employees. Retiree health insurance in linked to receipt of a pension benefit from the state
                                                                                             pension sysytem -- PERA. PERA membership include: "employees of the Colorado state government, public school teachers in the state, many
 CO        x           x
                                                                                        university and college employees, judges, many employees of cities and towns, state troopers, and the employees of a number of other public entities."
                                                                                                                                        (https://www.copera.org/pera/about/overview.htm)

                                                                                          The state GASB report only covers state government employees. The state report does refer to individuals covered by the State Teacher's Retirement
                                                                                        System. A phone conversation with Thomas Woodruff, Healthcare Policy & Benefits Service Division, Office of the State Comptroller, indicates that this
                                                                                         refers to a very small number of state employees covered by the Teacher's Retirement System. In general, teachers are covered by their own plan and
                                                                                           are not captured in the state report. Dr. Woodruff also confirmed that local non-education employees receive retiree health care directly from local
 CT                                0.17                          x                        governments and are not captured in the state report. The State Teacher's Retirement System GASB OPEB report suggests an AAL of $3,023,082,000
                                                                                           for 2011. (This ia an average of the reported 2010 and 2012 AAL provided by the report. The STRS report is for fiscal year 2012, while the state OPEB
                                                                                        report is for fiscal 2011.) Given the state reported AAL of nearly $18 billion, this yields a teacher scaling factor of 0.17. The teacher AAL is relatively low
                                                                                           because it only refers to the provision of a Medicare supplement plan. Prior to Medicare, retired teachers may obtain health care from their former
                                                                                                                                                  districts, but pay 100 percent of the cost.

                                                                                           State GASB report appears to cover all local government workers (including teachers) with the exception of a couple of very small groups such as
 DE        x           x
                                                                                                                                                      volunteer firefighters.
                                                    Table A1: Scaling for State and Local Employees not Covered in Primary State Report

         State GASB Report
                                                        Scaling
              Captures

                                 teacher:
                                                 teacher:   local non-ed.                                                                                         Notes
                     non-        based on                                   general:
                                                based on      : based on
                   education   liabilities in                               based on
State   teachers                                  census        census
                     local        teacher                                 supplememt
                                                employee      employee
                   employees   OPEB report                                 al sources
                                                  counts        counts
                                 or CAFR

                                                                                        The state GASB report covers the provision of retiree heatlh care under the State Group Insurance Plan (GSP). Eligibility for GSP health insurance as a
                                                                                        retiree is contingent on qualifying for a pension benefit from the Florida Retirement System (FRS). Although the FRS covers local employess (including
                                                                                         teachers), the GSP health insurance only applies to state employees. Moroever, the number of active employees in the state GASB report is much too
 FL                                                 x             x                         small to include local workers. (The state GASB report counts 159,407 active employees in the GSP plan. There are 326,753 k-12 employees and
                                                                                        168,583 state employees.) The exclusion of local workers (both K-12 and non-ed.) was confirmed in a telephone call with Sally Wade, an employee of the
                                                                                         Florida State Group Insurance Plan. The provision of retiree health care at the local level is handled by the individual governments with varying levels of
                                                                                                                                subsidy according to a telephone conversation with Gary Green of the FRS.

                                                                                          The state GASB report is two reports appended together: one for state workers and one for k-12 personnel. We calculated annual liabilities for the
 GA        x                       2.58                           x
                                                                                              state workers. The school personnel report indicates that the retire health care AAL is equal to 2.6 times the state retiree health care AAL.

 HI        x           x                                                                                                                 Report covers all state and local government workers.
 ID        x           x                                                                                                    State GASB report appears to capture all state and local government employees.



                                                                                        We collected three state-wide GASB OPEB reports. The first report , which is the basis of our cash flow projections, covers state employees other than
                                                                                            some "college" employees. The second report covers these college workers and the third report covers k-12 teachers. These second two reports
                                                                                             contain AALs jointly equal to 63 percent of the AAL in the first report. Local non-education workers are not covered in these three reports. We
                                                                                          collected information on the AALs of both the City of Chicago and Cook County. The remaining non-teacher local workers (e.g. excluding Chicago and
                                                                                        Cook County) were handled using a scaling factor equal to the ([number of local non-primary and secondary education instructional workers in Illinois] -
                                                                                         [number of City of Chicago and Cook County non-primary and secondary education instructional workers]) / number of state workers = 1.9. Employee
                                                                                           counts refer to full-time workers as measured by the Census Bureau. The provision of retiree health benefits in the City of Chicago is subject to the
                                                                                           provisions of the settlement of City of Chicago v. Korshak. The agreement expires on June 30, 2013 and the city's CAFR statement values the OPEB
                                                                                         obligations assuming the termination of the benefit on this date. This is not consistent with our current policy assumption. We therefore use the AAL
                                                                                        reported by the Retiree Healthcare Benefits Commission (RHBC). (The RHBC was created as a condition of the settlement agreement.) The AAL equals
 IL                                                                          2.91
                                                                                         $10.9 billion and assumes that the benefits which have been provided under the settlement agreement continue indefinitely. (Report to the Mayor’s
                                                                                                                   Office on the State of Retiree Healthcare, Retiree Healthcare Benefits Commission, January 11, 2013;
                                                                                        http://www.cityofchicago.org/city/en/depts/fin/provdrs/ben/alerts/2013/jan/retiree_healthcarebenefitscommissionreporttothemayor.html) (In May
                                                                                        2013 Chicago announced it was terminating the subsidy for retiree health care. As this occurred after our "base" fiscal year of 2011 we do not account
                                                                                          for this termination.) The Cook County Employee's Annuity and Benefit Fund reports an AAL of $1.1 billion for retiree health benefits. However, this
                                                                                            was computed using a 7.5% discount rate. We utilize the $1.7 billion AAL, calculated under a 4.5% discount rate (the same used by the state GASB
                                                                                             report used as the basis of the cash flows for the state), reported in Status of Local Pension Funding Fiscal Year 2011: An Evaluation of Ten Local
                                                                                            Government Employee Pension Funds in Cook County, The Civic Federation, May 21, 2013. The City of Chicago and Cook County have a combined
                                                                                             retiree health care AAL of 12.6 billion, equal to 38 percent of the state GASB report AAL. The total scaling factor for the state is equal to the two
                                                                                                       additional state reports (0.63) + Chicago and Cook County non-teacher (0.38) + remaining non-teachers in state (1.9) = 2.91.



                                                                                        The state GASB report covers all state employee, but is basically two separate reports: one for state police and one for everyone else. The state police
                                                                                        account for 76% of the total present value of the retiree health care liablities. As a result, we generated the cash flows from the state police portion of
                                                                                           the report and then scale up these cash flows by a 0.24 factor. (Retiree health benefits to non-police employees , other than the legislature and
                                                                                        conservation and excise police which are distinct from state police, are relatively small as there is no explicit subsidy.) The state report does not cover
 IN                                                 x             x          0.24
                                                                                        teachers or other local employees. A phone conversation with Nancy Tolson, Executive Director of the Indiana Retired Teachers Association, indicates
                                                                                         that teacher retiree health care is handled on a district-by-district basis. Some districts do not even offer access to their health plans to retirees and
                                                                                         those that do almost never provide a subsidy. The local scaling up is based upon the full state cash flows (i.e. the state police cash flows scaled up to
                                                                                                                                                 reflect all state government employees.)
                                                    Table A1: Scaling for State and Local Employees not Covered in Primary State Report

         State GASB Report
                                                        Scaling
              Captures

                                 teacher:
                                                 teacher:   local non-ed.                                                                                          Notes
                     non-        based on                                   general:
                                                based on      : based on
                   education   liabilities in                               based on
State   teachers                                  census        census
                     local        teacher                                 supplememt
                                                employee      employee
                   employees   OPEB report                                 al sources
                                                  counts        counts
                                 or CAFR
                                                                                        The state GASB report contains essentially no information on who is covered. The number of active employees covered matches up well with the count
                                                                                          of non-higher ed. state employees. Jim Pierson, Iowa Department of Administrative Services, Head of Benefits Education, confirmed that the state
 IA                                                 x             x          0.63        retiree health plan only applies to state employees outside of higher ed. (Although there are a "handful" of university employees covered by the state
                                                                                          plan, in almost all cases the higher ed. institutions direclty provide the benefit.) The scaling factor is the ratio of state higher ed. employees to non-
                                                                                                                                        higher-ed. state employees: (15,610) /(40, 561-15, 610)= 0.63.

                                                                                        The state GASB report makes it clear only state employees are covered by the plan (both higher ed. and other). Every single department covered by the
                                                                                          plan in listed on pgs. 11 - 12 and these are clearly all state agencies. Furthermore, the number of actives in the plan in the 2011 fiscal year, 36, 979,
 KS                                                 x             x                      nearly matches the number of full-time state government employees counted by the census, 38, 293. Kristen Basso, Communications Director for the
                                                                                          Kansas Public Employees Retirement System (KPERS), confirms that all local government retirees, including education employees and teachers, are
                                                                                                                     provided with health care on case-by-case basis as determined by the individual local government.

                                                                                        The state GASB report does not cover state police, teachers or non-education local workers (who are covered under the "County" retirement system.)
 KY                                                                          2.18       We obtained a separate GASB report for each of these groups. The ratio of each groups retiree health care AAL to the state retiree health care AAL is:
                                                                                                        9.5% (state police), 106.4% (local non-ed. worker) and 102.4% (k-12 employees). Thus, the total scaling factor is 2.18.

                                                                                        The state GASB report covers the following workers: state, teachers, other school and state police. Based on a phone coversation with an employee of
 LA        x                                                      x                        the statewide municipal pension fund (MERS: 800-820-1137; www.mersla.com) individual local governments typically provide coverage, but not
                                                                                                                                     universally as some of the very small governments do not.
                                                                                         The state GASB report appears to captures state employees and teachers. However, "University of Maine System Report of the Retiree Health Plan
                                                                                         Task Force II", Sept. 24 2008 makes it clear that the University of Maine system independently provides its retirees health care. The Annual Financial
ME         x                                                      x          0.08
                                                                                        Report of the University of Maine, Year Ended June 20, 2012, gives a fiscal 2011 OPEB AAL of $160,336,000. Given the state AAL of $1,981,000,000, this
                                                                                                                                                      implies a scaling factor of 0.08.

                                                                                         The state GASB report, following a discussion of eligibility for retiree health benefits, has an unlabeled table listing several state pension systems. The
                                                                                         Teacher's Retirement System is listed in the table. However, the count of active members in the state GASB report appear much too small to include
MD                                                  x             x
                                                                                          teachers. This was confirmed by a conversation with a staff member of the Legislation and Research Division of the Maryland State Retirement and
                                                                                                   Pension System who indicated that the state did not provide retiree health benefits to any K-12 teachers in the state of Maryland.


                                                                                        A report by a special commission on retiree health benefits estimates that the retiree health care AAL for the state's municipalities is $30 billion, equal
                                                                                        to 1.8 times the state government's retiree health AAL. The report suggests that only the state and municipal governments provide retiree health care
                                                                                           in Massachusetts. "The Commonwealth of Massachusetts Special Commission to Study Retiree Healthcare and Other Non-Pension Benefits Final
                                                                                        Report", Submitted January 11, 2013. (http://www.mass.gov/anf/docs/anf/opeb-commission/opeb-commission-final-report.pdf) The Public Employee
MA                                                                           1.80
                                                                                        Retirement Administration Commission (a state government entity which oversees the 105 retirement sytems in the state) website states the following
                                                                                             in regards to local government retiree health care: "While continuation of insurance coverage for retirees is an optional matter for the various
                                                                                         governmental units in the Commonwealth, most cities and towns have accepted the necessary provisions of the law which permit them to be able to
                                                                                                                              provide this service. (http://www.mass.gov/perac/guide/mainguide28.htm)

                                                                                         2012 school retirement fund CAFR shows a 2011 OPEB AAL of $14,496,000,000 for retirees and $12,550,000,000 for actives = $27,046,000,000. As the
 MI                                1.90                           x
                                                                                                                             state declared AAL equals $14,251,103,792, the scaling ratio equals 1.90.
                                                    Table A1: Scaling for State and Local Employees not Covered in Primary State Report

         State GASB Report
                                                        Scaling
              Captures

                                 teacher:
                                                 teacher:   local non-ed.                                                                                          Notes
                     non-        based on                                   general:
                                                based on      : based on
                   education   liabilities in                               based on
State   teachers                                  census        census
                     local        teacher                                 supplememt
                                                employee      employee
                   employees   OPEB report                                 al sources
                                                  counts        counts
                                 or CAFR


                                                                                             The state report only covers state workers and excludes state higher education workers. The GASB report for state higher ed. employees (the
                                                                                         Minnesota State Colleges and Universities Postretirement Medical Plan Actuarial Valuation) shows a present value of future benefits of $163,925,000.
                                                                                            Given the state present value of $1,013,680,000, we use a scaling factor of 0.16 to account for the state higher ed. employees. K-12 educational
                                                                                            employee OPEB obligations are based on "Special Study: Other Postemployment Benefit Liabilities of School Districts in Minnesota", Government
                                                                                        Information Division, Office of the State Auditor, State of Minnesota, March 31, 2009. The report contains the results of a survey of the declared GASB
                                                                                        OPEB liabilites of school distircts in the state (see Table 6). The total AAL for responding districts was $1,404,530,364. The only measure of district size
                                                                                            given is operating revenues. The total of these revenues for the reporting districts was $5,978,186,071. The Census Bureau's Public Elementary-
                                                                                           Secondary Education Finance Data reports $8,599,468,000 in total current spending in the fiscal year to which the state report refers in Minnesota.
                                                                                        (The Census total current spending category matches up conceptualy well with the state reported total operating revenues. They also match up well in
MN                                 2.91                                      5.46
                                                                                              dollar terms on a district-by-district basis.) We gross-up the reported AAL of responding districts ($1,404,530,364) by 1.44 ($8,599,468,000 /
                                                                                          $5,978,186,071) to obtain an AAL of $2,020,381,062. The state GASB report has an AAL of $693,297,000. Thus, to account for K-12 local workers we
                                                                                          use a scaling factor of 2.91 ($2,020,381,062 / $693,297,000). Finally, for local non-education workers we use data on GASB declared OPEB liabilities
                                                                                        from non-ed. local governments in Minnesota tabulated in a web appendix to Wirtz, Ronald, "OPEBs: What lies beneath the balance sheet" FedGazette,
                                                                                            Minneapolis Federal Reserve, April 2011. The web appendix has data for 18 local governments and reports a total OPEB AAL for these entities of
                                                                                            $1,665,069,714. The Census Bureau data on public employment shows these governments have 33,115 employees. As total local, non-ed. public
                                                                                        employment is 73,119 in Minnesota, we gross up the reported AAL by 2.21 (73, 119 / 33, 115) to obtain an AAL of 3,676,528,232. The state GASB report
                                                                                        has an AAL of 693,297,000. Thus, to account for local non-ed. workers we use a scaling factor of 5.30. The general scaling factor reported in the table is
                                                                                                                   the sum of the local non-ed. scaling factor and the state higher ed. scaling factor: 5.30 + 0.16 = 5.46.


                                                                                         The state GASB reports states "Eligible retirees will include State and School employees retiring from the State of Mississippi and electing coverage at
                                                                                              retiree contribution rates." We scale for municipal, non-ed. workers as follows. All public pensions in the state fall under one of four state
MS         x                                                                0.146
                                                                                         administered plans. Thes four plans have a total of 162,392 actives and the GASB report shows 141,646. To capture non-ed. municipal employees we
                                                                                                                                                scale by (162,392 - 141,646)/141,646 = 0.15 .
                                                                                          The state GASB report covers only state employees. Although "state" employees who are receceving a pension from the teacher's pension system
                                                                                        (PSRS) are eligible for retiree heatlh care from the state, almost all k-12 employees are employed by local governments, not the state. These local k-12
MO                                                  x             x                                           retirees receieve, by law, retiree health from the local government which had previously employed them (see
                                                                                            https://www.psrsmo.org/PSRS/HealthInsurance.html for teachers and https://www.psrsmo.org/PEERS/HealthInsurance.html for non-teacher
                                                                                                                                                            education retirees).
                                                                                        The state GASB report covers state employees and small numbers of employees from 6 state administered pension plans (other than the primary plan
                                                                                        for state workers). The counts for these 6 plans are much too small to be inclusive of all members in these plans. For instance, 145 and 48 individuals,
                                                                                         respectively, from the Teacher's Retirement System and the Shefiff's Retirement System are covered. Furthermore, the Teacher's Retirement System
MT                                                  x             x                                    website makes it clear that in most cases teacher's receive retiree health benefits directly from their former school district.
                                                                                        (http://www.trs.mt.gov/Retirees/InsurancePremiums.asp) The wording of the state report suggests these workers are likely directly employed by the
                                                                                           state (e.g. a small number of K-12 teachers employed in state run organizations). We proceed with this assumption and scale up based on census
                                                                                                                                                            employee counts.
 NE                                                                                                                         The state of Nebraska does not issue a GASB report as it has negligible liabilities.
                                                                                        The state - local breakdown in Nevada is unusually complicated. From 2003 - 2007 non-state public retirees could opt for the state retiree health plan.
                                                                                         The state plan picked up a number of local employees (i.e. they opted out of their local plans to join the state plan). Actives in the 2011 GASB report
                                                                                        are nearly 100 percent state employees. Local public retirees currently receive health care directly from the local government for whom they worked.
 NV                                                 x             x                     The above information was provided by Celestina Glove, the CFO of the Public Employee's Benefits Program, State of Nevada. Given that local retirees
                                                                                            could only opt in over a five year window and that all of the actives are state employees, we treat the state report as if it pertains only to state
                                                                                         employees. This will slighly overstate total state and local liability, but the bias should be small, particurarly as actives account for 70% of the present
                                                                                                                                                               value of liabilites.
                                                    Table A1: Scaling for State and Local Employees not Covered in Primary State Report

         State GASB Report
                                                       Scaling
              Captures

                                 teacher:
                                                 teacher:   local non-ed.                                                                                          Notes
                     non-        based on                                   general:
                                                based on      : based on
                   education   liabilities in                               based on
State   teachers                                  census        census
                     local        teacher                                 supplememt
                                                employee      employee
                   employees   OPEB report                                 al sources
                                                  counts        counts
                                 or CAFR

                                                                                          The state GASB report covers only state employees. The report states that retired employees receiving a pension benefit from the New Hampshire
                                                                                          Retirement System who meet "certain requirements" are eligible for the state retiree health care benefit. This includes Group 1 retirees -- a group
                                                                                        which includes teachers. However, the count of actives in the GASB report, 11, 514, is too small to cover both state workers and teachers (there were
 NH
                                                                                         31, 499 full-time local education workers in the same year and 15, 548 full-time state workers). A coversation with the staff of the Risk Management
                                                                                        Unit of the Department of Administrative Services, State of New Hampshire confirms that only retired state employees are eligible for the state retiree
                                                                                                                          health care plan. Local workers, both education and non-education, are not covered.

 NJ        x           x                                                                                                                 State report covers all state and local public employees.
                                                                                         The state GASB report covers all state and all k-12 employees. It also covers "participating" local employers. Collectively the two pension funds (PERA
                                                                                           and ERB) which provide the retiree health benefits covered in the state report have 122,188 active members according to their 2012 CAFRS. This
                                                                                          accounts for essentially the entire universe of NM active public pension plan members captured in the Census Bureau pension plan data. The state
NM         x          x*                                                     0.36
                                                                                         GASB report captures 90,083 actives. We therefore infer that there are 32, 105 local employees whose employer have opted not to participate in the
                                                                                        state retiree heatlh plan and assume they are providing this benefit at the local level instead. The local gross up factor is therefore (32, 105 / 90, 083) =
                                                                                                                                                                   0.36.

                                                                                             State GASB Report includes state workers, including the SUNY system, and some local government workers. We calculate our state cash flows
                                                                                          exclusively on the portion of the report excluding SUNY employees. As described in the text, we also explicitly calculate cash flows for New York City
                                                                                        (NYC) using its GASB report. We exclude the portion of the report for "Component Units" of NYC. (The NYC UAAL is equal to 175 percent of the state
                                                                                           UAAL.) We first add the state and NYC cash flows together. We then scale up this joint cash flow using the following source: E.J. Mahon, "Iceberg
                                                                                            Ahead: The Hidden Cost of Public-Sector Retiree Health Benefits in New York," Empire Center For New York State Policy, September 2012. Mahon
 NY        x                                                                 0.97
                                                                                         (2012) catalogs the declared UAAL liabilities for 87 local governments and provides an estimate for the remaining local governments. The ratio of the
                                                                                        UAAL from Mahon (2012) to the UAAL for the state (excluding SUNY) and NYC (excluding the Component Units) is 0.86. The scaling factors, again based
                                                                                        on the UAAL, for SUNY and the Component Units of NYC are 0.08 and 0.03, respectively. Thus, we employ an overall scaling factor of 0.97. (The UAALs
                                                                                           for both the State of New York and New York City are based on the Entry Age Normal actuarial method. Note that these governments also provide
                                                                                                    UAALs based on the Frozen Entry Age method and many publications which cite OPEB liabilities use the Frozen Entry Age figures.)

 NC        x                                                     x                                                                           State report covers state workers and teachers.
                                                                                         The state report covers "A employee of the North Dakota Public Employees Retirement System (NDPERS) that is covered by an employment contract
                                                                                            which provides for post-retirement benefits." NDPERS covers essentially all state and local workers in the state other than teachers. However,
                                                                                         although teachers have their own pension system in North Dakota, the retiree health benefits for teachers are nonetheless provided by NDPERS (see
 ND        x           x
                                                                                        http://www.nd.gov/rio/tffr/publications/retirement.htm). Thus, the state GASB report appears to capture all retiree health care liabilities in the state.
                                                                                          Moreover, the number of actives in the GASB report, 28,115 is relatively close to the number of toal active public pension members in the state as
                                                                                                                                                  recorded by the census, 32,430.
                                                                                         State GASB report includes state and local workers excluding teachers. The2011 teachers retirement system CAFR reports a retiree health care AAL
 OH                    x           0.28
                                                                                                                                  equal to 27 percent of the state reported retiree health care AAL.
                                                    Table A1: Scaling for State and Local Employees not Covered in Primary State Report

         State GASB Report
                                                        Scaling
              Captures

                                 teacher:
                                                 teacher:   local non-ed.                                                                                         Notes
                     non-        based on                                   general:
                                                based on      : based on
                   education   liabilities in                               based on
State   teachers                                  census        census
                     local        teacher                                 supplememt
                                                employee      employee
                   employees   OPEB report                                 al sources
                                                  counts        counts
                                 or CAFR

                                                                                        The state no longer issues an OPEB reported. As noted in the Fiscal 2011 CAFR of the Oklahoma State and Education Employees Group Insurance Board
                                                                                                                                                "During 2006 and 2007, OSEEGIB applied the
                                                                                                                    provisions of GASB Statement No. 43 (GASB 43), Financial Reporting for Postemployment Benefit
                                                                                                                   Plans Other Than Pension Plans, and presented the portion of its activity related to covered active
                                                                                                                 employees of participating employers as a public entity risk pool and the portion of its activity related
                                                                                                                 to covered retirees of participating employers as an agency fund in accordance with the guidance for
                                                                                                                 multiple-employer OPEB (other post-employment benefits) plans that are not administered as trusts.
                                                                                                                  During 2008, OSEEGIB determined its activity related to covered retirees of participating employers
                                                                                                                  does not meet the definition of an OPEB plan, and therefore is not subject to GASB 43. Additionally,
 OK
                                                                                                                  as OSEEGIB is not a cooperative group of governmental entities joining together to finance exposure
                                                                                                                       to risk, OSEEGIB is not subject to GASB Statement No. 10, Accounting and Reporting for Risk
                                                                                                                    Financing and Related Insurance Issues. OSEEGIB, as an instrumentality of the State of Oklahoma
                                                                                                                created to administer, manage, and provide group health, dental, life and disability insurance for active
                                                                                                                 employees and retirees of state agencies, school districts and other governmental units, believes the
                                                                                                                 preferred method of accounting and reporting presentation is a special-purpose government engaged
                                                                                                                     solely in business-type activities, more specifically an insurance enterprise. Effective January 1,
                                                                                                                  2008, OSEEGIB changed its financial statement accounting and reporting presentation and reported
                                                                                                                         results in a single enterprise fund presentation and no longer included an agency fund."

                                                                                               The state versus local breakdown is unusually complicated for Oregon. The Oregon Public Employees Retirement System (OPERS) is a state
                                                                                           administered pension system covering almost all state and local (ed. and non-ed.) government employees. There are two retiree health plans:the
                                                                                           Retiree Health Insurance Account (RHIA) and the Retiree Health Insurance Premium Account (RHIPA). RHIA, which provides a subsidy for Medicare
                                                                                         eligible retirees, is available to those receiving a pension from OPERS and includes both state and local government retirees. RHIPA, which provides a
 OR     see note   see note                                                  0.13         benefit to pre-Medicare retirees, is only available to state government employees. The AAL for RHIPA only (as opposed to the combined RHIPA and
                                                                                         RHIA) is $34,000,000. The total state AAL (RHIA plus RHIPA) is $495,000,000. There are 59,833 total full-time state government employees in Oregon
                                                                                         and 110,785 local government employees. We scale up the ratio of the RHIPA AAL to the total state AAL (RHIA plus RHIPA) times the ratio of local to
                                                                                          state employees: ($34,000,000 /$ 495,000,000) * (110,785 / 59,833) = 0.12. We acknowledge that the scaling is imperfect since it is distributed over
                                                                                                               both pre and post Medicare liabilities whereas it would ideally be distributed over only pre-Medicare liabilities.


                                                                                           The state report covers only state employees. The Public School Employee's Retirement System (PSERS) Actuarial Valuation for 2011 (which values
                                                                                           both pension and OPEB liabilities) shows an AAL of $1,339,444,000. Given the state reported AAL of $15,400,070,000, this implies a scaling factor of
                                                                                        0.087 for education workers. However, the PSERS OPEB valuation refers to a Premium Assistance (PA) program available to retirees with out-of-pocket
                                                                                           premium expenses for health insurance through the PSERS health insurance coverage (which is funded 100% from retiree premiums including funds
                                                                                         from the Premium Assistance Program) or from a school district's group health plan. (http://www.psers.state.pa.us/premiumasst.htm) According to
                                                                                          James McAneny, Executive Director of the Public Employee Retirement Commission (PERC), Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (www.perc.state.pa.us),
                                                                                            almost all school districts provide funding for retiree health care over and above the state funded PA program. This is done on a district-by-district
                                                                                          basis and their is no systematic collection of the size of these liabilities. As a result, we scale up for education employees based on census employee
 PA                                                 x                        0.14
                                                                                         counts and thereby implicitly assume that the school districts set their level of retiree health care benefits such that when they are added to the state
                                                                                              PA program, the total benefit is equivalent to the benefit provided to state workers. (I.e. we do not use the 0.087 scaliong factor.) Local, non-
                                                                                             education, retiree health is handled solely by each individual government. PERC conducted a survey of all municipal OPEB liabilities in the state.
                                                                                           Although the results are unpublished, PERC generously shared the underlying data. Municipalities with 63, 475 active pension members responded
                                                                                        with information on their OPEB AAL's which totaled $1,060,000,000. (The active counts come from PERC data on pension liabilities.) Accounting for 58,
                                                                                           645 active pension members at the County level and an additional 10, 499 actives whose employers either did not respond to the survey or failed to
                                                                                             provide a AAL value, the total non-education local AAL scales to $2,215,000,000. Given the state reported AAL of $15,400,070,000, this implies a
                                                                                                                                                    scaling factor for these workers of 0.14.
                                                    Table A1: Scaling for State and Local Employees not Covered in Primary State Report

         State GASB Report
                                                        Scaling
              Captures

                                 teacher:
                                                 teacher:   local non-ed.                                                                                          Notes
                     non-        based on                                   general:
                                                based on      : based on
                   education   liabilities in                               based on
State   teachers                                  census        census
                     local        teacher                                 supplememt
                                                employee      employee
                   employees   OPEB report                                 al sources
                                                  counts        counts
                                 or CAFR
 RI        x                                                      x                                                                      State GASB report covers state employees and teachers.

                                                                                         The state GASB report is unusually clear about who is, and is not, covered by the retiree health insurance evaluated: "For the State of South Carolina,
                                                                                         these benefits primarily include medical, prescription drug and dental insurance benefits provided to all eligible State and School District retirees, and
 SC        x                                                      x                          also include the basic long term disability benefits provided to State employees, School District employees, and employees for Local Political
                                                                                         Subdivisions. Any other OPEB benefits offered to the employees of the State of South Carolina are outside the scope of this report." Thus, the retiree
                                                                                                              health care in the state report covers state and local school employees, but not non-education employees.

 SD                                                 x             x                                                                          The state GASB report only covers state workers.

                                                                                              The Tennesse Department of Finance and Administration, Division of Accounts, provides a summary of all public OPEB obligations in the state
                                                                                              (http://www.tn.gov/finance/act/OPEB.shtml). There are four plans in total: State Plan (the basis of our cash flow projections), Teacher Plan,
                                                                                        Tennessee Plan (Medicare Supplement Plan which is separate from the State plan) and the Local Government Plan. The respective ratios of plan UAAL
 TN                                                                          1.76
                                                                                           to the UAAL for the State Plan are: 0.69 (Teacher Plan), 0.33 (Tennessee Plan), and 0.06 (Local Government Plan). All four plans are unfunded and
                                                                                         these ratios cannot there be thought of as based on the relative AALs. (The Local Plan AAL reported on the above state website excludes some of the
                                                                                                           obligations and the above ratio is therefore based upon the AAL value in the July 1, 2011 Local Plan OPEB report.)

                                                                                          Teachers 2011 GASB shows 681,457 actives and a UAAL of $28,894,299 (5.25% discount rate). Given the state AAL of $21,502,434,000, this yields a
 TX                                1.34                           x                     scalng factor of 1.34. The state report appears to only cover state employees. The Texas municipal retirement system does not provide retiree health
                                                                                                                                    care and their fact sheet states this is done directly by localities.

                                                                                         The state GASB report appears to only cover state employees and this was confirmed by Marcie Handy, the state of Utah Assistant State Comptroller,
                                                                                         Department of Administrative Services, Division of Finance. Both ed. and non-ed. local retiree heatlh care is completely decentralized and handled by
 UT                                                 x             x                       individual governments. The state valuation covers liabilities accrued before Jan. 1, 2006. On Jan. 1, the retiree health program was converted to a
                                                                                          plan which places money into a Health Reimburesement Account (HRA) which can be used to purchase health insurance. This new benefit does not
                                                                                                      trigger liabilities under GASB 43 or 45. Instead it is accounted for under GASB 16. (In 2014, the HRA program will terminate.)

                                                                                          The state GASB report used to generate the cash flows only pertains to state employees covered by the Vermont State Employee Retirement System
                                                                                            (VSERS) . The 2011 Annual Report, Office of the State Treasurer, State of Vermont, January 2012 provides the OPEB AAL for the Vermont State
 VT                                0.77                           x                                   Teacher's Retirement System in fiscal 2011: $780,032,000. Given the VSERS AAL of $1,011,782,851, we use scaling factor of
                                                                                        (780,032,000/1,011,782,851=0.77) for teachers. The 2011 Annual Report states that the State has no liabilities for local government workers other than
                                                                                                            teachers and that the individual local governments produce their own valuations for these liabilities, see pg. 23.

                                                                                         The Health Insurance Credit Program (HICP) supplements the pension benefit by providing $4 a month per year of service (no COLA; cannot exceed
                                                                                        monthly health insurance premium). Although the program is available to "participating" political subdivisions (i.e. local governments), the state GASB
 VA        x                                                      x                       report only covers state employees and teachers. In addition to the HICP, the state offers health insurance to state retirees through the Health
                                                                                             Insurance Benefit for State Retirees program. However, this only provides access to the insurance pool as the state pays none of the cost
                                                                                                                (http://www.dhrm.state.va.us/hbenefits/openenroll2012/NonMedicareRetireePremiums2012.pdf.)

WA         x           x                                                                Reasonable clear that state report gets all state and local workers as there are categories for: state (including higher ed.), k-12 and political subdivisions

WV         x           x                                                                                                           State GASB report covers all state and local workers, including k-12.

                                                                                        The state GASB report covers only state workers, including higher ed. This was confirmed by Bob Willett of the Department of Employee Trust Funds,
 WI                                                 x             x                     State of Wisconsin. Mr. Willett also provided the information that, although localities can use the state health plan for their workers and retirees, the
                                                                                                       state does not fund this and all actuarial accounting for local retiree health is done by each individual local government.

WY         x           x                                                                                             The state GASB report appears to cover all state and local government employees in the state.
                                                 Table A2
     Retiree Health Obligations: Increase in General Own Source Revenues to Balance Over Perpetuity
           Excess Cost Growth Assumption                                        Excess Cost Growth Assumption
      CBO               None            Continued                          CBO               None         Continued
       (1)               (2)                 (3)                            (4)               (5)             (6)

NY    5.2%             1.8%             8.8%             MO              0.4%             -0.1%            0.8%
CT    4.4%             1.1%             7.7%             MN              0.2%             0.2%             0.2%
NH    4.3%             1.0%             8.0%             WI              0.2%              0.0%             0.5%
NJ    3.6%              1.0%            6.6%             FL               0.2%            -0.1%             0.5%
TX    3.7%              1.4%            6.4%             ME               0.2%            -0.5%             0.8%
NC    3.1%              0.6%            6.0%             WA               0.2%             0.0%             0.5%
WV    2.2%              2.2%            2.2%             SD               0.2%             0.0%             0.4%
IL    2.1%              0.4%            3.7%             IA               0.2%             0.0%             0.4%
MI    1.7%             -0.3%            3.8%             ND               0.0%             0.0%             0.1%
HI    1.5%             -0.9%            4.2%             MS               0.0%             0.0%             0.1%
VT    1.5%              0.3%            2.8%             IN               0.0%            -0.1%             0.1%
MA    1.4%             -0.4%            3.2%             ID               0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
AL    1.2%             -0.1%            2.6%             OR              -0.1%            -0.2%            -0.1%
CA    1.3%              0.1%            2.6%             AZ              -0.1%            -0.1%            -0.1%
DE    0.9%             -0.6%            2.5%             MD              -0.1%            -2.2%            -0.5%
OH    1.0%             -0.1%            2.1%             CO              -0.2%            -0.2%            -0.2%
SC    0.8%             -0.3%            2.0%             RI              -0.3%            -0.5%            -0.1%
AK    0.7%             -1.0%            2.5%             PA              -0.4%            -1.1%            0.3%
MT    0.8%             0.3%             1.4%             VA              -0.4%            -0.4%            -0.4%
AR    0.8%             0.2%             1.4%             KS              -0.4%            -0.5%            -0.3%
WY    0.5%             0.5%             0.5%             KY              -0.6%            -1.6%            0.3%
NM    0.5%             -0.3%            1.4%             GA              -0.6%            -1.0%            -0.3%
NV    0.4%             -0.3%            1.3%             LA              -0.7%            -1.6%             0.2%
TN    0.4%              0.2%            0.7%             UT              -0.7%            -0.8%            -0.7%
US    1.3%             0.0%             2.6%
