NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EXTERNALITIES AND TAXATION OF SUPPLEMENTAL INSURANCE:
A STUDY OF MEDICARE AND MEDIGAP
Marika Cabral
Neale Mahoney
Working Paper 19787
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19787

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2014, Revised October 2017

We thank Jeff Clemens, Mark Duggan, Tom Davidoff, Liran Einav, Josh Gottlieb, Caroline
Hoxby, Erin Johnson, Amanda Kowalski, Jonathan Levin, and David Powell for helpful
comments. We also thank seminar participants at UC Berkeley, University of Chicago Junior
Faculty Group, University of Chicago Harris School, University of Houston, UT Austin Applied
Micro Lunch, Rice University, Stanford University, Texas A&M University, the 2013 RWJ
Annual Meeting, the 2013 Austin-Bergen Labor Workshop, the 2013 National Tax Association
Annual Conference, the 2013 Annual Health Economics Conference, and the 2013 and 2015
ASSA Meetings for their comments and suggestions. We thank Can Cui and Hanbin Yang for
excellent research assistance. We are grateful to John Robst for sharing Medigap premium data
and to Frances McCarty for help with the restricted access NHIS data. Cabral gratefully
acknowledges financial support from a National Science Foundation Fellowship. Mahoney
gratefully acknowledges financial support from a Kapnick Fellowship, RicWeiland Fellowship,
and the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. All errors are our own, and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2014 by Marika Cabral and Neale Mahoney. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Externalities and Taxation of Supplemental Insurance: A Study of Medicare and Medigap
Marika Cabral and Neale Mahoney
NBER Working Paper No. 19787
January 2014, Revised October 2017
JEL No. H2,I13
ABSTRACT
Most health insurance uses cost-sharing to reduce excess utilization. Supplemental insurance can
blunt the impact of this cost-sharing, increasing utilization and exerting a negative externality on
the primary insurer. This paper estimates the effect of private Medigap supplemental insurance on
public Medicare spending using Medigap premium discontinuities in local medical markets that
span state boundaries. Using administrative data on the universe of Medicare beneficiaries, we
estimate that Medigap increases an individual’s Medicare spending by 22.2%. We calculate that a
15% tax on Medigap premiums generates savings of $12.9 billion annually, with a standard error
of $4.9 billion.

Marika Cabral
Department of Economics
University of Texas at Austin
One University Station
BRB 1.116, C3100
Austin, TX 78712
and NBER
marika.cabral@austin.utexas.edu
Neale Mahoney
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
Neale.Mahoney@chicagobooth.edu

1

Introduction

Health insurance policies typically include cost-sharing, such as coinsurance, copayments, and
deductibles. By partially exposing beneficiaries to the marginal price of care, optimal cost-sharing
strikes a balance between the risk-smoothing benefits of insurance and the excess utilization from
moral hazard (Zeckhauser, 1970). However, in many settings individuals can purchase supplemental insurance, reducing their exposure to this cost-sharing and potentially exerting a negative
externality on the primary insurance provider.
A leading example of this phenomenon is the interaction between public Medicare insurance
and private Medigap supplemental insurance. Most elderly Americans have health insurance
through Medicare, which controls utilization with a deductible of approximately $1,000 for each
hospital admission and coinsurance of 20% for physician office visits.1 In addition to these features, Medicare has no annual or lifetime out-of-pocket maximum, leaving beneficiaries exposed
to substantial out-of-pocket risk. Although most private insurance prohibits the purchase of supplemental insurance, Medicare allows its beneficiaries to purchase private supplemental insurance
called Medigap. This supplemental insurance covers essentially all of Medicare’s cost-sharing, potentially leading to excess utilization and exerting a negative externality on Medicare.2 Taxing the
purchase of Medigap to account for this externality may be a promising avenue for controlling
Medicare costs—and increasing overall efficiency.
Researchers have long been aware that supplemental insurance may impose a fiscal externality on Medicare—and policymakers have issued a number of proposals to tax or regulate Medigap.3 Yet despite this policy interest, considerable uncertainty remains about the effects of such a
policy. Estimating the causal impact of Medigap is difficult because the supplemental insurance
coverage may be correlated with unobserved determinants of medical utilization. Previous studies, which have examined this relationship with regressions of medical spending on an indicator
for Medigap coverage, admit that adverse or advantageous selection may bias the results.
This paper uses plausibly exogenous variation to estimate the externality that Medigap im1 All dollar values are inflation-adjusted to 2005 values using the CPI-U. The Part A deductible was $912 in 2005 and
has been raised by $27 nominal dollars on average per year since 2000.
2 Because Medicare pays for a large fraction of the care provided on the margin, if beneficiaries increase spending
due to Medigap enrollment, then Medicare pays for a large fraction of this excess care.
3 For example, President Obama’s 2013 budget proposed a 15% tax on Medigap premiums.

1

poses on the Medicare system and to estimate how a corrective tax on Medigap would impact
Medicare costs and welfare. Medicare costs, and thus the costs financed through supplemental
Medigap insurance, exhibit considerable within-state variation due to geographic variation in factors ranging from household incomes to local physician practice styles to the supply of medical
resources. Yet despite this local variation in the determinants of health care spending, within-state
variation in Medigap premiums is very limited. This means that on opposite sides of state boundaries, otherwise identical individuals who belong to the same local medical market can face very
different Medigap premiums, solely due to the costs of individuals elsewhere in their state.
An example is the Hospital Service Area (HSA) centered on Bennington, Vermont, which
spans the border between southwest Vermont and upstate New York. On the Vermont side of the
border, Medigap premiums are $1,058 per year. On the New York side of the border, premiums
are $1,504 per year or about 40% higher. The reason for this premium difference is that New York
state has New York City in the south, a region with substantially higher Medicare costs than the
northern part of the state. It is the high-spending metropolitan south, combined with the limited
within-state variation in premiums, that inflates Medigap premiums in upstate New York, creating
a plausibly exogenous source of premium variation.
We isolate this variation by “zooming in” on HSAs that straddle state borders and instrumenting for premiums in these border-spanning HSAs with costs elsewhere in the state. HSAs
are defined by the Dartmouth Atlas as sets of adjacent ZIP codes in which residents receive most
of their routine hospital care at the same facilities. HSAs are roughly the size of a county, and
approximately 250 of the 3,436 HSAs cross state lines, accounting for 11% of the individuals in
our sample. We isolate premium variation within border-spanning HSAs with a “leave-out costs"
instrumental variable, which we define as the average uncovered Medicare spending for all Medicare beneficiaries outside an individual’s HSA but within their state of residence.4 Leave-out costs
differ by at least $64 in 50% of cross-border HSAs and by at least $166 in 20% of the cross-border
HSAs in our sample. Our first stage regression of premiums on leave-out costs and HSA fixed
effects is highly predictive with an R-squared ranging between 0.84 and 0.93 across specifications
and a p-value on the instrument of less than 0.01.
4 Throughout the paper, “uncovered Medicare spending" refers to the portion of Medicare-eligible spending that is
the responsibility of the beneficiary and is paid either by the beneficiary or the beneficiary’s supplemental insurer.

2

We use this variation in premiums to estimate the price sensitivity of Medigap demand. Our
preferred instrumental variable estimates indicate a demand elasticity of -1.5 to -1.8. These estimates are stable across alternative specifications and different approaches to measuring Medigap
coverage in our data. Our empirical strategy also allows us to examine potential substitution into
alternative forms of coverage, and we find no evidence of substitution into Medicare Advantage
or Medicaid based on our variation in premiums.
Using administrative data on the universe of Medicare beneficiaries, we use this same instrumental variables strategy to examine the impact of Medigap on medical utilization and Medicare
costs. Our estimates can be interpreted as local average treatment effects for individuals who
are marginal to variation in premiums—presumably the same individuals who would respond
to a tax on premiums. We find that Medigap increases Part B physician claims by 33.7% and
Part A hospital stays by 23.9%. Summing across all categories of spending, we find that Medigap increases overall Medicare costs by $1,396 per year on a base of $6,290 or by 22.2%. This
effect averages over individuals with higher spending due to moral hazard and any individuals
with potentially lower spending due to increased use of preventative care (Chandra, Gruber and
McKnight, 2010). We show that our results are robust to alternative specifications, and we conduct several falsification tests using individuals and procedures that should be unaffected by the
variation in premiums.
We combine our demand and cost estimates to calculate the impact of taxing Medigap. Our
estimates indicate that a 15% tax on Medigap premiums, with full pass-through, would decrease
Medigap coverage by 13 percentage points on a base of 48% and reduce net government costs
by 4.3% per Medicare beneficiary, with a standard error of 1.7 percentage points. About 35% of
this savings would come from tax revenue while the remainder would come from lower Medigap
enrollment. A tax equal to the full $1,396 externality requires us to extrapolate outside the premium variation in the data. To a first order approximation, our estimates indicate that such a tax
would eliminate the Medigap market and decrease Medicare costs by 10.7% per beneficiary.5 We
5 While our estimates directly address the savings from taxing Medigap, broader reforms could potentially further
increase efficiency. For example, Gruber (2013) suggests restructuring Medicare’s cost-sharing in addition to levying
a tax on supplemental insurance. A nuanced re-structuring of Medicare’s cost-sharing may aim to influence not only
the level of medical spending, but also what individuals spend money on, encouraging the use of high-value care and
discouraging the use of low-value care (Baicker, Chandra and Skinner, 2012; Baicker, Mullainathan and Schwartzstein,
2015). Beyond using cost-sharing to curb moral hazard, Medicare could also use supply-side policies to limit the overuse of medical care (e.g. Einav, Finkelstein and Mahoney, 2017)

3

conclude by discussing optimal Medigap taxation and welfare.
Our paper builds on an older literature that assesses the impact of Medigap with regressions
of medical spending on an indicator for Medigap coverage, controlling for selection into Medigap
with available covariates. The key challenge with this type of analysis is disentangling moral
hazard and selection. Given this identification challenge, it is perhaps not surprising that prior
studies have arrived at a wide range of estimates for the Medigap externality depending on the
included set of controls, with estimates of the effect of Medigap on Medicare spending spanning
the range of 10% to nearly 100%.6 We contribute to this literature by utilizing plausibly exogenous
variation paired with comprehensive administrative data on Medicare spending, allowing us to
overcome the classic identification concern and isolate the externality induced by Medigap.7
Our paper contributes to the literature in a number of ways. First, to the best of our knowledge, our paper is the first to estimate the fiscal externality from Medigap using a quasi-experimental
source of variation. Second, by using premium variation to identify the effect of Medigap on Medicare spending, we are able to quantify the cost savings and welfare effects of taxing Medigap.
Third, many public insurance programs throughout the world allow policyholders to purchase
private supplemental insurance.8 Thus, we think that our approach can be applied to studying
how to reduce costs and increase surplus from public insurance in a broad range of settings.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents background on Medicare and Medigap and describes our data sources. Section 3 outlines our empirical strategy and
Section 4 presents summary statistics and evidence on the validity of our identifying assumption.
6 Estimates of the Medigap externality range from Medigap increases Medicare spending by approximately 10%
(Ettner, 1997) to nearly 100% (GAO, 2013), with several studies suggesting estimates between these extremes (e.g., Wolfe
and Goddeeris, 1991; Khandker and McCormack, 1999; Hurd and McGarry, 1997). While prior studies acknowledge the
bias that selection has on these estimates, prior studies do not agree on the magnitude and direction of the bias due to
selection. Lemieux, Chovan and Heath (2008) argue that selection is probably adverse, leading these studies to overstate
the impact of Medigap. Finkelstein (2004) finds evidence consistent with adverse selection in the Medigap market.
Fang, Keane and Silverman (2008) find evidence of advantageous selection into Medigap, though this advantageous
selection disappears once they condition on a wider set of covariates.
7 Our paper is also related to Chandra, Gruber and McKnight (2010), which studies the effects of a change in the
generosity of the retiree supplemental insurance provided to California state employees through the CalPERS system.
The authors’ main finding is that CalPERS drug coverage can reduce hospitalizations among the chronically ill. These
results do not have direct relevance to this setting because Medigap does not typically include drug coverage.
8 In France, more than 92% of the population holds private supplemental insurance to protect against the substantial
coinsurance payments (10% to 40%) of the universal public health insurance system. In Austria, about a third of the
population has a supplemental private insurance plan that covers additional charges not covered under the basic health
insurance benefits. About 30% of Belgians carry private supplemental health insurance policies. Approximately 30%
of the population of Denmark purchases Voluntary Health Insurance (VHI) in order to cover the costs of statutory
copayments of the universal health care coverage package. See KFF (2008) and Cato (2008) for more details.

4

Section 5 presents the main results and Section 6 examines the robustness of these results to a number of specification checks and placebo tests. Section 7 presents policy counterfactuals. Section 8
concludes.

2

Background and Data

This section provides background on Medicare and Medigap, and describes our data sources.

2.1

Background

Medicare beneficiaries can choose to receive coverage from publicly administered fee-for-service
(FFS) Medicare or from a private Medicare Advantage plan.9 FFS Medicare allows beneficiaries
to choose their doctors and see a specialist without a referral. To control costs, FFS Medicare
uses cost-sharing, partially exposing beneficiaries to marginal cost of care. Medicare Advantage
policies have premiums subsidized by Medicare. Relative to FFS Medicare, Medicare Advantage
plans typically have more generous cost-sharing but place restrictions on provider choice. During
our sample period, which runs from 1999 to 2005, 85% of Medicare beneficiaries selected FFS
Medicare coverage, with the remaining 15% receiving coverage from private Medicare Advantage
plans.
The details of FFS Medicare coverage for 2005 (the last year of our sample) are shown in Table
1. For hospital visits, which are covered by Part A of the Medicare program, beneficiaries face
a deductible of nearly $1,000 and additional cost-sharing for long hospital stays. For physician
expenditures, which are covered by Part B of the Medicare program, beneficiaries pay a small
deductible and 20% coinsurance. A key feature of FFS Medicare is that there is no annual or
lifetime out-of-pocket maximum, so individuals are exposed to significant financial risk. Figure
1 shows the distribution of uncovered Medicare spending, which is defined as Medicare-eligible
spending for which the patient is responsible. The mean uncovered spending is $1,186, and 3.8%
of individuals in each year have uncovered expenditures in excess of $5,000.
To protect against the financial risk, 86% of FFS Medicare beneficiaries carry supplemental
9 Throughout the paper, we refer to Medicare Part C as Medicare Advantage, even though it was called “Medicare +
Choice” during the beginning of our sample period.

5

insurance. Approximately 13% of FFS beneficiaries qualify for supplemental insurance at no cost
through the government Medicaid program. Other beneficiaries may choose to purchase supplemental insurance offered by a former employer, and everyone has the option to purchase private Medigap coverage. Among FFS beneficiaries, 42% purchase Medigap coverage and approximately 40% purchase supplemental insurance through a former employer.10
The federal government regulates both the form of Medigap insurance and the purchase of
Medigap policies. Individuals are restricted to choose from a standardized set of plans, all of
which cover the same basic benefits.11 These basic benefits include coverage of the Part A deductible, Part A copays, and Part B coinsurance. Beyond the basic benefits, there is some variation
across plans in the remaining coverage, though most of this variation is for less common expenses
such as travel emergencies and home health care. Appendix A shows enrollment by plan and
discusses Medigap plan characteristics in detail.
In this paper, we focus on the extensive margin of whether an individual has Medigap, rather
than the effect of one plan compared to another, for two reasons. First, the basic benefits that are
likely to have the greatest effect on the marginal price of care are common to all plans. Thus, the
extensive margin is likely to be the primary driver of the marginal cost of care.12 Second, our aim
is to investigate the effect of a tax on Medigap policies. Because the Medigap tax proposals under
consideration do not discriminate across plans, the extensive margin is more policy-relevant than
substitution between Medigap plans.
In addition to regulating the form of Medigap policies, the federal government regulates
the purchase of policies. Medigap beneficiaries typically purchase Medigap insurance within six
months of turning 65 years old and signing up for FFS Medicare, during what is called the “open
enrollment period.” Medigap policies purchased during this open enrollment period are guaranteed renewable as long as Medigap enrollees pay plan premiums each year.13 Individuals in
10 According to the MCBS estimates, approximately 10% of FFS beneficiaries carried both Medigap and Retiree Supplemental Insurance coverage during our sample period.
11 There are three states in which the Medigap market is different. Massachusetts, Wisconsin, and Minnesota standardized their plans prior to federal regulation and have continued their own offerings. We exclude these three states
from our analysis. The Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act of 2003 introduced plans
K and L and eliminated the sale of Medigap plans with drug benefits (H, I, and J). These changes took effect after our
sample period.
12 Although coverage for the Part B deductible is available only for some plans, since most beneficiaries spend more
than the $110 Part B deductible, this coverage has little impact on the marginal cost of care.
13 The federal government regulates how Medigap policy prices can evolve. In particular, when an individual enrolls
in a Medigap plan, he is choosing an age-price profile that may be adjusted with medical inflation but may not be

6

this market typically sign up for a Medigap plan during their open enrollment period, and renew
their policy each year.14 During this open enrollment period, individuals cannot be legally denied
coverage for any reason, and pricing is limited to a small set of characteristics (gender, location,
and smoking status). In practice, premium variation is much more limited than what is legally
allowed, and companies rarely vary premiums for a given plan within a state.15 The beneficiaryweighted average annual premium of Medigap policies is $1,779, though the premium varies
substantially across states.16 In Section 4, we discuss the Medigap premium variation in more
detail.
Some individuals obtain supplemental coverage through a former employer. Unlike Medigap coverage during our sample period, Retiree Supplemental Insurance (RSI) policies typically
covered prescription drugs and provided less generous coverage (or sometimes no coverage) of
medical services. The average annual premium for an individual RSI policy in 2004 was $3,144,
and retirees on average contributed approximately 39% or $1,212 of this premium. Unlike individual Medigap policies, RSI coverage is often available to both the retiree and his or her spouse for
a higher premium contribution. This background information on RSI is drawn from KFF (2004).

2.2

Data Sources

We use data from several sources. The primary medical spending and utilization information
comes from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) and covers the years 1999
through 2005. The CMS Denominator file contains data on the universe of Medicare enrollees,
and includes information on sex, age, Medicaid status, Medicare Advantage enrollment, and ZIP
code of residence. To investigate beneficiary-level spending and utilization, we combine the CMS
Denominator file with the CMS Beneficiary Summary File which covers the universe of FFS Medicare beneficiaries. The Beneficiary Summary File data contain information on health care spending
contingent on his current or future health status. Thus, along with the contemporaneous benefits, Medigap coverage
provides insurance against reclassification risk in future periods. Since the evolution of premiums over time is set by
federal standards, throughout the paper we focus on the premium charged to a 65-year-old during the open-enrollment
period.
14 Medicare’s website provides beneficiaries with information on selecting a Medigap policy and encourages beneficiaries to select a policy as if they will annually renew the policy, because dropping coverage would mean that they
would face risk-rating were they to wish to re-enroll. In the Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey (MCBS), 87% of
individuals renew their Medigap plan across years.
15 In practice, smoking status and gender are rarely priced, and although plans are legally allowed to vary prices at
the ZIP code level, there tends to be very limited variation in company-plan level premiums within a state.
16 The beneficiary-weighted premium is calculated using the baseline sample, as described in Table 2.

7

(Medicare spending and beneficiary spending), utilization by category of care (e.g., hospitalizations, Part B claims), and chronic conditions.17
To further investigate which types of utilization are elastic to Medigap enrollment, we also
examine Medicare claims data. Outpatient claims data are available in the CMS Carrier data file
that contains outpatient claims for a 20% random sample of FFS Medicare beneficiaries. Inpatient
claims data are available in the CMS MedPAR data file which contains inpatient claims for 100%
of FFS Medicare beneficiaries.
The CMS administrative data do not contain information on Medigap enrollment.18 Thus, we
must rely on survey data to estimate the demand for Medigap. To maximize statistical power, we
combine estimates from two surveys: the Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey (MCBS) from 1992
to 2005 and the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) from 1992 to 2005. Both surveys ask
questions regarding supplemental insurance coverage among Medicare beneficiaries and contain
similar demographic and health information. Appendix B describes how we construct the key
variables from each survey.
Our premium data come from Weiss Ratings and contain Medigap premiums for policies
purchased during the open-enrollment period for year 2000.19 Prior work reveals that withinstate premium variation in plan-level Medigap premiums is very limited (Robst, 2006; Maestas,
Schroeder and Goldman, 2009). In practice, firms do not tend to vary premiums across localities
within a state, and firms rarely price gender or smoking status. For the analysis in this paper, we
use premium data aggregated to the state-plan-firm level.
As we describe in detail in Section 3, the empirical strategy focuses on isolating variation in
premiums within local medical markets that span state boundaries. Geographic crosswalks from
the Dartmouth Atlas are used to match localities with their associated local medical markets. Our
baseline definition of a local medical market is a Hospital Service Area (HSA). HSAs are defined
by the Dartmouth Atlas as sets of adjacent ZIP codes in which residents receive most of their
routine hospital care at the same facilities. HSAs are approximately the size of a county: there
17 Data on spending, utilization, and chronic conditions are available only for FFS Medicare beneficiaries (no data are
available for those on Medicare Advantage). Thus, it is key that we show that individuals do not substitute to Medicare
Advantage to be able to interpret our results.
18 The lack of CMS data on Medigap is perhaps not surprising since Medigap enrollment does not affect Medicare’s
reimbursement formulas so claims can be processed without this information.
19 We thank John Robst for sharing these data.

8

are 3,436 HSAs and 3,140 counties in the United States. However, unlike counties, HSAs often
span state boundaries, reflecting the fact that local medical markets are not aligned with political
boundaries. Using within-HSA variation provides us with a convenient way of ignoring state
border areas where geographic barriers, or sharp differences in socioeconomic factors, lead to
natural breaks in the providers from which medical care is received, allowing us to identify the
effect of Medigap among those individuals who receive care from the same medical providers.
We combine these datasets with supplemental data from several other sources. ZIP codelevel demographic data are obtained from the Census of Population and Housing 2000. Special
Tabulation on Aging (available through ICPSR) and ZIP code-level income data are obtained from
2001 IRS aggregate income statistics. Medicare reimbursement rates vary geographically due to
geographic adjustment factors. Although our research design focuses on individuals within local
medical markets who (by definition) tend to use the same providers, our baseline analysis controls
for Medicare geographic price adjustment factors, Part A OWI and Part B GAF, which are obtained
from CMS.

3

Empirical Strategy

This section provides an overview of our empirical strategy and presents our estimating equations.

3.1

Overview

Our empirical approach is to use exogenous variation in Medigap premiums to identify (i) the
price sensitivity of the demand for Medigap and (ii) the fiscal externality of Medigap on Medicare costs. Medical costs exhibit considerable within-state variation due to factors ranging from
household incomes to local physician practice styles to the supply of medical resources.20 Yet
despite this local variation, within-state premium variation is highly limited. Maestas, Schroeder
and Goldman (2009) show that, while firms are allowed to vary premiums at the ZIP code level,
there is very little within-state variation in the Medigap premiums for a given plan offered by a
20 See Cutler and Sheiner (1999), Cutler et al. (2013), Wennberg (1999), Wennberg, Fisher and Skinner (2002), and
MedPAC (2003), among others.

9

given insurance company. The authors cite state-level reporting requirements and regulations as
a potential explanation.21 Whatever the cause, the fact that premiums do not vary means that on
opposite sides of state boundaries, otherwise identical individuals who belong to the same local
medical markets can face very different premiums for Medigap, solely due to the costs of individuals elsewhere in their state. We isolate this variation by “zooming in” on HSAs that span
state borders and instrumenting for premium variation in these border spanning HSAs with costs
elsewhere in the state.
Figure 2 provides a concrete example of our empirical strategy. Panel A shows a map of per
capita uncovered Medicare spending in New York and Vermont by HSA; Panel B shows Medigap premiums in the same area. We define “uncovered Medicare spending” as the Medicareeligible spending that is the responsibility of the beneficiary and is paid for either out-of-pocket
or by a supplemental insurance plan. Two HSAs, centered on Bennington, VT, and Cambridge,
NY, straddle the New York-Vermont border. Each of these HSAs had average per capita uncovered Medicare spending around $900, typical of the other HSAs in the upstate NY and VT area.22
However, within these cross-border HSAs, there are sharp differences in Medigap premiums. Premiums on the New York side of the border are $1,504 per year versus $1,058 on the Vermont side.23
The reason for this premium difference is that New York state has New York City in the south, a
region with substantially higher Medicare costs than the northern part of the state.24 It is the highspending metropolitan south, combined with the limited within-state variation in premiums, that
inflates Medigap premiums in upstate New York, creating a plausibly exogenous source of premium variation. Figure 3 shows the analogous data for the continental United States. Like the
case of New York and Vermont, much of the premium variation within these cross-border HSAs
is driven by within-state variation in costs outside the relevant HSAs.
As mentioned above, we isolate this variation by zooming in on cross-border HSAs and by
instrumenting for premiums with the average uncovered costs of individuals who live within the
21 This

type of coarse pricing is not uncommon. Ericson and Starc (2015) show that health insurance plans set premiums by 5-year age bands on the Massachusetts health insurance exchange, even though plans were allowed to set
prices that vary at the yearly level. Agarwal et al. (2018) show evidence of coarse pricing in consumer lending and
DellaVigna and Gentzkow (2017) show evidence of coarse pricing in the retail sector.
22 Per-capita uncovered Medicare spending in 2000 was $902 and $927 in the Bennington HSA and Cambridge HSA,
respectively.
23 The average premium cited here is the average premium of all plans offered in the year 2000 by United Healthcare
and Mutual of Omaha, the two largest Medigap insurers.
24 The maximum HSA-level uncovered Medicare spending is $1,585 in the south versus $1,087 in upstate NY.

10

state but outside of the HSA of interest. There are two reasons why we augment a “borders” approach with an instrumental variables strategy. First, on a given side of a border-spanning HSA,
premiums are partially determined by the behavior of individuals on that side of the cross-border
medical market. For example, if individuals on the New York side of the Bennington, VT HSA
have higher average spending than those on the Vermont side, we would expect premiums to be
mechanically higher in New York to account for this higher utilization, holding all else equal. Our
“leave-out costs” instrument isolates variation that is due to the fact that Medigap premiums on
the New York side of the border are driven up by the high costs in New York City, hundreds of
miles to the south. It is worth noting that in practice this endogeneity problem shrinks substantially as we narrow the focus of the analysis to those in very close proximity to the boundary who
make up a very small fraction of any state.
The second—and more important—reason for our instrumental variables strategy is that we
do not observe the relevant measure of premiums each individual faced when considering a Medigap plan. As discussed in Section 2, our premium data cover all Medigap plans offered during
the 2000 open enrollment period. This introduces two sources of measurement error. First, we
cannot match individuals perfectly to the premium menu they faced during their respective open
enrollment periods (during the first six months they were Medicare eligible).25 Second, collapsing an entire menu of premiums into a single premium measure would require strong, untestable
assumptions on the underlying model of demand. Indeed, we cannot even calculate marketshare weighted average premiums, which would arguably be the most natural aggregate premium
proxy, as we do not observe enrollment for each plan.
The instrumental variables approach allows us to overcome these limitations. The first stage
relates the leave-out cost instrument (defined precisely below) to the available premium data, implying that the instrument is a powerful shifter of premiums across the full menu of Medigap
plans available at a given point in time. We estimate the price sensitivity of the demand for Medigap as the ratio of the reduced form effect of leave-out costs on Medigap coverage and the first
stage effect on premiums. We estimate the effect of Medigap on costs (and utilization) as the ratio
25 As discussed in Section 2.1, individuals typically buy a Medigap plan during their one-time open-enrollment period

when they are first Medicare eligible, at which point they can purchase a plan without facing medical underwriting. In
subsequent years, individuals tend to renew their plans at a guaranteed age-premium profile. As discussed in Section
2.2, our premium data cover plans offered during the 2000 open enrollment period. Thus, we cannot match most
individuals to the premium menu they faced during their respective open enrollment periods.

11

of the reduced form effect of our instrument on costs and the reduced form effect of our instrument
on coverage.

3.2

Estimating Equations

Let i denote individuals, j denote states, k denote HSAs, and l denote Medigap plans. Assume, to
a first approximation, that Medigap premiums in a given state for a given plan are proportional
to the uncovered Medicare spending of individuals within that state, p jl = αl Ei∈ Ij [ciu ], where ciu
is the uncovered Medicare spending of individual i and the expectation is taken over Ij , the set
of individuals in state j. For a HSA-state pair, we can decompose the determinants of premiums
into the uncovered spending of individuals within and outside of the given HSA: p jkl = αl Pr[i ∈
Ij,k |i ∈ Ij ] × Ei∈ Ij,k [ciu ] + αl Pr[i ∈ Ij,−k |i ∈ Ij ] × Ei∈ Ij,−k [ciu ], where Ij,k denotes the set of individuals
in state j and HSA k. We define our leave-out cost instrument as the average uncovered Medicare
spending of those who reside outside of the HSA but within the state of interest scaled by the
fraction of the state’s Medicare beneficiaries who make up this sample:
Leave-out costs jk = Pr[i ∈ Ij,−k |i ∈ Ij ] × Ei∈ Ij,−k [ciu ].

(1)

We estimate the first stage effect using the following regression:
0
p jkl = αc Leave-out costs jk + αk + X jk
α X + α0(l ) + α1(l ) + e jkl ,

(2)

where αk is a vector of HSA fixed effects, X jk are covariates, α0(l ) is a vector of Medigap insurer
fixed effects, α1(l ) is a vector of Medigap plan letter fixed effects, and e jkl is the error term. Including HSA fixed effects implies that the coefficient on leave-out costs αc is identified by variation in
leave-out costs within border-spanning HSAs.
We estimate the reduced form effect on Medigap enrollment using individual-level survey
data. Let qijk be an indicator that takes a value of one if the individual reports having Medigap
and zero otherwise. The reduced form regression takes the form:
0
qijk = β c Leave-out costs jk + β k + Xijk
β X + νijk ,

12

(3)

where β k is a vector of HSA fixed effects, Xijk are covariates, and νijk is the error term. The implied
instrumental variable impact on Medigap enrollment of an increase in premiums is given by the
ratio of the reduced form and first stage coefficients: β c /αc . We can explore the sensitivity of our
results by using αc ’s from alternative specifications of the first stage regression.
We estimate effect on Medicare costs (and utilization) using individual-level claims data. Let
yijk be a measure of costs. The costs regression takes the form:
0
yijk = γc Leave-out costs jk + γk + Xijk
γX + µijk ,

(4)

where γk are HSA fixed effects, Xijk are covariates, and µijk is the error term. As mentioned above,
the effect of Medigap on costs is given by the ratio of the reduced form costs and enrollment
effects: γc /β c . The effect on costs of an increase in premiums is given by the effect on Medigap
β

coverage of an increase in premiums ( αcc ) multiplied by the effect on utilization of an increase
in coverage ( γβ cc ). This simplifies to

γc
αc

and implies that our estimate of the effect of a premium

increase on utilization is invariant to our estimate of the demand elasticity. To account for the
fact that determinants of medical care may be related within local medical markets, we calculate
robust standard errors clustered at the HSA level in each stage of the estimation. We also examine
sensitivity to different levels of clustering in Appendix Table H1, including clustering at the HSA

× state level and multiway clustering on HSAs and states.

4
4.1

Summary Statistics and Identifying Variation
Summary Statistics

Table 2 presents summary statistics. Panel A shows summary statistics for all Medicare beneficiaries continuously enrolled within a calendar year. Panel B shows statistics for our baseline sample,
defined as the universe of FFS Medicare beneficiaries continuously enrolled within a calendar year,
excluding those who are simultaneously enrolled in Medicaid (known as dual-eligibles) and those
who qualify for Medicare before age 65 due to disability. We restrict the sample to FFS beneficiaries
since we do not observe costs or utilization for individuals with Medicare Advantage coverage.
We drop dual-eligibles because they received supplemental insurance through Medicaid, and we

13

drop non-elderly Medicare beneficiaries qualifying through Social Security Disability Insurance
(SSDI) because they are in a different risk pool for Medigap insurance.26,27
The first column of Table 2 displays summary statistics for all HSAs, including border-spanning
and non-border-spanning HSAs. Among all beneficiaries (Panel A), 73.6% have coverage from FFS
Medicare without Medicaid, 15.3% have coverage from a Medicare Advantage plan, and 11.1% are
dual-eligibles with coverage from both Medicare and Medicaid. Within the baseline sample of FFS
non-Medicaid beneficiaries (Panel B), 47.9% hold a Medigap policy, 46.3% hold an RSI policy, and
15.8% have no supplemental coverage. These numbers sum to greater than 100% because some
individuals report having both Medigap and RSI coverage. Medigap premiums have a mean
value of $1,779 per year. Within the baseline sample, total Medicare payments average $6,291, and
approximately 56% of payments are for inpatient care. On average, Medicare beneficiaries spend
two days in a hospital annually and have 26 Part B events, where an event is defined as a line-item
claim.
The second column of Table 2 presents the same summary statistics for the 11% of beneficiaries
who reside in HSAs that span state boundaries. This sample is of particular interest as variation
in our instrument among these individuals identifies the demand and utilization elasticities. In
the cross-border sample, individuals are 9 percentage points more likely to have FFS Medicare
without Medicaid and are about 9 percentage points less likely to have Medicare Advantage. This
is because the border-spanning sample is more rural and Medicare Advantage penetration was
lower in rural areas during our time period. The cross-border sample is very similar in terms of
the percentage of dual eligibles, enrollment in supplemental insurance, and demographics (age,
sex, and race). The cross-border sample has slightly lower Medigap premiums, Part A days, and
Part B events. Taken together, these statistics indicate that the border-spanning sample is broadly
similar to the sample of all HSAs.
Our main regression analysis focuses on the baseline sample. While the natural sample of
interest, our estimates would be biased if selection into the baseline sample is correlated with our
26 Because the premium data we have are for Medigap plans available to elderly Medicare beneficiaries, our identification strategy and the instrument are inappropriate for this sample.
27 In both the samples described in Panels A and B, we make a few geographic exclusions. We exclude the District of
Columbia from our analysis because more than 99% of the individuals in this region belong to a single HSA. We also
exclude beneficiaries from the three states that do not have standardized Medigap products (Wisconsin, Massachusetts,
and Minnesota). Lastly, we exclude a small number of HSA-states where the remainder of the state accounts for less
than 80% of the state Medicare population.

14

identifying variation.28,29 We examine this threat to validity with regressions of ZIP code level
measures of coverage type on our instrument and HSA fixed effects. Specifically, letting yzjk indicate the percentage of individuals with a given coverage type in ZIP code z, HSA j and state k, we
run regressions of the form

yzjk = δc Leave-out costs jk + δk + νzjk ,

(5)

where δk are HSA fixed effects and νzjk is the error term.
Panel A of Table 3 shows the results of these regressions. The dependent variables are the Part
B coverage rates, the fraction of beneficiaries originally qualifying for Medicare through SSDI, the
fraction of beneficiaries covered by Medicare Advantage (MA), and the fraction of beneficiaries
dually-eligible for both Medicare and Medicaid. Each of these measures are constructed using
data on the universe of Medicare beneficiaries from the CMS Denominator file. The results reveal
that none of these measures are related to our identifying variation.30
In addition to addressing concerns over sample selection bias, the results indicate that our
identifying variation does not induce substitution between Medigap and Medicare Advantage or
Medicaid. This is not surprising given the institutional setting. Medicaid provides supplemental
insurance, of similar generosity as Medigap, to poor beneficiaries for no premium, so it would
be strange if variation in Medigap premiums had an impact on Medicaid coverage. During the
28 As

discussed in Section 2, data on spending and utilization are available for the universe of Medicare FFS beneficiaries; analogous data on utilization and spending are not available for Medicare Advantage beneficiaries.
29 As explained by Slemrod and Yitzhaki (2001) and Hendren (2016), from an optimal policy perspective, whether an
individual received coverage from FFS Medicare or Medicare Advantage only matters if the type of coverage imposes
a fiscal externality on the government.
30 It is important to note that the MA enrollment point estimate is small in terms of magnitude. The point estimate
indicates that a $100 increase in Medigap premiums is associated with a 0.3 percentage point reduction in Medicare
Advantage coverage. To put this magnitude in context, consider the MA-FFS cost difference required to explain the
entire Medigap effect through selection. Specifically, let C0 represent the mean costs on FFS Medicare initially, and
C1 represent the mean costs on FFS Medicare after the premium increase. Let N0 be the fraction of total beneficiaries
on FFS Medicare initially, let NS be the fraction of total beneficiaries switching to FFS Medicare from MA after the
premium increase, and let N1 (= N0 + NS ) be the fraction of beneficiaries on FFS Medicare after the premium increase.
Let CS represent the average cost on FFS Medicare for those individuals who switch coverage from MA to FFS after the
premium increase. If there is no Medigap effect, then we can express the mean FFS costs after the premium increase as:
NS
0
C1 = C0 N
N1 + Cs N1 . We can calculate the implied value of CS that makes this expression hold using the mean values
of the variables in our data along with our regression estimates (C0 = 6, 291; C1 = 6, 291 − 67; N0 = 0.85; NS = 0.003;
N1 = 0.853). This calculation yields that CS = −12, 760. That is, switchers would need to have mean claim costs well
below zero (which is obviously not possible) for selection to explain our entire effect. The intuition is that the effect on
FFS costs is large relative to the effect on MA enrollment, so an implausibly large selection effect would be required to
explain the result

15

time period we analyze, Medicare Advantage plans were typically organized as Health Maintenance Organizations (HMOs). The lack of substitution into Medicare Advantage is consistent with
other evidence on limited substitution between HMO and FFS insurance plans in the non-elderly
context (e.g., Bundorf, Levin and Mahoney, 2012).

4.2

Identifying Variation

Having defined our baseline sample, we next examine our identifying variation. Figure 4 plots a
histogram of the leave-out costs instrument in cross-border HSAs net of the mean of the instrument within each HSA. The instrument is constructed using data on the baseline sample from the
2000 CMS Beneficiary Summary File.31 Leave-out costs exhibit substantial dispersion, with an interquartile range of $64 and a 90-10 percentile range of $166. This implies a jump of at least $64 in
50% of the cross-border regions, or 7.2% of the mean leave-out cost value in cross-border HSAs of
$886. In 20% of the regions, there is a jump of at least $166 or 18.7% of the mean.
The identification assumption is that the within-HSA variation in leave-out costs (i.e., uncovered Medicare spending of individuals within the state but outside of the border-spanning
HSA) affects the dependent variable of interest (e.g., Medigap enrollment, medical utilization)
only through Medigap premiums. Although we cannot test this assumption directly, we provide several pieces of empirical evidence that support the identifying assumption. In this section,
we show that the instrument does not covary with individual and local characteristics (potential
omitted variables) within cross-border HSAs. In Section 6, we further examine the robustness of
our results by (i) examining the stability of the estimates when we control for potential confounding factors and (ii) conducting falsification tests on outcomes and individuals that should not be
affected by our source of variation.
Finally, while we think our variation is valid, it is worth pointing out that the most likely
threat to validity would bias us against our bottom-line finding that Medigap increases Medicare
spending. To see this, suppose that demand for medical care is correlated within a state even
after controlling for local demand with HSA fixed effects. If this were the case, then this residual demand effect would generate a positive correlation between leave-out costs and Medicare
spending. Our main result is that higher leave-out costs, by raising the premium and reducing
31 We

use Beneficiary Summary File data from 2000 because our premium data are also from this year.

16

enrollment in Medigap, generate a negative correlation with Medicare spending. Thus, any bias is
likely to attenuate our estimates of the effect of Medigap and work against our main finding that
Medigap imposes a fiscal externality on the government.
To examine whether our instrument is correlated with individual and local characteristics
(potential omitted variables) in cross-border HSAs, we run versions of Equation 5 with individual
and local characteristics as the dependent variables. Panel B of Table 3 shows the results of these
regressions. The top section examines the correlation with ZIP code level characteristics in the
Census 2000 Special Tabulation on Aging. Nearly all of the ZIP code level Census demographics
have a statistically insignificant relationship with the leave-out costs instrument.32 The second
section of Panel B examines the correlation with ZIP code level IRS 2001 statistics on adjusted
gross income. The IRS income statistics have both strengths and weaknesses relative to the Census Special Tabulation income measures for our purposes. While the IRS data likely have less
measurement error, the Census Special Tabulation data focus specifically on the elderly population, our population of interest, rather than all households. Like the Census measures, the IRS
measures show no correlation.
A limitation of these regressions is that the magnitude of the estimates does not have a natural interpretation. To address this limitation, we estimate a specification that aggregates across
these different dependent variables based upon their importance in predicting Medicare spending.
Specifically, we construct a measure of predicted Medicare spending based on linear regression of
individual-level Medicare spending on the Census demographic variables and the controls in our
baseline sample. Then we examine whether there is a within-HSA correlation between this predicted Medicare spending measure and our instrument using Equation 5. As shown in the bottom
row of Table 3, the estimated coefficient from this exercise is statistically indistinguishable from
zero with a p-value of 0.31. Overall, this evidence suggests that observables plausibly related to
medical spending are unrelated to the identifying variation.
32 Although

there is one exception (the coefficient on Renters among those 65+), the reported standard errors are not
corrected for multiple hypothesis testing, and if we were to do so, many corrections would lead us to conclude that we
could not reject the hypothesis that all the coefficients are statistically indistinguishable from zero.

17

5

Results

This section presents the baseline estimates. We start by showing that the leave-out costs instrument is a powerful predictor of premiums. We then use variation in leave-out costs to estimate
the demand for Medigap and the effect of Medigap on Medicare utilization and spending.

5.1

Premiums

Table 4 presents estimates of the first stage regression of premiums on the leave-out costs instrument, HSA fixed effects, and controls (see Section 3, Equation 2). The first column displays results
for a plan-level specification that includes all plans offered by United Healthcare and Mutual of
Omaha, the two largest insurance companies with a combined market share of 69%.33 The second
and third columns of Table 4 examine the sensitivity of our estimates by restricting attention to
Plan C and Plan F, the most popular plans sold by these insurance companies. The coefficient on
the instrument ranges from 1.12 to 0.94 across specifications, indicating that the instrument shifts
premiums on an approximately one-for-one basis. The coefficient on the instrument is precisely
estimated with p-values of less than 0.01 across the specifications. The specifications explain much
of the premium variation within cross-border HSAs, with the R-squared ranging from 0.84 to 0.93.
Panel A of Figure 5 depicts this relationship using a scatter plot. The vertical axis displays
the residuals from a regression of premiums for all plans sold by the top two insurers on HSA
fixed effects and the same controls as the regression described above. The horizontal axis displays
the residuals from a regression of leave-out costs on HSA fixed effects and the same controls.
Each point shows the mean values for a HSA-state. The axes are re-scaled by adding the means
of the vertical and horizontal axis variables to ease interpretation. The plot confirms the strong
relationship between premiums and leave-out costs.
33 This

number is taken from Starc (2014), which summarizes data from the National Association of Insurance Commissioners. We do not have plan-level enrollment so we cannot construct an enrollment-weighted measure of premiums. Using an unweighted measure places excess weight on plans with low enrollment shares but does not materially
impact our results.

18

5.2

Demand

We estimate the demand for Medigap with regressions of coverage indicators on the leave-out
costs instrument, HSA fixed effects, and controls (see Section 3, Equation 3). We use data from
two surveys, the 1992 to 2005 Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey (MCBS) and the 1992 to 2005
National Health Interview Survey (NHIS). The MCBS sample contains 114,561 observations and
the NHIS sample contains 121,009 observations.
Our ability to precisely measure Medigap coverage varies across the datasets. In the MCBS,
we have a relatively accurate measure of Medigap coverage, and we use this measure as an outcome variable. In contrast, the NHIS survey questions make it more difficult to distinguish Medigap from other forms of supplemental insurance.34 We therefore estimate the effect in the NHIS
using a broader measure of supplemental insurance that captures whether the individual has any
supplemental insurance, including Medigap but also Medicare Advantage, Medicaid and RSI. Because our results using the administrative data indicate that the identifying variation does not
cause substitution into Medicare Advantage or Medicaid, we estimate our demand specification
using the “All Beneficiaries” sample described in Table 2 Panel A, and we interpret the effect on
the broad measure as reflecting the response of Medigap coverage to leave-out costs.35
In both surveys, our estimates are identified by cross-border HSAs in which we observe individuals on both sides of the state border. Of the 259 total cross-border HSAs, we observe individuals on both sides of state borders in 27 HSAs in the MCBS and 37 HSAs in the NHIS. This
means that the HSA-level estimates are identified using 2,903 of the 114,561 observations in the
MCBS and 5,690 of the 121,009 observations in the NHIS. To increase the precision of our estimates, we also estimate the same specifications using a more aggregate definition of local medical
markets called a Hospital Referral Region (HRR). The Dartmouth Atlas defines an HRR as the set
of adjacent ZIP codes in which individuals use the same hospitals for major medical care (such as
cardiovascular surgery). While there are 3,436 HSAs across the nation, there are only 306 HRRs.
Of the 140 total cross-border HRRs, we have observations on opposite sides of state borders in 66
34 The MCBS survey asks several questions regarding the source of coverage that we can use to cross-validate responses. In addition, the MCBS makes some effort to check Medicare Advantage and Medicaid enrollment against
administrative records. In contrast, the NHIS contains very few questions regarding sources of coverage, and responses
are not checked against administrative records.
35 The prior literature has traditionally assumed there is no substitution between Medigap and RSI, and the results
presented in Table 5 are consistent with no substitution into RSI based on our variation.

19

HRRs in the MCBS and 70 HRRs in the NHIS. In these HRR-level specifications, the estimates are
identified by 32,915 of the 114,561 observations in the MCBS and 39,060 of the 121,009 observations
in the NHIS.36
Table 5 presents the results of these regressions. The estimates in the MCBS indicate that a $100
increase in leave-out costs reduces Medigap demand by 6.6 to 9.0 percentage points. The estimates
are similar whether we use variation at the HSA or HRR level and whether we measure Medigap
coverage using the narrow Medigap coverage variable or the broader measure of supplemental
insurance coverage. In the NHIS, where we only have the broader measure of Medigap coverage,
we find that a $100 increase in leave-out costs lowers Medigap coverage by 1.0 to 3.1 percentage
points depending on whether we use variation at the HSA or HRR level.37
Our preferred estimates combine the point estimates from the MCBS and the NHIS using the
Delta Method to construct the appropriate standard errors.38 These estimates indicate that a $100
increase in leave-out costs reduces our broad measure of Medigap by 3.9 to 4.8 percentage points.
The HSA level estimate is statistically distinct from zero with a p-value of 0.04, and the HRR
level estimate is statistically distinguishable from zero with a p-value of 0.01. Since the Medigap
market-share is 47.9% in the MCBS baseline sample and the mean inflation-adjusted premium is
$1,779, these estimates translate into a demand elasticity of -1.5 to -1.8.
Although the demand estimates vary across specifications, the tax policy counterfactuals that
motivate our analysis are not particularly sensitive to the exact value of the demand elasticity.
Because our instrument affects premiums much like a tax would, the direct cost-savings from
taxing Medigap can be calculated from the reduced form relationship between premiums and
36 We

normalize the HRR-level demand coefficients in Table 5 by the HRR-level first stage effect so that estimates are
comparable with the HSA-level coefficients. See Table 5 for details.
37 Appendix C illustrates that the demand estimates are robust to inclusion of fewer or more controls than in these
baseline specifications. The baseline specifications in Table 5 include year fixed effects, local medical market fixed
effects, basic demographic controls, and controls for geographic price indexes (GAF and OWI).
38 Let β , se and n denote the point estimate, standard error, and sample size in dataset i. The combined point
i
i
i
estimate is constructed as the sample-size weighted average of the point estimates in the two samples:
β Combined =

n MCBS β MCBS + n NH IS β NH IS
n MCBS + n NH IS

Using the Delta Method and assuming that the point estimates are uncorrelated, the standard error of the combined
estimate is given by:
q
n2MCBS se2MCBS + n2NH IS se2NH IS
seCombined =
n MCBS + n NH IS

20

Medicare spending, a relationship we can more precisely estimate with the universe of spending
data. The role of the demand estimates is to calculate the revenue raised from taxing Medigap,
which turns out to be a small share of the total budgetary savings.

5.3

Utilization and Spending

We examine the effect on utilization and spending with regressions of these measures on the
leave-out costs instrument, HSA fixed effects, and controls (see Section 3, Equation 4). The main
source of data is the pooled 1999 to 2005 Beneficiary Summary Files, which provide us with annual beneficiary-level cost and utilization data for the universe of FFS Medicare beneficiaries. We
also use the 1999 to 2005 Carrier File for analysis that requires claim-level data. For these data, we
have information on a randomly selected 20% sample of individuals.

Utilization Table 6 presents estimates of the effect on utilization. The first column displays the
dependent variable, and each row shows results from a separate regression. The baseline specifications include controls for demographics (age, sex, and race), geographic price indexes (GAF
and OWI), and chronic conditions.39 Standard errors are clustered at the HSA level.40
Panels B to E of Figure 5 depict the relationship between our key utilization measures and
leave-out costs using scatter plots. The vertical axis displays the residuals from a regression of our
utilization measures on HSA fixed effects and the same controls as the regression described above.
The horizontal axis displays the residuals from a regression of leave-out costs on HSA fixed effects
and the same controls. Each point shows the mean values for a HSA-state. The axes are re-scaled
by adding the means of the vertical and horizontal axis variables.
Table 6 shows that most categories of utilization are decreasing in leave-out costs—implying
that Medigap coverage increases Medicare utilization. The first row shows that a $100 increase
in leave-out costs reduces Part B events (line-item claims) by 0.42, and this estimate is statistically
significant with a p-value of 0.02. Given the one-for-one relationship between the instrument and
premiums (Table 4), we can interpret this coefficient as the effect of a $100 increase in Medigap
39 Appendix D displays the full list of chronic health condition controls. Appendix Table E1 shows that the exclusion
of chronic conditions controls has a statistically indistinguishable effect on the estimates.
40 In Appendix Table H1, we examine sensitivity of our utilization estimates to different levels of clustering, including
clustering at the HSA × state level and multiway clustering on HSAs and states.

21

premiums. We also translate the estimates into an implied effect of Medigap by dividing this
estimate by the coefficient on leave-out costs from the preferred HSA-level demand specification
of -0.048. Dividing by the demand coefficient implies that Medigap increases Part B events by 8.7
or 33.7% of the average number of events.
The second and third rows of Table 6 examine subcategories of Part B events that are often
considered more discretionary and may be more elastic to variation in cost-sharing.41 We find
that a $100 increase in leave-out costs reduces imaging events (e.g., X-rays, CT scans, MRIs) by
0.08, implying a Medigap effect of 1.7 or 42.4% of the average. We find that a $100 increase reduces
testing events (e.g., glucose tests, bacterial cultures, EKG monitoring) by 0.41, implying a Medigap
effect of 8.5 or 74.7% of the average.42
We also use the 20% sample of claims data from the CMS Carrier File to examine effects on
other measures of Part B utilization. For each claim, these data provide the relative value units
(RVUs) of the care provided. An RVU is a measure constructed by CMS that is intended to reflect
relative input intensity, and CMS scales this measure to determine Medicare payments. The estimates indicate that a $100 increase in leave-out costs reduces RVUs by 1.3, implying a Medigap
effect of 26.9 or 38.0% of the average. The effect is statistically significant with a p-value less than
0.01. Panel C of Figure 5 depicts this relationship using a scatter plot.
The next two rows show the effects of the instrument on Part A hospital utilization. The
estimates indicate that a $100 increase in the instrument reduces the number of Part A hospital
stays by 0.004 with an implied Medigap effect of 23.9%. A $100 increase in leave-out costs reduces
the number of Part A hospital days by 0.06, for an implied Medigap effect of 1.3 or 61.6%. The
associated p-values of these estimates are 0.065 and 0.001, respectively. Panels D and E of Figure
5 show these relationships using scatter plots.
There is suggestive evidence that the reduction in Part A hospital utilization may be due in
part to substitution away from Part A hospital care to Skilled Nursing Facility (SNF) care. SNFs
provide care to recently discharged patients who need skilled medical and rehabilitative care. Al41 Prior research suggests that testing and imaging claims are more elective than general physician claims. For instance, Clemens and Gottlieb (2014) find that testing and imaging claims are more responsive to changes in provider
payments than evaluation and management claims, and Finkelstein, Gentzkow and Williams (2016) find that imaging
and testing claims are more responsive to place based factors than other types of care using a “movers” design.
42 As indicated in the Beneficiary Summary File data documentation, imaging events are defined as claims with a line
BETOS code that starts with the letter “I.” Testing events are claims with a line BETOS code that starts with the letter
“T.”

22

though receiving Part A care requires significant cost-sharing, Medicare provides complete coverage for SNF care with no deductible for the first 20 days per benefit period.43 Thus, patients
without Medigap have an incentive to obtain this care at an SNF. We find suggestive evidence
that an increase in leave-out costs raises SNF Days and SNF Stays. While the estimates are not
statistically distinguishable from zero, the point estimate for SNF Days suggests that substitution
to SNF may explain 19.3% (=0.012/0.062) of the decline in Part A Days caused by Medigap.

Medicare Payments Table 7 presents estimates of the effect on Medicare payments. The table
layout is identical to Table 6. The first column displays the dependent variable, and each row
shows results from a separate regression. We show the coefficient on leave-out costs (measured
in hundreds of dollars) and the implied effect of Medigap. These baseline specifications include
controls for demographics (age, sex, and race), geographic price indexes (GAF and OWI), and
chronic conditions.44 Standard errors are clustered at the HSA level.45
The top row of Table 7 shows the effect on total Medicare payments. A $100 increase in leaveout costs reduces total Medicare payments by $67.02, and this estimate is statistically significant
with a p-value of 0.043. This estimate implies that Medigap increases Medicare payments by
$1,396 on a mean of $6,291 or 22.2%.46 Panel F of Figure 5 depicts the relationship between total
Medicare payments and leave-out costs using a scatter plot, constructed in the same manner as
the other panels in the figure.
The remaining rows of Table 7 show that a $100 increase in leave-out costs reduces Part A
payments by $47.59 and Part B spending by $21.80. These estimates imply that Medigap raises
Part A spending by $992 or 32.8% and Part B spending by $454 or 17.2%. Similar to the utilization
results, we find that SNF Payments are decreasing in leave-out costs, although the estimate lacks
statistical precision. The point estimate for SNF payments suggests that a $100 increase in leave43 To

qualify for SNF coverage during a benefit period, beneficiaries must have a qualifying hospital stay of 3 days or
longer and enter the SNF within 30 days of hospital discharge for services related to the hospital stay.
44 Appendix D displays the full list of chronic health condition controls. Appendix Table E2 shows that the exclusion
of chronic health condition controls has a statistically indistinguishable effect on the payment estimates.
45 In Appendix Table H1, we examine sensitivity of our payment estimates to different levels of clustering, including
clustering at the HSA × state level and multiway clustering on HSAs and states.
46 Given the sizable effects on utilization and Medicare payments, one might be interested in testing whether Medigap
reduces mortality. Appendix G shows results consistent with Medigap having no effect on mortality. Specifically,
Appendix G demonstrates that that the age distribution (conditional on reaching age 65) is unrelated to the identifying
variation.

23

out costs raises SNF spending by $3.44. The implied Medigap effect is -$72 or a reduction of 17.9%.
Our preferred estimate—that Medigap increases Medicare payments by 22.2%—implies a
price elasticity similar to standard estimates in the literature. As emphasized by Aron-Dine, Einav
and Finkelstein (2013), summarizing the effect of health insurance with a single elasticity parameter is difficult because non-linear health insurance contracts do not exhibit a well-defined out-ofpocket “price” for medical care. This is particularly true for Medicare since cost-sharing is nonlinear in the level of utilization (e.g., Part A deductible, copays) and cost-sharing varies across categories of medical care (e.g., Part A, Part B, SNF). If we assume, as an approximation, that Medigap
reduces cost-sharing from 20% to 0%, then our preferred estimate that Medigap increases utilization by 22.2% implies an arc-elasticity of -0.11, which is in the same range as the classic RAND
estimate of -0.2 (Keeler and Rolph, 1988).47 Our elasticity estimate is also similar to the -0.16 elasticity estimated by Chandra, Gruber and McKnight (2014) in the context of Massachusetts health
care reform.

6

Robustness

The basic threat to our identification strategy is that there may be omitted variables that are correlated with both our leave-out costs instrument and Medicare utilization. In Section 4.2, we
showed that ZIP code-level demographic characteristics such as income, labor force participation,
and education are not correlated with our instrument. Below, we present two additional pieces
of evidence in support of our identification strategy. First, we show that our baseline results are
robust to the inclusion of additional control variables. Second, we conduct falsification tests that
demonstrate that omitted factors that change sharply at state boundaries are unlikely to be driving our results. In Appendix J, we present estimates from additional alternative specifications and
placebo border analysis which further suggest that our results are not driven by unrelated spatial
trends in medical spending.
47 Let

q1 and p1 be the quantity and price without supplemental insurance and let q2 and p2 be the price and quantity
q2 − q1
p −p
with Medigap. The arc elasticity is given by earc = (q +
/ 2 1 .
q )/2 ( p + p )/2
2

2

1

24

1

6.1

Alternative Specifications

Table 8 shows that our results are robust to the inclusion of additional control variables. The first
row displays the baseline Medicare payments result for reference. The second row displays the
results when ZIP code-level Census demographic variables are added to the baseline specification.
The third row displays the results when we include fully interacted HSA-by-year fixed effects,
instead of the additively separable HSA and year fixed effects in the baseline specification. The
point estimates are stable across all the specifications, with an implied Medigap effect ranging
from $1,396 to $1,157. Appendix Table F1 illustrates that estimates are broadly similar when we
re-estimate the baseline specification separately by year.

6.2

Falsification Tests

It would be a problem for the identification strategy if there are omitted factors related to Medicare
spending that are also correlated with the within-HSA variation in the leave-out cost instrument.
For example, if the underlying health of the population changed sharply at state boundaries in a
way that was correlated with our instrument, our results may simply reflect this health differential
and not the effect of Medigap. We present two pieces of evidence below that help to alleviate this
concern. First, we show that procedures that are very urgent (and thus should not be affected
by our instrument) are indeed not correlated with the instrument. Second, we demonstrate that
health outcomes do not covary with our instrument for individuals younger than 65 who are not
eligible for Medigap. Together, these tests indicate that factors affecting utilization in general (for
example, the underlying health of the population) are not driving the results.

Urgent Procedures

We investigate the relationship between our instrument and urgent proce-

dures using definitions of urgent procedures from the literature. First, we examine the effect on
urgent Part B RVUs using the characterization of Clemens and Gottlieb (2014), which is based on
the BETOS code classification. Second, we investigate urgent hospital admissions based on the
methodology of Card, Dobkin and Maestas (2009), which defines urgent hospitalizations as those
with similar daily frequencies on weekdays and weekends.48 We consider two variants of this
48 This

analysis is done using the CMS MedPAR files that contain hospital claims data for 100% of FFS Medicare
beneficiaries.

25

definition of urgent hospitalizations. We investigate the ten most common non-deferrable conditions identified by Card, Dobkin and Maestas (2009) in their data and we use use the Card, Dobkin
and Maestas (2009) methodology to characterize the set of urgent hospitalizations with our data
(the CMS MedPAR data). Appendix I describes all three characterizations of urgent procedures in
detail.
Table 8 presents the results of these regressions, which repeat the baseline specification replacing the dependent variable with the number of urgent procedures based on the characterizations
described above.49 Across the different classifications, there is no evidence of an effect of leave-out
costs on urgent procedures. The point estimates vary greatly in terms of magnitude and sign and
none of the estimates are statistically significant (p-values ranging from 0.20 to 0.51). These results
suggest that it is unlikely that discontinuities in other health-related factors are driving the main
results.

Non-Elderly Individuals

Next, we show that the instrument is unrelated to outcomes for non-

elderly individuals (aged 18-64) using data from the NHIS. We examine effects on utilization measures including hospital stays, hospital days, and physician office visits. In addition, we examine
the effect on self-report health, measured with a Likert Scale that runs from 1 to 5, with 1 indicating
"Excellent" and 5 indicating "Poor."
Table 8 presents the results of these regressions, which repeat the baseline specification replacing the dependent variable with these measures of utilization and health status among the
non-elderly. Across the four measures, the coefficient on leave-out costs is statistically indistinguishable from zero. Although the limited sample size of the NHIS prevents us from ruling out
effects, these falsification tests show no evidence of any covariance between health outcomes and
our instrument for individuals younger than 65 who are ineligible for Medigap.
49 As

in the baseline specification, these regressions are run at the individual-year level, so the measure of urgent
procedures is also at the individual-year level. The Clemens and Gottlieb (2014) measure is based on the 20% of individuals for which Part B claims data are available (in the CMS Carrier file). The two Card, Dobkin and Maestas (2009)
measures are created using the CMS MedPAR data available for 100% of beneficiaries.

26

7

Policy Counterfactuals

A natural policy to address the externality from Medigap is a tax on Medigap premiums. The idea
of taxing Medigap premiums is not new. For example, the Obama Administration’s 2013 budget
proposal called for a 15% tax on Medigap policies. In Budget Options Volume I: Health Care, the
Congressional Budget Office (CBO) considered a 5% excise tax on Medigap premiums. Below, we
investigate the effect of corrective taxation on Medicare’s budget and welfare.

7.1

Medicare’s Budget

A tax presents two sources of savings for the Medicare program. First, a tax discourages some
individuals from enrolling in Medigap, which reduces their Medicare spending by removing the
externality estimated above. Second, tax revenues are raised from those remaining Medigap purchasers.
We use the results from Section 5 to produce estimates of the effect of a tax on Medigap premiums in the following manner. First, the counterfactual Medigap market share is calculated using
the estimated demand elasticity, assuming the tax is fully passed through to consumers.50 The demand curve used for these calculations has a slope equal to ∂qijk /∂Leave-Out costs jk = −0.048 (as
the coefficient in the premium regressions was approximately one) and an intercept pinned down
by the national Medigap market share of 48% and the national average premium of $1,779. The tax
revenue raised is then calculated by multiplying the tax by the resulting Medigap market share.
Medicare cost savings are determined by applying the Medigap externality calculated above to all
those who drop their Medigap coverage due to the tax (the change in the Medigap market share).
Importantly, the cost savings estimate does not depend on our estimate of the Medigap demand
curve, and instead relies on the reduced form Medicare cost estimate in Table 7 that uses the administrative cost data.51 The total budgetary impact is simply the sum of the tax revenue raised
and Medicare cost savings from Medigap dis-enrollment. The parameters used in this calculation
50 The calculations in Table 9 assume that the tax is fully passed through to consumers. If the pass-through rate is ρ,
it would take a tax of size ρx % to achieve the Medicare budgetary impact we calculate for an x% tax.
51 To see this, note that a $100 tax on Medigap generates per-capita cost-savings of γ , the coefficient in column 1
c
of Table 7. Alternatively, this cost-savings could be calculated as the savings for each person who drops Medigap
coverage, the Medigap externality ( γβ cc ), multiplied by the fraction of people who drop Medigap coverage from a $100
tax (β c ). These procedures are equivalent and are both valid for a small tax.

27

are estimated using local variation in premiums, and the projected effects of larger taxes should
be viewed with appropriate caution.
Table 9 shows the results of this exercise. Each row displays the results for a different tax rate;
the columns display the tax revenue raised, the Medicare cost savings obtained through Medigap
dis-enrollment, and the total budgetary impact on the Medicare program. The per-capita numbers
presented in this table refer to the non-dual eligible, FFS Medicare population (the estimation
sample). A 15% tax on Medigap premiums would raise $94 per beneficiary in tax revenue and
reduce Medicare costs per beneficiary by $179 for a total savings of $273 per beneficiary or 4.3%
of per-capita costs.
Appendix Table K1 shows that this estimate varies from 3.9% to 4.8% using all of the alternative demand estimates in Table 5.52 As discussed in Section 5.2, these savings effects are quite
stable because the demand estimates are only used to calculate the revenue from taxing Medigap,
which turns out to be a small share of the total budgetary savings. Combining the standard errors associated with our demand and cost estimates, we calculate that the standard error of our
baseline estimate of 4.3% total savings is 1.7 percentage points.
We can translate this calculated per-capita savings into the aggregate savings for the current
Medicare program. In 2012 dollars, the per-capita savings from a 15% tax for non-Medicaid eligible, FFS Medicare enrollees is $321. By law, Medicare Advantage payments are set to be a
function of the local FFS Medicare spending. Thus, if we assume that Medicare Advantage capitation payments are reduced by the same amount as the FFS Medicare spending, then the percapita savings for Medicare Advantage beneficiaries is also $321. There are roughly 27.4 million
FFS, non-Medicaid eligible Medicare beneficiaries and 12.7 million Medicare Advantage enrollees
(KFF, 2012). Summing across these beneficiaries, the total savings for the Medicare program from
a 15% tax is estimated to be $12.9 billion, with a standard error of $4.9 billion.
Table 9 shows that a Pigouvian tax that fully accounts for the estimated externality would
completely eliminate the Medigap market, saving the Medicare program $670 per capita or 10.7%
52 Appendix Table K1 displays the projected total savings and standard errors associated with a 15% tax using the
various demand estimates. To calculate the standard error on the total savings, we first separately calculate the standard
error on the tax revenue raised (from the corresponding demand estimate) and the standard error from the Medicare
cost savings from Medigap dis-enrollment (from the reduced form). We then obtain the standard error on the total
savings by aggregating these standard errors using the Delta Method assuming no covariance between the demand
and cost estimates.

28

of total Medicare costs. When we adjust for inflation and assume that the savings are internalized
by the Medicare Advantage program, this translates into total savings for the Medicare program
of roughly $31.6 billion in 2012 dollars.

7.2

Welfare

The cost-savings to Medicare from taxing Medigap calculated in the prior section should not be
thought of as a pure efficiency gain. That is, while Medigap exerts a negative externality on the
Medicare system, it also generates surplus for consumers who value the risk protection benefits
it provides and, to some extent, the additional care they demand as a result of the increased coverage. One way to measure how much consumers value the benefits of Medigap is through their
willingness-to-pay, or the demand curve for Medigap. Below we compare the cost savings and
the efficiency gains from taxation using our estimates of the Medigap externality and Medigap
demand curve.
Figure 6 displays supply and demand in the Medigap market under the assumption of perfect
competition and constant marginal costs. Under these assumptions, we have the standard “price
equals marginal costs” equilibrium condition, and the private marginal cost curve can be approximated by a horizontal line at the average Medigap premium of $1,779. The social marginal cost
curve is the sum of private costs and the externality and is depicted in the figure by the horizontal
line at $3,175 (=$1,396 + $1,779). The equilibrium with no tax is represented by point A, the intersection of the private marginal cost curve and the demand curve. The social optimum result is the
elimination of the Medigap market. The deadweight loss from the fiscal externality of Medigap is
given by the trapezoid AIHG. In this figure, the net efficiency gain from a Pigouvian tax is 64% of
the total impact on Medicare’s budget; the remaining 36% is a transfer of surplus from individuals
who otherwise would have purchased Medigap to taxpayers.
Figure 6 also illustrates the private marginal cost curve in the case of a smaller tax τ that
does not cause the Medigap market to disappear. The effect of a tax τ on Medicare’s budget is
depicted by the sum of two rectangles: CEFB (the tax revenue raised) and ACJG (the cost savings
from Medigap dis-enrollment). The net efficiency gain is represented by the deadweight loss
trapezoid ABJG. Comparing this welfare gain to the overall impact on Medicare’s budget shows

29

that only a fraction of the impact on Medicare’s budget is a net welfare gain. The remainder of
Medicare’s total savings comes from transfers from Medigap purchasers and individuals deterred
from purchasing Medigap because of the tax. These transfers are represented in the figure by the
rectangle CEFB (tax revenue raised from Medigap purchasers under the tax) and the triangle ACB
(consumer surplus forgone by individuals discouraged from purchasing Medigap because of the
tax).
There are at least two caveats to these calculations. First, our analysis focuses on evaluating
the effect of a tax on Medigap premiums taking the form of Medigap and Medicare as given.
Although the first-best policy to address the Medigap externality may involve broader changes to
Medigap or Medicare coverage, taxing Medigap premiums is a commonly discussed policy and
our identifying premium variation gives us a unique opportunity to evaluate the effect of a tax on
Medigap premiums.53
Second, the welfare discussion above abstracts from market power. To the extent that Medigap
insurers have market power, the resulting markups already act as an implicit tax, raising the price
relative to the social marginal cost.54 It turns out that our estimate of the Medigap externality
is large enough that an optimal tax would substantially reduce the size of the Medigap market
regardless of the degree of market power.55 Of course, the exact welfare effect of such a tax would
need to be measured relative to the correct equilibrium and cost curves (which, in the case of
market power, would differ from those depicted in Figure 6).
53 See

56

Pauly (2000) for a theoretical discussion of the efficiency trade-offs involved in the simultaneous public and
private provision of insurance within the Medicare context.
54 Starc (2014) estimates that markups are substantial in this market, on the order of 30%.
55 Let us assume firms face constant marginal costs equal to the observed average uncovered Medicare spending $911
in our data. (Note that this number is likely conservatively low relative to insurer average costs if there is either adverse
selection in the Medigap market or administrative costs associated with Medigap policies.) In this case, regardless of the
structure of competition, a Pigouvian tax would bring the after-tax premium to a minimum of $2,307 (=$911 + $1,396),
as insurers will avoid making losses; the implied Medigap market share at a premium of $2,307 is approximately 23%.
In other words, our estimated Medigap externality is high enough that an optimal Pigouvian tax would cause the
Medigap market to shrink by at least 50% of its current size regardless of the form of competition.
56 A third potential caveat is that this analysis uses our estimated uncompensated demand curve, while the ideal
welfare analysis would use a compensated demand curve. However, there are a few reasons why the uncompensated
demand curve may be a good local approximation of the compensated demand curve in this setting. The change in
income associated with a small to moderate tax on Medigap is very small: a 15% tax on Medigap would amount to
roughly $200 annually, or less than 0.5% of average annual household income in the over 65 population. In addition,
prior estimates suggest the elasticity of health care spending with respect to income is small. A treatment arm in
the RAND health insurance experiment, which provided participants an unanticipated increase in income, found no
effect on health care utilization (Newhouse and the Insurance Experiment Group, 1993). Using oil price shocks and
geographic variation in exposure to these shocks, Acemoglu, Finkelstein and Notowidigdo (2009) find health care
expenditures have an elasticity of approximately 0.7 with respect to income.

30

8

Conclusion

Medicare includes cost-sharing to reduce unnecessary utilization. Since beneficiaries can purchase
supplemental insurance from Medigap, they are able to reduce their exposure to this cost-sharing,
potentially increasing utilization and imposing a negative externality on the Medicare system.
Using Medigap premium discontinuities that occur at state boundaries and an estimated demand
elasticity of -1.8, we find that Medigap increases overall Medicare costs by $1,396 per year on a
base of $6,290 or by 22.2%.
Our estimates indicate that a 15% tax on Medigap premiums, with full pass-through, would
decrease Medigap coverage by 13 percentage points on a base of 48% and reduce net government
costs by 4.3% per Medicare beneficiary or $12.9 billion in 2012 dollars. About 35% of these savings
would come from tax revenue while the remainder would come from lower Medigap enrollment.
A Pigouvian tax requires us to extrapolate outside the premium variation in the data. To a first
approximation, such a tax would generate combined savings of 10.7% per beneficiary or $31.6
billion in 2012 dollars.
In closing, we want to emphasize that taxing Medigap is not the only way to address the
externality from Medigap. Although taxing Medigap has received substantial attention, such a
tax is a fairly blunt instrument for increasing Medicare’s efficiency, and other policies may lead to
even larger efficiency gains.

31

References
Acemoglu, Daron, Amy Finkelstein, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo. 2009. “Income and Health
Spending: Evidence from Oil Price Shocks.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 95(4): 1079–1095.
Agarwal, Sumit, Souphala Chomsisengphet, Neale Mahoney, and Johannes Stroebel. 2018. “Do
Banks Pass Through Credit Expansions to Consumers Who Want to Borrow?” Quarterly Journal
of Economics.
Aron-Dine, Aviva, Liran Einav, and Amy Finkelstein. 2013. “The RAND Health Insurance Experiment, Three Decades Later.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 27(1): 197–222.
Baicker, Katherine, Amitabh Chandra, and Jonathan S. Skinner. 2012. “Saving Money or Just
Saving Lives? Improving the Productivity of US Health Care Spending.” Annual Review of Economics, 4(1): 33–56.
Baicker, Katherine, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Joshua Schwartzstein. 2015. “Behavioral Hazard
in Health Insurance.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(4): 1623–1667.
Bundorf, M. Kate, Jonathan D. Levin, and Neale Mahoney. 2012. “Pricing and Welfare in Health
Plan Choice.” American Economic Review, 102(7): 3214–3248.
Card, David, Carlos Dobkin, and Nicole Maestas. 2009. “Does Medicare Save Lives?” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 124(2): 597–636.
Cato. 2008. “The Grass Is Not Always Greener: A Look at National Health Care Systems Around
the World.” Cato Institute.
Chandra, Amitabh, Jonathan Gruber, and Robin McKnight. 2010. “Patient Cost-Sharing, Hospitalization Offsets, and the Design of Optimal Health Insurance for the Elderly.” American Economic Review, 100(1): 193–213.
Chandra, Amitabh, Jonathan Gruber, and Robin McKnight. 2014. “The Impact of Patient CostSharing on Low-Income Populations: Evidence from Massachusetts.” Journal of Health Economics, 33: 57–66.
Clemens, Jeffrey, and Joshua Gottlieb. 2014. “Do Physicians’ Financial Incentives Affect Treatment Patterns and Patient Health?” American Economic Review, 104(4): 1320–1349.
Cutler, David, and Louise Sheiner. 1999. “The Geography of Medicare.” American Economic Review, 89(2): 228–233.
Cutler, David, Jonathan Skinner, Ariel Dora Stern, and David Wennberg. 2013. “Physician Beliefs And Patient Preferences: A New Look at Regional Variation in Health Care Spending.”
NBER Working Paper 19320.
DellaVigna, Stefano, and Matthew Gentzkow. 2017. “Uniform Pricing in US Retail Chains.”
Working Paper.
Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, and Neale Mahoney. 2017. “Provider Incentives and Healthcare
Costs: Evidence from Long-Term Care Hospitals.” Revise & Resubmit, Econometrica.

32

Ericson, Keith M Marzilli, and Amanda Starc. 2015. “Pricing Regulation and Imperfect Competition on the Massachusetts Health Insurance Exchange.” Review of Economics and Statistics,
97(3): 667–682.
Ettner, Susan L. 1997. “Adverse Selection and the Purchase of Medigap Insurance by the Elderly.”
Journal of Health Economics, 16(5): 543–562.
Fang, Hanming, Michael P. Keane, and Dan Silverman. 2008. “Sources of Advantageous Selection: Evidence from the Medigap Insurance Market.” Journal of Political Economy, 116(2): 303–
350.
Finkelstein, Amy. 2004. “Minimum Standards, Insurance Regulation and Adverse Selection: Evidence from the Medigap Market.” Journal of Public Economics, 88(12): 2515–2547.
Finkelstein, Amy, Matthew Gentzkow, and Heidi Williams. 2016. “Sources of Geographic
Variation in Health Care: Evidence from Patient Migration.” Qquarterly Journal of Economics,
131(4): 1681–1726.
GAO. 2001. “Retiree Health Insurance: Gaps in Coverage and Availability.” Statement of William
J. Scanlon Director, Health Care Issues: Testimony Before the Subcommittee on EmployerEmployee Relations, Committee on Education and the Workforce, House of Representatives.
Government Accountability Office.
GAO. 2013. “Medigap and Other Factors Are Associated with Higher Estimated Health Care Expenditures.” Government Accountability Office.
Gruber, Jonathan. 2013. “Proposal 3: Restructuring Cost Sharing and Supplemental Insurance for
Medicare.” An Enduring Social Safety Net: The Hamilton Project.
Hendren, Nathaniel. 2016. “The Policy Elasticity.” Tax Policy and the Economy, 30(1): 51–89.
Hurd, Michael D., and Kathleen McGarry. 1997. “Medical Insurance and the use of Health Care
Services by the Elderly.” Journal of Health Economics, 16(2): 129–154.
Keeler, Emmett B., and John E. Rolph. 1988. “The Demand for Episodes of Treatment in the
Health Insurance Experiment.” Journal of Health Economics, 7(4): 337–367.
KFF. 2004. “Current Trends and Future Outlook for Retiree Health Benefits.” Kaiser Family Foundation.
KFF. 2008. “Selected European Countries’ Health Systems.” Kaiser Family Foundation.
KFF. 2012. “State Health Facts.” Kaiser Family Foundation.
Khandker, Rezaul K., and Lauren A. McCormack. 1999. “Medicare Spending by Beneficiaries
with Various Types of Supplemental Insurance.” Medical Care Research and Review, 56(2): 137–
155.
Lemieux, Jeff, Teresa Chovan, and Karen Heath. 2008. “Medigap Coverage And Medicare Spending: A Second Look.” Health Affairs, 27(2): 469–477.
Maestas, Nicole, Mathis Schroeder, and Dana Goldman. 2009. “Price Variation in Markets with
Homogeneous Goods: The Case of Medigap.” NBER Working Paper.
33

MedPAC. 2003. “Report to the Congress: Variation and Innovation in Medicare.” MedPAC.
Newhouse, Joseph P., and the Insurance Experiment Group. 1993. Free for All? Lessons from the
RAND Health Insurance Experiment. Havard University Press: Cambridge, MA.
Pauly, Mark V. 2000. “The Medicare Mix: Efficient and Inefficient Combinations of Social and
Private Health Insurance for US Elderly.” Journal of Health Care Finance, 26(3): 26–37.
Robst, John. 2006. “Estimation of a Hedonic Pricing Model for Medigap Insurance.” Health Services Research, 41(6): 2097–2113.
Slemrod, Joel, and Shlomo Yitzhaki. 2001. “Integrating Expenditure and Tax Decisions: The
Marginal Cost of Funds and the Marginal Benefit of Projects.” National Tax Journal, 54(2): 189–
201.
Starc, Amanda. 2014. “Insurer Pricing and Consumer Welfare: Evidence from Medigap.” RAND
Journal of Economics, 45 (1): 198–220.
Wennberg, John E. 1999. “Understanding Geographic Variations in Health Care Delivery.” New
England Journal of Medicine, 340(1): 52–53.
Wennberg, John E., Elliott S. Fisher, and Jonathan S. Skinner. 2002. “Geography and the Debate
over Medicare Reform.” Health Affairs, 21(2).
Wolfe, John R, and John H Goddeeris. 1991. “Adverse Selection, Moral Hazard, and Wealth Effects in the Medigap Insurance Market.” Journal of Health Economics, 10(4): 433–459.
Zeckhauser, Richard J. 1970. “Medical Insurance: A Case Study of the Tradeoff Between Risk
Spreading and Appropriate Incentives.” Journal of Economic Theory, 2(1): 10–26.

34

0

10

20

Percent
30

40

50

Figure 1: Uncovered Medicare Costs

0

2000

4000
6000
Uncovered Medicare Costs

8000

10000

Notes: Figure shows a histogram of annual uncovered Medicare spending, defined as Medicare-eligible spending that is the responsibility of the beneficiary, and is thus paid out-of-pocket by the beneficiary, paid by supplemental insurance, or absorbed by
the medical provider as bad debt. The figure is constructed using data from the 2005 CMS Beneficiary Summary File and covers the
universe of aged, FFS Medicare, non-Medicaid beneficiaries (N=22,196,098). Uncovered Medicare costs are top-coded at $10,000.
Approximately 3.8% of beneficiaries have uncovered Medicare spending greater than $5,000, and approximately 1% of beneficiaries
have uncovered Medicare spending greater than $10,000. Dollar values are inflation-adjusted to 2005 using the CPI-U.

35

Figure 2: Uncovered Medicare Expenditures and Medigap Premiums in NY and VT

81695
0124567

(a) Uncovered Medicare Spending by HSA, NY and VT

(b) Medigap Premiums for NY and VT
Notes: Panel (a) displays average annual uncovered Medicare spending by HSA in New York and Vermont. Uncovered Medicare
spending is defined as Medicare-eligible medical spending that is the responsibility of the beneficiary, and is thus paid out-of-pocket
by the beneficiary, paid by supplemental insurance, or absorbed by the medical provider as bad debt. The map is based on data
from the 2000 CMS Beneficiary Summary File for aged, FFS Medicare beneficiaries residing in NY and VT (N=1,415,957). Uncovered
Medicare spending ranges from $766 per capita in the HSA centered on Lowville, NY (a village in upstate NY) to $1,585 in the
HSA centered on Far Rockway, NY (a neighborhood of NYC). Among HSAs within these two states, the 5th percentile of uncovered
Medicare spending is $843, the 10th percentile is $847, the median is $956, the 90th percentile is $1,296, and the 99th percentile is
$1,404. Panel (b) displays annual average state-level Medigap premiums for the two largest insurers, United Healthcare and Mutual
of Omaha, based on data from Weiss ratings for 2000. The average annual Medigap premium is $1,504 in New York and $1,058 in
Vermont. Dollar values are inflation-adjusted to 2005 using the CPI-U.

36

Figure 3: Uncovered Medicare Spending and Medigap Premiums

(a) Uncovered Medicare Spending by HSA

(b) Medigap Premiums by State
Notes: Panel (a) displays average annual uncovered Medicare spending by HSA for the continental US. Uncovered Medicare
spending is defined as Medicare-eligible medical spending that is the responsibility of the beneficiary, and is thus paid out-ofpocket by the beneficiary, paid by supplemental insurance, or absorbed by the medical provider as bad debt. The map is based
on data from the 2000 CMS Beneficiary Summary File for aged, FFS Medicare beneficiaries (N=20,492,806). The 5th percentile
of HSA-level uncovered Medicare spending is $705, the 10th percentile is $801, the median is $944, the 90th percentile is $1,131,
and the 99th percentile is $1,360. Panel (b) displays annual average state-level Medigap premiums for the two largest insurers,
United Healthcare and Mutual of Omaha., based on data from Weiss ratings for 2000. Premium data do not exist for Wisconsin,
Massachusetts, and Minnesota, since these states do not have standardized Medigap policies. The average Medigap premium
is $1,456, and the median is $1,448. The 90th percentile is $1,772 and the 10th percentile is $1,232. Dollar values are inflationadjusted to 2005 using the CPI-U.

37

0

.05

.1

Fraction
.15

.2

.25

Figure 4: Leave-Out Costs

-200

-100

0
Leave-out Costs

100

200

Notes: Figure shows a histogram of the leave-out costs instrument net of mean leave-out costs within the 437 borderspanning HSAs. The leave-out costs instrument is defined using data from the 2000 CMS Beneficiary Summary File
(N=20,492,806). See Section 3 for more details. Dollar values are inflation-adjusted to 2005 using the CPI-U.

38

1000

15

1200

20

Premium
1400

Part B Events
25

30

1600

35

1800

Figure 5: Outcomes Versus Leave-Out Costs Instrument

700

800

900
Leave-Out Costs

1000

600

1100

800

1000

1200

1400

1200

1400

1200

1400

Leave-Out Costs ($)

(b) Part B Events

.2

20

.3

40

Total RVUs
60

Part A Stays
.4

.5

80

100

.6

(a) Premiums

600

800

1000

1200

1400

600

800

Leave-Out Costs ($)

1000
Leave-Out Costs ($)

(d) Part A Stays

4000

1.5

2

Part A Days
2.5

3

Medicare Payments ($)
5000
6000
7000
8000

3.5

9000

(c) Total RVUs

600

800

1000

1200

1400

600

Leave-Out Costs ($)

800

1000
Leave-Out Costs ($)

(e) Part A Days

(f) Medicare Payments

Notes: Figure displays scatter plots of key outcome variables against the leave-out costs instrument. The vertical axis displays the residuals
from a regression of the outcome variable on HSA fixed effects and the controls from the baseline specification. The horizontal axis displays the
residuals from a regression of leave-out costs on HSA fixed effects and the same controls. Each point shows the mean value for a HSA × state.
The axes are re-scaled by adding the means of the vertical and horizontal axis variables. Panel (a) uses data on premiums for plans sold by the
two largest insurers in the year 2000 (and is analogous to column 1 of Table 4). See Table 4 for more on the premium specification, Table 6 for
more on the utilization specifications, and Table 7 for more on the Medicare payments specification. Dollar values are inflation-adjusted to 2005
using the CPI-U.

39

Figure 6: Welfare Under Taxation

P
$3,175 H

J

G

$2,779 I
F
$1,779+τ

B

D

E

C

A

$1,779

SMC

Medigap
Externality

PMC tax τ

PMC no tax

Fraction Individuals
with Medigap

0.48

Notes: Figure shows the welfare effects of taxing Medigap.
The demand curve has a slope equal to
∂qijk /∂Leave-Out costs jk = −0.048 (as the coefficient on leave-out costs in the premium regressions is approximately
one) and an intercept pinned down by the equilibrium average price and quantity (p=1,779 and q=0.48). The private
marginal cost curve is the horizontal line at the observed average premium ($1,779). The social marginal cost curve
is the private marginal cost curve shifted upward by the Medigap externality. The deadweight loss from Medigap
is the trapezoid AIHG. The figure also displays the private marginal cost curve under a tax of τ. Dollar values are
inflation-adjusted to 2005 using the CPI-U.

Table 1: Medicare Cost-Sharing
Part A: Hospital Expenditures
Per-Day Copay
Deductible
Days 61-90
Days 91-150
$912

$228

$456

Part B: Physician Expenditures
Deductible

Coinsurance

$110

20%

SNF
Per-Day Copay
Deductible
Days 21-100
$0

$114

Notes: Table shows FFS Medicare cost-sharing for 2005. Part A cost-sharing is applied separately to each benefit period,
which begins upon a hospital or Skilled Nursing Facility (SNF) admission and ends when the patient has been out of
the hospital or SNF for 60 days. Medicare only pays for Part A hospitalizations in excess of 90 days through the
drawdown of 60 lifetime reserve days. Part B cost-sharing is applied on an annual basis. SNF cost-sharing is applied
separately in each benefit period, and Medicare provides no coverage for SNF stays longer than 100 days. Dollar values
are inflation-adjusted to 2005 using the CPI-U.

40

Table 2: Summary Statistics
Panel A: All Beneficiaries
Medicare Type (Denominator File, 1999-2005)
Traditional Medicare (FFS), Non-Medicaid
Medicare Advantage
Medicaid (Dual-Eligible)

All HSAs

Cross-Border HSAs (11.0%)

73.6%
15.3%
11.1%

82.7%
6.7%
10.6%

Panel B: Baseline Sample: FFS Medicare, Non-Medicaid Beneficiaries
Supplemental Insurance* (MCBS, 1992-2005)
Medigap
47.9%
Retiree Supplemental Insurance
46.3%
None
15.8%

50.0%
45.9%
14.1%

Medigap Premiums

$1,779

$1,727

Costs (Beneficiary Summary File, 1999-2005)
Part A Payments
Part B Payments
SNF Payments
Total Medicare Payments

$3,021
$2,648
$399
$6,291

$2,776
$2,395
$337
$5,760

Utilization (Beneficiary Summary File, 1999-2005; Carrier Claims File, 1999-2005)
Part A Days
2.10
Part A Stays
0.34
Part B Events
25.81
Part B RVUs
70.77
SNF Days
1.37
SNF Stays
0.06
Demographics (Denominator File, 1999-2005)
Sex
Male
Race
White
Black
Other
Age
65-74
75-84
85+

2.06
0.34
24.01
64.86
1.25
0.06

41.6%

41.6%

92.2%
5.6%
2.1%

92.6%
5.8%
1.7%

50.1%
37.4%
12.5%

51.7%
36.7%
11.7%

*Percentages add up to more than 100% because some individuals report holding both RSI and Medigap coverage.
Notes: Panel A displays the type of insurance coverage. The data source is the pooled 1999-2005 CMS Denominator File and the
sample is restricted to individuals who are enrolled for the entire year and meet the geographic restrictions described in Section 2
(N=222,390,439). Panel B displays summary statistics for the baseline sample of FFS Medicare, non-Medicaid beneficiaries. In addition to the Panel A sample restrictions, the sample excludes beneficiaries who also have coverage from Medicaid (dual-eligibles),
beneficiaries who originally qualified for Medicare through SSDI, and beneficiaries with Medicare Advantage coverage. The utilization and payment information come from the pooled 1999-2005 CMS Beneficiary Summary File (N=130,895,953) for all variables except
the Part B RVU variable which comes from the pooled 1999-2005 CMS Carrier Claims File (N=23,708,295). Demographics are based
on the 1999-2005 CMS Medicare Denominator File (N=130,895,953) and the insurance coverage variables come from the Medicare
Current Beneficiary Survey (N=86,229). The Medigap premium information comes from the Weiss Ratings, and the premium measure
is the average premium for all plans offered by United Healthcare and Mutual of Omaha, the two largest insurers, during the 2000
open-enrollment period. Dollar values are inflation-adjusted to 2005 using the CPI-U.

41

Table 3: Identifying Variation: Insurance Status and Individual Characteristics
Panel A: Identifying Variation and Insurance Status
Coefficient on Leave-out Cost (Hundreds)
P-Value
Est.
Std. Err.
Mean of Dep Var.

Dependent Variable

Medicare Administrative Data
All Beneficiaries
Part B Coverage
Original Medicare Eligibility Through SSDI
Medicare Advantage
Medicaid (dual-eligibles)

Dependent Variable

0.001
0.002
-0.003
0.008

(0.001)
(0.003)
(0.006)
(0.005)

0.54
0.39
0.62
0.15

0.92
0.07
0.15
0.11

Panel B: Identifying Variation and Individual Characteristics
Coefficient on Leave-out Cost (Hundreds)
P-Value
Est.
Std. Err.
Mean of Dep Var.

Census 2000, Special Tabulation of Elderly Population
High School Degree, 65+
Bachelors, 65+
Veteran, Male 65+
Veteran, Female 65+
Labor Force Participation, Female 65-69
Labor Force Participation, Male 65-69
Income <100% FPL, age 65+
Log Median Income, Age 65-74
Log Median Income, Age 75+
Log Mean House Value
Renters, Age 65+
Move Homes, 65-74
Move Homes, 55-64

-0.015
-0.012
-0.014
-0.001
-0.001
-0.004
-0.001
-0.017
-0.020
-0.033
-0.018
-0.009
-0.007

(0.013)
(0.011)
(0.010)
(0.001)
(0.006)
(0.011)
(0.005)
(0.030)
(0.027)
(0.045)
(0.007)
(0.009)
(0.011)

0.26
0.28
0.15
0.26
0.84
0.71
0.85
0.56
0.47
0.46
0.01
0.33
0.52

0.65
0.15
0.65
0.02
0.20
0.30
0.10
10.35
10.02
11.78
0.22
0.29
0.38

IRS Aggregate Income Statistics
Mean Ajusted Gross Income (AGI)
AGI<$10,000
$10,000< AGI < $25,000
$25,000< AGI < $50,000
AGI > $50,000

600.2
0.014
0.000
0.012
0.021

(2672.1)
(0.012)
(0.011)
(0.014)
(0.015)

0.82
0.27
0.98
0.39
0.15

46012.30
0.23
0.29
0.28
0.29

Medicare Administrative Data, Baseline Sample
Predicted Medicare Spending

35.3

(34.5)

0.31

6,291

Notes: Table shows estimates from regressions of outcome variables on leave-out costs and HSA fixed effects (see
Section 4, Equation 5). Panel A is based on the pooled 1999-2005 CMS Denominator File with the sample restrictions
described in Panel A of Table 2. The first section of Panel B is based on data from the 2000 Census Special Tabulation on
Aging (available from ICPSR). The second section of Panel B is based on the IRS Aggregate Income Statistics for 2001.
For these regressions, the data are aggregated to the ZIP code level and the observations are weighted by the Medicare
population residing in those ZIP codes. In the final row of Panel B, the dependent variable is predicted Medicare
spending, based on a linear regression of individual-level Medicare payments on the Census demographics listed in
the table and controls used in our baseline specifications (age, sex , race, year, and health risk). The fitted value is then
regressed on the leave-out costs instrument and HSA fixed effects using the baseline sample described in Table 2 Panel
B. Dollar values are inflation-adjusted to 2005 using the CPI-U.

42

Table 4: Regressions of Medigap Premiums on Leave-Out Costs

Leave-Out Costs

Plans A-J
(1)
1.118
(0.111)

Dependent Variable: Medigap Premiums
Plan C
(2)
0.937
(0.153)

Plan F
(3)
0.974
(0.155)

HSA FE
Insurer FE
Plan FE

X
X
X

X
X

X
X

R-Squared
N

0.926
45,129

0.841
6,298

0.877
6,449

Notes: Table shows estimates from regressions of Medigap premiums on the leave-out costs instrument, HSA fixed
effects, plan fixed effects, insurer fixed effects, and controls for GAF/OWI adjustment factors (see Section 3, Equation
2). The first column displays results from a specification that includes all plans offered by United Healthcare and
Mutual of Omaha, the two largest insurers. The second and third columns restrict attention to the most popular plans
offered by these companies, Plan C and Plan F, respectively. Observations are at the HSA-state-plan-company level.
Standard errors are clustered at the HSA level. Dollar values are inflation-adjusted to 2005 using the CPI-U.

Table 5: Regressions of Insurance Coverage on Leave-Out Costs
Leave-Out Costs (Hundreds)
Est
Std. Err.
P-Value

Mean of
Dep Var

MCBS alone (N=114,561)
Supplemental Coverage (HSA level)
Supplemental Coverage (HRR level)
Medigap (HSA level)
Medigap (HRR level)

-0.066
-0.068
-0.083
-0.090

(0.038)
(0.026)
(0.060)
(0.049)

0.08
0.01
0.17
0.07

0.90
0.90
0.36
0.36

NHIS Alone (N=121,009)
Supplemental Coverage (HSA level)
Supplemental Coverage (HRR level)

-0.031
-0.010

(0.027)
(0.016)

0.26
0.51

0.79
0.79

Combined MCBS+NHIS
Supplemental Coverage (HSA level)
Supplemental Coverage (HRR level)

-0.048
-0.039

(0.023)
(0.015)

0.04
0.01

0.85
0.85

Notes: Table shows estimates from regressions of insurance coverage indicators on leave-out costs, HSA or HRR fixed
effects, and controls for age, sex, and GAF/OWI adjustment factors (see Section 3, Equation 3). The analysis uses the
MCBS and NHIS data from 1992 to 2005, using a sample definition analogous to Panel A of Table 2. The dependent
variable in the Supplemental Coverage specifications is an indicator for Medigap, Medicare Advantage, Medicaid, or
RSI coverage. The HRR-level first stage ranges from 0.24 to 0.25 across specifications (Appendix Table C2) and we scale
the HRR demand estimates by 4 to make them comparable to the HSA-level estimates, which have first-stage of 0.94 to
1.1 across specifications. Standard errors are clustered at the HSA or HRR level depending on the specification. Dollar
values are inflation-adjusted to 2005 using the CPI-U.

43

Table 6: Regressions of Medicare Utilization on Leave-Out Costs

Dependent Variable
Part B Events
Imaging Events
Testing Events
Total RVUs
Part A Days
Part A Stays
SNF Days
SNF Stays

Leave-Out Costs (Hundreds)
Est
Std. Err.
P-Value
-0.4180
(0.1810)
0.021
-0.0812
(0.0323)
0.012
-0.4090
(0.1470)
0.005
-1.2900
(0.4960)
0.009
-0.0621
(0.0188)
0.001
-0.0040
(0.0021)
0.065
0.0120
(0.0201)
0.552
0.0003
(0.0008)
0.761

Mean of
Dep. Var.
25.81
3.99
11.41
70.77
2.10
0.34
1.37
0.06

Implied Medigap Effect
Level
%
8.71
33.7%
1.69
42.4%
8.52
74.7%
26.88
38.0%
1.29
61.6%
0.08
23.9%
-0.25
-18.2%
-0.01
-8.8%

Notes: Table displays estimates from regressions of Medicare utilization on leave-out costs, HSA fixed effects, and
controls for age, sex, race, health risk, and GAF/OWI adjustment factors (see Section 3 Equation 4). Each row displays the results from a separate regression. The implied Medigap effect is calculated by dividing the estimate by the
coefficient on leave-out costs from the baseline demand specification. This analysis draws on data from the pooled
1999-2005 CMS Beneficiary Summary File, CMS Denominator File, and CMS Carrier File (for RVU analysis). This analysis uses the baseline sample described in Panel B of Table 2 (N=23,708,295 for the RVU measure; N=130,895,953 for all
other measures). Standard errors are clustered at the HSA level. Dollar values are inflation-adjusted to 2005 using the
CPI-U.

Table 7: Regressions of Medicare Payments on Leave-Out Costs
Dependent Variable
Medicare Payments
Part A Payments
Part B Payments
SNF Payments

Leave-Out Costs (Hundreds)
Est
Std. Err.
P-Value
-67.02
(33.11)
0.043
-47.59
(22.76)
0.037
-21.80
(15.90)
0.159
3.44
(5.25)
0.513

Mean of
Dep. Var.
6,291
3,021
2,648
399

Implied Medigap Effect
Level
%
1396.25
22.2%
991.54
32.8%
454.23
17.2%
-71.61
-17.9%

Notes: Table displays estimates from regressions of Medicare payments on leave-out costs, HSA fixed effects, and controls for age, sex, race, health risk, and GAF/OWI adjustment factors (see Section 3, Equation 4). Each row displays the
results from a separate regression. The implied Medigap effect is calculated by dividing the estimate by the coefficient
on leave-out costs from the baseline demand specification. This analysis draws on data from the pooled 1999-2005 CMS
Beneficiary Summary File and CMS Denominator File. This analysis uses the baseline sample described in Panel B of
Table 2 (N=130,895,953). All dependent variables are top-coded at $64,000. Standard errors are clustered at the HSA
level. Dollar values are inflation-adjusted to 2005 using the CPI-U.

44

Table 8: Robustness Checks
Leave-Out Costs (Hundreds)
Est
Std. Err.
P-Value

Mean of
Dep. Var.

Implied Medigap Effect
Level
%

Baseline Specification
Medicare Payments

-67.02

(33.11)

0.043

6,291

1396.25

22.2%

Alternative Specifications (Dep Var is Medicare Spending)
Census ZIP Code-Level Controls Included
Region-Year Fixed Effects Included

-59.96
-55.54

(30.16)
(31.74)

0.047
0.085

6,291
6,291

1249.09
1157.02

19.9%
18.4%

Unaffected Procedures
Urgent RVUs (Clemens & Gottlieb Def'n)
Urgent Admissions (Card, Dobkin, & Maestas Def'n 1)
Urgent Admissions (Card, Dobkin, & Maestas Def'n 2)

5.44E-02
-1.31E-03
-6.89E-04

(6.76E-02)
(1.03E-03)
(1.03E-03)

0.421
0.201
0.505

4.274
0.077
0.125

-1.13
0.03
0.01

-26.5%
35.4%
11.5%

0.03
0.01
0.01
0.02

(0.08)
(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.06)

0.65
0.23
0.60
0.75

0.364
0.091
0.528
1.968

-0.71
-0.20
-0.21
-0.40

-196.3%
-225.3%
-39.5%
-20.5%

Unaffected Individuals
Non-Elderly Adults in NHIS
Hospital Days
Hospital Stays
Physician Office Visits (Indicator for ≥ 2)
Self-Reported Health

Notes: Table displays estimates from regressions of spending and utilization measures on leave-out costs, HSA fixed
effects, and controls for age, sex, race, health risk, and GAF/OWI adjustment factors (see Section 3, Equation 4). Each
row displays the results from a separate regression. The implied Medigap effect is calculated by dividing the estimate
by the coefficient on leave-out costs from the baseline demand specification. This analysis draws on data from the
pooled 1999-2005 CMS Beneficiary Summary File, CMS Denominator File, CMS Carrier File (“Urgent RVU" analysis),
NHIS ("Unaffected Individuals" analysis), and CMS MedPAR (“Urgent Admissions" analysis). Aside from the NHIS,
for each of these datasets we use a sample definition analogous to the baseline sample described in Panel B of Table 2.
The "Unaffected Individuals" analysis utilizing the NHIS data focuses on the sample of non-elderly adults, excluding
those with Medicare coverage. Standard errors are clustered at HSA level. Dollar values are inflation-adjusted to 2005
using the CPI-U.

45

Table 9: Counterfactuals: Taxing Medigap
Tax
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
30%
40%
Pigouvian Tax

Medigap
Market Share
48%
44%
39%
35%
31%
22%
14%
0%

Tax Revenue
(per Beneficiary)
$0
$39
$70
$94
$110
$119
$99
$0

Medicare Savings
(per Beneficiary)
$0
$60
$119
$179
$238
$358
$477
$670

Total Budgetary Impact
%
(per Beneficiary)
$0
0%
$99
1.6%
$189
3.0%
$273
4.3%
$348
5.5%
$477
7.6%
$575
9.1%
$670
10.7%

Notes: The first column lists the tax as a percentage of the $1,779 average Medigap premiums. The second column
lists the implied Medigap market share assuming full pass-through of the tax. The linear demand curve used in these
calculations has a slope equal to ∂qijk /∂Leave-Out costs jk = −0.048 (as the coefficient on leave-out costs in the premium
regressions was is approximately one) and an intercept pinned down by the equilibrium average price and quantity
(p=1,779 and q=0.48). The remaining columns list the tax revenue, cost savings from Medigap dis-enrollment, and total
budgetary impact, respectively. These results are based on the estimated $1,396 Medigap externality. Dollar values are
inflation-adjusted to 2005 using the CPI-U.

46

APPENDIX
NOT FOR PUBLICATION

A

Medigap Plans: Plan Features and Enrollees by Plan Letter

The form and pricing of Medigap policies are regulated by the federal government. During our
sample period, firms were permitted to sell standardized policies labeled A-J. Table A1 describes
the features of these different Medigap policies. As one can see, all the policies contain the “basic
benefits,” which include coverage of Part A copays and deductibles, Part B coinsurance, blood,
and additional lifetime hospital days. Much of the differentiation among the plans is for niche
services such as home health care and foreign travel emergencies.

Table A1: Medigap Benefits by Plan Letter

Basic	  Benefits
Part	  A	  Copays	  and	  Deductible
Part	  B	  Coinsurance
Blood
Additional	  Lifetime	  Hospital	  Days
SNF	  Coinsurance
Part	  B	  Deductible
Part	  B	  Excess	  Charges
Foreign	  Travel	  Emergency
Home	  Health	  Care
Prescription	  Drugs
Preventive	  Medical	  Care

A
X

Medigap	  Plan	  Letter
E
F*
G
X
X
X

B
X

C
X

D
X

X
X

X

X

X

X

X

X
X

X

X
X
X
X

H
X

I
X

J*
X

X

X

X

X
X

80%
X
X

X

X
X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X

Notes: Table shows Medigap plan benefits by plan letter. The “basic benefits” are provided by all plans. According to
federal regulations, firms that participate in the Medigap market must offer Plan A and either Plan C or Plan F.
*Plans F and J have high-deductible options that require beneficiaries to pay $1,580 before receiving Medigap benefits
that year. These plans are rarely offered and have very few enrollees.

Figure A1 illustrates the distribution of Medigap enrollees by plan letter. This distribution is
calculated from self-reported Medigap plan letter information from the MCBS (which is reported
by roughly half of the respondents who report having Medigap coverage). As one can see, Plan C
and Plan F are the most popular plans. Federal government regulations required firms that offered
any Medigap policy to offer two options as a subset of the available plans: Plan A and either Plan
C or Plan F.

47

Figure A1: Medigap Enrollment by Plan Letter
40%#

30%#

20%#

10%#

0%#
A#

B#

C#

D#

E#

F*#

G#

H#

I#

J*#

Notes: Figure displays enrollment by plan letter. This histogram is constructed using data from
the 1992-2005 Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey (MCBS). A Medigap plan letter is reported
by approximately half of the MCBS respondents who report having a Medigap policy.

B

Supplemental Insurance in MCBS and NHIS datasets

To investigate the elasticity of Medigap enrollment, we use data from two surveys: the Medicare
Current Beneficiary Survey (MCBS) and the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS). Below,
we describe how we translate the variables in these surveys into the insurance dependent variables we use in the demand estimation: Medigap (from MCBS) and supplemental insurance (from
MCBS and NHIS).
MCBS. MCBS insurance variables are available in the “ric 4” data file for each year. We code
individuals as having Medigap if they report having private coverage and report the plan is “selfpurchased” and either purchased directly or through AARP. We code individuals as having supplemental coverage if we can infer that they have any source of supplemental coverage, including
Medicaid, Medicare Advantage, Medigap, or RSI. Specifically, the following MCBS variables are
used in coding individual insurance status: d_phi, d_hmo, d_caid, d_obtnp1-5. 57
NHIS. NHIS insurance variables are available in the “personx’’ data file for each year. Relative
to the MCBS, the NHIS has fewer survey questions regarding sources of coverage, and the NHIS
survey responses are not verified against administrative data. We code individuals as having supplemental insurance if we can infer that they have any source of supplemental coverage, including Medicaid, Medicare Advantage, Medigap, or RSI. Specifically, the following NHIS variables
are used in coding individual insurance status: mchmo, medicare, plnpay21, plnpay22, private,
plnwrkn1, plnwrk2, medicaid.

C

Robustness of Demand Results

Robustness to Alternative Control Variables In the following table, we display our demand
results with alternative sets of controls. The table shows the estimates from the baseline specifica57 The

characterization leads to roughly the same market shares as displayed in GAO (2001).

48

tion for reference (as in Table 5). All specifications include year fixed effects, local medical market
fixed effects, and controls for Medicare geographic payment adjustments. The “Fewer Controls”
specification includes no additional controls, and the “Baseline Controls” specification includes
demographic controls for sex, race, and age. The “More Controls” specification includes demographic controls as well as controls for the incidence of chronic conditions including arthritis, heart
disease, diabetes, non-skin cancer, and previous heart attack. The table displays the results for the
dependent variables indicating Medigap (in the MCBS) and any supplemental coverage (in the
NHIS and the MCBS). Regardless of which set of controls are used, the results are qualitatively
and quantitatively very similar. The results indicate that Medigap enrollment is price-sensitive,
and the implied elasticity from the combined specification is in the range of -1.5 to -1.8. Within the
MCBS, the effects on Medigap and any supplemental insurance are very similar, consistent with
the evidence from the administrative data on the lack of substitution into alternative coverage
based on our variation.

Table C1: Demand: Robustness to Alternative Controls
Baseline	  Controls
Est
Std.	  Err.

Fewer	  Controls
Est
Std.	  Err.

More	  Controls
Est
Std.	  Err.

Mean	  of
Dep	  Var

All	  Beneficiaries
Combined	  MCBS+NHIS
Supplemental	  Coverage	  (HSA	  level)
Supplemental	  Coverage	  (HRR	  level)

-­‐0.048
-­‐0.039

(0.023)
(0.015)

-­‐0.046
-­‐0.038

(0.023)
(0.016)

-­‐0.048
-­‐0.042

(0.024)
(0.016)

0.85
0.85

MCBS	  alone
Supplemental	  Coverage	  (HSA	  level)
Supplemental	  Coverage	  (HRR	  level)
Medigap	  (HSA	  level)
Medigap	  (HRR	  level)

-­‐0.066
-­‐0.068
-­‐0.083
-­‐0.090

(0.038)
(0.026)
(0.060)
(0.049)

-­‐0.068
-­‐0.071
-­‐0.080
-­‐0.088

(0.038)
(0.028)
(0.064)
(0.047)

-­‐0.064
-­‐0.073
-­‐0.079
-­‐0.092

(0.040)
(0.028)
(0.060)
(0.048)

0.90
0.90
0.36
0.36

NHIS	  Alone
Supplemental	  Coverage	  (HSA	  level)
Supplemental	  Coverage	  (HRR	  level)

-­‐0.031
-­‐0.010

(0.027)
(0.016)

-­‐0.026
-­‐0.006

(0.025)
(0.016)

-­‐0.032
-­‐0.012

(0.027)
(0.016)

0.79
0.79

Controls
Year	  and	  Local	  Medical	  Market	  Fixed	  Effects
Demographic
Chronic	  Conditions

X
X

X

X
X
X

Notes: Table shows estimates from regressions of insurance coverage indicators on leave-out costs, HSA or HRR fixed
effects, and controls as indicated in the table above (see Section 3, Equation 3). The analysis uses the MCBS and NHIS
data from 1992 to 2005, using a sample definition analogous to Panel A of Table 2. The dependent variable in the
Supplemental Coverage specifications is an indicator for Medigap, Medicare Advantage, Medicaid, or RSI coverage.
The HRR-level first stage ranges from 0.24 to 0.25 across specifications (Appendix Table C2) and we scale the HRR
demand estimates by 4 to make them comparable to the HSA-level estimates, which have first-stage of 0.94 to 1.1
across specifications. Standard errors are clustered at the HSA or HRR level depending on the specification. Dollar
values are inflation-adjusted to 2005 using the CPI-U.

First-stage at HRR level. The following table presents the first stage at the HRR level. The estimates show that HRR-level leave-out costs are predictive of premiums, with a coefficient around
0.25. Recall that the analogous coefficient at the HSA level was approximately 1. The reason the
HRR-level coefficient is smaller is that HRRs are substantially larger than HSAs and therefore the
geographic areas used to calculate HRR-level leave-out costs are substantially smaller than the
areas used to calculate leave-out costs at the HSA level. Because of these smaller areas, HRR-level
leave-out costs are more noisy predictors of state-level costs and thus more noisy predicators of
49

premiums, attenuating the coefficient on HRR-level leave-out costs towards zero. Because of the
attenuated coefficient, the demand results at the HRR level need to be scaled up by a factor of four
to be comparable with the HSA-level estimates. This is what is done in reporting the results for
the demand coefficients.

Table C2: Premiums: Regressions of Medigap Premiums on Leave-Out Costs at HRR
level

Leave-Out Costs

Plans A-J
(1)
0.241
(0.057)

Dep. Var.: Medigap Premiums
Plan C
(2)
0.244
(0.059)

Plan F
(3)
0.249
(0.068)

HRR FE
Insurer FE
Plan FE

X
X
X

X
X

X
X

R-Squared
N

0.917
44,765

0.805
6,246

0.838
6,397

Notes: Table shows estimates from regressions of Medigap premiums on the leave-out costs instrument, HRR fixed
effects, plan fixed effects, insurer fixed effects, and controls for GAF/OWI adjustment factors (see Section 3, Equation
2). The first column displays results from a specification that includes all plans offered by United Healthcare and
Mutual of Omaha, the two largest insurers. The second and third columns restrict attention to the most popular plans
offered by these companies, Plan C and Plan F, respectively. Observations are at the HRR-state-plan-company level.
Standard errors are clustered at the HRR level. Dollar values are inflation-adjusted to 2005 using the CPI-U.

D

Control Variables in CMS Data

We include controls for individual chronic conditions in several specifications to improve the precision of our estimates. The chronic condition information comes from the CMS Beneficiary Summary File. The chronic condition controls we include are dummy variables that indicate when the
following conditions are present:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Acute Myocardial Infarction (AMI)
Alzheimer’s Disease (ALZH)
Alzheimer’s Disease and Rltd Disorders or Senile Dementia (ALZHDMTA)
Atrial Fibrillation (ATRIALFB)
Cataract (CATARACT)
Chronic Kidney Disease (CHRNKIDN)
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD)
Heart Failure (CHF)
Diabetes (DIABETES)
Glaucoma (GLAUCOMA)
Hip/Pelvic Fracture (HIPFRAC)
Ischemic Heart Disease (ISCHMCHT)
Depression (DEPRESSN)
Osteoporosis (OSTEOPRS)
50

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Rheumatoid Arthritis or Osteoarthritis (RA_OA)
Stroke or Transient Ischemic Attack (STRKETIA)
Breast Cancer (CNCRBRST)
Colorectal Cancer (CNCRCLRC)
Prostate Cancer (CNCRPRST)
Lung Cancer (CNCRLUNG)
Endometrial Cancer (CNCRENDM)
Anemia (ANEMIA)
Asthma (ASTHMA)
Hyperlipidemia (HYPERL)
Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia (HYPERP)
Hypertension (HYPERT)
Acquired Hypothyroidism (HYPOTH)

The CMS corresponding variable used to derive each of these indicator variables is included in
the list above in parentheses after each chronic condition. For more information on the CMS
algorithm for determining whether these conditions are present, see the documentation at: http:
//www.resdac.org/cms-data/files/mbsf/data-documentation.

E

Alternative Specifications

The baseline specifications reported in the text include controls for age, sex, race, chronic conditions, and log GAF/OWI adjustment factors. In Table E1, we report the results for the utilization
dependent variables when chronic health condition controls are omitted. Overall, the results are
qualitatively similar as when the chronic health condition controls are included.

Table E1: Utilization: Regressions of Medicare Utilization on Leave-Out Costs, Without
Health Controls
Dependent Variable
Part B Events
Imaging Events
Testing Events
Total RVUs
Part A Days
Part A Stays
SNF Days
SNF Stays

Leave-Out Costs (Hundreds)
Est
Std. Err.
P-Value
-0.3210
(0.1990)
0.106
-0.0561
(0.0337)
0.096
-0.3400
(0.1710)
0.047
-0.9550
(0.4970)
0.055
-0.0354
(0.0218)
0.105
0.0002
(0.0025)
0.931
0.0246
(0.0251)
0.327
0.0009
(0.0011)
0.414

Mean of
Dep. Var.
25.81
3.99
11.41
70.77
2.10
0.34
1.37
0.06

Implied Medigap Effect
Level
%
6.69
25.9%
1.17
29.3%
7.08
62.1%
19.90
28.1%
0.74
35.1%
0.00
-1.3%
-0.51
-37.3%
-0.02
-29.9%

Notes: Table displays estimates from regressions of Medicare utilization on leave-out costs, HSA fixed effects, and controls for age, sex, race, and GAF/OWI adjustment factors (see Section 3 Equation 4). Each row displays the results from
a separate regression. The implied Medigap effect is calculated by dividing the estimate by the coefficient on leave-out
costs from the baseline demand specification. This analysis draws on data from the pooled 1999-2005 CMS Beneficiary
Summary File, CMS Denominator File, and CMS Carrier File (for RVU analysis). This analysis uses the baseline sample
described in Panel B of Table 2 (N=23,708,295 for the RVU measure; N=130,895,953 for all other measures). The difference between these results and those presented in Table 6 is that this specification excludes health controls. Standard
errors are clustered at the HSA level. Dollar values are inflation-adjusted to 2005 using the CPI-U.

Table E2 reports the results when the baseline specification for the payment dependent variables is estimated omitting the chronic health condition controls. The results are less statistically
51

Table E2: Payments: Regressions of Medicare Payments on Leave-Out Costs, Without
Health Controls
Dependent Variable
Medicare Payments
Part A Payments
Part B Payments
SNF Payments

Leave-Out Costs (Hundreds)
Est
Std. Err.
P-Value
-9.98
(33.45)
0.766
-4.70
(22.18)
0.832
-11.36
(16.76)
0.498
6.90
(6.42)
0.283

Mean of
Dep. Var.
6,291
3,021
2,648
399

Implied Medigap Effect
Level
%
207.83
3.3%
97.87
3.2%
236.73
8.9%
-143.84
-36.0%

Notes: Table displays estimates from regressions of Medicare payments on leave-out costs, HSA fixed effects, and
controls for age, sex, race, and GAF/OWI adjustment factors (see Section 3, Equation 4). Each row displays the results
from a separate regression. The implied Medigap effect is calculated by dividing the estimate by the coefficient on
leave-out costs from the baseline demand specification. This analysis draws on data from the pooled 1999-2005 CMS
Beneficiary Summary File and CMS Denominator File. This analysis uses the baseline sample described in Panel B of
Table 2 (N=130,895,953). All dependent variables are top-coded at $64,000. The difference between these results and
those presented in Table 7 is that this specification excludes health controls. Standard errors are clustered at the HSA
level. Dollar values are inflation-adjusted to 2005 using the CPI-U.

precise when these controls are omitted. However, these results are statistically indistinguishable
from the point estimates in the baseline specification. It is perhaps not surprising that the health
controls are important for precision as the R-squared increases from 0.03 without health controls
to 0.43 with health controls for the “Medicare Payments” specification.

F

Heterogeneity

The baseline analysis presented in the text uses administrative cost and utilization data from 19992005. Below we present our baseline Medicare spending regression estimated year-by-year. While
the subsample estimates are a bit more noisy, overall the year-by-year estimates line up with the
estimates on the entire sample.
In the text, we focus on the mean effect of Medigap premiums on Medicare payments, as this
is the relevant object for evaluating the effect of a tax on Medigap. Below we present additional
graphical evidence of the effect of Medigap premiums on the distribution of Medicare payments.
Figure F1 shows the effect of a $1,000 increase in leave-out costs on the CDFs of Part A, Part B, and
total Medicare payments. Solid lines show the CDF of payments in each category.58 Dashed lines
depict the effect of a $1,000 increase in leave-out costs. The lines are calculated using the coefficient
on leave-out costs from regressions of the form Pr(Paymentsijk < X ) = γc Leave-out costs jk + γk +
0 γ +µ
Xijk
X
ijk where X = 500, 1,000, . . . 32,000. Dotted lines show the 95% confidence intervals of
these estimates, calculated using standard errors clustered at the HSA-level.

58 The

distribution is censored at $32,000 per year.

52

Table F1: Payment Regressions, by Year

Dependent Variable

Leave-Out Costs (Hundreds)
Est
Std. Err. P-Value

Medicare Spending
Baseline (1999-2005)

-67.0

(33.1)

0.043

6,291

1,396

22.2%

130,895,953

-30.4
-80.2
-69.6
-58.1
-20.3
-48.4
-83.8

(42.0)
(39.4)
(39.7)
(41.6)
(35.9)
(41.5)
(40.0)

0.469
0.042
0.080
0.163
0.572
0.243
0.036

6,049
5,975
6,195
6,305
6,398
6,556
6,518

633
1,671
1,450
1,210
423
1,008
1,746

10.5%
28.0%
23.4%
19.2%
6.6%
15.4%
26.8%

17,896,807
17,990,486
18,464,210
18,968,995
19,196,098
19,319,846
19,059,511

By year
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005

Mean of
Dep. Var.

Implied Medigap Effect
Level
%

N

Notes: Table displays estimates from regressions of Medicare payments on leave-out costs, HSA fixed effects, and
controls for age, sex, race, health risk, and GAF/OWI adjustment factors (see Section 3, Equation 4). Each row displays
the results from a separate regression. The baseline estimates using pooled data from 1999-2005 are displayed in the
first row, while the subsequent rows present estimates from the same specification estimated separately by year. The
implied Medigap effect is calculated by dividing the estimate by the coefficient on leave-out costs from the baseline
demand specification. This analysis draws on data from the pooled 1999-2005 CMS Beneficiary Summary File and
CMS Denominator File. This analysis uses the baseline sample described in Panel B of Table 2 (N=130,895,953 for all
years). All dependent variables are top-coded at $64,000. Standard errors are clustered at the HSA level. Dollar values
are inflation-adjusted to 2005 using the CPI-U.

53

1

.2

.75

.8

.4

F(Part A spending)
.85
.9

F(Part B spending)
.6

.8

.95

1

Figure F1: Effect on CDF of Payments

$1K

$2K
$4K
Part B spending

$8K

$16K

$0.5K

$1K

$32K

$0

$0.5K

$1K

$2K
$4K
Part A spending

$8K

.4

F(Total spending)
.6

.8

1

$0.5K

.2

$0

$0

$2K
$4K
Total spending

$8K

$16K

$32K

Notes: Figure shows the impact of a $1,000 increase in leave-out costs on the CDF of Part B payments, Part A
payments, and total Medicare payments. The solid lines show the empirical CDF of payments. The dashed
lines show the estimated CDF under an $1,000 increase in leave-out costs. These CDFs are constructed using
the coefficient on leave-out costs from regressions of the form Pr(Payments < X ) = γc Leave-out costs jk +
0 γ +µ
γk + Xijk
X
ijk for X = 500, 1,000, . . . 32,000. Dotted lines show the 95% confidence intervals of these
estimates. This analysis draws on data from the pooled 1999-2005 CMS Beneficiary Summary File and CMS
Denominator File. This analysis uses the baseline sample described in Panel B of Table 2 (N=130,895,953 for
all years). Standard errors are clustered at the HSA level. Dollar values are inflation-adjusted to 2005 using
the CPI-U.

54

$16K

$32K

G

Premium Variation and Mortality

We can analyze the effect of Medigap on mortality by examining the effect of the instrument
on the cross-sectional age distribution of Medicare beneficiaries. If Medigap reduces mortality,
then higher leave-out costs, and the corresponding lower Medigap take-up, should lead to earlier
death, shifting the age distribution in an inward direction.
Figure G1 displays the impact of a $10 increase in leave-out costs on the cross-sectional age
distribution. Solid lines show the empirical CDF of age. Dashed lines show the estimated CDF
under a $10 increase in leave-out costs. These CDFs are constructed using the coefficient on leave0 γ +µ
out costs from regressions of the form Pr(Ageijk < X ) = γc Leave-out costs jk + γk + Xijk
X
ijk
for X = 70, 75, . . . 100. Dotted lines show the 95% confidence intervals of these estimates. Overall,
the plots show that the instrument has no detectable effect on the age distribution of Medicare
beneficiaries. Although this evidence is consistent with Medigap having no mortality effect, our
research design does not have the power to detect small to moderate effects on mortality .

0

0

.2

.2

.4

.4

F(Age)

F(Age)
.6

.6

.8

.8

1

1

Figure G1: Effect on Cross-Sectional Age Distribution

70

80

90

100

Age

70

80

90
Age

(a) Men

(b) Women

Notes: Figure shows the impact of a $10 increase in leave-out costs on the cross-sectional age distribution.
Solid lines show the empirical CDF of age. Dashed lines show the estimated CDF under a $10 increase in
leave-out costs. These CDFs are constructed using the coefficient on leave-out costs from regressions of the
0 γ + µ for X = 70, 75, . . . 100. Dotted lines show the
form Pr(Age < X ) = γc Leave-out costs jk + γk + Xijk
X
ijk
95% confidence intervals of these estimates. This analysis draws on data from the pooled 1999-2005 CMS
Denominator File. This analysis uses the baseline sample described in Panel B of Table 2 (N=130,895,953 for
all years). Standard errors are clustered at the HSA level. Dollar values are inflation-adjusted to 2005 using
the CPI-U.

H

Robustness to Level of Clustering

Table H1 below displays our main utilization and payment regressions along with standard errors
utilizing various levels of clustering: HSA and State, HSA, State, HSA-State, 5-digit Zipcode, and
individual. For each specification, the table notes the cluster-adjusted standard error and p-value,
along with the number of clusters. As expected, the precision of our estimates goes up as we
cluster on finer levels.
It is important to note that there is a trade-off between clustering at different levels: higher
levels of clustering allow for more flexible correlation among observations, while lower levels of
55

100

Table H1: Payment and Utilization Regressions: Robustness to Alternative Level of Clustering

Dependent Variable

Utilization
Part B Events
Imaging Events
Testing Events
Total RVUs
Part A Days
Part A Stays
SNF Days
SNF Stays
Payment
Medicare Payments
Part A Payments
Part B Payments
SNF Payments

Number of Clusters

Est
(1)

Baseline Cluster Level
HSA
Std. Err.
P-Value
(2)
(3)

Individual
Std. Err.
P-Value
(4)
(5)

Leave-Out Costs (Hundreds)
Level of Clustering for Standard Errors
Alternative Cluster Level
5-digit Zipcode
HSA-State
State
Std. Err.
P-Value
Std. Err.
P-Value
Std. Err.
P-Value
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)

Multiway: HSA, State
Std. Err.
P-Value
(12)
(13)

-0.418
-0.081
-0.409
-1.290
-0.062
-0.00395
0.012
0.00026

(0.181)
(0.032)
(0.147)
(0.496)
(0.019)
(0.00214)
(0.020)
(0.00085)

0.021
0.012
0.005
0.009
0.001
0.065
0.552
0.761

(0.029)
(0.005)
(0.019)
(0.188)
(0.006)
(0.00072)
(0.008)
(0.00030)

<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
0.111
0.396

(0.107)
(0.018)
(0.099)
(0.289)
(0.011)
(0.00129)
(0.014)
(0.00055)

<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
0.002
0.406
0.640

(0.154)
(0.027)
(0.125)
(0.410)
(0.016)
(0.00182)
(0.017)
(0.00070)

0.006
0.003
0.001
0.002
<0.001
0.030
0.492
0.713

(0.157)
(0.027)
(0.135)
(0.342)
(0.017)
(0.00168)
(0.024)
(0.00083)

0.011
0.005
0.004
<0.001
0.001
0.023
0.622
0.759

(0.235)
(0.048)
(0.177)
(0.629)
(0.024)
(0.00270)
(0.032)
(0.00120)

0.082
0.100
0.026
0.046
0.015
0.150
0.708
0.831

-67.0
-47.6
-21.8
3.44

(33.1)
(22.8)
(15.5)
(5.3)

0.043
0.037
0.159
0.513

(10.4)
(7.5)
(4.9)
(2.0)

<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
0.083

(19.1)
(13.5)
(8.2)
(3.6)

<0.001
<0.001
0.007
0.343

(27.8)
(19.6)
(12.4)
(4.6)

0.016
0.015
0.079
0.455

(26.1)
(16.6)
(12.4)
(6.3)

0.014
0.006
0.085
0.585

(42.0)
(28.9)
(17.1)
(8.5)

0.117
0.107
0.209
0.688

3,121

21,989,766

31,003

3,352

45

3,121 and 45

Notes: Table displays estimates from regressions of Medicare utilization and Medicare payments on leave-out costs,
HSA fixed effects, and controls for age, sex, race, health risk, and GAF/OWI adjustment factors (see Section 3 Equation
4). Each row in the table above displays estimates for a different dependent variable. Columns present standard errors
(and associated p-values) with alternative levels of clustering. This analysis draws on data from the pooled 1999-2005
CMS Beneficiary Summary File, CMS Denominator File, and CMS Carrier File (for RVU analysis). This analysis uses
the baseline sample described in Panel B of Table 2 (N=23,708,295 for the RVU measure; N=130,895,953 for all other
measures). Dollar values are inflation-adjusted to 2005 using the CPI-U.

clustering may be more reliable in finite sample with finitely many clusters. We use HSA-level
clustering in the baseline specifications reported in the main text (also reported in columns 2 and
3 of Table H1). There are a few reasons for this choice. First, HSA is arguably the most important
level of clustering, because individuals within an HSA see a common set of medical providers
and there is a well-established literature documenting the importance of medical providers as a
determinant of medical spending (e.g., Finkelstein, Gentzkow and Williams (2016), Wennberg,
Fisher and Skinner (2002)). Second, the HSA-level nests the level of the variation of the leaveout costs instrument, as our instrument is constructed at the HSA-State level. Third, based on
our analysis in the table above, clustering at the HSA level is generally more conservative than
clustering at the state level.

I
I.1

Definition of Urgent Procedures
Betos Code Characterization from Clemens and Gottlieb (2013)

We follow the categorization used by Clemens and Gottlieb (2014) to group Part B RVUs by BETOS
code to determine which procedures are for less discretionary care. Specifically, we define urgent
procedures as Part B claims associated with the following BETOS codes:
• P1A: Major procedure—breast
• P1B: Major procedure—colectomy
• P1C: Major procedure—cholecystectomy
56

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

I.2

P1D: Major procedure—turp
P1F: Major procedure—hysterectomy
P1G: Major procedure—other
P2B: Major procedure, cardiovascular—aneurysm repair
P3A: Major procedure, orthopedic—hip fracture repair
P4A: Eye procedure—corneal transplant
P4C: Eye procedure—retinal detachment
P5C: Ambulatory procedure—groin hernia repair
P7A: Oncology—radiation therapy
P7B: Oncology—other
P9A: Dialysis services

Weekend Versus Weekday Daily Frequency Characterization from Card, Dobkin
and Maestas (2009)

Card, Dobkin and Maestas (2009) characterize urgent hospitalizations by inspecting the weekend
versus weekday daily frequency of ICD-9 codes for hospital admissions originating in the ER. We
consider two definitions urgent hospitalizations based on this characterization. For the first definition, we define a procedure as urgent if it is listed in Table I of Card, Dobkin and Maestas (2009) as
one of the ten highest frequency urgent ICD-9 diagnoses based on their data and characterization.
Below is the list of procedures that this first definition encompasses.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Obstructive chronic bronchitis with acute exacerbation
Respiratory failure
AMI of other inferior wall (1st episode)
AMI of other anterior wall (1st episode)
Intracerebral hemorrhage
Chronic airway obstruction, n.e.c.
Fracture of neck of femur intertrochanteric section
Cerebral artery occlusion, unspecified
Convulsions unknown cause
Asthma, unspecified with status asthmaticus

For the second definition, we apply the same procedure as Card, Dobkin and Maestas (2009) to
the 2002 CMS MedPAR data to identify urgent procedures. Specifically, we construct the fraction
of hospitalizations originating from the ER during the weekend for each ICD-9 code. We then
define a hospitalization as urgent if the T-stat on this fraction being equal to 72 is less than or equal
0.3713 (the 10th percentile of the distribution of T-stats).59 Below are the descriptions of the ten
highest frequency ICD-9 codes that are characterized as urgent through this second methodology:
•
•
•
•
•
•

Escherichia coli infections
Paralytic ileus
Home accidents (Accident in home)
Acute pancreatitis
Other abnormal blood chemistry (Abn blood chemistry NEC)
Diverticulitis of colon (without mention of hemorrhage) (Dvrtcli colon w/o hmrhg)

59 Note

that this definition of urgent procedures is more conservative than that in Card, Dobkin and Maestas (2009).
Card, Dobkin and Maestas (2009) define a procedure as urgent if the T-stat is less than 0.965.

57

•
•
•
•

J

Infection with microorganisms resistant to penicillins (Inf mcrg rstn pncllins)
Benign neoplasm of colon (Benign neoplasm lg bowel)
Other closed transcervical fracture of neck of femur (Fx femur intrcaps NEC-cl)
Acute myocardial infarction of other inferior wall

Robustness to Spatial Trends in Utilization

Many determinants of health care utilization vary continuously over geography, including provider
choice, environmental factors, and behavioral factors. If these determinants of health care utilization are correlated with the instrument, our identification assumption will not hold. We address
this concern in three ways. First, we re-estimate the baseline specification, restricting the sample of individuals within cross-border HSAs to be those within a very short distance of the state
boundary. The idea behind this sample restriction is that if there are spatial trends in health care
utilization (driven by characteristics such as provider choice and demographics), then those individuals who live closest to one another are the best controls for one another. Table J1 reports
the results. The point estimates remain statistically significant and similar in magnitude when we
concentrate on the sample within 30 kilometers of state boundaries.60,61 This is reassuring as this
restricted sample contains individuals who are most similar to one another in terms of continuously trending unobservables.
Second, we verify that our estimates are robust to spatially trending omitted variables by
estimating a specification with carefully defined placebo borders. Specifically, we partition each
HSA-state segment in cross-border HSAs into two areas: the border area within 20 km of the state
boundary and the near border area consisting of the remainder of the HSA-state. The placebo border
is then the division between these two areas, meaning that placebo border is entirely internal to
the state in question. We then assign the border area a counterfactual instrument equal to the
instrument of the neighboring state, while the near border area has the true value of the instrument
as in our baseline estimation. With this newly defined instrument determined by the placebo
border, we then run the same regressions as in the baseline specification replacing the HSA fixed
effects with HSA-state fixed effects. The results are reported in Table J1. If the baseline results
are not picking up the causal effect of Medigap but instead reflecting unrelated spatial trends in
medical spending, then one would expect the coefficient from this specification to be the same as
in our baseline specification. In contrast to the significant results in our baseline estimation, we see
that the coefficient in this specification is statistically indistinguishable from zero (with a p-value
of 0.54). This test reveals that our estimated effect of Medigap is not simply reflecting unrelated,
continuous spatial trends in medical utilization.
Third, we evaluate the robustness of our estimates to an alternative leave-out costs measure
that drops individuals in a “buffer zone” around the cross-border HSAs. The Dartmouth Atlas
aggregates HSAs into larger HRRs based on markets for tertiary medical care (specifically, where
patients were referred for major cardiovascular surgical procedures and for neurosurgery). Each
HRR is composed of approximately 10 HSAs. Our baseline leave-out costs instrument was created
using un-covered costs of individuals outside of the cross-border HSA but within the state. We
create an alternative leave-out costs measure based on individuals outside of the HRR of the cross60 The sample used for this specification drops individuals in cross-border HSAs that reside more than 30 km from the
border based on ZIP code centroid. These specifications still include all individuals who do not reside in cross-border
HSAs, as these individuals continue to assist in identifying the coefficients of the control variables.
61 Within cross-border HSAs, the mean distance from a ZIP code centroid (our most disaggregated measure of location) to the state boundary is 25 km and the median distance is 16 km.

58

Table J1: Robustness Checks
Leave-Out Costs (Hundreds)
Est
Std. Err.
P-Value

Mean of
Dep. Var.

Implied Medigap Effect
Level
%

Baseline Specification
Medicare Payments

-67.02

(33.11)

0.043

6,291

1396.25

22.2%

Alternative Specifications (Dep Var is Medicare Spending)
Census ZIP Code-Level Controls Included
Region-Year Fixed Effects Included

-59.96
-55.54

(30.16)
(31.74)

0.047
0.085

6,291
6,291

1249.09
1157.02

19.9%
18.4%

Unaffected Procedures
Urgent RVUs (Clemens & Gottlieb Def'n)
Urgent Admissions (Card, Dobkin, & Maestas Def'n 1)
Urgent Admissions (Card, Dobkin, & Maestas Def'n 2)

5.44E-02
-1.31E-03
-6.89E-04

(6.76E-02)
(1.03E-03)
(1.03E-03)

0.421
0.201
0.505

4.274
0.077
0.125

-1.13
0.03
0.01

-26.5%
35.4%
11.5%

0.03
0.01
0.01
0.02

(0.08)
(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.06)

0.65
0.23
0.60
0.75

0.364
0.091
0.528
1.968

-0.71
-0.20
-0.21
-0.40

-196.3%
-225.3%
-39.5%
-20.5%

-70.62
-14.27

(32.25)
(22.97)

0.029
0.535

6,291
6,291

1471.15
297.23

23.4%
4.7%

Unaffected Individuals
Non-Elderly Adults in NHIS
Hospital Days
Hospital Stays
Physician Office Visits (Indicator for ≥ 2)
Self-Reported Health
Robustness to Spatial Trends (Dep Var is Medicare Spending)
Restricted to ZIP Codes Within 30 km of Border
Placebo Borders

Notes: Table displays estimates from regressions of spending and utilization measures on leave-out costs, HSA fixed
effects, and controls for age, sex, race, health risk, and GAF/OWI adjustment factors. Each row displays the results from
a separate regression. The implied Medigap effect is calculated by dividing the estimate by the coefficient on leave-out
costs from the baseline demand specification. This analysis draws on data from the pooled 1999-2005 CMS Beneficiary
Summary File, CMS Denominator File, CMS Carrier File (“Urgent RVU" analysis), NHIS ("Unaffected Individuals"
analysis), and CMS MedPAR (“Urgent Admissions" analysis). Aside from the NHIS, for each of these datasets we use
a sample definition analogous to the baseline sample described in Panel B of Table 2. The "Unaffected Individuals"
analysis utilizing the NHIS data focuses on the sample of non-elderly adults, excluding those with Medicare coverage.
Standard errors are clustered at HSA level except for the "Placebo Borders" specification in which standard errors are
clustered at the HSA-state level (see text for a full description). Dollar values are inflation-adjusted to 2005 using the
CPI-U.

border HSA but still within the state. This restricts us to using variation that is geographically
further away of the HSA of interest.
Table J2 reproduces the baseline utilization and spending regressions using this alternative
instrument definition. The implied Medigap effects are broadly similar to those estimated using
our baseline instrument. For instance, using this alternative instrument, we find that Medigap
raises total Medicare payments by $1,822, which is very similar to the $1,396 baseline effect (Table
7). Note that while the alternative instrument reduces concerns about bias from spatial correlation,
dropping these individuals reduces the power of our instrument, inflating the standard errors.

59

Table J2: Robustness: Alternative Instrument Definition

Dependent Variable

Leave-Out Costs (Hundreds)
Est
Std. Err.
P-Value

Mean of
Dep. Var.

Implied Medigap Effect
Level
%

N

Medicare Payments
HSA defn
HRR defn

-67.0
-87.4

(33.1)
(68.6)

0.043
0.203

6,291
2,648

1,396
1,822

22.2%
68.8%

130,895,953
130,895,953

Part B Payments
HSA defn
HRR defn

-21.8
-41.0

(15.5)
(24.8)

0.159
0.097

2,648
2,648

454
855

17.2%
32.3%

130,895,953
130,895,953

Part A Payments
HSA defn
HRR defn

-47.6
-43.9

(22.8)
(48.4)

0.037
0.365

3,021
3,021

992
915

32.8%
30.3%

130,895,953
130,895,953

HSA defn
HRR defn

-1.29
-1.85

(0.50)
(1.16)

0.009
0.112

70.77
70.77

26.88
38.50

38.0%
54.4%

23,708,295
23,708,295

Part B Events
HSA defn
HRR defn

-0.418
-0.859

(0.181)
(0.337)

0.021
0.011

27.59
27.59

8.71
17.89

31.6%
64.8%

130,895,953
130,895,953

-0.062
-0.081

(0.019)
(0.046)

0.001
0.079

2.21
2.21

1.29
1.69

58.6%
76.6%

130,895,953
130,895,953

Total RVU

Part A Days
HSA defn
HRR defn

Notes: Table displays estimates from regressions of Medicare payments on leave-out costs, HSA fixed effects, and
controls for age, sex, race, health risk, and GAF/OWI adjustment factors (see Section 3, Equation 4). Each row displays
the results from a separate regression. The rows indicate whether the leave-out costs instrument is defined at the HSA
or HRR level. The HRR-level first stage ranges from 0.24 to 0.25 across specifications (Appendix Table C2) and we
scale the HRR leave-out costs coefficient estimates by 4 to make them comparable to the HSA-level estimates, which
have first-stage of 0.94 to 1.1 across specifications. The implied Medigap effect is calculated by dividing the estimate by
the coefficient on leave-out costs from the baseline demand specification. This analysis draws on data from the pooled
1999-2005 CMS Beneficiary Summary File and CMS Denominator File. This analysis uses the baseline sample described
in Panel B of Table 2 (N=130,895,953). All dependent variables are top-coded at $64,000. Standard errors are clustered
at the HSA level. Dollar values are inflation-adjusted to 2005 using the CPI-U.

K

Robustness of Policy Counterfactuals

Table K1 examines the sensitivity of our estimates of the budgetary effect of a tax on Medigap
premiums. To examine robustness to heterogeneity in the price-elasticity of demand, rows of
Table K1 re-calculate the effect of a 15% tax using the different demand estimates from Table 5. We
find that across these different estimates, the total budgetary savings to Medicare range from 3.9%
to 4.8%. We also show standard errors for each specification. For our baseline estimate of 4.3%
total savings, the standard error is 1.7 percentage points.

60

Table K1: Tax Counterfactuals: Robustness to Alternative Demand Estimates
Tax

Demand Parameter Used

15% Supp Cov, Combined Hsa
(baseline)
15% Supp Cov, MCBS Hsa
15% Supp Cov, NHIS Hsa
15% Medigap, MCBS Hsa
15% Supp Cov, Combined Hrr
15% Supp Cov, MCBS Hrr
15% Supp Cov, NHIS Hrr
15% Medigap, MCBS Hrr

Medigap
Market Share
35%
30%
40%
26%
38%
30%
46%
24%

Tax Revenue
(per Beneficiary)
Estimate
SE
$94
$16
$81
$107
$69
$100
$79
$122
$64

$27
$18
$43
$11
$19
$11
$35

Medicare Savings
Total Budgetary Impact
(per Beneficiary)
(per Beneficiary)
Estimate
SE
Estimate ($) Estimate (%) SE ($)
$179
$88
$273
4.3%
$104
$179
$179
$179
$179
$179
$179
$179

$88
$88
$88
$88
$88
$88
$88

$260
$286
$248
$279
$258
$301
$243

4.1%
4.5%
3.9%
4.4%
4.1%
4.8%
3.9%

$115
$107
$131
$100
$107
$99
$123

SE (%)
1.7%
1.8%
1.7%
2.1%
1.6%
1.7%
1.6%
2.0%

Notes: The first column lists the tax as a percentage of the $1,779 average Medigap premium. The second column
describes the demand estimate from Table 5 that is used in the calculation, assuming full pass-through of the tax. The
linear demand curve used in these calculations has a slope equal to ∂qijk /∂Leave-Out costs jk (as the coefficient on leaveout costs in the premium regressions is approximately one) and an intercept pinned down by the equilibrium average
price and quantity (p=1,779 and q=0.48). The remaining columns list the tax revenue, cost savings from Medigap
dis-enrollment, and total budgetary impact, respectively. These results are based on the estimated $1,396 Medigap
externality. To calculate the standard error on the total budgetary savings, we first separately calculate the standard
error on the tax revenue (from the corresponding demand estimate) and the standard error from the Medicare cost
savings from Medigap dis-enrollment (from the reduced form cost estimates). We then obtain the standard error on the
total savings using the Delta Method assuming no covariance between the demand and cost estimates. Dollar values
are inflation-adjusted to 2005 using the CPI-U.

61

