                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




DISENTANGLING FINANCIAL CONSTRAINTS, PRECAUTIONARY SAVINGS, AND MYOPIA:
        HOUSEHOLD BEHAVIOR SURROUNDING FEDERAL TAX RETURNS

                                              Brian Baugh
                                           Itzhak Ben-David
                                             Hoonsuk Park

                                         Working Paper 19783
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19783


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       January 2014




  We thank the company for providing the data set. We thank Sumit Agarwal, René Stulz, Michael Palumbo,
  Manuel Adelino, Andrew Chen, and the participants of the conferences and seminars at the Cleveland
  Federal Reserve Bank, Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank, and The Ohio State University for helpful
  comments. We are grateful for the financial support of the NBER Household Finance Grant. This work
  was supported in part by an allocation of computing time from the Ohio Supercomputer Center. Ben-David
  gratefully acknowledges the financial support of the Dice Center at the Fisher College of Business
  and the Neil Klatskin Chair in Finance and Real Estate. The views expressed herein are those of the
  authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

  NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
  reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
  NBER publications.

  © 2014 by Brian Baugh, Itzhak Ben-David, and Hoonsuk Park. All rights reserved. Short sections
  of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
  credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Disentangling Financial Constraints, Precautionary Savings, and Myopia: Household Behavior
Surrounding Federal Tax Returns
Brian Baugh, Itzhak Ben-David, and Hoonsuk Park
NBER Working Paper No. 19783
January 2014
JEL No. D10,D11,D12

                                               ABSTRACT

We explore household consumption surrounding federal tax returns filings and refunds receipt to test
various theories of consumption. Because uncertainty regarding the refund is resolved at filing, precautionary
savings theory predicts an increase in consumption at this date. Contrary to this prediction, we find
that households generally do not increase consumption at filing. Following the receipt of the refunds,
consumption of both durables and nondurables increases dramatically and then decays quickly. Our
results show that households, on average, are financially constrained, exhibit myopic behavior, and
do not respond to precautionary savings motives.


Brian Baugh                                           Hoonsuk Park
Fisher College of Business                            Fisher College of Business
The Ohio State University                             The Ohio State University
bkbaugh@gmail.com                                     park_1458@fisher.osu.edu

Itzhak Ben-David
Associate professor of finance and
Neil Klatskin Chair in Finance and Real Estate
Fisher College of Business
The Ohio State University
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
bendavid@fisher.osu.edu
1.     Introduction

       Over the last three decades, several theories of household consumption have been
proposed to explain the high sensitivity of consumption to cash flows found in many empirical
studies. Specifically, the modal finding is that households increase their consumption following
the receipt of anticipated and unanticipated cash flows. This result contradicts the standard
framework of the Life-Cycle/Permanent Income Hypothesis (LCPIH) (Modigliani and Brumberg
1954, Friedman 1954, Modigliani 1971, Hall 1978), which posits that households should exhibit
no reaction to anticipated cash flows and smooth the consumption reaction of unanticipated cash
flows over the lifetime. The proposed theories introduce frictions of different kinds (Jappelli and
Pistaferri 2010): financial constraints that prevent households from borrowing against future
income to smooth consumption (Hayashi 1985, Zeldes 1989, Jappelli, Pischke, and Souleles
1998), income uncertainty which induces precautionary savings (“buffer stock”) and subsequent
high marginal propensities to consume (Carroll 1997), and myopia (Keynes 1936, Flavin 1984,
Campbell and Mankiw 1990, Laibson 1997). Although these theories rely on entirely different
sets of assumptions and frictions, their empirical predictions regarding the high sensitivity of
consumption to cash are similar and therefore are difficult to disentangle. To determine which
theory best describes the data, a new empirical setting must be explored which is different from
the status quo of measuring a consumption response to the receipt of anticipated or unanticipated
cash flows.

       This study provides a novel empirical design that allows us to examine three contrasting
explanations for the high sensitivity of household consumption to cash flows: financial
constraints, precautionary savings, and myopia. Our data allow us to cleanly identify the date
when information about future tax refunds is conveyed to households and the date when the
actual tax refund is received. The information received by the household when it files for taxes
reduces its future income uncertainty, but the household’s income does not change until it
receives the refund at a later date. The theories of financial constraints, precautionary savings,
and myopia have different predictions about how households will behave around these dates, and
our study design allows us to empirically test and compare the three theories.

       Our initial dataset includes detailed bank account and credit card information for
approximately 500,000 households. It includes transaction-level income and consumption data.


                                                1
Using this large dataset, we identify a subset of households that use tax filing servicers such as
TurboTax. We call the filing date the information date. For this subset of households, we also
identify the date they received their tax refund from the federal government. We call the refund
receipt date the cash flow date. After applying various filters, we have complete tax return filing
and tax refund receipt information for 27,591 households.

        We begin by analyzing the consumption response of households surrounding both the tax
filing and tax receipt events.1 At the tax filing date, households learn how large their refund will
be. Since tax refunds are both relatively large (e.g., median refund is 4.4% of annual income) and
relatively uncertain, this provides a novel test for the precautionary savings theory. Figure 1
shows that households facing various sources of income uncertainty will hold buffer stock to
provide a cushion for bad times, such as during periods of unemployment, when marginal utility
is high. Since tax refunds constitute a large source of income uncertainty (and even potentially a
negative income, unlike paychecks), precautionary savings theory predicts an increase in
consumption at the filing date, on average, due to the reduction in income uncertainty.

        Our empirical analysis, however, shows that there is little consumption response to the
reduction of uncertainty at the filing date. Consumers do not use existing cash for consumption
following the filing date, as the theory predicts. Instead, we observe an increase in purchases via
credit cards, providing evidence that households in our data set appear to be financially
constrained.

        Next, we examine the consumption response of households to the actual cash refund.
This event allows us to separate the LCPIH with financial constraints from myopia. According to
the latter, households should adjust their consumption upwards in a permanent fashion. 2
Conversely, myopic behavior should express itself in a short burst of consumption since myopic
households do not plan well for the future. We find a strong immediate consumption response for
both durables (retail purchases and total credit card purchases) and nondurables (restaurants and
Automatic Teller Machines (ATMs)), which decays rapidly over the following weeks. The data,
therefore, is consistent with myopic behavior as opposed to LCPIH with financial constraints.


1
  Several previous studies documented high sensitivity of consumption to government payments: e.g., Souleles
(1999), Johnson, Parker, and Souleles (2006), Agarwal, Liu, and Souleles (2007), Agarwal and Qian (2013).
2
  Lumpy consumption (non-persistent consumption) of durables is within the realm of rationality, but lumpy
consumption of nondurables is generally not.

                                                     2
       Overall, the household consumption patterns surrounding tax filings and tax refund that
we observe reject the buffer-stock theory and provide support to myopic behavior of households
that are financially constrained.



2      Hypotheses Development

2.1    General Framework

       The framework in this paper is a setting in which households form expectations of future
cash flows based on previous cash flows. They are fully informed about the forthcoming cash
flow—their tax refund—and they later on receive it. We explore the consumption reaction
around two dates: The filing date is our information date, and the tax refund receipt is our cash
flow date.

       The base case model for the consumption reaction of households to new information and
the receipt of cash flows is based on the Euler equation test of the Life-Cycle/Permanent Income
Hypothesis formulated by Hall (1978). In this section, we rely on the description provided by
Jappelli and Pistaferri (2010). According to the theory, households optimize their consumption
given the information known about future cash flows. Households smooth consumption so that
the marginal utility from consumption in the current period equals the marginal utility in the next
period, assuming the interest rate is equal to the intertemporal discount rate. We notate this using
the following Euler equation:

                                       (     )           (   )

       The main prediction of the LCPIH theory is that households adjust their consumption
following income changes. The adjustment of consumption is permanent, as households
consume their expected permanent income each period. Permanent and one-time changes in
income alike will therefore be smoothed over the lifetime of households, but the effect of
transitory changes in income should be negligible.

       Empirical studies examining household behavior surrounding anticipated increases in
income have largely failed to support the predictions of the LCPIH model. (e.g., Bodkin 1959,
Parker 1999, Poterba 1988, Souleles 1999, Gertler and Gruber 2002, Stephens 2003, Stephens
2006, Aaronson, Agarwal and French 2012, Agarwal, Bubna and Lipscomb 2013) Several

                                                 3
studies document strong deviations from the theory, showing that household consumption is
highly sensitive to cash flows. For example, Zeldes (1989) finds that the aggregate sensitivity of
consumption to income increases with household financial constraints. In contradiction to the
LCPIH, Shea (1995) finds excess sensitivity to cash flows, which he attributes to loss-aversion
rather than liquidity constraints. Souleles (1999) uses tax refunds to test the LCPIH and finds
mixed evidence on financial constraints. More recently, Agarwal, Liu, and Souleles (2007)
examine credit card data to see how households used the 2001 federal income tax rebates. They
find that, consistent with the LCPIH, households initially saved some of the rebate but later spent
more, which is inconsistent with the LCPIH. Cole, Thompson, and Tufano (2008) find that
financially constrained households spend their tax refunds more quickly than less constrained
households. The common result in these studies is that households increase consumption
following the receipt of positive cash flows and that the rate of increase is higher among
financially constrained households.

       There are three common, non-mutually exclusive explanations for the high sensitivity of
household consumption to cash flows: financial constraints, precautionary savings, and myopia.
The first explanation is that households would like to behave according to the LCPIH, but
financial constraints prevent them from doing so. Most empirical studies test this explanation
using Zeldes’ (1989) sample splitting approach, where the sample is split into constrained and
unconstrained subsamples. The financial constraints explanation is supported if the LCPIH holds
for the unconstrained but not for the constrained subsample. Zeldes (1989), and many following
papers such as Agarwal, Liu, and Souleles (2007), and Agarwal and Qian (2013) find that
financially constrained households have a stronger consumption reaction to cash flows.

       The second explanation is that households are impatient and therefore would like to
consume now rather than waiting for the future. At the same time, they face uncertainty about
their future income and thus engage in precautionary savings (“buffer stock model”; Carroll
1992, 1997). As with financial constraints, consumption is predicted to increase when income
increases. The theory is difficult to separate from the financial constraints hypothesis (Jappelli
and Pistaferri 2010) because both theories predict similar consumption patterns given realized
cash flows. Blundell, Low, and Preston (2013) posit that consumption growth should increase
with future consumption uncertainty. Jappelli and Pistaferri (2000) test this prediction using
Italian survey data and find support for it.

                                                4
       The third explanation is that households, regardless of whether they are unconstrained,
are myopic and do not behave as the LCPIH prescribes. In other words, households are current
income spenders: whenever a cash flow arrives, it is consumed. This hypothesis, first proposed
by Keynes in 1936, has been further developed by Flavin (1984), Campbell and Mankiw (1990),
and Laibson (1997). Several studies have indirectly tested this prediction using household-level
data. For example, Shea (1995) finds that households show a higher sensitivity to income
declines than increases, which seems to support loss-aversion over financial constraints. Zhang
(2013) finds that households that are compensated on a biweekly schedule spend their occasional
third monthly paycheck on durable goods. She concludes that households use heuristics for
planning consumption.



2.2    Using Information and Cash Flow Dates to Separate the Theories

       We argue that one way to disentangle the theories of high cash flow sensitivity is to
observe the consumption reactions around information and cash flow dates. When households
file their taxes, they become fully informed about whether they will receive a refund and the
amount of the refund (or the amount they owe). This allows us to identify changes in uncertainty
and to pinpoint households that anticipate a positive change in income.



2.2.1 The Information Event

       Under all scenarios presented in Section 2.2, households are informed at the filing date
with certainty about the cash flow that they will receive in several weeks. If households are
financially constrained or myopic, they cannot react to this information because they do not have
access to the cash. Households that have access to short-term credit facilities, such as credit
cards, are predicted to use them to finance consumption until the cash arrives.

       More importantly, the information households receive on the filing date provides
interesting variation in the uncertainty of future income that we use to test the precautionary
savings theory. Compared to paychecks, tax refunds represent a relatively uncertain source of
future income, due both to the complexity and the time variation of the U.S. tax code. The
information date resolves uncertainty for the current year’s tax refund and, thus, reduces the


                                                 5
optimal level of precautionary savings. The median tax refund is 4.4% of a household’s annual
income, representing a significant reduction of uncertainty for the household. Precautionary
savings theory predicts that households will consume upon resolving uncertainty—or in our case,
when they file their taxes. This prediction is a direct application of the theory and is independent
of the households’ expectations. As long as there is some uncertainty about the amount of the
household’s tax refund, resolving it (i.e., filing) should result in a positive average consumption
response following the information date.

       We thus have three hypotheses surrounding household behavior at the time of filing:

       H1a: Financial Constraints. Households are financially constrained and therefore
       cannot respond to the tax filing information. Those who have access to short-term credit
       use it to accelerate consumption of the forthcoming cash.

       H1b: Myopia. Myopic households do not react to the tax filing information. Those who
       have access to short-term credit use it to accelerate consumption of the forthcoming cash.

       H1c: Precautionary Savings. Households liquidate a portion of their buffer stock and
       consume it as a response to the reduction in uncertainty.



2.2.2 The Cash Flow Event

       Next, we examine predictions for the consumption effects on the cash flow date.
Households that are financially constrained cannot respond when they learn that they will be
getting a tax refund (unless their constraints can be temporarily alleviated) and therefore increase
consumption when the cash flow is received. This increase in consumption is expected to be
smoothed, and thus we expect to observe a persistent increase in consumption following receipt
of the cash. Consistent with this prediction, Hsieh (2003) finds that Alaskan households smooth
consumption surrounding the receipt of the anticipated annual oil dividend.

       Myopic households act differently on the cash flow date. They increase consumption,
though only temporarily. Under the current income version of myopic behavior put forth in
Campbell and Mankiw (1990) or Flavin (1984), consumers make spending decisions based on
current income rather than permanent income. Under behavioral theories such as the hyperbolic
discounting hypothesis of Laibson (1997), households consume immediately due to the bias

                                                 6
toward the present. Therefore we expect households to show a sharp jump in consumption after
the receipt of cash, but soon thereafter to revert back to their normal level of spending.

       Precautionary savings theory also predicts that households will consume a portion of the
refunds they receive. As Carroll (1992) points out, consumption will be less depressed by
precautionary savings when wealth increases via income receipt. Hence, we should observe an
increase in consumption following the increase in income. However, the prediction about the
persistence of consumption predicted by the precautionary savings theory is unclear because
households have characteristics that push in opposite directions: they are prudent but at the same
time impatient.

       We have three primary hypotheses in regard to household behavior at the refund receipt:

       H2a: Financial Constraints. Financially constrained households will increase
       consumption in a permanent manner.

       H2b: Myopia. Myopic households will increase consumption temporarily, because they
       are either current income spenders or hyperbolic discounters.

       H2c: Precautionary Savings. Households motivated by precautionary savings will
       increase their consumption following the cash receipt.



3.     Economic Setting and Identification

3.1    Economic Setting

       The U.S. government regularly withholds income taxes from the paychecks of each
member of a household. Typically, the government withholdings are more than the income tax
obligation of the household, resulting in a tax refund during the following calendar year.
Households are required by law to file a federal income tax return by mid-April every year, and
they often use online tax preparation companies such as TurboTax to calculate and report the
amount of income taxes they owe to the government. Through this filing process, households
learn whether they owe additional taxes beyond what was already withheld during the year or
whether they will receive refunds. There is often a several-weeks delay between the tax filing




                                                  7
date and receipt of the tax refund.3 This creates a novel setting in which the amount of the tax
refund is known ahead of time but is not received until the government deposits the refund in the
household’s bank account.

        Although tax filings can lead to positive or negative payments, we limit our analysis to
positive refunds only. Following Altonji and Siow (1987) and Shea (1995), we expect to see an
asymmetric response to negative versus positive cash flows with respect to financial constraints.
However, we do not include them in our analysis because households with negative tax
payments are likely to be under-withholding their income taxes or have realized significant
investment gains and thus are likely to be very different in tax sophistication or wealth. Also,
relatively few of the households in our sample had a negative filing (about 5% of the full sample).



3.2     Identification

        We perform the analysis using a difference-in-differences methodology in which we
measure the consumption effects around the tax filing and tax refund events. As described in
Section 3.3, our data consist of household-day observations of spending by consumption
category. All households in our final data set file tax returns and receive tax refunds. The
identification is achieved from the variation in the filing date and the refund date. The basic
empirical specification that we pursue is:


                                        ∑           (              )     ∑           (                )




        The sample that we use is at the household-day level. We use four categories of
consumption: restaurants (via credit or debit cards), retail (via credit or debit cards), ATM
withdrawals, and total credit card purchases. We select these categories since they can be well
identified in our data based on text searches. In addition, restaurants and retail represent different
levels of durability (restaurant spending are non-durable goods, and retail is typically durable
goods). ATM and credit cards represent different types of method of payments. While the first

3
 In 2012, the IRS indicated that 90% refunds were processed within 21 days of filing: http://www.irs.gov/uac/2012-
Tax-Season-Refund-Frequently-Asked-Questions.

                                                        8
two categories are mutually exclusive, total credit card purchases includes also some of the
spending on restaurants and retail purchases.

       The dependent variable is the daily spending in each consumption category. The
independent variables of interest are the filing and refund week dummies. These indicator
variables receive a value of 1 if the observation is at week k relative to the filing or refund
events, and 0 otherwise. In addition, we include calendar day fixed effects and household fixed
effects. These fixed effects capture the average consumption on a particular calendar day (to
remove seasonal effects) and the average household daily level. Hence, the variation that is
captured in the filing week dummies and the refund week dummies represent the average excess
consumption relative to the average daily consumption amounts and the average household
consumption amounts. We include two-week dummies for the weeks prior to the filing event and
four-week dummies following the event. In a similar fashion, we include two-week dummies for
the weeks prior to the refund event, and 12-week dummies for the weeks following the refund
event. The timing of the events is shown in Figure 2.

       Our empirical analysis is robust to varying consumption patterns across weekdays.
Because we are able to pinpoint the exact dates of the filing and refund and because consumption
has a strong weekly pattern (e.g., weekend and weekday consumption is different), our time
intervals of interest are seven days long, measured around the dates of filing or refund. For
simplicity, we refer to the seven-day intervals as “weeks,” e.g., when discussing the consumption
in the seven days (week) following the receipt of the tax refund.



4.     Data

4.1    Data Source

       We use household-level transaction data obtained from a company that provides online
account aggregation services to households located in the United States. Through this service
households are able to link accounts (401k, IRA, checking, savings, credit card, etc.) from other
institutions and aggregate account balances and transactions into a single location, regardless of
how many institutions the household is involved with. Additionally, the company provides
services such as budgeting and goal setting.


                                                9
       Our data set includes information about banking (i.e., checking, savings, and debit card)
transactions and credit card transactions for more than 500,000 households from January 1, 2011,
to December 31, 2012. The data set provides the date, amount, and description and indicates
whether the transaction is an inflow or an outflow. Thus, our database contains transaction-level
data similar to those typically found on monthly bank or credit card statements. Several of the
transactions we observe are ambiguous, such as checks. The transaction description does not tell
us whether a particular check is a payment to a grocer, a landlord, a stockbroker, or a grandchild,
so we look only at the subset of transactions we can cleanly identify through the descriptions.
This limits the scope of the consumption measured in this study to that consumed through debit
and credit cards, which constitutes the majority of the transactions we observe. Households have
unique identifiers that allow us to track them through time. To ensure that our results are not
driven by entry or exit into our sample, we construct a balanced sample by including only
households for which we have transactions in both January 2011 and December 2012.



4.2    Identifying Key Events and Variables

       A key component of the study is identifying the information (tax return filing) and cash
flow (tax refund receipt) events. We find the filing date for households by running a keyword
search for the top tax preparation services, such as TurboTax (See Appendix A for full list). We
are able to capture filing events only for households that used these preparation services and paid
using debit or credit cards. As a result, we do not observe households that elected to deduct the
preparation charges directly from the refund itself. The transaction date of the tax preparation
software is designated as the filing date of the household. We exclude households that have tax
preparation transactions on multiple days (as would be the case for a family filing separately on
different days).

       To identify the date of the federal tax refund or tax payment, we run a keyword search for
direct deposits that includes the words “TAX” and “TREASURY” or “USATAXPAYMENT.”
As with the filing, we exclude from our sample any household that receives a refund more than
once per year. Finally, we require that the filing date precede the tax refund or tax payment date.
We require that the tax preparation date be between 1 and 60 days before the tax refund or tax
payment. We require a minimum of one day to give us power to disentangle the information

                                                10
event from the cash flow event. The payment must be made or the refund must be received
within 60 days of the filing to place a reasonable upper bound on the processing time of a normal
tax refund. In an attempt to limit our sample to more typical refunds, we require that the filing
date occur before May 1 and that the refund date occur before June 20. Furthermore, we require
the tax return to be positive (i.e., households received cash on the refund date) and the household
to have two or more bank or credit card accounts linked with the data provider. We include only
those households for whom we can observe tax refunds for two consecutive years. After
applying the above filters, our baseline sample contains 27,591 households, corresponding to
10.1 million household-day observations.

        In the analysis, we use two measures of financial constraints based on transactions
information: income and financial slack. We measure income based on direct deposit of income.
Specifically, we search for the keywords PAYROLL, SALARY, SOCIAL SECURITY, DIR
DEP, and DIRECT DEPOSIT (with the additional restrictions detailed in Appendix A). We
measure income as the sum of all income receipts in the month of January, so that our
measurement of income predates tax filing and refund within the year. Our final sample consists
of 18,912 households for which we can identify income.

        We measure a households’ financial slack using the interest that is paid and received on
account balances. We do not observe balances directly, so we must infer them through interest
transactions. To avoid a mechanical relationship between interest earned and the size of the
refund, we limit our search of interest transactions to the first month of the year. To identify bank
interest transactions, we run a keyword search containing the word INT (with additional
restrictions detailed in Appendix A). Our sample consists of 26,378 households for which there
is at least one interest payment received during the month of January. To identify credit interest
transactions, we run a keyword search containing the words INTEREST and CHARGE. This
sample contains 5,480 households for which there is at least one credit card interest charge
incurred during January. To be included in our financial slack calculations, households need to
have either interest received or paid, or both. We approximate net bank balance in the following
equation, using annual interest rates of 0.6 and 20 percent for bank interest and credit card
interest:




                                                 11
        We focus on four consumption categories: restaurants, retail, ATM withdrawals, and total
credit card purchases. We identify the list of retailers from a subset of Stores Magazine’s top 100
retailers.4 To identify restaurant transactions, we begin by querying for transactions from the top
100 restaurants, defined as the top 100 restaurants by 2011 revenue according to Nation’s
Restaurant News.5 We augment this list by querying generic restaurant names such as BURGER,
TACO, PIZZA, GRILL, STEAK, etc. The full query is provided in Appendix A. For ATM
withdrawals, we query for ATM (not also containing the word FEE) that is debited from the
account to estimate how much cash households are withdrawing from their accounts. To identify
total credit card purchases, we look at the aggregate spending on the household’s credit card
accounts. We require that restaurant, retail, ATM, and daily total credit card purchases be greater
than $1. To guard against miscategorization of retail and restaurant transactions, we eliminate
retail transactions over $5,000, payments to credit cards issued by retailers, and brokerage and
fund transfers with the name of the retailer in the description. We winsorize restaurant, retail,
ATM, and credit card purchase transaction amounts at the 99% level for each category.



4.3     Summary Statistics

        Summary statistics are provided in Table 1. Our final sample contains 27,591 households,
which we divide into income quintiles. The mean monthly household income of the sample is
$5,510, and the median is $4,334, corresponding to average and median annual household
incomes of $66,120 and $52,008, respectively. These figures are quite close to the U.S. Census
Bureau estimates of $67,368 and $52,488, respectively, for 2011.6

        For many households, tax refunds are a substantial addition to their current income.
Figure 3 presents the distribution of the total refund amount relative to household income.
Approximately half of the households receive refunds greater than or equal to half a month’s
salary. A quarter of households receive refunds greater than one month’s salary. The mean tax
refund in our sample is $3,054. Households spend considerable amounts on restaurants and
4
  http://www.stores.org/2012/Top-100-Retailers
5
  http://nrn.com/us-top-100/top-100-chains-us-sales
6
  http://www.census.gov/hhes/www/cpstables/032012/hhinc/hinc01_000.htm

                                                   12
retail. The average daily restaurant expenditure, conditional on going to a restaurant, is $22.97.
The mean probability of going to a restaurant on a given day is 26%. Retail spending, conditional
on going to a retailer is $69.80 and the mean probability of going to a retailer in a given day is
25%. Similarly, households on average withdraw $176.54 conditional on going to the ATM and
spend $139.02 on credit cards conditional on spending on credit cards. The probability of using
an ATM machine on a given day is 5%, and the probability of using credit cards is 40%.



5      The Reaction of Households to Tax Refund

       Our main tests focus on measuring the average change in consumption at the household
level around two critical dates to differentiate between the alternative consumption theories: (1)
filing the tax return and (2) receiving the tax refund. Next, we look at the persistence of the
consumption reaction to further test the three theories.

       Our first series of tests examine the average response of households to the tax filing and
tax refund receipt events (Table 2). The sample contains daily household consumption dollar
amounts by type of goods: restaurants, retail, ATM withdrawals, or total credit card purchases.
The regression specification is as follows:

                   (   )                   ( )               (   )                  (   )




       The dependent variable (      ) is the consumption dollar amount at the household-day
level. The explanatory variables of interest are a series of week dummies measuring the time
from the tax return filing and refund receipt. We have six week-dummies for the filing event
(        ) and 14 week-dummies (              ) for the refund event; each event includes two weeks
before the event and 4 and 12 weeks, following the event respectively. For brevity, we present
the first six dummies. We also include household fixed effects (         ) and calendar day fixed
effects ( ). The household fixed effects capture the average spending of households during the
period studied. The calendar day fixed effects capture common seasonal patterns. Hence, the
inclusion of these fixed effects ensures that the week dummies around the filing and refund
events indeed capture the change in dollar consumption following the event within the household
consumption time series and do not reflect seasonal patterns. In Table 2, Panel A, we regress


                                                  13
daily dollar consumption amounts on week fixed effects around the filing and refund dates. The
regressions show that households are generally unresponsive to the filing event. Spending in the
restaurant, retail, and ATM categories is not statistically significant from zero in the weeks
before and after the filing. In contrast, during the week that the refund is received, there are
strong increases in spending across the categories of restaurants, retail, and ATMs. The increase
in consumption following the tax refund event is statistically and economically significant: an
8% increase in restaurant spending, a 12% increase in retail spending, and a 16% increase in
ATM withdrawals. Interestingly, we find the opposite reaction in regard to total credit card
purchases. We find that credit card purchases increase by 12% following filing, but the
sensitivity following the refund is a statistically insignificant 1% increase. This finding supports
the financial constraints explanation of the excess sensitivity to cash flows, which we discuss
further in the next section.

        The increases in average spending around the filing and refund dates can result from a
higher propensity to spend or from higher dollar amounts spent, or both. We investigate these
alternative possibilities in Table 2, Panel B. We regress a dummy of whether a purchase in the
consumption category took place on the week fixed effects and household fixed effects. The
results are similar to the previous results: the likelihood of shopping increases around the time of
filing and following the actual refund. Following the filing event, households statistically
insignificantly increase the likelihood of spending in the categories of restaurants, retail, and
ATMs by 1%, 1%, and 4%, respectively. Following the refund event, households increase the
likelihood of spending in the categories of restaurants, retail, and ATMs by 5%, 6%, and 7%,
respectively. It appears therefore that around the filing event, the increase in the propensity to
shop accounts for the entire increase in spending. However, following the actual refund date, the
increase in probability accounts only for a fraction of the increase in dollar spending, i.e., there
was also an increase in the dollar amount per transaction. We also find a completely different
reaction in total credit card purchases. Households were 11% more likely to use credit cards
following filing, but they were 3% less likely to use credit cards after the refund.




                                                 14
6      Characterizing the Consumption Response Surrounding the Information and Cash
Flow Events

6.1    Information or Cash Flow?

       Our first test examines the consumption response surrounding the information and cash
flow dates. In Table 2, Panel A, we regress the daily dollar consumption level per category
(restaurants, retail, ATM, and total credit card expenditure) on event week dummies, household
fixed effects, and date fixed effects.

       We document that there is little action on the information date. The results in Columns
(1) through (3) indicate no statistically significant adjustment in restaurant, retail, and ATM
spending, summed across credit and debit cards surrounding the information date. Column (4)
shows that total expenditures made via credit cards increase by 12%. Table 2, Panel B, shows
similar regressions, but the dependent variable is binary, i.e., whether shopping in the category
took place or not. The result shows that the increase in the likelihood of consumption following
the information date is weak, except through credit cards.

       The consumption reaction surrounding the cash flow date is very strong in all product
categories, both in dollar terms and in likelihood. Households increase consumption in
restaurant, retail, and ATM categories by 8%, 12%, and 16%, respectively, but total credit card
expenditures are not different from zero. Based on these results, it seems that households wait for
the arrival of the cash flow before consuming it unless they can borrow short term through credit
cards to finance consumption. There is no evidence of increased consumption using cash at hand
following the information date.

       Our results show that households increase consumption following the return filing date
and following the refund receipt date, but the response to the latter date is significantly stronger.
Although taxpayers have virtually no uncertainty about the refund amount between the filing and
receipt dates, most households do not fully respond following the information date but rather
wait until the actual receipt of the cash flow. This phenomenon calls for further investigation.

       One explanation for our consumption findings could be that the filing date does not
contain new information because households could have calculated their projected tax refunds
months earlier. While this is technically feasible, it appears that households do react to the


                                                 15
information delivered in the filing date when they have access to credit cards. In particular,
households with credit cards use them to increase consumption, demonstrating that information
is delivered in the tax filing event. An alternative objection to our conclusion is that households
that practice precautionary savings are financially constrained at the same time and thus not able
to consume when uncertainty is reduced. However, precautionary savings households hold
precautionary savings and thus should be unconstrained, particularly over a two-week time
horizon. Our results contradict the prediction of the precautionary savings theory that resolution
of uncertainty should result in a positive consumption response, but they are consistent with both
the financial constraints and myopia theories.



6.2     Exploring the Financial Constraints of Households

        To further investigate the role of financial constraints, we split the sample by household
income and financial slack. Households with financial constraints do not react strongly to the
information about future cash flows: Because they are constrained, they cannot spend cash based
on future promises. Households that are not constrained, however, can use the information about
future refunds and are more likely to consume the income when the information is released.

        Previous studies have used several proxies for household financial constraints. Since
Zeldes (1989) used the ratio of wealth to income to split the sample into constrained and
unconstrained subsamples, the literature has followed with splits primarily based on wealth. For
example, Runkle (1991) looks at home ownership and liquid savings; Shea (1995) looks at
whether wealth is zero or positive; and Souleles (1999) looks at the ratio of wealth to earnings.
Recently, Agarwal, Liu, and Souleles (2007) and Agarwal and Qian (2013) examined credit card
limits and utilization.

        Due to the nature of our data, we are not able to accurately observe the complete picture
of a household’s access to financial markets, as in Agarwal, Liu and Souleles (2007). Instead, we
use a household’s bank account transactions to estimate whether it is financially constrained.
Because we can observe the paycheck, bank interest, and credit card interest, we split our sample
based on both the household’s income and financial slack, which is the net bank balance (see
Section 4.2). We believe that this is a reasonable approximation of financial constraints since



                                                 16
Jappelli (1990) reports that current income and wealth are closely related to the probability of
being financially constrained.



6.2.1 Response to Refund by Income

       We begin by splitting the sample by household income. To be included in the sample,
households need to receive a clearly identifiable paycheck. Thus, we drop households that are
self-employed, unemployed, or otherwise receive paychecks that we cannot identify. Then, we
split the population into five groups based on income, and rerun the main tests. For brevity, we
present only results for the bottom and top quintiles in the tables; in the accompanying figures,
we present the coefficients for all quintile groups.

       Table 3, Panel A, shows our results. We find that households in the top-income quintile
have much lower excess sensitivities compared to those in the bottom-income quintile.
Following the filing event, households show little consumption response in the restaurant, retail,
and ATM categories. An exception is an increase in retail shopping by the top-income quintile
and a large increase in credit card purchases by both the bottom and top-income quintiles (about
an 11% increase for each). Following the receipt of the tax refund, we observe a strong
consumption reaction for the bottom-income quintile for restaurants, retail, and ATMs. For
example, during the first week following the refund, top-income households increased
consumption via restaurants and retail by 3.8% and 3.5%, respectively, and bottom-income
households increased consumption by 14% and 21%.

       We chart the quintile coefficients as a percentage change from the respective
unconditional means for the week following filing and refund in Figure 4. The coefficients are
generated by five separate regressions run on subsamples broken down by income. For each
subsample, we regress daily consumption on week fixed effects surrounding the filing event and
the refund event. We scale the coefficients by the average daily consumption in the category;
hence, the magnitudes present the percentage change in consumption. The regressions show that
the consumption response in the week following the filing is mostly flat and close to zero for all
income quintiles. However, the consumption response in the week after the refund is
significantly different from zero and is lower among high-income households.



                                                 17
          In regard to financial constraints, the analysis of total credit purchases has an important
interpretation. Since households with credit cards have some access to credit markets, credit card
spending can be an estimate of consumption under relaxed constraints. The results for total credit
card spending stand in stark contrast to the consumption behavior for restaurants, retail, and
ATMs. Table 3, Panel A, shows a strong significant response in the week after the filing date and
weaker sensitivity in the week following the refund date. In Figure 4, we can see that while
abnormal expenditures for restaurants, retail, and ATMs are greater in the week of the refund, it
is the opposite for total credit card expenditures. Also, there seems to be no difference in the
response among the income quintiles when we condition for credit card expenditures in contrast
to the higher sensitivity seen among low-income households in restaurant, retail, and ATM
consumption. This result still supports the financial constraints theory since low-income
households with credit cards are not financially constrained.

          The result about the credit card consumption leads to two important conclusions. First,
because households act on the information conveyed in the filing event, we conclude that the
filing date is informative for households—it is not information that they ignore. Second, the only
observable consumption response following the filing date is the use of a short-term credit
facility (credit cards), providing evidence that households are indeed financially constrained.



6.2.2 Response to Refund by Financial Slack

          Another way to stratify the population by financial constraints is by using a proxy for
financial slack. Unfortunately, we do not observe the balances on households’ accounts. Yet, we
can proxy the financial slack related to their liquid resources using the following method. The
dataset includes the interest paid to credit card companies and interest received from banks. We
assume that the interest rate paid is 20% and that the interest rate received is 0.6%. Given the
interest paid and received and the assumptions about the interest rates, we can calculate a
ballpark figure for a household’s balances at credit card companies and banks. For each
household, we estimate the total balances and then split the population into five “financial slack”
groups.

          We rerun the main specifications for the five subsamples and present the results for the
extreme quintiles in Table 3, Panel B. Our results show that the different financial slack groups

                                                  18
consume roughly the same dollar amounts on average across the restaurant, retail, and ATM
categories. For example the low financial slack households spend $15.83 per day on average
within the retail category, and the high financial slack households spend $18.77 per day on
average within the same category.

       Although the difference in average spending across the financial slack groups is small,
we observe a large difference in the excess sensitivity following the refund event. After receiving
tax refunds, the high-slack households increase restaurant and retail consumption by 7% and 9%,
respectively. However, low-slack households show a much more dramatic increase in spending
of 14% and 25% on restaurants and retail, respectively. As with the income quintiles, there is no
significant consumption response following the week after filing within the restaurant, retail, and
ATM withdrawal categories.

       In Figure 5, we chart the quintile coefficients as a percentage change from the respective
unconditional means. The results are largely similar to those of Figure 4, with high sensitivity
decreasing with higher slack. We also look at credit card expenditures and find similar results as
before. Excess credit card spending is concentrated in the week following the filing date and is
weaker in the weeks following the actual refund.

       Overall, the results of this analysis show that households react primarily to actual cash
flows. The only exception being that credit cards (which are a form of short-term debt) are used
primarily following the filing date. We see this exception as evidence of financial constraints,
because households at all financial constraints levels do not use disposable cash to react to cash
flow news.



6.3    Response Persistence

       The previous results provided supportive evidence for either the LCPIH or myopia
theories. We next examine the shape of the response of households over time to disentangle
financial constraints from myopia. The financial constraint theory holds that financially
constrained households are still rational and therefore will strive to smooth consumption over
time. The predicted pattern of the consumption reaction is a step function once the cash is
received and the constraint is alleviated. Conversely, myopia argues that households increase


                                                19
consumption temporarily—consuming the cash that was received—with little effect on long-run
consumption. 7

        The regressions in Panel A of Table 2 allow us to examine the time-series pattern. We
tabulate the previously omitted variables in Table 4 for completeness. We observe that following
the cash flow date, all consumption categories exhibit a sharp increase followed within two to
three weeks by a quick decline back to the previous average level of consumption. We also
present these coefficients in Figure 6. The lack of a persistent response to the income change is
another piece of evidence against the LCPIH and alternative theories based on rational
expectations: if the spike in consumption were due to some sort of financial constraint, we would
expect households to smooth consumption after the change in income has been realized.

        These findings support the myopia hypothesis that households consume cash flows that
come their way without much planning or smoothing. If households are present-biased (Laibson,
1997), they would also show a lack of persistence in consumption even with future planning,
because they prefer to spend in the present.



7       Conclusion

        Empirical studies have consistently shown that household consumption is highly sensitive
to cash flows, and researchers have developed several theories to explain this pattern. The
theories differ in their assumptions about the rationality of households and the constraints they
face. Despite stark differences among such theories, empirical tests had trouble distinguishing
among them with the available data.

        We exploit a novel setting surrounding the annual filing of U.S. tax returns and tax
refund receipts to provide a direct test of three common theories of household consumption
behavior: precautionary savings, financial constraints, and myopia. We measure this
consumption response at both the information receipt date and the cash flow receipt date. The tax
refund filing allows us to directly observe the effects of variation in the uncertainty of future



7
 The prediction of the precautionary savings theory about the persistence of the consumption response is less clear.
On one hand, households are impatient and may be inclined to consume cash quickly, but on the other – they are
prudent, hence may desire to smooth their consumption.

                                                        20
income on a household’s consumption behavior. This setting, combined with the household
demographics that we observe, allow us to explore in-depth the causes of excess sensitivity.

       Our findings confirm the existence of both financial constraints and myopia in
households. Households wait to consume until cash is received rather than at the information
acquisition date, which is consistent with the presence of financial constraints. Further, this effect
is decreasing in the amount of financial constraints in the household, using proxies of either
income or net banking balance. Additionally, excess credit card spending occurs at filing but not
at the refund date, consistent with unconstrained households responding to positive cash flow
information rather than receipt of the funds.

       We do not find evidence supporting the precautionary savings theory. The theory predicts
that the resolution of cash flow uncertainty will lead to a consumption response. Yet, we
document no such response surrounding the information date, when uncertainty is resolved.

       We do, however, find evidence of household myopia. We first document that households’
consumption patterns quickly decay following the cash flow date. This pattern is consistent with
myopic behavior rather than consumption smoothing over time. Our results are consistent with
households being, on average, both financially constrained and myopic.




                                                 21
References

Aaronson, Daniel, Sumit Agarwal, and Erik French, 2012, Spending and Debt Response to
   Minimum Wage Hikes, American Economic Review 102(7), 3111–3139.
Agarwal, Sumit, Amit Bubna, and Molly Lipscomb, 2013, Timing to the Statement:
   Understanding Fluctuations in Consumer Credit Use, Working Paper, University of Virginia.
Agarwal, Sumit, Chunlin Liu, and Nicholas S. Souleles, 2007, The Reaction of Consumer
   Spending and Debt to Tax Rebates, Journal of Political Economy 115(6), 986–1019.
Agarwal, Sumit, and Wenlan Qian, 2013, Consumption and Debt Response to Unanticipated
   Income Shocks: Evidence from a Natural Experiment in Singapore, Working Paper, National
   University of Singapore.
Altonji, Joseph G., and Aloysius Siow, 1987, Testing the Response of Consumption to Income
   Changes with (Noisy) Panel Data, Quarterly Journal of Economics 102(2), 293–328.
Blundell, Richard, Hamish Low and Ian Preston, 2013, Decomposing Changes in Income Risk
   Using Consumption Data, Quantitative Economics, 4(1), 1–37.
Bodkin, Ronald, 1959, Windfall Income and Consumption, American Economic Review 49(4),
   602–614.
Campbell, John Y., and Gregory N. Mankiw, 1990, Permanent Income, Current Income, and
   Consumption, Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 8(3), 265–279.
Carroll, Christopher, 1992, The Buffer-Stock Theory of Saving: Some Macroeconomic Evidence,
   Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 61–156.
Carroll, Christopher, 1997, Buffer-Stock Saving and the Life Cycle/Permanent Income
   Hypothesis, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(1), 1–55.
Cole, Shawn, John Thompson, and Peter Tufano, 2008, Where Does it Go? Spending by the
   Financially Constrained, Harvard Business School Working Paper 08-083.
Flavin, Marjorie, 1984, Excess Sensitivity of Consumption to Current Income: Liquidity
   Constraints or Myopia? Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Friedman, Milton, 1957, A Theory of the Consumption Function, Princeton: Princeton University
    Press.
Gertler, Paul and Jonathan Gruber, 2002, Insuring Consumption Against Illness, American
   Economic Review 92(1), 51–70.
Hall, Robert, 1978, Stochastic implications of the life cycle-permanent income hypothesis:
   theory and evidence, Journal of Political Economy 86(61), 971–987.
Hayashi, Fumio, 1985, The Effect of Liquidity Constraints on Consumption: A Cross-Sectional
   Analysis, Quarterly Journal of Economics 100(1), 183–206.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai, 2003, Do Consumers React to Anticipated Income Changes? Evidence from
   the Alaska Permanent Fund, American Economic Review 93(1), 397–405.
Jappelli, Tulio, 1990, Who is Credit Constrained in the U.S. Economy? Quarterly Journal of
   Economics 105(2), 219-234.

                                             22
Jappelli, Tulio, and Luigi Pistaferri, 2000, Using Subjective Income Expectations to Test for
   Excess Sensitivity of Consumption to Predicted Income Growth, European Economic Review
   44, 337–358.
Jappelli, Tulio, and Luigi Pistaferri, 2010, The Consumption Response to Income Changes,
   Annual Review of Economics 2(1), 479–506.
Jappelli, Tulio, Jörn-Steffen Pischke, and Nicholas S. Souleles, 1998, Testing for Liquidity
   Constraints in Euler Equations with Complementary Data Sources, Review of Economics and
   Statistics 80(2), 251–262.
Johnson, David S., Jonathan A. Parker, and Nicholas S. Souleles, 2006, Household Expenditure
   and the Income Tax Rebates of 2001, American Economic Review 96(5), 1589–1610.
Keynes, John, 1936, The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money. Macmillan,
   LondonLaibson, David, 1997, Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting, Quarterly Journal
   of Economics 112(2), 443–477.
Modigliani, Franco, and Richard Brumberg, 1954, Utility Analysis and the Consumption
  Function: An Interpretation of Cross-Section Data, Post-Keynesians Economics, ed. K.
  Kurihara. New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press.
Modigliani, Franco, 1971, Monetary Policy and Consumption, in Consumer Spending and
  Monetary Policy: The Linkages, Conference Series No. 5, Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of
  Boston.
Parker, Jonathan A., 1999, The Reaction of Household Consumption to Predictable Changes in
   Social Security Taxes, American Economic Review 89(4), 959–973.
Poterba, James M., 1988, Are Consumers Forward Looking? Evidence from Fiscal Experiments,
   American Economic Review – Papers and Proceedings 78(2), 413–418.
Runkle, David E., 1991, Liquidity Constraints and the Permanent-Income Hypothesis, Journal of
   Monetary Economics 27(1), 73–98.
Shea, John, 1995, Union Contracts and the Life-Cycle/Permanent-Income Hypothesis, American
   Economic Review 85(1), 186–200.
Souleles, Nicholas S., 1999. The Response of Household Consumption to Income Tax Refunds,
   American Economic Review 89(4), 947–958.
Stephens, Melvin, 2003, “3rd of tha Month”: Do Social Security Recipients Smooth
   Consumption between Checks? American Economic Review 93(1), 406–422.
Stephens, Melvin, 2006, Paycheque Receipt and the Timing of Consumption, The Economic
   Journal 116(July), 680–701.
Zeldes, Stephen P., 1989, Consumption and Liquidity Constraints: An Empirical Investigation,
   Journal of Political Economy 97(2), 305–346.
Zhang, C. Yiwei, 2013, Monthly Budgeting Heuristics: Evidence from Extra Paychecks,
   Working Paper, University of Pennsylvania.




                                             23
                    Appendix A. Method of Categorizing Transactions

Income
      Inflow, and
      Transaction in bank account
      Transaction amount is greater than $500, and
      Contains one of the following keywords:
           o “payroll”
           o “salary”
           o “social security”
           o “dir dep” and NOT “ach”
           o “direct dop” and NOT “ach”
    Does not contain one of the following keywords:
           o “fia csna”
Restaurant
    Outflow, and
    Amount NOT over $5,000, and
    Contains one of the following keywords:
           o “mcdonald's”                               o   “dennys”
           o “mcdonalds”                                o   “outback”
           o “subway”                                   o   “steak”
           o “starbucks”                                o   “chipotle”
           o “burger”                                   o   “buffalo wild”
           o “wendys”                                   o   “cracker barrel”
           o “wendy's”                                  o   “hardees”
           o “taco”                                     o   “fri”
           o “donut”                                    o   “popeyes”
           o “pizza”                                    o   “golden corral”
           o “kfc”                                      o   “cheesecake”
           o “applebees”                                o   “panda ex”
           o “grill”                                    o   “little caesars”
           o “bar”                                      o   “carls j”
           o “chicke”                                   o   “carl's j”
           o “chick fil”                                o   “ruby tuesday”
           o “chick-fil”                                o   “roadhouse”
           o “sonic d”                                  o   “whataburger”
           o “olive g”                                  o   “red robin”
           o “chili's”                                  o   “jimmy john”
           o “chilis”                                   o   “waffle”
           o “grill”                                    o   “restau”
           o “panera”                                   o   “bob evans”
           o “box”                                      o   “five guys”
           o “arbys”                                    o   “pf chang”
           o “dairy queen”                              o   “casino”
           o “lobster”                                  o   “quiznos”
           o “ihop”                                     o   “zaxby”
           o “denny's”                                  o   “culver's”

                                           24
            o  “culvers”                                   o   “sbarro”
            o  “long john”                                 o   “cheese”
            o  “papa murphy”                               o   “bakery”
            o  “perkins res”                               o   “cantina”
            o  “carrabba”                                  o   “yogurt”
            o  “macaroni”                                  o   “smoothie”
            o  “cream”                                     o   “salad”
            o  “pollo”                                     o   “.com”
            o  “deli”                                      o   “cuisine”
            o  “o'charley”                                 o   “grill”
            o  “boston mark”                               o   “grille”
            o  “krispy k”                                  o   “fish”
            o  “qdoba”                                     o   “sushi”
            o  “white ca”                                  o   “sandwich”
            o  “cici”                                      o   “cocktail”
            o  “famous dav”                                o   “cafe”
            o  “tim horton”                                o   “tavern”
            o  “bonefish”                                  o   “coffee”
            o  “jamba”                                     o   “seafood”
            o  “juice”                                     o   “lobster”
            o  “cheddar's”                                 o   “crab”
            o  “cheddars”                                  o   “dining”
            o  “bagle”                                     o   “buffet”
            o  “seafood”                                   o   “bbq”
            o  “checkers”                                  o   “b.b.q”
            o  “eatery”                                    o   “barbecue”
        Does NOT contain one of the following keywords:
            o “pmt”                                        o   “:bill pay”
            o “payment”                                    o   “co id:”
            o “pymt”                                       o   “co id”
            o “pmts”                                       o   “outgoing”
            o “payments”                                   o   “transfer”
            o “pymts”                                      o   “wire”
            o “bill pay”                                   o   “amazon” and “web”
            o “paymnt”                                     o   “aws.amazon”
            o “paymnts”                                    o   “amazon” and “p.o.s.”
            o “checkpaymt”                                 o   “funds”
            o “checkpaymt”                                 o   “banks”
            o “brokerage”                                  o   “amazon” and “services”


Retail
        Outflow, and
        Amount NOT over $5,000, and
        Contains one of the following keywords:
            o “wal-mart”                                   o   “walmart”


                                               1
       o  “wal mart”                                  o   “babies” and “us”
       o  “target”                                    o   “menards”
       o  “walgreen”                                  o   “office d”
       o  “costco”                                    o   “barnes” and “nob”
       o  “depot”                                     o   “health” and “mar”
       o  “cvs”                                       o   “game” and “stop”
       o  “lowe's”                                    o   “dollar” and “tree”
       o  “lowes”                                     o   “auto” and “zone”
       o  “best” and “buy”                            o   “dillard”
       o  “sears”                                     o   “advance auto”
       o  “amazon”                                    o   “oreilly a”
       o  “macy's”                                    o   “o'reilly a”
       o  “rite aid”                                  o   “office” and “max”
       o  “kohls”                                     o   “qvc”
       o  “apple”                                     o   “dick's s”
       o  “maxx”                                      o   “dicks s”
       o  “marshalls”                                 o   “petsm”
       o  “homegoods”                                 o   “big” and “lots”
       o  “penney”                                    o   “jcpenney”
       o  “true v”                                    o   “couche” and “tard”
       o  “meijer”                                    o   “circle k”
       o  “dollar g”                                  o   “on the run”
       o  “wholesale” and “bj”                        o   “dell sales & service”
       o  “gap”                                       o   “dell.com”
       o  “nordstrom”                                 o   “dell preferred”
       o  “eleven”                                    o   “sherwin-williams”
       o  “staples”                                   o   “sherwin williams”
       o  “ace h”                                     o   “tractor” and “sup”
       o  “bed” and “bath”                            o   “foot” and “locker”
       o  “ross” and “store”                          o   “radio” and “shack”
       o  “victoria” and “secret”                     o   “burlington co”
       o  “henri” and “bendel”                        o   “michaels”
       o  “white” and “barn”                          o   “belk”
       o  “la” and “senza”                            o   “williams” and “sonoma”
       o  “family” and “dol”                          o   “ikea”
       o  “toys” and “us”                             o   “sports” and “auth”
   Does NOT contain one of the following keywords:
       o “pmt”                                        o   “checkpaymt”
       o “payment”                                    o   “checkpaymt”
       o “pymt”                                       o   “brokerage”
       o “pmts”                                       o   “:bill pay”
       o “payments”                                   o   “co id:”
       o “pymts”                                      o   “co id”
       o “bill pay”                                   o   “outgoing”
       o “paymnt”                                     o   “transfer”
       o “paymnts”                                    o   “wire”


                                         1
o   “amazon” and “web”
o   “aws.amazon”
o   “amazon” and “p.o.s.”
o   “funds”
o   “banks”
o   “amazon” and “services”




                              1
Tax filing
    Outflow, and
    Contains keyword “tax” and
    Contains one of “turbo”, “hrb”, “taxact”, “slayer”, “brain” and “complete”

Tax refund
    Inflow, and
    Contains keywords “treasury” and “tax”

Tax payment
    Outflow, and
    Contains keywords (“usataxpymt”) or (“treasury” and “tax”)


Bank Interest
    Inflow, and
    In the month of January, and
    Transaction in bank account, and
    Contains keyword “int”
    Does not contain keywords “depos” or “transfer”

Credit Card Interest
    Outflow, and
    In the month of January, and
    Transaction in credit card account, and
    Contains keywords “interest” and “charge”
                                                         Table 1. Summary Statistics
                                                                   Obs        Mean      Std Dev     p1         p25        p50       p90        p99

Household Demographics
 Refund Amount                                                      27,591     $3,054      $2,607        $26     $1,058    $2,341    $6,704     $11,586
 Refund Change (= Refund Amount - Lag(Refund Amount))               27,591     ($112)      $2,164   ($6,872)   ($1,003)     ($30)    $2,317      $5,853
 Days Between Filing and Refund                                     27,591       10.7         8.3          1          6         9        19          48
 Monthly Income (Conditional)                                       18,912     $5,510     $10,296       $200     $2,776    $4,334    $9,314     $23,241
 Monthly Bank Interest (Cconditional)                               26,378    $167.42   $2,574.60      $0.00      $0.11     $0.51    $21.19   $5,222.22
 Monthly Credit Card Interest (Unconditional)                       27,591     $13.85      $51.65      $0.00      $0.00     $0.00    $35.28    $253.63
 Monthly Credit Card Interest (Conditional on paying interest)       5,480     $69.71      $97.67      $0.84     $12.69    $35.75   $174.35    $471.04

Total Spending (Debit + Credit)
 Unconditional Restaurant Amount                                 10,098,306     $6.07     $16.45      $0.00      $0.00      $0.00    $19.70      $82.19
 Unconditional Retail Amount                                     10,098,306    $17.13     $56.50      $0.00      $0.00      $0.00    $49.86    $277.08
 Unconditional ATM Amount                                        10,098,306     $8.16     $61.26      $0.00      $0.00      $0.00     $0.00    $203.00
 Unconditional Credit Card Purchases Amount                      10,098,306    $55.19    $155.54      $0.00      $0.00      $0.00   $151.36    $806.15
 Restaurant Amount (Conditional on non-zero values)               2,669,164    $22.97     $25.21      $1.95      $7.51     $14.22    $51.54    $129.26
 Retail Amount (Conditional on non-zero values)                   2,477,934    $69.80     $96.60      $1.29     $14.25     $37.05   $167.96    $491.14
 ATM Amount (Conditional on non-zero values)                        466,621   $176.54    $226.90     $20.00     $60.00    $100.00   $400.00   $1,000.00
 Credit Card Purchase Amount (Conditional on non-zero             4,008,638   $139.02    $222.00      $1.62     $26.10     $65.98   $319.97   $1,339.19
 Restaurant Dummy                                                10,098,306     0.264
 Retail Dummy                                                    10,098,306     0.245
 ATM Dummy                                                       10,098,306     0.046
 Credit Card Purchase Dummy                                      10,098,306     0.397

Debit Spending Only
 Unconditional Restaurant Amount                                 10,098,306     $3.45     $11.48      $0.00      $0.00      $0.00    $10.54     $58.45
 Unconditional Retail Amount                                     10,098,306     $8.97     $36.66      $0.00      $0.00      $0.00    $17.89    $185.91
 Unconditional ATM Amount                                        10,098,306     $8.15     $61.23      $0.00      $0.00      $0.00     $0.00    $203.00
 Unconditional Credit Card Purchases Amount                      10,098,306     $0.00      $0.00      $0.00      $0.00      $0.00     $0.00      $0.00

Credit Spending Only
 Unconditional Restaurant Amount                                 10,098,306     $2.62     $12.19      $0.00      $0.00      $0.00     $2.39     $59.53
 Unconditional Retail Amount                                     10,098,306     $8.16     $43.25      $0.00      $0.00      $0.00     $4.99    $188.58
 Unconditional ATM Amount                                        10,098,306     $0.01      $1.66      $0.00      $0.00      $0.00     $0.00      $0.00
 Unconditional Credit Card Purchases Amount                      10,098,306    $55.19    $155.54      $0.00      $0.00      $0.00   $151.36    $806.15




                                                                               1
                         Table 2. Consumption Reaction to Filing and Refund

This table explores the response of households to the filing of tax returns and the receipt of tax refunds. The data
consist of daily household spending data for the categories of restaurants, retail, ATM, and credit card purchases.
Household days when there is no spending in a category receive a value of zero. In Panel A, the dependent variable
is the dollar amount of spending in the respective category. In Panel B, the dependent variable is a dummy variable
indicating whether there was spending in the category. The independent variables include week dummies around the
tax filing and tax refund events as well as day and household fixed effects. All regressions are OLS regressions.
Standard errors are clustered at the household level. t-statistics are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote
statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Panel A: Consumption Response to Refund ($)

             Dependent variable:                                    Daily $ spent on …
                                                                                            Credit Card
                                                   Restaurants     Retail        ATM
                                                                                            Purchases
                                                       (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)
             Filing: Week -2                        0.15***         0.00         -0.05       1.41***
                                                     (3.73)        (0.02)       (-0.35)        (3.79)
             Filing: Week -1                          0.04         -0.18         -0.20       1.18***
                                                     (0.75)       (-1.18)       (-1.20)        (2.61)
             Filing: Week 0                           0.07          0.15         -0.04       6.38***
                                                     (1.33)        (0.82)       (-0.22)       (12.27)
             Filing: Week 1                           0.05          0.02         -0.19        1.33**
                                                     (0.84)        (0.09)       (-0.98)        (2.42)
             Filing: Week 2                          0.11*         -0.04        -0.34*          0.74
                                                     (1.92)       (-0.21)       (-1.77)        (1.40)
             Filing: Week 3                           0.03          0.26          0.01          0.51
                                                     (0.68)        (1.56)        (0.05)        (1.09)

             Refund: Week -2                        0.16***         0.15         -0.09         0.89*
                                                     (3.21)        (0.92)       (-0.57)        (1.93)
             Refund: Week -1                        0.20***       0.78***         0.13         0.88*
                                                     (3.64)        (4.22)        (0.75)        (1.67)
             Refund: Week 0                         0.50***       2.09***       1.31***         0.37
                                                     (8.46)       (10.41)        (6.24)        (0.65)
             Refund: Week 1                         0.48***       1.59***       0.51***        1.30**
                                                     (8.28)        (8.24)        (2.70)        (2.42)
             Refund: Week 2                         0.25***       1.21***        0.31*        1.82***
                                                     (4.90)        (6.95)        (1.75)        (3.76)
             Refund: Week 3                         0.29***       0.75***         0.10         0.77*
                                                     (6.37)        (5.17)        (0.71)        (1.84)

             Household fixed effects                  Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
             Day fixed effects                        Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
             Week 4-12 dummies after refund           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes

             Obs                                   10,098,306    10,098,306    10,098,306    10,098,306
                   2
             Adj. R                                  0.093         0.062         0.077         0.128
             Unconditional mean                      $6.07        $17.13         $8.16        $55.19
             Filing: Week 0 / Unconditional mean     1.2%          0.9%          -0.5%        11.6%
             Refund: Week 0 / Unconditional mean     8.2%         12.2%          16.1%         0.7%

                                                            2
                   Table 2. Consumption Reaction to Filing and Refund (Cont.)

Panel B: Consumption Response to Refund (Probability)

         Dependent variable:                                 Daily indicator of transaction of…
                                                                                                  Credit Card
                                               Restaurants         Retail         ATM
                                                                                                  Purchases
                                                   (1)               (2)             (3)              (4)
         Filing: Week -2                        0.004***           0.001           0.001           0.008***
                                                 (3.168)          (0.922)         (1.477)           (6.806)
         Filing: Week -1                          0.002            -0.000          -0.000          0.009***
                                                 (1.241)          (-0.303)       (-0.161)           (6.425)
         Filing: Week 0                          0.003*           0.003**        0.002***          0.045***
                                                 (1.959)          (2.259)         (2.749)          (29.859)
         Filing: Week 1                           0.001            0.001           0.001           0.012***
                                                 (0.782)          (0.569)         (0.898)           (7.436)
         Filing: Week 2                           0.002            0.000           0.000           0.007***
                                                 (1.405)          (0.181)         (0.121)           (4.563)
         Filing: Week 3                           0.002            0.002           0.001           0.003**
                                                 (1.211)          (1.417)         (1.320)           (2.417)

         Refund: Week -2                        0.004***          0.002*           -0.000          0.003**
                                                 (3.216)          (1.790)        (-0.855)          (2.275)
         Refund: Week -1                        0.006***         0.006***          -0.000          -0.003*
                                                 (3.916)          (4.130)        (-0.304)          (-1.855)
         Refund: Week 0                         0.014***         0.014***        0.003***         -0.014***
                                                 (8.624)          (9.705)         (5.259)          (-8.455)
         Refund: Week 1                         0.012***         0.009***         0.001*          -0.007***
                                                 (7.784)          (6.506)         (1.826)          (-4.275)
         Refund: Week 2                         0.008***         0.009***          0.000            -0.001
                                                 (5.541)          (7.131)         (0.502)          (-0.938)
         Refund: Week 3                         0.007***         0.006***          0.001            -0.001
                                                 (5.597)          (5.399)         (1.108)          (-0.782)

         Household fixed effects                  Yes               Yes            Yes               Yes
         Day fixed effects                        Yes               Yes            Yes               Yes
         Week 4 dummy after filing                Yes               Yes            Yes               Yes
         Week 4-12 dummies after refund           Yes               Yes            Yes               Yes

         Obs                                   10,098,306        10,098,306     10,098,306        10,098,306
               2
         Adj. R                                  0.155             0.109          0.114             0.345
         Unconditional mean                      0.264             0.245          0.046             0.397
         Filing: Week 0 / Unconditional mean     1.1%              1.2%           4.3%              11.3%
         Refund: Week 0 / Unconditional mean     5.3%              5.7%           6.5%              -2.5%




                                                        3
             Table 3. Consumption Reaction to Tax Refunds, by Financial Constraints

This table explores the role of financial constraints in the response of households to the filing of tax returns and the
receipt of tax refunds. Panel A divides the sample into income quintiles. Panel B divides the sample into net bank
balance quintiles. In Panel A, income quintiles 1 and 5 denote bottom income and top income, respectively. In Panel
B, net bank balance quintiles 1 and 5 denote bottom net bank balance and top net bank balance, respectively. The
data consist of daily household spending data for the categories of restaurants, retail, ATM, and credit card
purchases. Household days when there is no spending in a category receive a value of zero. The dependent variable
is the dollar amount of spending in the respective category. The independent variables include week dummies
around the tax filing and tax refund events as well as day and household fixed effects. All regressions are OLS
regressions. Standard errors are clustered at the household level. t-statistics are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and
* denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Panel A: By Income Quintile

Dependent variable:                                                         Daily $ spent on …
                                           Restaurants                Retail                    ATM           Credit Card Purchases
Income quintile:                      Bottom         Top      Bottom          Top       Bottom        Top      Bottom        Top
                                         (1)          (2)        (3)           (4)          (5)        (6)        (7)         (8)
Filing: Week -2                       0.23**         0.22      -0.29         -0.16         0.11       0.24       0.84       2.59**
                                       (2.36)       (1.62)    (-0.96)       (-0.40)      (0.31)      (0.47)     (0.98)      (1.99)
Filing: Week -1                         0.06        0.29*       0.23          0.35        -0.08      -0.65       0.10        2.32
                                       (0.47)       (1.82)     (0.58)        (0.71)     (-0.17)     (-1.14)     (0.09)      (1.54)
Filing: Week 0                          0.07         0.04      -0.18        1.22**        -0.20      -0.84     4.50***     9.44***
                                       (0.50)       (0.23)    (-0.41)        (2.14)     (-0.39)     (-1.53)     (3.82)      (5.49)
Filing: Week 1                          0.09         0.11       0.03          0.35      -1.09**      -0.02       1.60       3.20*
                                       (0.59)       (0.60)     (0.05)        (0.60)     (-2.16)     (-0.03)     (1.29)      (1.78)
Filing: Week 2                          0.05         0.16       0.28          0.69        -0.57      -0.32       0.12       2.97*
                                       (0.37)       (0.94)     (0.62)        (1.22)     (-1.19)     (-0.50)     (0.10)      (1.69)
Filing: Week 3                         -0.07        -0.13       0.20       1.62***         0.40      -0.46      -0.65       3.15*
                                      (-0.61)      (-0.82)     (0.50)        (3.00)      (0.80)     (-0.78)    (-0.66)      (1.92)

Refund: Week -2                         0.16        0.21       -0.38        -0.67       0.11         -0.41      -0.16       -0.84
                                       (1.28)      (1.22)     (-0.98)      (-1.35)     (0.23)      (-0.77)     (-0.16)     (-0.55)
Refund: Week -1                       0.39***       0.10        0.44        -0.03       0.22          0.85       1.40       -1.16
                                       (2.93)      (0.56)      (1.02)      (-0.05)     (0.42)       (1.45)      (1.20)     (-0.67)
Refund: Week 0                        0.74***      0.32*      2.89***        0.83     2.18***       1.49*        0.32        0.05
                                       (5.19)      (1.72)      (5.92)       (1.36)     (3.84)       (1.91)      (0.26)      (0.03)
Refund: Week 1                        0.74***       0.26      1.80***       -0.03       0.75          0.59       1.39       -2.01
                                       (5.10)      (1.48)      (3.94)      (-0.05)     (1.46)       (0.95)      (1.15)     (-1.16)
Refund: Week 2                        0.43***       0.02      1.39***        0.74      -0.17        1.29**       0.67        0.62
                                       (3.46)      (0.11)      (3.40)       (1.38)    (-0.34)       (2.17)      (0.62)      (0.40)
Refund: Week 3                        0.45***       0.14      0.93***        0.33      -0.38       1.39***       0.39       -0.28
                                       (4.30)      (0.89)      (2.72)       (0.68)    (-1.01)       (2.61)      (0.41)     (-0.19)

Household fixed effects                 Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes
Day fixed effects                       Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes
Week 4 dummy after filing               Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes
Week 4-12 dummies after refund          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes

Obs                                   1,384,578   1,384,212   1,384,578   1,384,212   1,384,578   1,384,212   1,384,578   1,384,212
Adj. R2                                0.091       0.094       0.062       0.064       0.079        0.081      0.123       0.137
Unconditional mean                      5.20        8.37       14.12       23.90        7.69        13.28      38.34       88.70
Filing: Week 0 / Unconditional mean     1.3%       0.5%        -1.3%       5.1%        -2.6%        -6.3%      11.7%       10.6%
Refund: Week 0 / Unconditional mean    14.2%       3.8%        20.5%       3.5%        28.3%        11.2%       0.8%        0.1%



                                                                4
       Table 3. Consumption Reaction to Tax Refunds, by Financial Constraints (Cont.)

Panel B: By Financial Slack Quintile

Dependent variable:                                                      Daily $ spent on …
                                        Restaurants               Retail                     ATM           Credit Card Purchases
Financial slack quintile:          Bottom         Top     Bottom          Top        Bottom        Top      Bottom        Top
                                      (1)          (2)      (3)            (4)           (5)        (6)        (7)         (8)
Filing: Week -2                    0.19**         0.14     -0.37          0.26          0.07      -0.64      -0.02        1.51
                                    (2.10)       (1.43)   (-1.49)        (0.80)       (0.21)     (-1.63)    (-0.03)      (1.53)
Filing: Week -1                     -0.07        -0.09     -0.23          0.35       -0.71**       0.39       1.35        0.62
                                   (-0.66)      (-0.75)   (-0.72)        (0.90)      (-2.07)      (0.77)     (1.47)      (0.53)
Filing: Week 0                       0.04        -0.07     -0.14          0.24         -0.30      -0.56     7.14***     7.34***
                                    (0.32)      (-0.54)   (-0.37)        (0.54)      (-0.82)     (-1.14)     (6.88)      (5.54)
Filing: Week 1                      -0.01         0.05     -0.10         -0.57         -0.52       0.10       1.63        0.28
                                   (-0.08)       (0.40)   (-0.23)       (-1.20)      (-1.26)      (0.18)     (1.48)      (0.21)
Filing: Week 2                       0.02        -0.03    -0.69*         -0.10         -0.54      -0.19       0.11       -0.06
                                    (0.12)      (-0.24)   (-1.70)       (-0.23)      (-1.35)     (-0.32)     (0.10)     (-0.05)
Filing: Week 3                      -0.19        -0.05     -0.56         -0.08          0.29      -0.63      -0.04       -0.90
                                   (-1.64)      (-0.39)   (-1.48)       (-0.20)       (0.81)     (-1.27)    (-0.04)     (-0.73)

Refund: Week -2                    0.26**      0.32***      0.33        -0.56        0.18         -0.33       0.37      2.24*
                                   (2.38)       (2.68)     (1.00)     (-1.42)       (0.51)       (-0.69)     (0.39)     (1.87)
Refund: Week -1                   0.41***       0.28**     0.92**        0.72       0.65*          0.26      -1.34       2.01
                                   (3.21)       (2.15)     (2.38)      (1.56)       (1.66)        (0.51)    (-1.28)     (1.49)
Refund: Week 0                    0.86***      0.46***    3.92***     1.63***      2.26***       1.38**      -0.49      3.07**
                                   (6.57)       (3.29)     (8.73)      (3.27)       (5.12)        (2.30)    (-0.43)     (2.09)
Refund: Week 1                    0.94***      0.52***    2.95***      1.01**       1.01**         0.57     2.35**       1.84
                                   (7.14)       (3.75)     (6.94)      (2.24)       (2.57)        (1.10)     (2.08)     (1.33)
Refund: Week 2                    0.51***        0.17     2.01***      0.73*         0.44         1.04*       0.41     4.37***
                                   (4.37)       (1.35)     (5.17)      (1.72)       (1.22)        (1.95)     (0.42)     (3.43)
Refund: Week 3                    0.45***        0.14     1.51***       -0.27        0.45          0.47       1.23       0.15
                                   (4.38)       (1.37)     (4.73)     (-0.75)       (1.43)        (1.07)     (1.44)     (0.14)

Household fixed effects             Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes
Day fixed effects                   Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes
Week 4 dummy after filing           Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes
Week 4-12 dummies after refund      Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes

Obs                               2,026,542   1,930,650   2,026,542   1,930,650   2,026,542    1,930,650   2,026,542   1,930,650
       2
Adj. R                              0.114       0.091      0.078       0.059        0.078        0.081      0.129       0.129
Unconditional mean                   6.11        6.32      15.83       18.77         8.46        11.87      43.77       73.97
Filing: Week 0 / Unconditional mean  0.7%       -1.1%      -0.9%       1.3%         -3.5%        -4.7%      16.3%       9.9%
Refund: Week 0 / Unconditional mean 14.1%        7.3%      24.8%       8.7%         26.7%        11.6%      -0.9%       4.2%




                                                             5
                         Table 4. Consumption Reaction to Filing and Refund
                                  (Extended Version of Table 2, Panel A)

This table presents the full results of the regressions run in Table 2. The data consist of daily household spending
data for the categories of restaurants, retail, ATM, and credit card purchases. Household days when there is no
spending in a category receive a value of zero. The dependent variable is the dollar amount of spending in the
respective category. The independent variables include week dummies around the tax filing and tax refund events as
well as day and household fixed effects. All regressions are OLS regressions. Standard errors are clustered at the
household level. t-statistics are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%,
and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                           6
Dependent variable:                          Daily $ spent on …
                                                                     Credit Card
                          Restaurants       Retail        ATM
                                                                     Purchases
                              (1)              (2)          (3)           (4)
Filing: Week -2            0.15***            0.00       1.41***        -0.61
                            (3.73)           (0.02)       (3.79)       (-0.71)
Filing: Week -1              0.04            -0.18       1.18***         0.99
                            (0.75)          (-1.18)       (2.61)        (0.93)
Filing: Week 0               0.07             0.15       6.38***         0.09
                            (1.33)           (0.82)      (12.27)        (0.07)
Filing: Week 1               0.05             0.02        1.33**       2.71**
                            (0.84)           (0.09)       (2.42)        (2.08)
Filing: Week 2              0.11*            -0.04         0.74       5.50***
                            (1.92)          (-0.21)       (1.40)        (4.12)
Filing: Week 3               0.03             0.26         0.51         2.27*
                            (0.68)           (1.56)       (1.09)        (1.90)

Refund: Week -2            0.16***            0.15         -0.09       0.89*
                            (3.21)           (0.92)      (-0.57)       (1.93)
Refund: Week -1            0.20***          0.78***         0.13       0.88*
                            (3.64)           (4.22)       (0.75)       (1.67)
Refund: Week 0             0.50***          2.09***      1.31***        0.37
                            (8.46)          (10.41)       (6.24)       (0.65)
Refund: Week 1             0.48***          1.59***      0.51***       1.30**
                            (8.28)           (8.24)       (2.70)       (2.42)
Refund: Week 2             0.25***          1.21***       0.31*       1.82***
                            (4.90)           (6.95)       (1.75)       (3.76)
Refund: Week 3             0.29***          0.75***         0.10       0.77*
                            (6.37)           (5.17)       (0.71)       (1.84)
Refund: Week 4             0.24***          0.85***       0.37**      1.48***
                            (5.49)           (5.88)       (2.55)       (3.55)
Refund: Week 5             0.27***          1.09***         0.24      2.22***
                            (6.00)           (7.27)       (1.51)       (5.19)
Refund: Week 6             0.17***          0.49***       0.28*       1.77***
                            (3.77)           (3.37)       (1.85)       (4.11)
Refund: Week 7             0.21***          0.48***        -0.02      1.58***
                            (4.82)           (3.33)      (-0.14)       (3.71)
Refund: Week 8             0.15***          0.39***       0.27*         0.64
                            (3.39)           (2.71)       (1.82)       (1.54)
Refund: Week 9             0.18***           0.36**         0.13      1.28***
                            (4.18)           (2.51)       (0.86)       (3.08)
Refund: Week 10              0.05            0.30**        -0.08       0.79*
                            (1.23)           (2.08)      (-0.53)       (1.93)
Refund: Week 11            0.19***            0.08          0.10        0.62
                            (4.45)           (0.56)       (0.74)       (1.57)

Household fixed effects      Yes             Yes           Yes          Yes
Day fixed effects            Yes             Yes           Yes          Yes

Obs                       10,098,306    10,098,306      10,098,306   10,098,306
      2
Adj. R                      0.093            0.062        0.077         0.128
Unconditional mean          $6.07           $17.13        $8.16        $55.19

                                        7
Figure 1: Components of Buffer Stock




     Figure 2: Timing of Events




                 8
Figure 3: Histogram of Refund Amount Normalized by Monthly Income




                                9
Figure 4: Consumption Response by Income Quintile




                       10
Figure 5: Consumption Response by Net Bank Balance Quintile




                            11
Figure 6: Time Series of Week Dummy Coefficients Surrounding Filing and Refund




                                      12
