NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DO IN-WORK TAX CREDITS SERVE AS A SAFETY NET?
Marianne Bitler
Hilary Hoynes
Elira Kuka
Working Paper 19785
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19785

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2014

Funding for this project was provided by the Center for Poverty Research at UC Davis. We thank Dan
Feenberg for help with the NBER SOI data and Myrtis Herrod of the IRS for providing us with tabulations
of the EITC for the most recent period. We are grateful to Laura Kawano, Yair Listokin, Jacob Goldin,
Doug Miller, and Bruce Meyer and participants at the NBER Universities Research Conference “Poverty
Inequality and Social Policy,” the 2013 CELS Meeting, and the UC Davis Brown bag for useful comments.
We also thank Janet Holtzblatt, Jeff Liebman, Laura Wheaton, and Ed Harris for help with constructing
the “at-risk”' population to accompany the data from SOI tax filing units. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Marianne Bitler, Hilary Hoynes, and Elira Kuka. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Do In-Work Tax Credits Serve as a Safety Net?
Marianne Bitler, Hilary Hoynes, and Elira Kuka
NBER Working Paper No. 19785
January 2014
JEL No. H2,I28,I3
ABSTRACT
The cash and near cash safety net in the U.S. has undergone a dramatic transformation in the past fifteen
years. Federal welfare reform has led to the “elimination of welfare as we know it” and several tax
reforms have substantially increased the role of “in-work”' assistance. In 2010, we spent more than
5 dollars on the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) for every dollar spent on cash benefits through
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF), whereas in 1994 on the eve of federal welfare
reform these programs were about equal in size. In this paper, we evaluate and test whether the EITC
satisfies a defining feature of a safety net program—that it responds to economic need. In particular,
we explore how EITC participation and expenditures change with the business cycle. The fact that
the EITC requires earned income leads to a theoretical ambiguity in the cyclical responsiveness of
the credit. We use administrative IRS data to examine the relationship between business cycles and
the EITC program. Our empirical strategy relies on exploiting differences in the timing and severity
of economic cycles across states. The results show that higher unemployment rates lead to higher EITC
recipients and total dollar amounts of credits for married couples. On the other hand, the effect of business
cycles on the EITC is insignificant for single individuals, whether measured by recipients or expenditures.
In sum, our results show that the EITC serves as an automatic stabilizer for married couples with children
but not for the majority of recipients—single parents with children. The patterns we identify are consistent
with the predictions of static labor supply theory, and with expectations about how economic shocks
are likely to affect one versus two-earner households.

Marianne Bitler
Department of Economics
University of California, Irvine
3151 Social Science Plaza
Irvine, CA 96297
and NBER
mbitler@uci.edu

Elira Kuka
Department of Economics
University of California Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis CA 95616
ekuka@ucdavis.edu

Hilary Hoynes
Richard & Rhoda Goldman School of Public Policy
University of California, Berkeley
2607 Hearst Avenue
Berkeley, CA 94720-7320
and NBER
hoynes@berkeley.edu

1. Introduction
The Earned Income Tax Credit provides a refundable tax credit to lower income working families
through the tax system. As a consequence of legislated expansions in the EITC and the dismantling of
welfare through the 1996 welfare reform, the EITC is now the most important cash transfer program for
these families (Bitler and Hoynes 2011). In 2010, the EITC reached 27.8 million tax filers at a total cost
of $60.9 billion. Almost 20 percent of tax filers receive the EITC, and the average credit amount is
$2,194.
One feature of a safety net program is that it raises incomes at the bottom of the income
distribution. Using this definition, the EITC is the most important safety net program for low-income
families with children: the recent release by the U.S. Census of the Supplemental Poverty measure reveals
that in 2011 the EITC lifted 4.7 million children from poverty, more than any other program (Short
2012)1. Among all persons in the U.S. there is only one government program that lifts more persons from
poverty – Social Security (Short 2012).
A second key feature of a safety net is that protection increases in times of need. For example, a
negative shock to family earnings as a result of job loss is mitigated by social insurance benefits (e.g.,
unemployment compensation), public assistance benefits (e.g., food stamps), as well as (for higher
income families) the progressive income tax system (Auerbach and Feenberg 2000). Kniesner and Zilliak
(2002) refer to these as “explicit” income smoothing (e.g., transfers) and “implicit” income smoothing
(e.g., taxes). This stabilizing feature of the EITC has not been explored and is the focus of our work.
To examine this issue, we use high quality administrative data on tax returns from the Internal
Revenue Service. We focus on estimating the relationship between business cycles and the EITC

recipients and expenditures. Our empirical strategy relies on exploiting differences in the timing and
severity of economic cycles across states. We measure the business cycle using the state unemployment
rate in a panel fixed effects model.
A defining feature of the EITC, and a general characteristic of “in-work” assistance programs, is

1

This calculation includes the combined anti-poverty effects for the EITC and the child tax credit.

1

that positive earnings are required for eligibility for the tax credit. The prior literature has established that
the EITC has led to sizable increases in the employment rates of single mothers (Eissa and Liebman 1996,
Meyer and Rosenbaum 2000, 2001) and has led to modest reductions in the employment of married
women (Eissa and Hoynes 2004). Given the earnings requirement at the center of EITC eligibility, the
response of the EITC to cycles (and economic need) is theoretically ambiguous. On the one hand, a
downturn may lead to higher rates of EITC participation – if downturn-induced decreases in earnings
move taxpayers into the EITC eligibility range for income. On the other hand, a downturn could lead to
lower rates of EITC participation – if downturn-induced decreases in employment bring earnings to zero.
This ambiguous role of the EITC in the presence of economic shocks has been discussed by some
legal scholars in the context of assessing the tradeoffs of efficiency, equity and stabilization (Listokin
2012, Ryan 2013). And more generally, it is well known that a progressive income tax structure serves as
an automatic stabilizer (see e.g., Auerbach and Feenberg 2000). However, ours is the first study to
empirically examine this stabilizing feature of the EITC, to explore differences across groups of
taxpayers, and to place such a discussion in the context of labor supply theory.
Our estimates suggest that the net effect of cycles on the EITC varies across different family
types. We find that higher unemployment rates—our primary measure of downturns in the business
cycle—lead to higher rates of EITC recipiency and total dollar amounts of credits per tax unit for married
couples with children.2 This suggests that for married couples, an adverse labor market shock causes them
to move to a lower level in the earnings distribution relative to where they would have been absent the
shock, leading to more participation in the program. In contrast, the effect of business cycles on use of the
EITC is negative (but statistically insignificant) for single tax filers with children, whether measured by
recipiency rates or expenditures per tax unit. This is consistent with expectations for a “one earner” labor
supply model – whereby job loss would eliminate family earnings thus reducing EITC participation. Thus
on net, we find the EITC stabilizes income for married couples with children but not for the majority

2

Throughout our analysis, all recipient counts and expenditure amounts are expressed relative to a population
denominator. For the central EITC results, the populations are the total within-cell number of potential tax filing
units calculated from the CPS ASEC. When we compare results across safety-net programs, however, we use the
total population of persons in each state and year as the denominator. Details are provided below.

2

group of recipients, single parents with children.
Our main results use data for 1996−2008; 1996 being the start of the period during which EITC
rules and real benefits have been relatively constant and 2008 being the last year that the IRS Statistics of
Income micro data are available. We collapse this data to cells defined by state, tax year, marital (filing)
status, and number of children. We then estimate models separately for different demographic groups
defined by marital status and number of children. Using more aggregate data, we are able to extend this
analysis through 2010, enabling us to capture effects during the full Great Recession. The results are
similar for this period to those for our main sample period which spans 1996-2008.
To put these results in context, we compare our results to estimates of the cyclicality of other key
safety net programs including Unemployment Compensation, Food Stamps, and TANF. Our estimates
imply that a 1 percentage point increase in the unemployment rate leads to a 6.1 percent increase in the
EITC recipiency rate for married couples with children. Filers without children, who are eligible for a
much smaller credit, also exhibit counter-cyclical movements – a one percentage point increase in the
unemployment rate leads to a 3.2 percent increase in the recipiency rate. The largest group of recipients,
single filers with children, shows a small negative (pro-cyclical) but insignificant response to the
unemployment rate. Overall, pooling all tax filers, EITC recipiency rates are modestly counter-cyclical,
with a one percentage point increase in the unemployment rate leading to a 1.8 percent increase in the
number of recipients per tax unit and a 2.2 percent increase in the number of recipients per capita. We
show that the EITC exhibits less countercyclical movement than do TANF, Food Stamps, and
Unemployment Compensation. Estimating similar models for the same time period for recipients in each
of these programs per capita, we find that a one percentage point increase in the unemployment rate leads
to an increase in caseloads per capita of 8.4 percent for Food Stamps, 7.7 percent for TANF, and 14.5
percent for Unemployment Insurance payments (UI).
As a second way to put these results in context, we use the March Current Population Survey to
explore how the EITC affects the cyclicality of income. In particular, we estimate the effects of
unemployment on poverty rates, using similar state panel data models. Our baseline results use the
official poverty measure, which depends on a family’s pre-tax cash income. We then recalculate poverty
3

rates adding our measure of the imputed EITC (using the NBER TAXSIM model) to pre-tax cash income.
Consistent with the analysis of administrative SOI tax data, poverty fluctuates less across the business
cycle due to the EITC, with the strongest protective aspect of the EITC being among married couples with
children.
These results are valuable for several reasons. First, the Great Recession is the first “test” of our
safety net in the post-welfare reform era (Bitler and Hoynes 2010). Given the recent decrease in use of
traditional welfare programs (TANF) that acted as automatic stabilizers in the past, it is important to
understand how this recession is affecting the American population and poverty among them. Secondly,
as many OECD countries adopt similar in-work policies (Owens, 2005), understanding the effect of
business cycles on in-work programs like the EITC is fundamental for policy makers' decision making
and budget planning. Third, given the rising importance of the EITC within the federal income tax
system, learning about the automatic stabilizing features of the EITC is important, and up until now, this
question was largely unstudied. Our results show that for those who remain in the labor market, the
phase-out region of the credit is stabilizing but the phase-in region is de-stabilizing.
The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 outlines the EITC and the recent
evolution of the safety net and discusses the relevant theoretical predictions. Section 3 discusses the data
and Section 4 presents our empirical model. The results are presented in Section 5, sensitivity analysis is
in Section 6, and we conclude in Section 7.

2. The EITC, the Prior Literature, and Theoretical Predictions
The U.S. safety net for low-income families has undergone a dramatic transformation in the past
fifteen years. Many aspects of this transformation are illustrated in Figure 1. In this figure, we plot real
per capita expenditures from 1980 to 2011 (2010 for the EITC) for the three main cash or near-cash
programs for low-income families with children: the EITC, Temporary Assistance for Needy Families
(TANF), and Food Stamps (now called SNAP or the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program). The

4

shaded regions are contractionary periods, annualized periods based on the NBER recession dates.3
The expansion of the EITC between 1986 and 1998, coupled with the decline in cash welfare
expenditures beginning with the welfare waivers of the early 1990s and continuing through the 1996
federal welfare reform, led to the rise in the importance of the EITC and a corresponding fall in the
importance of cash welfare (TANF). By 2010, spending on the EITC was almost five and a half dollars
for every dollar on TANF cash benefits (in 1994, on the eve of federal welfare reform, these programs
were about equal in size). This evolution represents a tremendous change in the safety net for low-income
families with children – a transformation from out-of-work aid (cash welfare) to in-work aid (EITC).
As is suggested by Figure 1, the EITC is now one of the most costly cash or near-cash safety net
programs for low-income families with children. In 2010, the most recent year for which data are
available, the EITC was received by 26 million families (or more accurately tax filing units, which can
include single individuals as well), at a cost of almost $60 billion. This amounts to an average credit of
about $2,240 (IRS 2011).
The EITC is distributed through the federal tax system, and the goal is to increase the after-tax
income of lower earning taxpayers, primarily those with children, while incentivizing work. The EITC
schedule has three regions. In the first, known as the phase-in region, the credit is phased in at a constant
rate: for each dollar earned, taxpayers currently receive 34−40 cents from the credit. In the second region,
the flat region, taxpayers receive the maximum amount of EITC benefit. In the phase-out region, the
credit is phased out at a constant rate: taxpayers lose 16−20 cents of credit for each extra dollar earned.
Figure 2 illustrates the relationship between earned income and the EITC for the largest group of
recipients, single filers with two children. The x-axis is annual earned income and the y-axis is the 2012
EITC amount. The potential income transfer is substantial – the maximum credit is $5,236 and the phaseout range extends to earned income of $41,952. There are separate schedules for taxpayers depending on

3

The official NBER recession dating is monthly; this figure presents annual data. We constructed an annual series
for contractions based on the official monthly dates, augmented by examination of the peaks and troughs in the
national unemployment rate. See Bitler and Hoynes (2010) for more information on the annual dating.

5

the number of children, and in some years, marital status.4 Importantly, individuals without children are
only eligible for a very small credit—in 2012 the maximum benefit for childless filers is $475, less than
one-tenth the size of the credit for two-child families.5
Enacted in 1975, the EITC has been expanded by tax legislation a number of times in the
subsequent years (in 1986, 1990, 1993, 2001, and 2009). Although the basic shape of the EITC schedule
has remained the same (as in Figure 2), these various expansions have led to changes in the credit's
subsidy rate in the phase-in region and tax rate in the phase-out region as well as changes in the maximum
EITC benefit. Figure 3 illustrates these benefit changes to the EITC over time. In particular, we plot the
real maximum credit by year and number of children for each year between 1983 and 2012. The 1993
expansion is the most significant, introducing the relatively small credit for childless taxpayers and a
second higher benefit schedule for those with two or more children compared to those with one child. The
2009 expansion, introduced as part of the federal stimulus, introduced a separate even more generous
schedule for those with three or more children.
Table 1 provides summary statistics for 2008, the most recent tax year in the micro SOI data (the
data are discussed more fully below). In 2008 there were 24.4 million tax returns with an EITC claim for
a total cost of $50.5 billion. Returns with an EITC claim represent 18.6 percent of the total tax returns
filed that year. The table shows that the recipients are split between singles with children (58.7%),
married couples with children (19.4%) and taxpayers without children (21.9%). In 2008, the average
credit per filer was $2,613 for single parents with children, $2,471 for married couples with children, and
$253 for childless individuals. Overall, the majority of the dollars spent on the program go to families
with children: 74.1% of the credit dollars go to single filers with children and 23.2% go to married filers
with children. The small share of dollars claimed among those without children (2.7%) reflects their much

4

Beginning in 2002, the phase-out range was increased for married taxpayers filing jointly. In 2012, the end of the
phase out range for these taxpayers is about $5,000 higher than for singles. This difference has been expanding over
time; for example it was $1,000 higher than for singles during 2002-2004 and $2000 higher during 2005-2007.
5
Adjusted gross income (AGI) also plays a role in calculating EITC eligibility and benefits. First, AGI must also be
less than the amount at the end of the phase-out region. Second, for filers in the phase-out region, their credit is the
lower of the credit calculated based on earned income and the credit based on AGI. When we analyze EITC
eligibility (e.g., as in Table 3 and Figure 4 below) we use only earned income and do not impose the AGI
requirement. For more information on the EITC program, see Eissa and Hoynes (2006) and Hotz and Scholz (2003).

6

lower potential and actual credit amounts.
A substantial literature uses the EITC expansions to estimate the impact of the credit on labor
supply. Among single-earner families with children, labor-supply theory predicts an increase in
employment. However, hours of work (earnings) for those already in the labor market are predicted to
decline.6 Because the EITC is based on family income, the credit leads to a very different set of incentives
for married taxpayers. Among secondary earners in married couples, the EITC is expected to reduce
employment and hours worked for those already in the labor force (Eissa and Hoynes 2004). The prior
literature provides consistent and robust evidence that the EITC increases the employment of single
mothers (Eissa and Liebman 1996, Meyer and Rosenbaum 2000, 2001). Additionally, the research shows
that the EITC leads to modest reductions in the employment of married women (Eissa and Hoynes 2004).
There is less evidence supporting the prediction of a negative intensive margin response on either hours or
earnings (for a review see Eissa and Hoynes 2006). Work by Saez (2010) and Chetty et al. (2013)
suggests intensive margin adjustments for some workers.
In addition, because eligibility for the EITC is tied to marital status and the presence and number
of children, an expansion in the credit could theoretically lead to changes in these demographic outcomes.
The research, however, suggests that the EITC neither impacts fertility (Baughman and Dickert-Conlin,
2009) nor family formation (Dickert-Conlin 2002; Ellwood, 2000, Herbst 2011).7 Recent work shows
that the EITC has important effects beyond income and earnings; additional family income from the EITC
leads to improvements in maternal and infant health (Hoynes et al., 2012, Evans and Garthwaite 2010,
Baker 2008) and children's cognitive achievement (Dahl and Lochner 2012).
We contribute to the literature by evaluating and testing whether the EITC satisfies a defining
feature of a safety-net program – use of such programs should go up in times of economic need. In

6

The prediction depends where the taxpayer is in the EITC schedule. If she is in the phase-in region, the EITC leads
to an ambiguous impact on hours worked due to the negative income effect and positive substitution effect. In the
flat region and phase-out region, the EITC leads to an unambiguous reduction in hours worked. Moreover, some
taxpayers with earnings beyond the phase-out region may choose to reduce their hours of work and take advantage
of the credit.
7
This finding is consistent with the broader literature finding that the elasticity of fertility with respect to transfers
from income support programs is very small (Moffitt 1998).

7

particular, we explore how EITC participation and expenditures change with the business cycle. This
focus links our paper to the empirical literature on the cyclicality of safety-net programs such as food
stamps (e.g., Ziliak et al., 2003, Bitler and Hoynes 2010), AFDC/TANF (Blank 2001, Ziliak et al., 2000,
Bitler and Hoynes 2010) and other food and nutrition programs (Corsetto 2012). Our paper also
contributes to the macro public finance literature on the automatic stabilizing features of the tax system. It
is well known that a progressive income tax system stabilizes income in downturns (for recent empirical
studies see Auerbach and Feenberg 2000 and Kniesner and Ziliak 2002). The implications of having the
non-linear EITC schedule within the more generally progressive federal income tax code have not been
explored thus far in the literature.
Predictions about how use of transfer and social insurance programs (AFDC/TANF,
Unemployment Compensation, and food stamps) and regular federal income tax payments will respond to
economic downturns are straightforward; tax receipts should go down and transfers and UI use should go
up. In contrast, theoretical predictions about the effect of cycles on EITC use are ambiguous. As
discussed above, eligibility for the EITC requires that earnings are strictly greater than zero and less than
the amount defining the end of the phase-out range. On the one hand, a downturn may lead to higher rates
of EITC participation – if decreases in earnings disproportionately move taxpayers down into the EITC
eligibility range. On the other hand, a downturn could lead to lower EITC participation – if the main
effect of the downturn is to cause individuals to leave the labor force; reducing earnings to zero. These
two possibilities are illustrated on Figure 2, presented earlier, which shows the EITC schedule for single
filers with two children. The right-most arrow shows a reduction in earnings that moves a family into the
EITC eligibility range; we label this arrow with a “+” to indicate that this movement leads to an increase
in EITC participation. The second (left-most) arrow shows a reduction in earnings that moves a family
out of the EITC eligibility range (reducing earnings to zero and leading to a loss of eligibility for the
EITC; in addition the family may end up not filing taxes which would also reduce the number of tax
filers); we label this arrow with a “−”, to indicate that this movement leads to a decrease in EITC
participation. The third (middle) arrow illustrates a reduction in earnings, but one that takes place within
the EITC eligibility range, leading to a “0” impact on participation.
8

One can also examine these different scenarios for earnings losses within the context of EITC
dollars received (rather than EITC recipients). This provides another measure of whether the EITC
provides income stabilization. A reduction in earnings from above the end of the phase-out range to
within the EITC eligible range or movement down within the phase-out range illustrate the incomestabilizing feature of the EITC. However, the movement out of the labor market or a movement down
within the phase-in region represents income de-stabilizing features of the EITC. Thus, “The net
stabilization effect depends upon the nature of the distribution of shocks to income across the income
distribution” (Listokin, 2012, p. 77).
Figure 4 serves to sharpen these theoretical predictions for our demographic groups of interest.
Here we present histograms for tax-return-reported earned income in 2006, the peak year prior to the start
of the Great Recession. We present the histograms for six demographic groups that correspond to the
different EITC schedules: single with no children, married with no children, single with one child,
married with one child, single with two or more children, and married with two or more children. For
each, the dashed line shows the EITC schedule and we force the x- and y-axes to have the same scale
across all 6 graphs. We limit the sample in each case to those returns with earned income between $1 and
$60,000. Note that we do not condition on receipt of the EITC, but tabulate the number of returns with
each amount of earned income to see how these counts stack up across various points in the EITC
schedule and higher earnings amounts.8 On each graph, we also indicate the share of total filers for that
demographic group that are excluded from the histogram (those with earned income that is <=0 or
>$60,000).
Several observations can be drawn from these figures. First, they well illustrate the variation in
the generosity of the schedule across these six groups. The credit is substantially larger for families with
children than for those without children and the credit is larger for families with two or more children

8

Our eligibility determination is not exact. First, as we discuss more below, a tax filer without children must be
between the ages of 25 and 64 to receive the EITC. We do not observe age in our tax data (nor the flag for aged
dependent status). Thus many in the tabulation for filers without children in fact are ineligible for the EITC because
they are older than 64 or younger than 25. Additionally, as mentioned above, for some taxpayers eligibility also
depends on AGI and here we only use earned income.

9

than for one-child families. Second, the distribution of earned income for single families with children is
shifted considerably to the left of the distribution for married families with children. Only 29.1% of
singles with one child and 17.8% of singles with two children have earnings higher than the top of the
phase-out range (compared to 75.9% and 74.6% for married families with one and two children). Third,
consistent with Saez (2010), there is evidence of clustering at the first kink of the EITC schedule for
single families with children.
In addition to the labor-supply channel, it is possible that our results could also capture effects
operating through the cyclicality of marriage and fertility. Schaller (2012), for example, estimates that an
increase in state unemployment rates leads to small declines in both marriage and divorce rates (between
1.5 and 1.7 percent), with evidence that the marriage effects are permanent while the divorce effects are
more temporary. This “endogenous marital status” would operate against the expected labor supply
channel – an increase in unemployment would lead to a reduction in the stock of married families which
would potentially decrease the number of EITC married filers and increase the number of EITC single
filers. The literature on the cyclicality of fertility is more mixed, but many studies document a negative
effect of unemployment rates on fertility (e.g., Dehejia and Lleras-Muney 2004, Schaller 2013). These
issues are particularly important to consider when we stratify our analysis by marital (filing) status, where
a clean interpretation requires that the composition of the sample is not changing with the changes in the
unemployment rate. In part to address this issue, we normalize the EITC recipients and expenditures by
the population of potential filers (by marital status and number of children). Further, note that when we
estimate models for the full, pooled, EITC sample, this issue is less important. Overall, our view is that
the potential for endogenous changes in marriage and fertility is likely quite small and second order
relative to the changes in labor supply across the cycle.
Given this discussion and the empirical evidence on the distribution of income, we conclude that
the effect of a downturn on EITC participation and dollars of stabilization is likely to vary by family
structure. Singles with children, due to being in one-earner families and having relatively low earnings,
are at higher risk of losing the EITC in the event of an adverse labor market shock. On the other hand,
given the higher level of earnings among married couples combined with the presence of two potential
10

earners, an adverse labor market shock is more likely to lead to an increase in the number of married
families with earnings in the EITC-eligible range. On net, therefore, we expect married-couple EITC
receipt to be more counter-cyclical than single-parent EITC receipt (which may even be pro-cyclical).
Therefore, the EITC is more likely to serve as an income stabilizer for married couples (or more
generally, for those with moderate incomes). Single parent families are less likely to experience income
stability from the EITC, and could theoretically experience increased income in-stability from the EITC.

3. Data
To empirically analyze the effect of business cycles on the size of EITC claims, we utilize data
from a variety of sources. Our primary data are administrative data from the IRS compiled from tax
returns. The Statistics of Income (SOI) is a nationally representative sample of federal income tax returns.
These are annual cross-sections, available for years 1979−2008. There are approximately 104,300
observations per year on average and these data are representative of all tax filers, and, therefore, also
representative of EITC claimants. The SOI data contain sample weights that allow us to infer results
about the U.S. population of tax filers as a whole. The SOI data are limited to information on the federal
tax return. We use information on filing status (single, head of household, married filing jointly, married
filing separately), number of dependents, earned income, EITC credit amount, number of children
qualifying for the EITC, and state of residence.
Our research design, discussed below, leverages variation in the timing and severity of business
cycles across states. Thus, unlike much of the EITC literature, we do not leverage variation in the
generosity of the EITC. In fact, we seek to analyze a period with minimal changes to the EITC. Thus, our
main estimates rely on data for the tax years 1996 to 2008, to avoid the major confounding EITC
expansions that occurred in the early 1990s. Figure 3, presented above, shows the relative stability of the
EITC over this period.9

9

During the period we analyze, some minor expansions of the EITC still occurred. For example, as discussed above,
the phase-out region for married couples with children was extended beginning in 2002. Additionally, in 2001 a
“modified” AGI measure was replaced with AGI for analysis of eligibility and benefits in the phase-out region. In
our analysis, time dummies will absorb the overall effects of expansions.

11

We end our sample period in 2008 because this is the last year for which the SOI micro data are
available. This is unfortunate given that we miss the full extent of the Great Recession. We were able to
obtain summary data on EITC claims, by state and filing status (single, head of household, married), for
2009−2010. We use this to estimate more aggregated models using data through 2010. We discuss this
below.10
Our sample is created as follows. First, we exclude all high-income individuals (filers with
returns over $200,000 of AGI), whose state identifiers are not reported in the SOI data because of issues
of confidentiality. This sample exclusion is not problematic because these high-AGI filers have income
far beyond the end of the EITC eligibility range11. Second, we exclude individuals from Puerto Rico, the
Virgin Islands, Guam or U.S. citizens living abroad, as well as military personnel stationed abroad. In the
SOI data, these filers all have the same geographic identifier, making it impossible for us to assign them
to the labor market conditions that they face. Moreover, we drop late filers, who are individuals filing tax
returns in one year but whose returns correspond to some previous tax year. By dropping late filers, we
exclude 59,835 observations from our main 1996−2008 sample, which represents around 2.8% of the
weighted sample. In a robustness check, we analyze whether our results are sensitive to this sample
restriction. Finally, we exclude married individuals filing separately, since these filers are not eligible for
the EITC. For consistency, we exclude these individuals both from the EITC recipients and expenditures
analysis and from the total tax filers analysis.
After these sample restrictions, and for the majority of our empirical analysis, we collapse the
data to totals for cells based on year, state, marital status (married or single) and number of children (zero,
one, or two or more).12
After this collapse of the data, we have a total of 3,978 cells in our 1996-2008 sample (50 states

10

These summary data are based on a sum of zipcode level data where zipcodes with fewer than 10 EITC recipients
are suppressed. Thanks to Myrtis Herrod of the IRS for this data.
11
Dropping this group could affect the estimates, presented below, for “total filers.”
12
The tax data identify filing status as married filing jointly, head of household, or single (and marred filing
separately which we drop). We assign taxpayers to be married if they file married filing jointly, and single if the filer
declared he/she was single or a head of household (meaning single with dependent children). The variable for the
number of children takes the values 0, 1 or 2, according to how many children the filers declare for EITC purposes.
When tabulating total filers we use the number of child dependents (0, 1, 2+) to assign the observations to the
appropriate cells; we must do so as there is no number of EITC qualifying children for the non-EITC cells.

12

plus DC times 13 years times 6 filing status/number of children groups). For each cell, we calculate the
total number of filers, the total number of filers claiming the EITC, and the total amount of EITC benefits
received; all as the weighted sums of these variables, using the sample weights provided in the SOI data.
We use data from the March Current Population Survey to create population estimates of the
number of potential tax filers in each cell to use as denominators for our SOI analysis. The March CPS (or
Annual Social and Economic Supplement to the Current Population Survey) is administered to most
households in March and collects labor market, income, and program participation information for the
previous calendar year, as well as demographic information from the time of the survey. The sample size
is approximately 150,000 persons or 57,000 households per year. We use these CPS data to convert the
administrative tax data to rates – EITC recipients per population (of potential tax filers) and EITC dollars
per potential tax filers – for each state-year-marital status-number of children cell. We construct the CPS
population denominators to reflect counts of the “at risk” population of potential tax filers (family
units/single individuals relevant for claiming the EITC). We use the CPS to identify the same six
demographic groups used in the SOI: each family (or subfamily) is assigned to a cell based on the marital
status of the family head and the family’s number of children. Following the EITC filing rules, we count a
child as a dependent if their age is less than or equal to 19 or a full time student and their age is less than
or equal to 24. In addition, to receive the EITC as a childless filer, a tax filer must be between 25 and 64
(and thus we limit the CPS population counts for the childless to those imputed tax filing units with
whose head is 25-64). We use the CPS March person weight for potential tax unit heads to aggregate
these counts of potential filing unit heads to population counts of the same concept.13
We also use the CPS to examine how the EITC affects the cyclicality of income and poverty,
examining whether families have income below 50%, 100%, 150%, and 200% of the federal poverty line.

13

We find that the number of single filers with children in the CPS is significantly below the number of single filers
with children in the tax records. Others have noted this difference, which may reflect complicated living
arrangements (children moving between custodial parents during the year) or noncompliance. Following others, we
adopt an expansive definition of children. Following the filing rules, we identify children as individuals 19 or
younger, or individuals 24 or younger who are full time students. Moreover, we also identify as children individuals
who are not participating in the labor force because of disability. We explore the sensitivity of our findings to how
we construct these denominators in Appendix Table 3. We discover that these choices make very little difference to
our estimates (or in the state-level population totals, not shown).

13

Official poverty status in the U.S. is determined by comparing total pre-tax family cash income to poverty
thresholds, which vary by family size, number of children, and presence of elderly persons. In 2012, for
example, the poverty threshold for a family of three (one adult, two children) was $18,498. Notably,
official poverty does not reflect the effects on income of the tax system (e.g., the EITC) or the non-cash
transfer system (e.g., food stamps). We calculate a second poverty measure where we add imputed EITC
to pre-tax income; the EITC amount is assigned using the NBER TAXSIM model. We also calculate cash
poverty and cash plus EITC poverty using the equivalence scales implicit in the newly released
Supplemental Poverty Measure (Short 2011, 2012).14 We calculate these four poverty measures for each
family and then collapse the data to cells based on state, year, and family type.15
To put our results on the cyclicality of the EITC in further context, we estimate similar models for
other safety net programs including AFDC/TANF, Food Stamps, and Unemployment Insurance (UI). As
with the EITC, we measure administrative counts of caseloads (here at the state-by-year level) that cover
the same time period as our core SOI results. We choose to normalize these caseloads by state total
population, given the differences in eligibility determinations and units across programs (and also present
EITC results normalized in the same way). The AFDC/TANF and Food Stamps caseloads are average
monthly measures (of families), while the UI data represent the total population probability of being on
UI on a weekly basis (total weeks of any UI benefits claimed divided by 52 weeks times state population).
The data can be found at DHHS (2013), USDA (2013) and DOL (2010).
Finally, we merge the SOI, CPS and program caseload data per population (of potential
filers/capita) with state annual unemployment rates, the main explanatory variable in our regressions; they
are obtained from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Lastly, to control for potential confounders from state
safety-net programs, we include data on state Medicaid/SCHIP income eligibility thresholds as well as

14

The Supplemental Poverty Measure is a broad post-tax resource measure that incorporates in-kind transfers (food
stamps, housing assistance, school lunch) and other large categories of expenses (e.g., out of pocket medical
expenses, child care, and fixed costs of work, child support) and allows the thresholds to vary with geographic area
and by expenditures on housing, food, clothing, and utilities and with an equivalence scale for various different
units. We cannot use the SPM measure for our analysis, however, as it is unavailable in public-use micro data before
2010.
15
We weight each unit by the weight of the individual denoted as the head (if a family/subfamily) or the weight of
the individual themselves (for the unrelated childless filers).

14

dummies for the presence of state EITC programs or other state welfare reforms, and where relevant,
dummies for demographic group.

4. Empirical Strategy
Our empirical strategy exploits variation in the timing and severity of cycles across states to
estimate the causal effect of labor market conditions on use of the EITC. Specifically, we measure the
business cycle using the state unemployment rate.16 We start with the following pooled model:

(1)

‫ݕ‬௚௦௧ ൌ ߚ ή ܷܴ௦௧ ൅ ߠ௚ ൅ ߙ௦ ൅ ߜ௧ ൅ ܼ௦௧ ߨ ൅ ‫ݎܽ݁ݕ‬௧ ή ߛ௦ ൅ ߝ௚௦௧

where subscripts refer to demographic cell g (filing status x number of children [0, 1, 2+]), state s, and tax
year t. URst is the state unemployment rate and T g are demographic group-specific intercepts. Our
primary dependent variable is the EITC participants per relevant population (ratio of EITC participants to
our CPS measure of population of potential tax filers, both for group g) measured in the tax year. We also
examine state-level EITC expenditures and EITC filers as a share of the total population of such filers
(overall and in various ranges of the EITC credit). We cluster standard errors at the state level, and the
regressions are weighted by the relevant denominators (potential filer population at the state-yeardemographic group level).
Equation (1) contains controls for state and year fixed effects, D s and G t respectively. By adding
year fixed effects we absorb changes in use of the EITC that are due to national business cycles. This
approach is necessary because it allows us to differentiate between changes in EITC use due to labor
market conditions and changes due to national EITC expansions (which are minimal during this time
period), secular changes in EITC take-up rates, and other national level confounders. Our main coefficient
of interest is E , which represents the effect of the state unemployment rate on the EITC.17 If the

16

We also explore the sensitivity of our findings to the measure of the business cycle, exploring also
log(employment) and log(state GDP), and finding very similar results.
17
The unemployment rate is the annual average for the calendar year corresponding to the tax year. Thus the
dependent variable, EITC recipiency rate, and the key independent variable, the state unemployment rate, are both

15

estimate of E is positive, it implies that the EITC is countercyclical and therefore during a recession, the
EITC acts as an automatic stabilizer. If E is negative, it implies that the EITC is pro-cyclical and is destabilizing.
To explore how well the theoretical predictions match the data, we analyze models stratified by
demographic group. For example, single individuals may lose their jobs during recessions, thus losing
EITC eligibility, while married couples may switch from being two-earner families to single-earner
families (or experience some other reduction in family earnings), leading to increases in the rate of EITC
use. To test these predictions, we separately estimate equation (1) for our main three groups of interest:
married couples with children, single parents with children, and childless individuals. We give limited
attention to the childless given the very modest maximum EITC benefit for this group.
In order to control for possible confounders at the state-year level, in some specifications, we
include various state-level measures of the safety net as well as the state-level EITC (in states with a state
credit). The vector Z st includes measures of state welfare reform, indicators for the presence of state
EITC programs, and state Medicaid/SCHIP income eligibility limits. Additionally, we explore the
sensitivity of the findings to controlling for state-specific linear time trends ( J s ). Finally, we explore the
sensitivity of our findings to other measures of the local business cycle.
Similar models are estimated for our analysis of poverty rates and other program caseloads.

5. Results
Table 2 presents our main results. Column 1 presents estimates for the pooled sample, while the
remaining columns are estimates stratified by our three demographic groups. The pooled sample contains
663 observations (data is collapsed to the state-year level) while the other columns have 1326
observations.18 Panel A presents estimates for EITC recipients and Panel B presents estimates for EITC

measured over the tax year. It is worth pointing out that that most EITC participants receive the as a tax refund early
in the calendar year following the tax year.
18
The pooled sample is constructed by collapsing the numerator (EITC) and denominator (population) and creating
the ratio of the two. The stratified samples have double the observations because each contains two demographic
cells. The childless sample includes cells for married and singles, and the with-children groups includes cells for one

16

expenditures (in real 2008 dollars). In each panel here and throughout the paper, the counts of EITC
recipients and EITC dollars are expressed per population of potential tax filing units. All regressions
include state and year fixed effects. Moreover, all regressions but the pooled estimates include fixed
effects for demographic characteristics. All models are clustered on state.
The results for the pooled sample show that a one percentage point increase in the state
unemployment rate leads to a 0.4 percentage point increase in EITC participation (statistically significant
at only the 10% level). (Here and throughout, unemployment is expressed in percentage points, and the
mean over the full period is 5.8.) For each regression (here and the tables below), we also include the
mean of the dependent variable and the “Percent Impact” (which is calculated as the coefficient on the
unemployment rate divided by the mean of the dependent variable). For the pooled sample, the effect of a
one percentage point increase in the unemployment rate translates to 1.8 percent impact on recipients. The
effect on total EITC dollars per potential tax filer is also positive, with a one percentage point increase in
unemployment rate leading to a 1.2 percent increase in per capita expenditures, although this coefficient
is statistically insignificant. These results suggest that, overall, the EITC program is weakly
countercyclical and serves as an automatic stabilizer--providing additional resources in economic
downturns.
The remaining columns of Table 2 present results for our three main subsamples: married couples
with children, single parents with children, and childless individuals. Column 2 shows that the EITC is
strongly countercyclical for married parents, both measured by the recipiency rate and by total dollar
amounts per potential tax filer. A one percentage point increase in the state unemployment rate leads to a
6.1 percent increase in the recipiency rate and a 5.7 percent increase in real credits per potential tax filer,
with both estimates significant at the 1 percent level. In addition, the EITC is estimated to be weakly
countercyclical also for childless individuals (Column 4) – a one percentage point increase in
unemployment leading to a 3.2 percent increase in the recipiency rate (significant at the 10 percent level).
In contrast, the largest group of EITC participants, single parents, has negative, but statistically

and two or more children. In all models we include fixed effects to absorb different participation rates across the
demographic groups.

17

insignificant coefficients for the effect of the cycle on use of the EITC. These results, taken at face value,
suggest pro-cyclical movements and income de-stabilization for single parent families.
In Appendix Table 1, we provide more detail by estimating models separately for all six
demographic groups (single or married, by zero/one/two or more children). Those results show similar
responses for families with one and two or more children. They also show that the childless results are
primarily driven by single filers.
We also estimated models that allowed for differential effects in expansions and recessions. In all
cases we could not reject that the coefficients where the same for the two periods, suggesting no evidence
in favor of asymmetric responses (Appendix Table 2). Our results are robust to alternative measures of
the business cycle. Appendix Table 3 shows qualitatively similar results with log of employment as the
measure of the cycle. Estimates with the log of state GDP also are qualitatively similar; use of the EITC is
countercyclical for married couples with children and the childless.
The differential patterns by marital status are illustrated in another way in Figure 5. Each panel
provides a scatterplot where the observations are at the state level (where the size of the circle is weighted
to reflect the state's population of possible filers). The horizontal axis in each panel denotes the change in
annual unemployment rates (in percentage points) between 2000 and 2008 and the vertical axis the
change in EITC recipients per population (in percent) over the same period, by state.19 We also include
the linear fit (using the states’ potential filer population as weights). We present these scatterplots for four
groups: the pooled sample, childless filers, single parents with children, and married couples with
children. The figure reveals considerable variation in labor market changes across states—the 2000 to
2008 change ranges from -1.2 percentage points (for WV) to a change of about 4.6 percentage points (for
MI). Consistent with the regressions, the figures show a positive relationship between the severity of the
unemployment rate increase and EITC recipients per potential tax filer for married couples and childless

19

The vertical axis has the same scale for each figure to aid the visual comparisons across groups. There are a few
small states that are off the scale for married couples with children. The linear fit, however, uses all of the
observations.

18

filers. Single parents with children, however, exhibit a negative relationship with rising unemployment
rates associated with declining EITC recipiency rates.
These results are consistent with our theoretical predictions of the effect of local market
conditions on the EITC by family type. Figure 4, presented above, illustrates that only a relatively small
share of the total filing population of single parents with children have incomes above the EITC phase-out
range. With such a large share of the distribution contained within the EITC eligibility range, it is likely
that a negative labor market shock will lead to no change in eligibility (a reduction in earnings within the
eligibility range) or a reduction in eligibility (due to job loss and earnings falling to zero). On the other
hand, among married families with children, far more than half the distribution lies above the phase-out
range. A labor market shock to this group, therefore, would be much more likely to lead to an increase in
the EITC (by moving earnings into the EITC eligible range). Given the presence of two potential earners
in the married households, it is less likely that a shock to them would lead both members of the family to
leave the labor market entirely unlike the single parents. This is consistent with the evidence in Table 2.
To more fully explore the differences by marital status and the connections to labor supply
predictions, we estimate our models on the full sample of filers (rather than EITC recipients) In particular,
we assign each filer to one of six earnings “regions”: phase-in, flat, phase-out, “near” phase-out (the
region $25,000 above the end of the phase-out for families with children; $15,000 above for the
childless), above the “near” phase-out, and the remaining filers (negative or zero earned income). These
regions are assigned using the appropriate tax schedule for that group and tax year (e.g., using the
appropriate filing status and number of dependents). The cells are defined as in Table 2 – by state, year,
filing status and number of children (0, 1, 2 or more). The weighted counts of filers are, as in Table 2,
divided by the CPS population of potential filers for the relevant demographic group.20 We do not
condition on EITC participation for this analysis as we want to learn how earnings adjusts in economic
cycles. It is important to point out that our SOI data is (necessarily) censored to include only those who
file taxes. In particular, many families whose earnings drop to zero will not be required to file taxes.

20

Because we are analyzing the full set of tax filers (rather than EITC recipients) we do not restrict the childless
population to be 25-64 (for the CPS population counts).

19

We begin in Table 3 by examining the responsiveness of total filers (panel A) and EITC eligible
filers (panel B) to the business cycle to assess whether there are important changes in the population of
filers and EITC eligible individuals in response to the business cycle. As above, we estimate models for
three groups: married with children, single with children, and the childless. The results show that single
parents with children exhibit pro-cyclical filing status – a one percentage point increase in the
unemployment rate leads to a 1.7 percent reduction in the share of single parents who file taxes. Childless
filers also show pro-cyclical filing status probabilities. In contrast, married couples show a very small and
statistically insignificant relationship between cycles and the probability of filing. The insensitivity of
total tax filing probability among married couples is consistent with their having two potential earners.
The results for counts of those eligible for the EITC as a share of potential filers mirror the main results
for EITC recipients in Table 2.
Figure 6 presents the results for earnings in the phase-in, flat, phase-out, “near” phase-out, and
above near phase-out regions. We plot the coefficient on the unemployment rate along with its 95 percent
confidence interval. (Appendix Table 4 contains the full set of coefficients and standard errors.) Figure 6a
shows that, for married parents with children, an increase in the unemployment rate leads to a reduction in
the propensity to have earnings in the top category (above “near” phase-out) and an increase in the
propensity to have earnings at all other, lower, levels. Notably, they have statistically significant increases
for earnings in the phase-out and phase-in regions, consistent with the higher EITC participation and
dollars distributed.
The results for single parents with children, in Figure 6b, show that an increase in unemployment
leads to reductions in the propensity to have earnings in all regions above the very lowest (phase-in
region). However, only the reductions for the near phase-out and above near phase-out are statistically
significant. The propensity to have earnings in the phase-in increases (although not statistically
significantly). The results in Table 3 and Figure 6 serve to deepen our understanding of the income
stabilizing (or de-stabilizing) nature of the EITC. It also reveals that our findings are consistent with a
static labor supply model interpretation. That is, some one-earner households with relatively low earnings
experience reductions in earnings within the EITC schedule, however they also experience earnings losses
20

that send them out of tax filing status. For two potential earner households, whose baseline earnings is
significantly shifted to the right of single parent families, the economic downturn leads to a shift from
above the EITC schedule range down into the EITC eligibility range, with no change to tax filing status.
To put these results in context, it is useful to compare these results to estimates for the cyclicality
of other key safety net programs. These results are presented in Table 4, where we compare results for the
EITC (here measured per capita) to those for AFDC/TANF (column 3), Food Stamps (column 4) and UI
(column 5). For each model, the data are at the state-year level covering 1996−2008 and we divide the
caseloads by the state population (as opposed to the state population of potential filers as before). For the
EITC, we present two measures – all EITC participants per capita (column 1) and EITC participants with
children per capita (column 2). The results in these first two columns show that a one percentage point
increase in the unemployment rate leads to a 2.2 percent increase in EITC recipients, and a somewhat
smaller 1.8 percent increase for EITC participants with children.21 The remaining columns show that a
one percentage point increase in the unemployment rate leads to an increase in per capita caseloads of 8.4
percent for Food Stamps, 7.7 percent for TANF, and 14.5 percent for UI. The result is significantly less
protection provided by the (aggregate) EITC in recessions than is provided by the other programs. Even
the most “cyclical” or income stabilizing EITC group, married families with children (for whom a one
percentage point increase in the unemployment rate leads to a 6.3 percent increase in recipients), exhibits
less countercyclical movements than TANF, Food Stamps, and unemployment compensation. This result
is echoed in work by Kniesner and Ziliak (2002) who find more “explicit” insurance (e.g., transfers) for
low income households than “implicit” insurance (e.g., taxes).
As a second way to put these results in context, we use the March CPS to explore how the EITC
affects the cyclicality of income and poverty. We measure whether a family has income below 50, 100,
150 and 200 percent of official poverty; both measured using official pre-tax income and also by adding

21

The results for the pooled EITC sample (column 1, table 4) differ slightly from the results for the pooled sample
in table 2 (column 1)—2.2% in Table 4 versus 1.8% in Table 2. Here, in table 4, we wanted to use a consistent
definition for the denominator across the columns in the table. Given the range of programs here, we opted to use
the state total population as the denominator (rather than the number of potential filers that we used in Table 2). This
shows minor sensitivity to the choice of denominators.

21

in the EITC. We impute the EITC using the NBER TAXSIM model. The results, estimating the same
model as (1), are presented in Table 5. We present estimates for married couples with children and single
parents with children. The first four columns show official poverty and confirm existing research
documenting a positive relationship between unemployment rates and poverty (Bitler and Hoynes 2010,
2013, Blank 1989, 1993, Blank and Blinder 1986, Blank and Card 1993, Cutler and Katz 1991, Freeman
2001, Gunderson and Ziliak 2004, Hoynes et al. 2006, Meyer and Sullivan 2011) with larger cyclicality
for single parents with children. For example, a one percentage point increase in unemployment leads to a
2.0 percentage point increase in official poverty (income below 100% poverty) for single families with
children and 0.7percentage point increase in official poverty for married couples with children. We repeat
the exercise in columns 5-8 but recalculate poverty incorporating income from the EITC. Incorporating
EITC income significantly reduces the cyclicality of poverty for married couples. The effect of a one
percentage point increase in unemployment is reduced by 42% for incomes below 50% poverty, by 21%
for incomes below 100% poverty, by 6% for incomes below 150% poverty, with a very small and
insignificant effect on the propensity to have incomes below 200% poverty. Given the relationship
between poverty rates and the EITC schedule (see Appendix Figure 2), and given the results on earnings
regions in the SOI data (Figure 5) this is precisely the patterns we would expect. In contrast, for single
parents with children, the EITC has minimal effects on the cyclicality of income. The results are very
similar for the poverty measures using the new supplemental poverty measure equivalence scales (Panels
C and D of the table).22

6. Additional Results and Sensitivity Checks
The validity of our estimates requires that the changes in state unemployment rates are not
reflecting other policies or trends at the state level that are both correlated with the unemployment rate
and drive EITC participation. We explore this in two ways, with the results presented in Table 6. First, we

22

This is a rather mechanical exercise, and in particular we are examining the cyclicality of poverty rates with and
without the EITC in a static setting—assuming that nothing else in the family changes. Notably, this does not
capture the channel whereby the EITC affects income and poverty through changing labor supply and earnings.

22

control for other state policies including welfare reform, indicators for the presence of state EITC
programs, and state Medicaid/SCHIP income eligibility thresholds. The results show (main results in
column 1, results adding state-year controls in column 2) that the results are highly robust to these
controls. Second, we include state-specific linear time trends (in column 3). Adding state linear trends
changes the coefficients somewhat (leading to increases in the magnitude of impacts for single families
with children and decreases for married couples with children), but the qualitative conclusions are
unchanged. Finally, we add both trends and controls, with the results close to those with state linear
trends.
Because individuals can file federal tax returns for previous years, each tax-year cross-section of
the SOI data contains not only returns for that tax year, but also for previous years. For example, in
calendar year 2006, most individuals file returns for income earned and taxes due for 2005. However, a
few individuals file for taxes due in 2004, 2003, etc. We refer to these individuals as late filers. In our
data, we have information on the year when the return was physically filed, as well as the tax year for
which the return is filed. Hence we are able to identify late filers, who represent around 2.8 percent of our
weighted sample.
Because in our empirical analysis we are estimating the contemporaneous effect of local labor
market conditions on the EITC, keeping late filers in our sample could introduce measurement error or
possibly introduce a systematic bias in the sample. While the ideal specification would require us to reclassify the year variable so that it refers to the year for which the federal returns were filed, and not the
tax year in which they were filed, this re-classification cannot be done appropriately for the entire time
period. In the last few years of data (2007 and 2008) not all late filers will have shown up. For this reason,
in our main specification, we exclude from the sample all late filers. However, to explore the sensitivity
of our findings to dropping late filers, we estimate models where we restrict the analysis to the years
1996−2004 (when we expect that most late filing of taxes for tax year 2004 have shown up). Table 7
presents the results obtained for three alternative treatments of late filers. In column 1 we repeat our main
results (exclude late filers, but for years 1996-2004). In column 2, we re-classify late filers to the tax year
for which the federal returns were filed. In column 3, we retain the late filers and do not alter the tax year
23

variable (the late filers appear in the counts for the year when they filed the returns). The results show that
our results are not very sensitive to this construction the sample. The estimated effect of the state
unemployment rate on the propensity to use the EITC does not vary significantly across the three sets of
results.
Our results end our sample period in 2008 because this is the last year for which the SOI micro
data is available. This is unfortunate given that we miss the full extent of the Great Recession and its
aftermath; the unemployment rate rose from 4.6 in 2007, to 5.8 in 2008, 9.3 in 2009, and 9.6 in 2010
before beginning to fall (to 8.9 in 2011 and 8.1 in 2012). We were able, though, to obtain summary data
from the IRS on EITC participants, by state and filing status (single, head of household, married) for
2009−2010. We collapse our original SOI data to match the data available for 2009−2010 and use this to
estimate more aggregated models using data through 2010. Because we only observe filing status (and
not number of children), these three groups do not match up exactly with the groups we present in our
main analysis. For this analysis of the data through 2010, though, we seek to examine the sensitivity to
adding these two deep recession years for a consistent definition of the cells. We can do that here.23 We
present these results in Table 8. In panel A, we estimate the models for the (base) period 1996-2008.
These results differ from Table 2 only in the aggregation to these three filing status groups. In panel B, we
present estimates for the same groups but with data extended through 2010. The results are virtually
unchanged by the addition of these two years.
Our last sensitivity test relates to our use of the CPS to construct the potential filer population in
the denominator of the EITC recipient and expenditure measures. We explored several different
definitions for the denominators in an effort to best capture the EITC filing rules (especially as they relate
to dependents) within the available CPS data. These results, presented in Appendix Table 5, show very
little difference across the alternative definitions for the at risk population.24

23

Those with filing status of married (and to a lesser extent for those filing single), include those with and without
children. Among head of household filers, a small number of filers have no children.
24
The denominator, the population of potential filers, is constructed according to the marital status of the family head
and the number of children in the family. The alternative definitions presented in Appendix Table 3 differ only on the
methodology used to identify children in the family. In the first definition, we identify as children individuals that are
18 or younger. In the second one, we identify as children individuals 19 or younger, or individuals 24 or younger that

24

7. Conclusion
Welfare reform and the expansion of the EITC have dramatically changed the landscape of
policies of redistribution for low income families with children in the United States. This change has led
to a movement away from “out of work” benefits, with their strong work disincentives, and an increase in
“in work” benefits, which promote employment. This dramatic policy shift has been followed by other
developed countries (Owens 2005).
The research shows that these policies have been successful at increasing the employment of
single mothers with children (Eissa and Liebman 1996, Meyer and Rosenbaum 2000, 2001, Grogger
2003). Additionally, results based on the new Supplemental Poverty Measure, first released by the Census
in 2011, show that the EITC is the most important anti-poverty program for families with children. The
Census tabulations show that the EITC removes 4.7 million children from poverty, more than any other
tax or transfer program (Short 2012).
In light of the importance of the EITC for lower income families, in this paper we evaluate
whether the EITC satisfies a central tenet of safety net programs – that they provide protection in times of
economic need. Additionally, the Great Recession provides our first opportunity to test our transformed
safety net. We examine this issue by using administrative tax records to estimate the cyclicality of the
EITC. We do so by leveraging substantial variation across states in the timing and severity of cycles
which we measure with the state unemployment rate.
Our results show that for the largest group of EITC recipients, single mothers with children, there
is a negative but statistically insignificant relationship between unemployment rates and their use of the
EITC. There is therefore no evidence that the EITC stabilizes income for this group; in fact the point
estimates suggests that the EITC acts as an income de-stabilizer. On the other hand, for married couples
with children (and to a lesser extent the childless), use of the EITC is found to rise in recessions and thus

are full time students. In the third case, we modify the second definition of children to include disabled individuals
and to exclude non-citizens. Lastly, in our fourth alternative we identify children as in the second definition, include
disabled and perform a “filers maximization” algorithm. This algorithm mimics tax noncompliance behavior when
tax filers strategically declare dependent children in order to minimize the tax burden of the household.

25

the credit acts as an automatic stabilizer for this group. These results can be understood within the context
of labor supply theory and in particular connect to the different predictions for how earnings changes for
one- versus two-earner households as well as underlying differences in the distribution of income across
the different family types.
To put these results in perspective, we compare the cyclicality of the EITC to other safety net
programs finding that TANF, Food Stamps, and (unsurprisingly) UI are substantially more cyclical than
the EITC.

26

8. References
Auerbach, Alan and Daniel Feenberg. (2000). “The Significance of Federal Taxes as Automatic
Stabilizers,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 14, 37–56.
Baker, K. (2008). “Do Cash Transfer Programs Improve Infant Health: Evidence from the 1993
Expansion of the Earned Income Tax Credit,” mimeo, University of Notre Dame.
Baughman, R. and Dickert-Conlin, S. (2009). “The Earned Income Tax Credit and Fertility,” Journal of
Population Economics, Vol. 22(3): 537-63.
Blank, R. (1989). “Disaggregating the Effect of the Business Cycle on the Distribution of Income,”
Economica, 56:141-163.
Blank, R. (1993), “Why were Poverty Rates so High in the 1980s?” In Poverty and Prosperity in the Late
Twentieth Century. Papadimitriou and Wolff, eds, St Martin’s Press.
Blank, R. (2001). “What Causes Public Assistance Caseloads to Grow?”, Journal of Human Resources,
Vol. 36(1): 85-118.
Blank, R. and A. Blinder (1986). “Macroeconomics, Income Distribution, and Poverty” In Fighting
Poverty: What Works and What Doesn’t. Danziger and Weinberg, eds. Harvard University Press.
Blank, R. and D. Card (1993), “Poverty, Income Distribution and Growth: Are They Still Related?”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2:1993.
Bitler, M. and H. Hoynes (2010).”The State of the Safety Net in the Post-Welfare Reform Era”,
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: 71-127.
Bitler, M. and H. Hoynes (2013). “Immigrants, Welfare and the U.S. Safety Net” in David Card and
Steven Raphael (eds), Immigration, Poverty, and Socioeconomic Inequality, in press, Russell Sage
Foundation, New York, NY.
Chetty, R., Friedman, J., and Saez, E. (2013). “Using Differences in Knowledge Across Neighborhoods to
Uncover the Impact of the EITC on Earnings,” American Economic Review, forthcoming.
Corsetto, L. (2012). “Food and Nutrition Program Cyclicality,” mimeo, UC Davis.
Cutler and Katz 1991,”Macroeconomic Performance and the Disadvantaged”, Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity 1:1994.
Dahl, G. and Lochner, L. (2012). “The Impact of Family Income on Child Achievement: Evidence from
the Earned Income Tax Credit,” American Economic Review: Vol. 102(5): 1927-56.
Dalaker, Joe 2005. Alternative Poverty Estimates in the United States, Current Population Report P60227, United States Bureau of the Census.
Dehejia, R. and A. Lleras-Muney (2004). “Booms, Busts, and Babies' Health.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, Vol. 119, No. 3, pp. 1091-1130.
Dickert-Conlin, S. (2002). “EITC and Marriage,” National Tax Journal, Vol. 55(1): 25-40.

27

Eissa, N. and Hoynes, H. (2004). “Taxes and the Labor Market Participation of Married Couples: The
Earned Income Tax Credit,” Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 88 (9-10): 1931-58.
Eissa, N. and Hoynes, H. (2006). “Behavioral Responses to Taxes: Lessons from the EITC and Labor
Supply,” Tax Policy and the Economy, Vol. 20: 74-110.
Eissa, N. and Liebman, J. (1996). “Labor Supply Response to the Earned Income Tax Credit,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, Vol. 111: 605-37.
Ellwood, D. (2000). “The Impact of the Earned Income Tax Credit and Social Policy Reforms on Work,
Marriage and Living Arrangements,” National Tax Journal, Vol. 53(4).
Evans, W. and Garthwaite, C. (2010). “Giving Mom a Break: The Impact of Higher EITC Payments on
Maternal Health,” NBER Working Paper 16296.
Freeman, R. (2001). “The Rising Tide Lifts…?” In Sheldon Danziger and Robert Haveman, eds.,
Understanding Poverty, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 97-126.
Grogger, J. (2003), “The Effects of Time Limits, the EITC, and Other Policy Changes on Welfare Use,
Work, and Income Among Female-Headed Families.” Review of Economics and Statistics 85(2):394408.
Gundersen, Craig and James Ziliak. 2004. “Poverty and Macroeconomic Performance across
Space, Race, and Family Structure,” Demography, 41:1, 61-86.
Herbst, C. (2011). “The Impact of the Earned Income Tax Credit on Marriage and Divorce: Evidence
from Flow Data,” Population Research and Policy Review, Vol. 30: 101--28.
Hotz, J. and Scholz, K. (2003). “The Earned Income Tax Credit,” in Means-Tested Transfer Programs in
the United States.
Hoynes, Hilary W., Douglas L. Miller, and David Simon. 2012. Income, the Earned Income Tax Credit,
and Infant Health. NBER Working Paper 18206
Hoynes, Hilary W., Marianne E. Page, and Ann Huff Stevens. 2006. “Poverty in America:
Trends and Explanations.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 20: 47-68.
Internal Revenue Service (2011). EITC Statistics, Report NR. 701-98-11 December 2011.
http://www.eitc.gov.irs.gov/central/eitcstats/
Kniesner, Thomas and James Ziliak (2002). “Explicit Versus Implicit Income Insurance,” Journal of Risk
and Uncertainty, 25(1).
Listokin, Yair J. (2012). “Equity, Efficiency, and Stability: The Importance of Macroeconomics for
Evaluating Income Tax Policy,” Yale Journal on Regulation. 45-78.
Meyer, B. and D. Rosenbaum (2001), “Welfare, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and the Labor Supply of
Single Mothers”, QJE 116(3): 1063-1114.
Meyer, B. and Rosenbaum, D. (2000). “A Making Single Mothers Work: Recent Tax and Welfare Policy
and its Effects,” National Tax Journal, Vol. 53: 1027-1062.

28

Meyer, B. and D. Sullivan (2011). “Consumption and Income Poverty over the Business Cycle,”
Research in Labor Economics, vol. 32, 51-82.
Owens, J. (2005). “Fundamental Tax Reform: The Experience of OECD Countries,” Background Paper,
Number 47, Tax Foundation.
Ryan, Kerry (2013). “EITC as Income (In)Stability?”, Florida Tax Review (forthcoming).
Saez, E. (2010). “Do Taxpayers Bunch at Kink Points?” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy
2(3), 2010, 180-212.
Schaller, J. (2012) “For richer if not for poorer? Marriage and divorce over the business cycle,” Journal of
Population Economics.
Schaller, J. (2013) “Booms, busts, and fertility: testing the Becker model using gender-specific labor
demand,” working paper, University of Arizona.
Short, K. (2011). “The Research Supplemental Poverty Measure: 2010.” Current Population Reports
P60-241. U.S. Census Bureau.
Short, K. (2012). “The Research Supplemental Poverty Measure: 2011.” Current Population Reports
P60-244. U.S. Census Bureau.
U.S. Department of Agriculture 2013. Caseload Data. Unpublished data provided by Katie Fitzpatrick and
John Kirlin of the Economic Research Service.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Administration for Children and Families, 2013.
Caseload Data. [online] Office of Family Assistance. Available at:
http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/ofa/data-reports/index.htm.
U.S. Department of Labor 2013. 1979-2010 Data. Unpublished data provided by DOL OSEC.
Ziliak, J. P., Figlio, D. N., Davis, E. E., and Connolly, L. S. (2000). “Accounting for the Decline in
AFDC Caseloads: Welfare Reform or the Economy?” Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 35(3): 570-86.
Ziliak, J. P., Gundersen, C. and Figlio, D. N. et al. (2003). “Food stamp caseloads over the business
cycle,” Southern Economic Journal, Vol. 69 (4): 903-19.

29

Table 1: Summary Statistics, EITC Recipients and Expenditures, 2008

Total EITC Recipients (Millions)
Total EITC Expenditures (Billions 2008$)

24.4
$50.5

Percent Distribution of Recipients, by Demographic Group
No Children
Single with Children
Married with Children

21.9%
58.7%
19.4%

Percent Distribution of Expenditures, by Demographic Group
No Children
Single with Children
Married with Children

2.7%
74.1%
23.2%

Average Credit Amount (2008$), by Demographic Group
No Children
Single with Children
Married with Children

$253
$2,613
$2,471

Notes: Data are from the 2008 Statistics of Income, which contains information on tax returns for tax year 2008 (income earned during calendar year
2008). The sample excludes high-income earners, individuals living abroad,
late ﬁlers and married couples ﬁling separately. Statistics are weighted to
represent the population of tax ﬁlers.

Table 2: Eﬀects of Unemployment Rate on EITC Recipiency Rates
and Expenditures per Potential Tax Filer
(1)
All

(2)
Children,
Married

(3)
Children,
Single

A: EITC Recipients per Potential Tax Filer
Unemployment Rate 0.385∗
0.881∗∗∗
-0.820
(0.220)
(0.270)
(1.306)
Mean Y
0.220
0.144
0.855
Percent Impact (%)
1.8
6.1
-1.0
Observations
663
1326
1326

(4)
No Children
0.252∗
(0.133)
0.079
3.2
1326

B: Real EITC Expenditures per Potential Tax Filer (2008$)
Unemployment Rate 547.6
1969.7∗∗∗
-2168.8
47.2
(609.2)
(672.9)
(3843.3)
(46.4)
Mean Y
460.5
345.3
2201.6
20.1
Percent Impact (%)
1.2
5.7
-1.0
2.3
Observations
663
1326
1326
1326
Notes: Data are from the 1996–2008 Statistics of Income, with denominators
measuring the number of potential tax ﬁlers from the CPS ASEC for the corresponding survey year after the tax year. The sample excludes high-income
earners, late ﬁlers, individuals living abroad and married couples ﬁling separately. The dependent variables are total EITC recipients and real EITC
expenditures ($2008), each divided by the total population of potential ﬁlers
in each cell. All regressions include controls for demographic characteristics,
as well as state and year ﬁxed eﬀects. The results are weighted by the population of potential ﬁlers in each cell. The unemployment rate is measured in
percentage points. Percent impact is calculated as the eﬀect of a 1 percentage point (1 unit) increase in the unemployment rate divided by the mean
value of the dependent variable. Standard errors are clustered by state and
shown in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.

Table 3: Eﬀect of Unemployment Rate on Filing Propensity and EITC Eligible Filers
per Potential Filer, Based on Earned Income
(1)
Children,
Married

(2)
Children,
Single

No Children

0.198
(0.577)
1.00
0.818
0.2
1326

-1.775∗
(1.053)
1.00
1.135
-1.6
1323

-1.466∗∗∗
(0.519)
1.00
1.021
-1.4
1326

1.035∗∗∗
(0.322)
0.24
0.192
5.4
1326

-0.537
(1.031)
0.74
0.839
-0.6
1323

-0.147
(0.210)
0.25
0.273
-0.5
1326

A: Total Filers
Unemployment Rate
Share of Filers
Mean Y
Percent Impact (%)
Observations
B: Filers in the Eligible Region
Unemployment Rate
Share of Filers
Mean Y
Percent Impact (%)
Observations

(3)

Notes: Data are from the 1996–2008 Statistics of Income, with denominators
measuring the number of potential tax ﬁlers from the CPS ASEC for the corresponding survey year after the tax year. The sample excludes high-income
earners, individuals living abroad, late ﬁlers and married couples ﬁling separately. Dependent variable represents the number of ﬁlers in the SOI or the
number of ﬁlers whose earned income puts them in the EITC eligible range,
each divided by the population of total potential ﬁlers in the demographic
group. All regressions include controls for demographic characteristics, as well
as state and year ﬁxed eﬀects. The results are weighted by the population
of potential ﬁlers in each cell. The unemployment rate is measured in percentage points. Percent impact is calculated as the eﬀect of a 1 percentage
point (1 unit) increase in the unemployment rate divided by the mean value
of the dependent variable. Standard errors are clustered by state and shown
in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.

Table 4: Eﬀect of Unemployment Rate on Participation Rate in Other Safety Net Programs

Unemployment Rate
Mean Y
Percent Impact (%)
Observations

(1)
EITC
All
0.163∗∗
(0.068)
0.072
2.2
663

(2)
EITC
Children
0.108∗
(0.063)
0.058
1.8
663

(3)

(4)

(5)

AFDC/TANF
0.066∗
(0.033)
0.009
7.7
663

Food Stamps
0.285∗∗∗
(0.061)
0.034
8.4
663

UI
0.135∗∗∗
(0.012)
0.009
14.5
663

Notes: Participation rates for years 1996–2008.
The dependent variables are EITC,
AFDC/TANF, food stamps, and UI recipients, each divided by the state population. Sources
for recipients are in text. All regressions include state and year ﬁxed eﬀects. The results are
weighted by the state population. The unemployment rate is measured in percentage points.
Percent impact is calculated as the eﬀect of a 1 percentage point (1 unit) increase in the unemployment rate divided by the mean value of the dependent variable. Standard errors are
clustered by state and shown in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.

Table 5: Eﬀect of Unemployment Rate on Oﬃcial Poverty Rate: With and Without EITC
Oﬃcial Poverty

A: Married with Children
Unemployment Rate
Mean Y
Percent change in coef. due to EITC
Observations
B: Single with Children
Unemployment Rate
Mean Y
Percent change in coef. due to EITC
Observations

Add EITC

50%

100%

150%

200%

50%

100%

150%

200%

0.262∗∗∗
(0.062)
0.025

0.742∗∗∗
(0.120)
0.077

0.793∗∗∗
(0.138)
0.151

1.024∗∗∗
(0.187)
0.237

1326

1326

1326

1326

0.152∗∗
(0.057)
0.020
-42.0
1326

0.588∗∗∗
(0.107)
0.059
-20.8
1326

0.744∗∗∗
(0.127)
0.141
-6.2
1326

1.028∗∗∗
(0.186)
0.235
0.4
1326

1.084∗∗∗
(0.288)
0.199

1.974∗∗∗
(0.349)
0.373

1.822∗∗∗
(0.445)
0.526

1.730∗∗∗
(0.337)
0.649

1326

1326

1326

1326

1.024∗∗∗
(0.289)
0.177
-5.5
1326

1.775∗∗∗
(0.337)
0.317
-10.1
1326

1.864∗∗∗
(0.454)
0.481
2.3
1326

1.788∗∗∗
(0.336)
0.632
3.4
1326

0.868∗∗∗
(0.145)
0.158

1.054∗∗∗
(0.190)
0.245

1326

1326

0.148∗∗
(0.063)
0.021
-42.2
1326

0.640∗∗∗
(0.124)
0.064
-9.3
1326

0.837∗∗∗
(0.139)
0.149
-3.6
1326

1.041∗∗∗
(0.191)
0.244
-1.2
1326

1.781∗∗∗
(0.466)
0.534

1.731∗∗∗
(0.322)
0.655

1326

1326

1.221∗∗∗
(0.301)
0.183
-3.3
1326

1.787∗∗∗
(0.335)
0.330
-7.6
1326

1.941∗∗∗
(0.469)
0.494
9.0
1326

1.709∗∗∗
(0.345)
0.639
-1.3
1326

C: Married with Children, SPM Equivalence Scales
Unemployment Rate
0.256∗∗∗ 0.706∗∗∗
(0.058)
(0.124)
Mean Y
0.027
0.081
Percent change in coef. due to EITC
Observations
1326
1326
D: Single with Children, SPM Equivalence Scales
Unemployment Rate
1.263∗∗∗ 1.934∗∗∗
(0.303)
(0.345)
Mean Y
0.207
0.385
Percent change in coef. due to EITC
Observations
1326
1326

Notes: Data are from the CPS ASEC calendar years 1996-2008 and are collapsed at the demographic group, state and year
level. Children are deﬁned following the deﬁnition for dependent children (same as children for EITC purposes). Panels A and
B include the results of regressions for being below various multiples of the oﬃcial poverty threshold; Panels C and D include
the results of regressions for being below various multiples of the oﬃcial poverty threshold for a family of 4 but incorporate the
equivalence scales for families of diﬀerent sizes from the new Supplemental Poverty Measure. All regressions include controls
for demographic characteristics, as well as state and year ﬁxed eﬀects. The results are weighted by the number of families
in each cell. The unemployment rate is measured in percentage points. Percent change in the unemployment coeﬃcient due
to the EITC is calculated as the percentage change in the coeﬃcient for being below the relevant multiple of the poverty
threshold between the speciﬁcations for oﬃcial poverty and oﬃcial poverty after adding the EITC to income. Standard errors
are clustered by state and shown in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.

Table 6: Eﬀect of Unemployment Rate on EITC Recipiency Rates,
Sensitivity to Adding State-Year Controls
EITC Recipients / Population

A: Married with Children
Unemployment Rate
Observations
B: Single with Children
Unemployment Rate
Observations
C: Childless
Unemployment Rate
Observations
State Policies
State Linear Trend

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.881∗∗∗
(0.270)
1326

0.888∗∗∗
(0.263)
1326

0.477∗
(0.260)
1326

0.464∗
(0.257)
1326

-0.820
(1.306)
1326

-0.735
(1.266)
1326

-1.304
(1.585)
1326

-1.504
(1.617)
1326

0.252∗
(0.133)
1326

0.257∗
(0.135)
1326

0.149
(0.147)
1326

0.118
(0.149)
1326

Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes

Notes: Data are from the 1996–2008 Statistics of Income, with denominators measuring the number of potential tax ﬁlers from the CPS ASEC
for the corresponding survey year after the tax year. The sample excludes
high-income earners, individuals living abroad, late ﬁlers and married couples ﬁling separately. The dependent variables are total EITC recipients
and real EITC expenditures ($2008), each divided by the total population
of potential ﬁlers in each cell. All regressions include controls for demographic characteristics, as well as state and year ﬁxed eﬀects. The results
are weighted by the population of potential ﬁlers in each cell. The unemployment rate is measured in percentage points. Standard errors are
clustered by state and shown in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, ***
p<0.01.

Table 7: Eﬀects of the Unemployment Rate on EITC Recipiency Rates,
Sensitivity to Treatment of Late Filers
Tax Year, with Late Filers
Excluded [Baseline]
(1)
A: Married with Children
Unemployment Rate
Mean Y
Percent Impact (%)
Observations
B: Single with Children
Unemployment Rate
Mean Y
Percent Impact (%)
Observations
C: Childless
Unemployment Rate
Mean Y
Percent Impact (%)
Observations

Filing Year

Included
(2)

Late Filers Included
(3)

0.462∗
(0.273)
0.143
3.2
918

0.422
(0.293)
0.147
2.9
918

0.504∗
(0.291)
0.147
3.4
918

-1.101
(1.563)
0.838
-1.3
918

-1.066
(1.578)
0.856
-1.2
918

-1.002
(1.648)
0.857
-1.2
918

0.418∗
(0.217)
0.074
5.7
918

0.506∗∗
(0.230)
0.079
6.4
918

0.416∗
(0.229)
0.078
5.3
918

Notes: Data are from the 1996–2004 Statistics of Income, with denominators measuring the number of potential tax ﬁlers from the CPS ASEC for the corresponding
survey year after the tax year. The sample excludes high-income earners, individuals
living abroad and married couples ﬁling separately. The dependent variable is total
EITC recipients divided by the total population of potential ﬁlers in each cell. All
regressions include controls for demographic characteristics, as well as state and year
ﬁxed eﬀects. The results are weighted by the population of potential ﬁlers in each
cell. The unemployment rate is measured in percentage points. Percent impact is
calculated as the eﬀect of a 1 percentage point (1 unit) increase in the unemployment rate divided by the mean value of the dependent variable. Standard errors are
clustered by state and shown in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.

Table 8: Eﬀects of Unemployment Rate on EITC Recipiency Rates,
Sensitivity to Extending Sample through 2010
EITC Recipients / Population

A: Years 1996-2008
Unemployment Rate
Mean Y
Percent Impact (%)
Observations
B: Years 1996-2010
Unemployment Rate
Mean Y
Percent Impact (%)
Observations

(1)
All

(2)
Married

(3)
Head of Household

(4)
Single

0.385∗
(0.220)
0.220
1.8
663

0.500∗∗∗
(0.166)
0.097
5.2
663

0.252
(1.215)
0.781
0.3
663

-0.041
(0.249)
0.151
-0.3
663

0.269∗∗
(0.128)
0.224
1.2
765

0.431∗∗∗
(0.115)
0.101
4.3
765

-0.192
(0.827)
0.782
-0.2
765

0.111
(0.134)
0.156
0.7
765

Notes: Data are from the 1996–2008 Statistics of Income, with denominators measuring the number of potential tax ﬁlers from the CPS ASEC
for the corresponding survey year after the tax year. The sample excludes
high-income earners, individuals living abroad, late ﬁlers and married couples ﬁling separately. The dependent variables are total EITC recipients
and real EITC expenditures ($2008), each divided by the total population
of potential ﬁlers in each cell. All regressions include controls for state and
year ﬁxed eﬀects. The results are weighted by the population of potential ﬁlers in each cell. The unemployment rate is measured in percentage
points. Percent impact is calculated as the eﬀect of a 1 percentage point
(1 unit) increase in the unemployment rate divided by the mean value of
the dependent variable. Standard errors are clustered by state and shown
in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.

Figure 1: Per Capita Expenditures on Cash and Near Cash Transfer Programs for Families (2009$)

'(%


 !

''(

 


#   
  ! 

'%%

  ! 

&)(
&(%
&'(
&%%
)(
(%
'(
%
&+*%

&+*(

&++%

&++(

'%%%

'%%(

'%&%

Notes: Figures are derived from data in Bitler and Hoynes (2010) and updated data.

Figure 2: EITC Schedule for Single Parents with Two Children (2012) and Predicted Eﬀects
$7,000

$6,000

(−)

Credit Amount 2012 $

$5,000

$4,000

$3,000

(+)

(0)

$2,000

$1,000

$0
$0

$10,000

$20,000

$30,000

Earned Income 2012 $

$40,000

$50,000

Figure 3: EITC Maximum Beneﬁts By Number of Children (2012$)
 
 
 

    
 
   
   

 
 
 
 

              


Notes: Data on nominal EITC beneﬁts are from Tax Policy Center. Data on CPI are from
the BLS.

Figure 4: EITC Eligibility and the Earned Income Distribution—2006
(a) Single, No Children

0

10000

20000
30000
40000
Total Earned Income

Density of Earned Income

50000

60000

5000
2000
3000
4000
EIC Schedule ($)
1000
0

Density of Earned Income
1.5e−05 3.0e−05 4.5e−05
0

6.0e−05

1000
0

0

Density of Earned Income
1.5e−05 3.0e−05 4.5e−05

2000
3000
4000
EIC Schedule ($)

5000

6.0e−05

(b) Married, No Children

0

EIC Schedule ($)

50000

5000
2000
3000
4000
EIC Schedule ($)
1000
0

Density of Earned Income
1.5e−05 3.0e−05 4.5e−05
0

60000

0

EIC Schedule ($)

50000

60000

EIC Schedule ($)

5000
2000
3000
4000
EIC Schedule ($)
1000
0

Density of Earned Income
1.5e−05 3.0e−05 4.5e−05
0

60000

EIC Schedule ($)

6.0e−05

1000
0

2000
3000
4000
EIC Schedule ($)

5000

6.0e−05
Density of Earned Income
1.5e−05 3.0e−05 4.5e−05

Density of Earned Income
Notes: Share (E<=0) = .011, Share (E>60K) = .059

50000

(f ) Married, Two+ Children

0

20000
30000
40000
Total Earned Income

20000
30000
40000
Total Earned Income

Notes: Share (E<=0) = .021, Share (E>60K) = .533

(e) Single Two+ Children

10000

10000

Density of Earned Income

Notes: Share (E<=0) = .024, Share (E>60K) = .092

0

EIC Schedule ($)

6.0e−05

1000
0

2000
3000
4000
EIC Schedule ($)

5000

6.0e−05
Density of Earned Income
1.5e−05 3.0e−05 4.5e−05

Density of Earned Income

60000

(d) Married, One Child

0

20000
30000
40000
Total Earned Income

50000

Notes: Share (E<=0) = .216, Share (E>60K) = .334

(c) Single, One Child

10000

20000
30000
40000
Total Earned Income

Density of Earned Income

Notes: Share (E<=0) = .151, Share (E>60K) = .084

0

10000

0

10000

20000
30000
40000
Total Earned Income

Density of Earned Income

50000

60000

EIC Schedule ($)

Notes: Share (E<=0) = .011, Share (E>60K) = .552

Notes: Figures show the earned income distribution for Tax Year 2006 with the EITC schedule overlaid. Figures on left
are for single ﬁlers; ﬁgures on right are for married ﬁlers. Figures in Panels (a) and (b) are for ﬁlers with no children;
those in Panels (c) and (d) are for ﬁlers with one child, and those in Panels (e) and (f) are for ﬁlers with 2 or more
children. The share of ﬁlers with negative or 0 income as well as those with income above $60,000 are in the ﬁgure notes.
Data are from Statistics of Income for tax year 2006 (income earned during calendar year 2006). The sample excludes
high-income earners, individuals living abroad, late ﬁlers and married couples ﬁling separately. Histograms are weighted
to represent the population of tax ﬁlers.

Figure 5: EITC Recipiency Rates and Unemployment Rates, Changes from 2000 to 2008 by State
(a) All
120
90
60
30
0
−30
−60

−60

−30

0

30

60

90

120

(b) No Children

0

1
2
3
Change in Unemployment Rate

Percent Change in EITC Caseloads / Population

4

0

Fitted values

1
2
3
Change in Unemployment Rate

Percent Change in EITC Caseloads / Population

Fitted values

(d) Married with Children

−60

−60

−30

−30

0

0

30

30

60

60

90

90

120

120

(c) Single with Children

4

0

1
2
3
Change in Unemployment Rate

Percent Change in EITC Caseloads / Population

4
Fitted values

0

1
2
3
Change in Unemployment Rate

Percent Change in EITC Caseloads / Population

4
Fitted values

Notes: Data are from the 2000 and 2008 Statistics of Income. Unemployment rate changes measured in percentage points;
recipiency rate changes measured in percent. The sample excludes high-income earners, individuals living abroad, late
ﬁlers and married couples ﬁling separately. Unemployment rates are from the BLS. Circle sizes are proportional to the
population of potential ﬁlers in each cell, calculated with CPS ASEC data. In order to present results on the same scale,
we drop observations where the percent change in EITC recipients divided by population is larger than 130.

Figure 6: Eﬀect of Unemployment Rate on Location in EITC Schedule According to Earned Income

Above Phaseout

Near Phaseout

Phaseout
Flat

Phasein

−2

Estimated Coefficient
−1
0
1

2

(a) Married with Children

Total Earned Income
Near Phaseout region: earnings up to $25,000 above phaseout
Notes: Effect of UR on Total Filers = 0.198 (0.577)

Above Phaseout

Near Phaseout

Phaseout

Flat

Phasein

−2

Estimated Coefficient
−1
0
1

2

(b) Single with Children

Total Earned Income
Near Phaseout region: earnings up to $25,000 above phaseout
Notes: Effect of UR on Total Filers = −1.775 (1.053)

Notes: Data are from the 1996–2008 Statistics of Income, with denominators measuring the number of potential tax ﬁlers from the CPS ASEC
for the corresponding survey year after the tax year. The sample excludes
high-income earners, individuals living abroad, late ﬁlers and married couples ﬁling separately. Each point represents an estimated coeﬃcient where
the dependent variable is the number of ﬁlers whose earned income puts
them in each EITC range, each divided by the population of total potential ﬁlers in the demographic group. All regressions include controls for
demographic characteristics, as well as state and year ﬁxed eﬀects. The
results are weighted by the population of potential ﬁlers in each cell. The
unemployment rate is measured in percent. Standard errors are clustered
by state.

A

Appendix: Further Results
Table A.1: Eﬀects of Unemployment Rate on EITC Recipiency Rate and Expenditures per Potential Tax ﬁler,
by Marital Status and Number of Children
Single
(1)
Zero
A: EITC Recipiency Rate
Unemployment Rate 0.477∗∗
(0.204)
Mean Y
0.115
Percent Impact (%)
4.1
Observations
663
B: EITC Dollars/Potential Tax
Unemployment Rate
95.8
(66.1)
Mean Y
29.2
Percent Impact (%)
3.3
Observations
663

Married

(2)
One

(3)
Two or More

(4)
Zero

(5)
One

(6)
Two or More

-1.137
(1.706)
0.814
-1.4
663

-0.472
(1.493)
0.906
-0.5
663

-0.102
(0.123)
0.023
-4.4
663

0.693∗
(0.373)
0.134
5.2
663

0.986∗∗∗
(0.346)
0.150
6.6
663

Filer (2008$)
-3419.5
-767.7
(3906.9)
(5195.9)
1647.3
2899.1
-2.1
-0.3
663
663

-31.2
(39.2)
6.0
-5.2
663

1026.4
(723.8)
239.2
4.3
663

2477.1∗∗
(1007.3)
407.5
6.1
663

Notes: Data are from the 1996–2008 Statistics of Income, with denominators measuring the number
of potential tax ﬁlers from the CPS ASEC for the corresponding survey year after the tax year. The
sample excludes high-income earners, individuals living abroad, late ﬁlers and married couples ﬁling
separately. The dependent variables are total EITC recipients and real EITC expenditures ($2008),
each divided by the total population of potential ﬁlers in each cell. All regressions include controls for
state and year ﬁxed eﬀects. The results are weighted by the population of potential ﬁlers in each cell.
The unemployment rate is measured in percentage points. Percent impact is calculated as the eﬀect
of a 1 percentage point (1 unit) increase in the unemployment rate divided by the mean value of the
dependent variable. Standard errors are clustered by state and shown in parentheses. * p<0.10, **
p<0.05, *** p<0.01.

Table A.2: Asymmetric Eﬀects of Unemployment Rate on EITC Recipiency Rate,
Expenditures per Potential Tax Filer, and and Propensity to File Taxes
(1)
Children,
Married

(2)
Children,
Single

No Children

0.956∗∗∗
(0.270)
0.894∗∗∗
(0.271)
0.288
1326

-0.333
(1.405)
-0.722
(1.305)
0.172
1326

0.280∗
(0.146)
0.257∗
(0.134)
0.497
1326

B: EITC Dollars/Potential Tax Filer (2008$)
UR * Expansion
2111.6∗∗∗
-1320.6
(679.9)
(4145.0)
UR * Recession
1995.9∗∗∗
-1998.3
(672.5)
(3862.8)
p-value, rec. coef. = exp. coef.
0.463
0.407
Observations
1326
1326

53.8
(47.7)
48.3
(46.1)
0.638
1326

A: EITC Recipiency Rate
UR * Expansion
UR * Recession
p-value, rec. coef. = exp. coef.
Observations

C: Probability of Filing Taxes
UR * Expansion
UR * Recession
p-value, rec. coef. = exp. coef.
Observations

0.266
(0.627)
0.210
(0.580)
0.762
1326

-1.769
(1.077)
-1.774∗
(1.043)
0.988
1326

(3)

-1.720∗∗∗
(0.604)
-1.550∗∗∗
(0.570)
0.307
1326

Notes: Data are from the 1996–2008 Statistics of Income, with denominators
measuring the number of potential tax ﬁlers from the CPS ASEC for the corresponding survey year after the tax year. The sample excludes high-income
earners, individuals living abroad, late ﬁlers and married couples ﬁling separately. The dependent variables are total EITC recipients, real EITC expenditures ($2008) and total ﬁlers, each divided by the total population of
potential ﬁlers in each cell. Expansion (recession) years are deﬁned as years
in which a state experienced a decrease (increase) in the state unemployment
rate. All regressions include controls for demographic characteristics, as well
as state and year ﬁxed eﬀects. The results are weighted by the population
of potential ﬁlers in each cell. The unemployment rate is measured in percentage points. Percent impact is calculated as the eﬀect of a 1 percentage
point (1 unit) increase in the unemployment rate divided by the mean value
of the dependent variable. Standard errors are clustered by state and shown
in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.

Table A.3: Eﬀects of Employment on EITC Recipiency Rate and Expenditures
per Potential Tax Filer
(1)

(2)
Children,
Married

(3)
Children,
Single

No Children

A: EITC Recipiency Rate
Log (Employment) -0.127∗∗
(0.049)
Mean Y
0.220
Observations
663

-0.163∗∗
(0.061)
0.144
1326

-0.054
(0.272)
0.855
1326

-0.070∗∗∗
(0.026)
0.079
1326

B: EITC Dollars/Potential Tax
Log (Employment)
-241.6
(155.5)
Mean Y
460.5
Observations
663

Filer (2008$)
-307.6
-495.8
(187.1)
(805.9)
345.3
2201.6
1326
1326

All

(4)

-16.3∗
(9.2)
20.1
1326

Notes: Data are from the 1996–2008 Statistics of Income, with denominators
measuring the number of potential tax ﬁlers from the CPS ASEC for the
corresponding survey year after the tax year. The business cycle is measured
by the natural log of non-farm employment from the BLS. The sample excludes high-income earners, late ﬁlers, individuals living abroad and married
couples ﬁling separately. The dependent variables are total EITC recipients
and real EITC expenditures ($2008), each divided by the total population
of potential ﬁlers in each cell. All regressions include controls for demographic characteristics, as well as state and year ﬁxed eﬀects. The results
are weighted by the population of potential ﬁlers in each cell. Standard errors are clustered by state and shown in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05,
*** p<0.01.

Table A.4: Eﬀect of Cycles on Filing Propensity and EITC Eligible Filers per Potential Filer, By Earned Income

A: Married with Kids
Unemployment Rate
Share of Filers
Mean Y
Percent Impact (%)
Observations
B: Single with Kids
Unemployment Rate
Share of Filers
Mean Y
Percent Impact (%)
Observations

(1)
Total

(2)
Eligible

(3)
Phasein

(4)
Flat

(5)
Phaseout

(6)
Near Phaseout

(7)
Above

(8)
Non-positive

0.198
(0.577)
1.00
0.818
0.2
1326

1.035∗∗∗
(0.322)
0.24
0.192
5.4
1326

0.281∗∗∗
(0.104)
0.03
0.026
10.9
1326

0.071
(0.068)
0.04
0.030
2.4
1326

0.602∗∗
(0.268)
0.17
0.142
4.2
1326

0.211
(0.256)
0.24
0.197
1.1
1326

-1.074∗∗
(0.514)
0.52
0.424
-2.5
1326

0.027
(0.044)
0.01
0.012
2.2
1326

-1.775∗
(1.053)
1.00
1.135
-1.6
1323

-0.537
(1.031)
0.74
0.839
-0.6
1323

0.168
(0.472)
0.18
0.195
0.9
1323

-0.170
(0.364)
0.15
0.175
-1.0
1323

-0.535
(0.604)
0.41
0.469
-1.1
1323

-0.723∗∗
(0.348)
0.17
0.192
-3.8
1323

-0.590∗∗∗
(0.195)
0.07
0.085
-6.9
1323

0.075
(0.118)
0.02
0.020
3.8
1323

Notes: Regressions present the eﬀect of the unemployment rate on the total number of ﬁlers per potential tax ﬁlers (column 1)
or the number of ﬁlers in various ranges of the EITC schedule according to earnings denominated by the number of potential tax
ﬁlers (columns 2–8). All regressions include controls for demographic characteristics, as well as state and year ﬁxed eﬀects. The
results are weighted by the population in each cell. The unemployment rate is measured in percentage points. Percent impact
is calculated as the eﬀect of a 1 percentage point (1 unit) increase in the unemployment rate divided by the mean value of the
dependent variable. Standard errors are clustered by state and shown in parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01

Table A.5: Sensitivity of Eﬀects of Unemployment Rate on Recipiency Rates and Expenditures
per Potential Tax Filer to Deﬁnition of Population (Denominator)
(1)
Children,
Married

(2)
Children,
Single

No Children

0.935∗∗∗
(0.295)

-0.828
(1.437)

0.236∗
(0.126)

b) Kids: 19 and younger, or 24 and FT students

0.892∗∗∗
(0.276)

-0.493
(1.379)

0.244∗
(0.132)

c) Kids: b) and disabled, citizens only

0.938∗∗∗
(0.265)

-0.794
(1.349)

0.243∗
(0.130)

d) Kids: b) and disabled, and ﬁlers maximization

0.856∗∗∗
(0.256)

-0.636
(1.121)

0.260∗
(0.142)

2091.7∗∗∗
(732.9)

-2511.3
(4266.4)

44.1
(44.3)

b) Kids: 19 and younger, or 24 and FT students

1991.0∗∗∗
(685.4)

-1571.4
(4057.4)

45.4
(46.1)

c) Kids: b) and disabled, citizens only

2088.0∗∗∗
(666.8)

-2017.9
(3964.0)

45.1
(45.5)

d) Kids: b) and disabled, and ﬁlers maximization

1908.6∗∗∗
(641.4)
1326

-1786.7
(3381.3)
1326

48.3
(49.8)
1326

A: EITC Recipients
a) Kids: 18 and younger

B: EITC Dollars (2008$)
a) Kids: 18 and younger

Observations

(3)

Notes: Data are from the 1996–2008 Statistics of Income, with denominators measuring the number
of potential tax ﬁlers from the CPS ASEC for the corresponding survey year after the tax year using
various deﬁnitions of this population. The sample excludes high-income earners, individuals living
abroad, late ﬁlers and married couples ﬁling separately. The dependent variables are total EITC
recipients and real EITC expenditures ($2008), each divided by the total population of potential
ﬁlers in each cell. All regressions include controls for state and year ﬁxed eﬀects. The results are
weighted by the population of potential ﬁlers in each cell. The unemployment rate is measured in
percentage points. Standard errors are clustered by state and shown in parentheses. * p<0.10, **
p<0.05, *** p<0.01.

Figure A.1: Eﬀect of Cycles on EITC Eligible Filers per Potential Filer, By Earned Income
(a) Married with Children—SOI

Total Earned Income

Above Phaseout

Near Phaseout

Total Earned Income

Near Phaseout region: earnings up to $25,000 above phaseout

Near Phaseout region: earnings up to $25,000 above phaseout

Notes: Effect of UR on Total Filers = 0.198 (0.577)

Notes: Effect of UR on Total Filers = −1.775 (1.053)

(c) Married with Children—CPS

(d) Single with Children—CPS

Above Phaseout

Near Phaseout

Phaseout

Flat

Phasein

Estimated Coefficient
−.01
0
.01

.02

Effect of UR on EITC Eligibility, Single w/ Children

−.02

Above Phaseout

Near Phaseout

Phaseout

Flat

−.02

Phasein

.02

Effect of UR on EITC Eligibility, Married w/ Children

Estimated Coefficient
−.01
0
.01

Phaseout

Flat

Phasein

2
Estimated Coefficient
−1
0
1
−2

Above Phaseout

Near Phaseout

Phaseout
Flat

Phasein

−2

Estimated Coefficient
−1
0
1

2

(b) Single with Children—SOI

Total Earned Income

Total Earned Income

Notes: Data are from the 1996–2008 Statistics of Income and the 1997–2009 CPS ASEC, with denominators measuring the number
of potential tax ﬁlers from the CPS ASEC for the corresponding survey year after the tax year. The sample excludes high-income
earners, individuals living abroad, late ﬁlers and married couples ﬁling separately. Each point represents an estimated coeﬃcient where
the dependent variable is the number of ﬁlers whose earned income puts them in each EITC range, each divided by the population of
total potential ﬁlers in the demographic group. All regressions include controls for demographic characteristics, as well as state and
year ﬁxed eﬀects. The results are weighted by the population of potential ﬁlers in each cell. The unemployment rate is measured in
percentage points.Standard errors are clustered by state.

Figure A.2: EITC Eligibility, Earned Income Distribution, and Poverty Thresholds—2006
(a) Single, No Children

(b) Married, No Children

0

10000

20000
30000
40000
Total Earned Income

Density of Earned Income

50000

60000

100%

2000 3000 4000
EIC Schedule ($)
1000
0

EIC Schedule ($)

10000

10000

20000
30000
40000
Total Earned Income

Density of Earned Income

50000

60000

50000

60000

EIC Schedule ($)

EIC Schedule ($)

150%

2000 3000 4000
EIC Schedule ($)

5000

100%

1000

Density of Earned Income
1.5e−05 3.0e−05 4.5e−05 6.0e−05
0

60000

50%

0

1000

5000
Density of Earned Income

50000

20000
30000
40000
Total Earned Income

(f ) Married, Two Children

150%

20000
30000
40000
Total Earned Income

10000

Density of Earned Income

2000 3000 4000
EIC Schedule ($)
10000

150%

2000 3000 4000
EIC Schedule ($)

EIC Schedule ($)

0
0

100%

1000
0

0

Density of Earned Income
1.5e−05 3.0e−05 4.5e−05 6.0e−05

100%

EIC Schedule ($)

5000

50%

(e) Single, Two Children
50%

60000

0

Density of Earned Income
1.5e−05 3.0e−05 4.5e−05 6.0e−05
0

2000 3000 4000
EIC Schedule ($)

5000
1000

150%

0
0

50000

(d) Married, One Child

0

Density of Earned Income
1.5e−05 3.0e−05 4.5e−05 6.0e−05

100%

20000
30000
40000
Total Earned Income

Density of Earned Income

(c) Single, One Child
50%

150%
5000

50%

0

Density of Earned Income
1.5e−05 3.0e−05 4.5e−05 6.0e−05
0

0

2000 3000 4000
EIC Schedule ($)

5000
1000
0

Density of Earned Income
1.5e−05 3.0e−05 4.5e−05 6.0e−05

50% 100% 150%

0

10000

20000
30000
40000
Total Earned Income

Density of Earned Income

50000

60000

EIC Schedule ($)

Notes: Figures show the earned income distribution and the EITC schedule overlaid with data on poverty thresholds.
Figures on left are for single ﬁlers; ﬁgures on right are for married ﬁlers. Figures in Panels (a) and (b) are for ﬁlers with
no children; those in Panels (c) and (d) are for ﬁlers with one child, and those in Panels (e) and (f) are for ﬁlers with
two children. Data on earned income are from Statistics of Income for tax year 2006 (income earned during calendar
year 2006). The sample excludes high-income earners, individuals living abroad, late ﬁlers and married couples ﬁling
separately. Histograms are weighted to represent the population of tax ﬁlers. Data on nominal EITC beneﬁts are from
the Tax Policy Center. Data on poverty thresholds are from the US Census Bureau.

