                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  THE EFFECT OF PRICES ON NUTRITION:
     COMPARING THE IMPACT OF PRODUCT- AND NUTRIENT-SPECIFIC TAXES

                                          Matthew Harding
                                         Michael Lovenheim

                                        Working Paper 19781
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19781


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2014




We thank USDA Economic Research Service for the opportunity granted under a Third Party Agreement
with Nielsen. Research support from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, the UPS Foundation,
and the U.S. Department of Agriculture is gratefully acknowledged. Binying Liu provided excellent
research assistance. We thank Jerry Hausman, Ephraim Leibtag, Arthur Lewbel, Aviv Nevo, and
conference participants at the AEA Annual Meetings, the 2013 RWJ Healthy Eating Conference,
and the 9th Conference on Industrial Organization and the Food Processing Industry, Toulouse, June
21-22, 2012 for excellent comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Matthew Harding and Michael Lovenheim. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Effect of Prices on Nutrition: Comparing the Impact of Product- and Nutrient-Specific
Taxes
Matthew Harding and Michael Lovenheim
NBER Working Paper No. 19781
January 2014
JEL No. C33,H2,I12,I19

                                                 ABSTRACT

This paper provides an analysis of the role of prices in determining food purchases and nutrition using
very detailed transaction-level observations for a large, nationally-representative sample of US consumers
over the period 2002-2007. Using product- specific nutritional information, we develop a new method
of partitioning the product space into relevant nutritional clusters that define a set of nutritionally-bundled
goods, which parsimoniously characterize consumer choice sets. We then estimate a large utility-derived
demand system over this joint product-nutrient space that allows us to calculate price and expenditure
elasticities. Using our structural demand estimates, we simulate the role of product taxes on soda, sugar-sweetened
beverages, packaged meals, and snacks, and nutrient taxes on fat, salt, and sugar. We find that a 20%
nutrient tax has a significantly larger impact on nutrition than an equivalent product tax, due to the
fact that these are broader-based taxes. However, the costs of these taxes in terms of consumer utility
are not higher. A sugar tax in particular is a powerful tool to induce healthier nutritive bundles among
consumers.


Matthew Harding
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall,
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
mch@stanford.edu

Michael Lovenheim
Department of Policy Analysis and Management
Cornell University
102 Martha Van Rensselaer Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
mfl55@cornell.edu
1      Introduction

Obesity is one of the largest prevailing public health concerns in the United States. National
obesity rates (defined as having a body mass index (BMI) greater than 30 kg/m2 ) have increased
dramatically among both children and adults over the past several decades. In the late 1970s,
the national obesity rate among adults was about 14.5%; it increased to 22.5% by the early
1990s (Flegal et al., 1998). Today, over 2/3 of Americans are overweight and over 36% are
obese.1 Estimates also suggest that about 30% of children are obese or overweight, although
the trend appears to have flattened somewhat in recent years (Ogden et al., 2010; Cawley,
2010). The increases in obesity have been more pronounced among those with lower income,
especially for women, as well as among non-Asian minorities. 2 Obesity has been linked to
a higher prevalence of chronic diseases, such as arthritis, diabetes and cardiovascular disease
(Must et al., 1999; Pi-Suyner, 1991). The associated cost to the U.S. medical system has been
estimated at about $147 billion in 2006, with Medicare and Medicaid financing approximately
half such costs (Finkelstein, Fiebelkorn and Wang, 1998). The high and rising obesity rate
combined with the financial burden it places on the health care system have made it one of the
leading public health problems in the United States.
     The rise in obesity can be ascribed mainly to the fact that physical exercise has not increased
over this time period but calories consumed have grown dramatically (Cutler, Glaeser and
Shapiro, 2003). The implication is that Americans are consuming an increasingly unhealthy
diet, both in terms of the total number as well as the composition of calories. With over 2/3
of household caloric intake occurring at home (Nestle, 2012), a question of central importance
is why households are purchasing large quantities of more unhealthy food and what public
policies could be used to support purchasing a more healthy nutritional bundle. The core
type of policies that have been discussed in the economics and public health communities are
price-based interventions, such as a sugar-sweetened beverage (SSB) tax or a fat tax. To date,
however, there is little robust evidence on how price policies will affect the products consumers
purchase and the resulting nutritional bundles of households.
     The lack of understanding of how price-based policies will affect nutrition is surprising given
the pervasive policy discussions throughout the world on how to use the tax system to support
healthier eating. However, there are several data limitations and methodological complications
    1 The
        Economist. Special Report: Obesity. December 15, 2012.
    2 Non-Hispanic
                blacks have the highest rates of obesity (49.5%) compared to non-Hispanic whites (34.3%): http://www.cdc.
gov/obesity/data/adult.html




                                                           1
prior work has faced that has limited our understanding of price-based nutritional policies. In
this paper, we combine structural demand techniques with a Big Data approach to this problem
that relies on linking several large, proprietary databases together to provide a comprehensive
view of consumer purchases, prices, nutritional characteristics of foods purchased, and pur-
chasing environments. Our analysis focuses on identifying the role of prices in driving the
type and nutritional content of foods households purchase for home consumption, which sheds
needed light on how consumption bundles and nutrition are shaped by prices consumers face
in order to inform the development of appropriate price-based policies to support nutritional
goals policymakers may have. The size and scope of our data allow us to partition the product
space into “nutritional clusters” that represent distinct groupings of product types within each
product group (e.g., diet and regular soda, less- and more-healthy packed meals). We then
estimate a structural Quadratic Almost Ideal Demand System (QAIDS) model over the joint
product-nutrient groups at the household-month level, accounting for the endogeneity of prices
with instruments based on marginal cost variation and the endogeneity of expenditures using
instruments based on local business cycle variation. Using the resulting price and expenditure
elasticities, we simulate the effect of various product (e.g., soda) and nutrient (e.g., sugar) taxes
on the distribution of consumer expenditures across groups and on the distribution of nutrients.
We also calculate the consumer welfare costs of each tax.
   The unique and detailed data we employ combined with our methodological approach allows
us to advance the literature on consumer demand and expand our knowledge of the effects of
price-based interventions on nutrition along several dimensions. First, a major limitation that
prior research has faced is the lack of comprehensive data linking consumer purchases to prices
and nutrition. The dataset we assemble for this project is unique in its size and scope: no prior
work has used data that has the volume of information we possess as well as the long time-
frame over which we have it at the household level. Our purchasing data are from the Nielsen
Homescan Panel, which is comprised of a demographically-representative set of consumers that
provides, for each purchase transaction of a grocery item, the universal product code (UPC),
the price paid, and the date of purchase. Overall, we observe over 123 million transactions made
by consumers between 2002-2007. In addition, the data contain rich demographic information
for each household, including household composition, race, income, and the census tract in
which they live. Using the UPCs, we match each product with information from another
data set that contains all nutritional information included on the product nutritional label.
Finally, using the census tract identifiers, we construct precise measures of the food purchasing

                                                  2
environment each household faces with data from a yearly census of US supermarkets, grocery
stores, and convenience stores. Together, these data provide extensive information on the
nutritive bundles households purchase, the prices paid for all goods, and the local purchasing
environments surrounding each household.
    This data set is well-suited to examine the role of prices in household purchasing behavior
and nutrition and provides a significant advantage over earlier attempts at quantifying food
demand. Existing researchers using scanner data have typically had access to data that is more
limited in time or in the breadth of information used. For example, Dubois, Griffith and Nevo
(forthcoming) use a similar scanner dataset to construct international comparisons for the year
2005-06 only. They document and examine the reasons for nutritional differences across the US,
UK and France and find that price differences and product composition differences play some
role in driving cross-country food purchasing variation. These results suggest that price-based
manipulations could have important impacts on household nutrient intake, however they do not
examine how product and nutrient taxes would affect the distribution of consumer expenditures
and nutrition. Finkelstein et al. (2012) and Finkelstein et al. (2010) use similar data as well but
only for 2006, and their analysis data do not include a complete set of purchased products. 3
In their examination of purchasing patterns over the lifecycle, Aguiar and Hurst (2007) use
data only for Denver, covering the period January 1993 through March 1995, and do not have
nutritional information about the products purchased. 4 The dataset we construct thus provides
the opportunity to measure a more detailed set of information over a longer period of time than
any existing demand study in the literature.
    The second contribution we make is to partition the data into a joint product-nutrient
space over which the demand model can be estimated. A core difficulty in estimating food
demand models is that it is not possible to price the individual nutritional components of a
good. That is, one cannot determine what part of the price of a good is due to the fat content
and what part is due to the salt content. Prior research typically has addressed this issue
   3 Other researchers who have used scanner data to estimate demand models have focused on a specific category of products,

such as beverages (Dharmasena and Capps, 2012; Lin et al., 2011; Zhen et al., 2011), snack foods (Kuchler, Tegene and Harris,
2005), and dairy (Chouinard et al., 1998; Griffith, Nesheim and O’Connell, 2010). These analyses typically contain only one or
a few years of data, do not examine substitution across groups, and/or aggregate the data to the product-month level or to the
household-year level, which throws out a large amount of important demographic and price information. Aggregation also renders
the estimates subject to biases that might arise from local composition changes that are correlated with price changes. Another
strand of the demand literature uses household survey data combined with local price estimates from the American Chamber of
Commerce Research Association (ACCRA) or from respondent reports (Yen et al., 2004; Duffey et al., 2010). The prices used
in these analysis are likely to be far noisier than in our data, and respondent reports of foods purchased or consumed also are
measured with more error. Finally, although the specific methods used in all of these studies differ, there is little attention paid to
endogeneity issues with respect to prices. The use of endogenous price variation could introduce significant biases in the resulting
demand estimates.
   4 In a related study examining lifecycle expenditures, Aguiar and Hurst (forthcoming) use Consumer Expenditure Survey data

that provide information about a wider variety of goods consumed but that do not have the specificity about food products
purchased that characterize the Nielsen Homescan data.


                                                                  3
either by separating different products into different nutrition groupings in an ad-hoc manner
or by estimating models with the nutrients purchased from each product type as the outcome
of interest in the demand model (Finkelstein et al., 2012). 5 Neither method is completely
satisfying, however, because the former relies on researcher judgements about how consumers
segment products and the latter does not account for the fact that nutrients are correlated
with each other within products, thus introducing a bias from omitted variables. We develop a
new method for partitioning the product space into relevant nutritional groupings using cluster
analysis. The motivation of this method is that nutrients tend to be correlated with each other
in specific ways that define a set of relevant goods for a consumer. For example, high-fat snack
foods also tend to be high-salt and high-sugar, while healthier snack foods have low amounts
of all of these nutrients.
    This process amounts to partitioning each product type into clusters of nutrient groupings
that define a nutritionally-similar set of goods using the data, rather than making judgement
calls about what the relevant different food groupings are. It also is possible for there to be
several nutritional clusters for each product type. Clustering in this manner thus allows us to
generate a set of nutritionally-bundled goods within each product group that define consumers
choice sets in a parsimonious manner and that do not require us to assign a price to each
nutrient. Specifically, we categorize all purchases into 14 product categories, which are then
further partitioned into 33 different product-nutrient groups. We then estimate QAIDS models
at the household-month-group level, the result of which is a matrix of own- and cross-price
elasticities as well as expenditure effects for the different groups. These estimates subsequently
are used to simulate the effect of product- and nutrient-specific taxes on purchasing behavior
and nutritional bundles. This method is straightforward but data-intensive, which highlights
the value of our Big Data approach. 6
    Our analysis also contributes to a relatively large literature that focuses on estimating the
price elasticity of demand for particular foods. 7 These studies can be split into two groups. The
first uses structural demand techniques to identify price elasticities of demand. As discussed
   5 Alternatively, Dubois, Griffith and Nevo (forthcoming) model the joint product-nutrient space in such a way that the char-

acteristics of products are fully subsumed into the nutrient space. While useful for the aggregate cross-country comparisons they
employ, this method imposes restriction on the cross-price elasticities and does not allow one to examine product-specific price
manipulations directly. Thus, it is less useful for our research questions.
   6 Another alternative would be to estimate a choice model over UPCs in the spirit of Berry, Levinsohn and Pakes (1995). Given

that we have 568,637 total UPCs spanning 123 million transactions, such a model is currently not tractable to estimate. The
QAIDS model estimated over the joint product-nutrient space has the benefit of being computationally feasible while still allowing
for a large degree of flexibility in consumer substitution across relevant food types.
   7 See Andreyeva, Long and Brownell (2010) for a review and meta-analysis of this literature. Most of the these studies use

aggregate time-series data, with a smaller percentage using household-level data. A small minority use household scanner data,
and these studies typically lack credible instruments for prices and do not allow for consumer substitution across products.




                                                                4
above, data limitations and issues pertaining to price endogeneity have hampered these analyses.
The second group uses variation from imposition of excise or sales taxes as natural experiments
to examine how consumers respond to arguably exogenous price changes. While most states
exempt food purchased in grocery stores from sales taxes, as of 2011, 35 states either include
soda in the sales tax base and/or levy an excise tax on soda. The existing literature using
these tax changes as natural experiments to identify the effect on soda demand find that soda
is inelastic with respect to this tax variation (Powell et al., 2013; Fletcher, Frisvold and Tefft,
2010a,b).8 However, these taxes tend to be quite small and they are unlikely to be salient
to consumers because they usually are added onto the price at checkout (Chetty, Looney and
Kroft, 2009). In general, there is a lack of tax variation with which to identify the effect of taxing
most products or nutrients. The lack of such policy variation highlights the need to examine
how larger and more salient price changes might affect consumption using structural demand
models that incorporate methods to identify causal price parameters. We argue our estimates
are the most detailed and accurate set of price and expenditure elasticities for the US produced
to date, and thus they are of interest in their own right. Furthermore, our methodology allows
us to estimate the welfare costs of imposing different types of taxes, which typically is not
possible using reduced form methods surrounding tax changes.
    Finally, our paper contributes to the literature on commodity taxation and nutrition by
examining taxes on different products and on nutrients themselves that incorporate both the
ability of consumers to substitute across different goods in response to price changes but also the
ability of consumers to reduce overall food consumption when prices rise. The inability to link
purchases and prices together with nutritional content of food has precluded an examination of
the effects of taxing specific nutrients, such as a sugar tax, in prior work, and existing studies
are limited to an examination of the effects of taxing a specific product, like soda, or a group
of products that have “undesirable” nutritional characteristics, like sugar-sweetened beverages.
However, in order to inform the development of food-based taxes to affect nutrition, it is
important to generate evidence on how consumer behavior will respond to taxing different types
of products, product groupings and nutrients more broadly. For example, what will be the effect
of taxing soda versus other highly-processed goods that previous work has argued contribute to
rising obesity (Cutler, Glaeser and Shapiro, 2003)? How does taxing products affect consumer
behavior differently than taxing nutrients? Does taxing sugar rather than taxing soda have a
   8 Another 13 states tax snack foods, such as chips and pretzels, but we are unaware of any studies that examine the effect of

these taxes. Some countries, such as Hungary, also tax foods high in sugar, fat, or salt. A recent meta-analysis of the international
evidence suggests that these taxes have generally affected consumption in the predicted direction, but that in order to have a
significant population health impact taxes in excess of 20% are required (Mytton, Clarke and Rayner, 2012).


                                                                 5
larger affect on nutrition, and how do fat taxes compare with sugar taxes in terms of changing
consumer behavior and in terms of welfare costs of these taxes? We examine these questions
directly by separately simulating the effects of a 20% tax on soda, sugar sweetened beverages
(SSBs), packaged meals, snacks/candy, fat, sugar and salt on budget shares for our 33 product
groups and on nutrient bundles purchased by households. By incorporating substitution effects
across goods as well as the income effects due to these taxes, these simulations yield a more
comprehensive picture of how these product- and nutrient-specific taxes affect nutrition than
has been possible in prior research.
   Our main finding from the tax simulations is that nutrient-specific taxes have much larger
effects on nutrition than do product-specific taxes, without causing a larger decline in consumer
utility. The intuition for this result is that nutrient-based taxes have a much broader base, so it
is more difficult to substitute away from any one good in response to such taxes. For example, a
20% tax on soda decreases total purchased calories by 4.84% and decreases sugar consumption
by over 10%. However, a 20% sugar tax decreases total calories by over 18% and sugar by over
16%. The larger effect of a sugar tax on nutrition comes despite the fact that it has the same
effect on indirect utility as a soda tax. Due to their negative income elasticities and the patterns
of own- and cross-price elasticities we find, taxes on snacks and packaged meals have very small
effects on nutrition. Fat and salt taxes, on the other hand, have much larger effects, decreasing
calories by 19% and 10%, respectively. SSB taxes, which can be thought of as a hybrid price
policy that targets a set of products based on their nutritional content, also are quite effective,
reducing caloric intake by over 9%. However, these taxes are less-effective and only slightly less-
distortive than a broad-based sugar tax. Overall, our results point to large potential impacts
of nutrient-based taxes on nutrition that are driven by their broad base. Among these, sugar
taxes stand out as being particularly effective at supporting healthier purchasing behavior.
   This paper is structured as follows. Section 2 introduces the different proprietary databases
and describes how the analysis dataset was constructed. We then explain how the data are used
to estimate the QAIDS model. Section 3 discusses the estimated parameters of the demand
system as well as the price and expenditure elasticities. Section 4 presents counterfactual
simulations of the impact of product taxes for soda, SSBs, packaged meals, and snacks/candy
and also nutrient taxes on fat, sugar, and salt on purchasing behavior and nutrition, and Section
5 concludes.




                                                 6
2      Data and Empirical Model

2.1         Data

The data we use for this analysis is constructed from several different databases that, together,
provide the most detailed information on food purchases over a multi-year period by American
households to date. The core of the data set consists of records on over 123 million food purchase
transactions made at grocery stores. These data come from the Nielsen Homescan database. 9
The Nielsen Homescan data are collected from a demographically-representative panel of US
households who are provided with a small scanner similar to ones used at grocery stores. We
observe food purchases intended for at-home consumption made at a variety of stores, from
traditional grocery stores, supermarkets and convenience stores to supercenters and warehouse
clubs. Most purchases are identified using a unique Universal Product Code (UPC), a 12 digit
barcode scanned by the retailer at the point of purchase. Households are required to scan the
UPC barcode of each item purchased and record the price, date, and location of purchase as well
as the quantity of each item bought. Non-UPC label items, such as fresh fruits and vegetables,
are recorded manually by the households and also are included in our data and analysis. UPC-
labeled items are automatically matched by Nielsen to an additional database that contains
detailed product characteristics, such as brand, size, and price of the product. Prices are checked
against store data in order to account for discounts and coupons. 10 At the end of the week,
households transmit their purchase data electronically to Nielsen. Participating households
are not paid in cash but earn a set number of points with each data upload. Households are
rewarded the longer they stay with the program, and those who already have been in the panel
for at least six months receive a substantially larger number of points for each transmission.
The points can be redeemed for products, so households have a strong incentive to upload
their purchase data. The reward program is similar to point programs offered by major credit
cards, where customers can redeem points for select merchandise from a product catalog, such
as tools, electronics, toys or to enter sweepstakes. To our knowledge the rewards are not food
related or likely to induce a significant income effect in the population. All households are in
the sample for at least 10 months, and most stay in for under 5 years.
     Participating households are recruited across 52 large markets (roughly corresponding to
the largest Metropolitan Statistical Areas or MSAs in the US). As a result of the engaging
system, which generously rewards participation, the panel is oversubscribed with an up to two
    9 For   additional information on the Nielsen Homescan data, see Todd et al. (2010).
 10 Einav,    Leibtag and Nevo (2010) discuss some of the technical issues that arise as a result of the price recording process.


                                                                    7
year waiting list. Nielsen aims to maintain a nationally-representative panel, subject to addi-
tional weights. Thus, recruitment into the panel is ongoing, with observably similar refresher
households replacing those who leave the sample.
    The Nielsen Homescan data do not contain any nutritional information about the products
purchased. From Gladson and FoodEssentials, we have obtained nutritional information at the
UPC level for all products tracked by these companies. These companies monitor and track the
various products sold in stores and record the nutritional panel and packaging characteristics for
products from a wide range of manufacturers. The data contain all nutritional information on
the product nutrition facts panel by UPC code, including the amount of each nutrient and the
entire ingredient list. While the nutrition data cover a large proportion of the total purchases
made by households in the panel, about 35% of the transactions in our data cannot be matched
directly to products in the nutrition database. The products that cannot be matched directly
typically consist of small, often generic, brands with a limited regional distribution network.
In order to ascribe nutritional characteristics to these products, we developed a matching algo-
rithm that assigns to each product the average per-serving characteristics within decreasingly
narrow bins of similar products. We first match unmatched Nielsen products to products with
nutritional information in the same “product module” with the same size, type, brand, product,
flavor, variety and formula. 11 This produces matches for an additional 15% of the transactions.
We then alter the product characteristics used for matching to systematically broaden the set
of potential match products. Details of the matching strategy and the proportion of the sample
in each year matched using each set of characteristics are show in Table A-2. This algorithm
produces nutritional estimates for between 96 and 98 percent of the products recorded in the
Nielsen Homescan data, depending on the year. 12 Furthermore, about 5% of the transactions
are “random weight” or bulk foods, such as fruits, vegetables, and fresh meats, that are not
tracked by Gladson or FoodEssentials. The nutritional content of these items were coded man-
ually by name and integrated with the database using information from the USDA National
Nutrient Database.
    Although these data provide extremely detailed information about grocery purchases, there
are some limitations of using these data to study nutritional outcomes. First, they do not
include restaurant purchases (including fast food) or purchases made at vending machines, and
  11 Product modules are specific product designations that indicate small groups of similar products. For example, diet and regular

soda are two product modules, as are canned apples and pears. There are numerous product modules in the data, and thus products
within product modules are very similar to each other in terms of nutritional content.
  12 This algorithm is essentially the same as the one employed by Dubois, Griffith and Nevo (forthcoming) and resulted from a

joint collaboration with the USDA.




                                                                 8
any food consumed outside the home that is not purchased by the household at a store will
not be included. Second, because we are using purchase data, we cannot observe consumption
of the overall household or of different household members. Spoilage, wastage, and different
eating patterns among different household members complicate extrapolations from purchasing
behavior to individual consumption. Despite these limitations, we believe these data are appro-
priate to estimate a rich food demand model and study the effects of food taxes on nutrition. To
the extent that these factors influence purchasing behavior and nutritive bundles, it is unlikely
that changes in the food available within the household does not result in changes in nutrients
consumed by household members. This is particularly true because over 2/3 of calories are
consumed in the home (Nestle, 2012).
   The data allow us to control for a rich set of observables that capture detailed information
on the household and the purchasing environment in which food purchase decisions are made.
Nielsen administers a yearly demographic survey to all participating households that records
their home address, household income, the education and race of the head of household, the
age and labor supply for both male and female heads of households, the household composition
and number of children. Our data do not include addresses, but we are given the census tract
in which each household resides in each year. The summary statistics for the demographic
variables are presented in Table A-1. Consistent with previous work using these data (e.g.,
Burda, Harding and Hausman (2012)), we find that certain sampling distortions remain relative
to national averages. For example, in the data 31.8% of the male heads and 36.8% of the female
heads are recorded as not employed. Similarly, we find that 28.5% of the sample reports a
household income above $70,000 compared to only 24.7% who report a household income of
below $30,000. These sample means reflect the relative attractiveness of participation in the
panel to households of different demographic compositions, but, especially since we control for
these demographic characteristics in our empirical models, it is unlikely any differences between
the Nielsen sample and a national sample will bias our estimates.
   While the Nielsen database has some information about the stores at which purchases are
made, it does not contain information on the set of stores available to consumers. In order to
further characterize purchasing environments, we supplement our data with records from the
National Establishment Time-Series (NETS) Database, compiled by Walls and Associates using
data from the Dun and Bradstreet (D&B) archival national establishment data (DUNS Mar-
keting Information file, DMI). This database tracks over 40 million establishments nationwide,
with information on their industries and location. We obtained data on the location of all stores

                                                9
at which one can buy groceries (i.e., all non-prepared foods) in each county in which a Nielsen
respondent lives in the 52 markets. For each household, we construct the detailed distribution
of stores by geographic distance. For simplicity, we categorize stores as: supermarkets, grocery
stores and convenience stores and count the number of stores within 1/4 mile, 1/2 mile, 3/4
mile, 1 mile, 1 1/2 miles and 2 miles of the centroid of a household’s residence census tract. 13


2.2       Product Classification

One of the challenges involved in building a comprehensive food demand model consists in
choosing the level of product aggregation that leads to a realistic, yet computationally feasible
structural demand system. A central contribution of this paper is the use a joint product-
nutrient aggregation, which models households as making joint decisions over products and
nutrients. The need for such a process of aggregation is easy to see when considering the
impact of a sugar tax on soda. When modeling the impact of such a tax, it is not sufficient to
aggregate all soda products into one category, because people may substitute across different
soda types when sugared soda become more expensive. Changes to the price of sugar-sweetened
soda also could cause households to substitute towards other goods with more or less sugar in
them, depending on whether sugar soda is a complement or substitute with other high-sugar
goods. Furthermore, taxing sugar-sweetened soda could lead to a substitution towards other
unhealthy nutrients, such as fat. A realistic model that captures the manner in which consumers
choose over types of goods requires a joint product and nutrient demand system in order to
accurately model households substitution patterns. At the same time, expanding the choice set
too much leads to a computationally infeasible demand system, which highlights the need to
balance computational feasibility with allowing a sufficient choice set for consumers.
   Our approach to this problem is to classify all products into 33 mutually exclusive product-
nutrient groups derived as follows. First, we categorize all UPCs into 14 product categories,
roughly corresponding to the major food areas a customer is likely to encounter in the store.
These are fruits/vegetables, cold beverages, warm beverages, soda, packaged meals, grains/pasta/bread,
canned food/sauce, cereal/breakfast items, other dairy (such as yogurt and cheese), meat, condi-
ments, snacks/candy, milk and baking goods. Second, we analyze the nutritional content of
each UPC in each of the 14 categories in terms of the most important and most salient nutri-
tional items recorded on the nutritional panel of each product: calories, calories from fat, total
fat, cholesterol, salt, carbohydrates, sugar and protein. Using these nutrients, we perform a
 13 All   stores are counted in these measures, not just stores within the household’s county.



                                                                  10
k-median clustering at the UPC level separately for each of the 14 product categories. This
clustering separates the 14 initial product groups into 33 distinct product-nutritional clusters,
where the separation is a direct function of the nutrients recorded for those products.
   K-median clustering is a variation of the more frequently encountered k-means clustering
algorithm. The k-median procedure partitions the UPCs within each of the 14 categories into
k additional distinct groups, where each group is characterized by a centroid corresponding to
the vector of median values of each nutrient for the UPCs in a given partition. The distance
between a product and the centroid of a group is evaluated in terms of the corresponding L1
distance between the nutrient values. We chose the k-median over the k-means procedure due
to its robustness to outliers in the nutrition distribution.
   We provide a partial solution to the problem of choosing the optimal number k of clusters
corresponding to each of the major product categories by employing the following optimization.
For each of the 14 product categories, we sequentially partition all UPCs using the k-median
algorithm into k = 1 . . . 10 partitions. For each partition, we compute the silhouette value
corresponding to each UPC. The silhouette value is a metric that captures the distance between
a given UPC and the UPCs in the other partitions. Thus, a UPC with a silhouette value of
+1 indicates that a product is classified as being part of a group that is well-separated from
all other groups in the nutrition space. UPCs with silhouette values close to 0 are from a
nutrition composition point of view not distinguishable from UPCs in another cluster. For
each configuration, we compute the average silhouette value. Partitions with larger average
silhouette values are preferred, and we choose the number of partitions that maximize the
average silhouette value for each of the 14 product groups.
   This clustering procedure provides a local solution to the optimal number of product clusters.
Due to the computational complexities of the estimating a large non-linear demand system, we
only evaluated a maximum of 10 partitions for each product group. However, the algorithm
partitioned each of the 14 product categories into 2 or 3 additional groups, which suggests using
more partitions would not have altered our results. The result is a total of 33 product groups
that are distinct both in terms of product type and nutritional content. Figure 1 plots the
silhouette values by UPCs for soda products computed for k = 2 partitions, which provides
an illustration of how this method works. It shows that the two partitions are well separated
in the nutrient space. Only a very small number of UPCs have (small) negative silhouette
values, indicating that their nutritional composition is shared by both groups and thus cannot



                                                 11
be unambiguously allocated to either group. 14 As Figure 1 illustrates, k = 2 is the optimal
partition for the soda group when considering partitions of 10 or fewer groups. In this case,
one of the groups is clearly distinguished in the nutrient space by having 0g of sugar and 0
calories per serving, compared to the other group where the median UPC has 960 calories and
256g of sugar per serving. Thus, the k-medians method ostensibly breaks soda into diet and
non-diet “clusters.” While soda is a fairly simple category to divide up along nutritional lines,
the success of this method in doing so suggests it also is reasonably dividing other types of
product groups that are more difficult to separate, such as packaged meals and cereal.
   Figure 2 maps the average household budget in terms of the 14 major expenditure categories.
Additional details on budget shares and prices for each of the 33 groups is available in Table 1.
They demonstrate the comparatively large share of snacks and candy (15.6%), meat (12.8%),
soda (5.3%), and packaged meals (7.5%), relative to fruits and vegetables (9.1%). International
comparisons reveal these to be substantially larger than the shares consumed in other developed
countries, such as France or the UK, where fruits and vegetables account for close to 20% of
expenditure (Dubois, Griffith and Nevo, forthcoming). In Figure 2, darker rectangles correspond
to more expensive product categories as measured by the price per ounce. Products with a
higher share of the household food budget tend to also be more expensive. Meat/protein is
twice as expensive as fruits and vegetables per ounce, while while snacks and candy are over 2
1/2 times as expensive.
   Table 2 lists the median nutrient quantity per serving for each of the 33 joint product-
nutrient cluster groups in the data. These values correspond to the group centroids in the
nutrition space. Packaged meals stand out relative to all other food categories as having the
most calories, calories from fat, total fat, salt, and protein, the second largest amount of
cholesterol after meat, and the third largest amount of carbohydrates after cereal, pasta and
bread. Compared to a serving of fruits and vegetables, a serving from a packaged meal has over
3 times the number of calories and 7 times the amount of fat and salt. Soda, which has almost
no nutritional value, dominates all other food items in terms of sugar per serving, with 3 times
the amount found in a serving of fruits and vegetables and twice the amount found in milk
products. The high sugar content of soda and of other beverages explains the intense policy
focus on sugar-sweetened beverage prices. However, several other categories, such as cereal and
canned foods, also have substantial sugar content that suggests a SSB tax would be imperfectly
  14 Note that the clustering algorithm still assigns these products to the “closest” group, but this small set of products has

characteristics that are similar to those in both groups.




                                                              12
targeted at high-sugar goods. Snacks and candy, which correspond to the largest share of a
household’s at-home food budget, also are characterized by a large number of calories and a
significant amount of salt and sugar in spite of the limited nutritional value.
   Table 2 also shows that within the 14 aggregate product categories there are substantial
differences across nutritional groups. This is a direct implication of the k-median clustering,
which partitions the product space into nutritionally-distinct clusters. Figure 3 present a bar
chart of the (median) calories per serving for each of the product groups. Each aggregate
category is also separately labeled and colored. While we do not label the individual product
groups for each aggregate category, we can think of most categories as being divided into low,
medium, and high calorie products, while some categories only have a low and a high calorie
group.
   The mapping of these product groups across the multivariate nutritional space is rather more
complicated however, reflecting the non-linear relationships between the different nutrients
when combined in the different product formulations. The soda category, for example, can
easily be described as consisting of two groups of products: zero calorie / zero sugar soda (“diet-
soda”) and high calorie / high sugar soda (“classic” soda). The packed meals and snacks/candy
categories exhibit similar clustering, with there being a “healthy” and “unhealthy” grouping
of each. These results demonstrate that for these product categories, nutrients are highly
correlated with each other – high-sugar snack foods tend also to be high in fat. When one
taxes fat (sugar), it thus should affect sugar (fat) consumption from these groups as well. In
contrast, some groups exhibit clustering around certain nutrients. For example, the baking
goods category consists of a group of high-calorie but low-sugar products and another group of
products containing substantially fewer calories per serving but also containing a non-negligible
amount of sugar. Similarly for fruits and vegetables, there is a high-calorie and low-salt group,
a low-salt and high-calorie group, and a low-calorie, low-salt group. Taxing salt therefore could
lead to more calories being consumed from baking goods and fruits and vegetables. These
trade-offs are likely familiar to most households who are routinely facing the problem that
minimizing the amount of one nutrient (e.g. fat) requires them to consume much larger amounts
of another nutrient (e.g. salt or sugar). Ultimately, such trade-offs represent the chemical reality
of product formulation, where reducing one ingredient requires the manufacturer to increase
the amount of another in order to preserve the attractiveness of the product to the consumer.
Table 2 shows that this trade-off is important for some products but not for others, which is
an interesting finding. To the extent that prior work has attempted to split up product groups

                                                 13
to allow for within-group substitution, they have done so in an ad-hoc manner that relies on
judgements made by individual researchers. The k-medians results show that nutrient clusters
vary considerably across product types, making such determinations very difficult. The ability
to model the joint product-nutrient space in a parsimonious manner that also reflects the actual
choices households face without having to rely on judgement calls about product classifications
we believe represents an important contribution to food demand modeling.


2.3   Empirical Methodology: QAIDS Model

A large number of different empirical strategies have been employed in the literature to estimate
food demand models. Since the aim of this paper is to evaluate counterfactual policy changes for
which few if any natural experiments exist, it is important to adopt a utility-derived structural
approach. A structural approach will allow us to use estimated price and income effects to
simulate the effect of product and nutrient taxes. In addition, this approach will permit us to
examine how variation in purchasing environments affect purchasing behavior.
   A nonparametric analysis of the relationship between log expenditure and income, which is
available upon request from the authors, indicates that all product groups have either linear or
quadratic Engel curves. This result suggests a rank 3 demand model. Restricting attention to
the class of exactly aggregable demand systems, the maximum rank of such demand systems
is 3 (Deaton, 1981). Thus, following Banks, Blundell and Lewbel (1997), the quadratic nature
of the Engel curves argues for a demand model that is linear in log real expenditure and log
real expenditure squared. In particular, this class of models has the attractive feature that
it allows households at different points of the income distribution to have different marginal
consumption responses to the same tax.
   We focus on rank 3 demand systems with indirect utility:
                                        (                    −1            )−1
                                             ln m − ln a(p)
                        ln V (p, m) =                               + λ(p)         ,          (1)
                                                  b(p)

where p denotes the vector of product group prices (in dollars per ounce) for each of the
i = 1 . . . K product categories (with K = 33), and m denotes the total expenditure on grocery
purchases for at-home consumption for the household in the given time frame. Moreover, let




                                                  14
wi denote the budget share of product group i. Then,

                                              K
                                              X                   K X
                                                                  X K
                           ln a(p) = α0 +           αi ln pi +              γij ln pi ln pj ,                           (2)
                                              i=1                 i=1 j=1


is a price index (in translog form),
                                                          K
                                                          Y
                                                b(p) =           pβi i ,                                                (3)
                                                          i=1

is the Cobb-Douglas price aggregator, and

                                                        K
                                                        X
                                             λ(p) =           λi ln pi ,                                                (4)
                                                        i=1

                                   PK
is a function of prices p, with       i=1   λi = 0.
   The system of budget share equations for the product groups is given by:

                                   K
                                   X                                                        2
                                                        m    λi                        m
                       wi = αi +     γij ln pj + βi ln     +                       ln             .                     (5)
                                 j=1
                                                       a(p) b(p)                      a(p)

In order to estimate this model, we use data on over 123 million transactions for 162,974
household years. As a result of the expansion of the consumer panel over the years, the number
of participating households increases from 40,000 to over 60,000 over the sampling period. We
aggregate all of the data to the household-month-product-nutrition cluster group level. This
aggregation leads to 34,245,832 observations. Aggregating the data in this manner has several
advantages. First, using monthly budget shares minimizes problems associated with storage
that plague studies using high-frequency shopping data. Monthly data at the product-nutrition
cluster group level also decreases the prevalence of zeros, whereby households have no purchases
of the given group in the month. Finally, using monthly data rather than longer horizons, such
as quarterly data, makes it more likely that the average prices used reflect the prices faced by
the household in that time period.
   Letting wi,h,t denote the budget share of group i for household h in month t, the model above
gives rise to the following structural system of estimating equations:

                             K
                             X                                                                       2
                                                        mh,t      λi                     mh,t
         wi,h,t   = αi,h,t +     γij ln pj,h,t + βi ln         +                     ln                    + ui,h,t ,   (6)
                             j=1
                                                       a(ph,t ) b(ph,t )                a(ph,t )

where ui,h,t is an iid error term and ph,t denotes the vector of prices faced by household h in



                                                        15
month t.
    For computational simplicity, we approximate the term a(ph,t ) by the Stone price index
(Decoster and Vermeulen, 1998):

                                                             K
                                                             X
                                               a(ph,t ) =          wk,h,t ln(pk,h,t ),                                             (7)
                                                             k=1

                                  QK
and as above, b(ph,t ) =             i=1   pβi,h,t
                                               i
                                                   is a Cobb-Douglas price aggregator.
    Household-level heterogeneity is introduced in the structural model through the group-
specific intercepts αi,h , which are allowed to depend linearly on both observable and unob-
servable household characteristics:

                                               αi,h,t = α̃i + μh + πi Zh + δt .                                                    (8)

In equation (8), α̃i is a product-nutrition cluster group intercept, μh is a market fixed effect,
and Zh is an extensive set of household-level demographics, including household income, male
and female head education, age, labor supply, race, household size, and family composition.
These variables are shown in Table A-1. We also include in Zh the purchasing environment
controls discussed in Section 2.1. Common macroeconomic fluctuations are controlled for with
the inclusion of month and year fixed effects δt .15 Our aim in this paper is to use a flexible
model specification that accounts for individual heterogeneity but that is rich enough to eval-
uate the relative merits of the different food taxes under consideration. A full exploration of
heterogeneity in food demand is beyond the scope of this paper and would add little, since
we are primarily interested in the average/aggregate impacts of the taxes as opposed to their
distributional effects. 16
    Estimating this system of structural equations involves solving two econometric problems.
First, instruments are required to identify the parameters of interest, since in general
E(ui,h,t |pj,h,t , mh,t ) 6= 0. The endogeneity of prices and expenditure comes from a straightfor-
ward simultaneous equations problem. If there is unobserved demand heterogeneity or local
demand shocks that are correlated with local prices or with household expenditure levels, then
prices and expenditures are endogeneous. The instruments used thus need to be correlated with
  15 We also have estimated models using month-by-year fixed effects and the estimates are virtually identical. These results are

available upon request.
  16 In an earlier version of this paper, we estimated different sets of parameters for different income levels. While this produces

insightful results on income gradients, it adds little to evaluating the relative merits of different types of food taxes. Furthermore,
we found little evidence of differential price responsiveness across the income distribution. We leave distributional questions and
more detailed investigations of heterogeneity in the demand system for future research.




                                                                  16
prices and expenditures but uncorrelated with unobserved demand heterogeneity and demand
shocks, conditional on the other controls in the model. Second, due to the large sample size, a
computationally efficient approach is required for solving the system of 33 structural equations.
    Our choice of instruments is informed by the existing economic literature. Prices are typi-
cally set by stores at the market level. At the same time, stores purchase the majority of their
products from national manufacturers who typically charge a uniform wholesale price. Thus,
store level prices can be seen as the combination of market level factors and production cost
factors common across markets. If we assume that the market-level pricing factors are indepen-
dent across markets once the common production cost is accounted for, we can use the average
price of each product across other markets as instruments (Hausman, Leonard and Zona, 1994;
Nevo, 2003).17 These prices are unlikely to be influenced by factors affecting only local demand
variation, and it is important to emphasize that any national-level demand shifts are accounted
for by the year and month fixed effects. We construct price instruments by computing the
average price of a product identified at the UPC-level in the same month and year in all other
markets other than the one the consumer has made the purchase in. These prices are then
aggregated at the product-nutrition cluster group level.
    Additionally, we use local macroeconomic variation to identify expenditure coefficients, which
assumes that expenditure is related to a non-linear function of market real income (Blundell
and Robin, 1999), an index of market housing prices (Campbell and Cocco, 2007), and market
unemployment(Attanasio et al., 2009). We approximate the relationship between log expendi-
ture and log monthly per-capita market income, log quarterly housing prices, and log monthly
unemployment by a second order polynomial expansion that includes squared terms and in-
teractions between all of these variables. 18 For both prices and expenditures, the first stage
residuals are added as additional regressors to the estimating equations (Hausman, 1978).
    The first stage price estimates are shown in Appendix Tables A-3, A-4, A-5, and the ex-
penditure first stage is shown in Appendix Table A-6. For all instruments, the first stages are
strong in the sense that the instruments are highly correlated with the endogeneous indepen-
dent variable. For prices, the own price instruments are universally close to 1 and are highly
statistically significant, even though standard errors are clustered at the census tract level. The
expenditure instruments also are strong, with a first-stage F-statistic of 24.92.
  17 Finkelstein et al. (2012) uses a weighted average of prices within each respondent’s market and month, where the weights

are the inverse distance from the respondent’s census tract. While this instrument addresses certain endogeneity issues related to
individual demand heterogeneity, it does not address endogeneity coming from market-level demand shocks as well as unobserved
heterogeneity correlated across space within a market.
  18 Monthly per-capita income come from the US Bureau of Economic Analysis, housing prices are from the Federal Housing

Finance Agency’s Home Price Index, and unemployment rates come from the US Bureau of Labor Statistics.



                                                               17
   Computationally, the estimation of the system of 33 structural equations is inherently dif-
ficult due to the non-linearity of the specification in conjunction with the large number of
observations and model parameters. However, the system of equations is conditionally linear
(Blundell and Robin, 1999; Lecocq and Robin, 2006). If we condition on b(ph,t ), the system of
budget shares given in equation (6) is linear in the unobserved parameters α̃i , μh , πi , δt , γij , λi
(recall that in our specification a(ph,t ) is approximated by the Stone price index and does not
depend on unknown parameters). This suggests a recursive estimation approach. Given an ini-
tial guess of the βi parameters, estimates of the α̃i , μh , πi , δt , γij , βi , λi parameters can be easily
obtained from a linear moment estimator. We then use the estimated βi parameters to update
the value of b(ph,t ) until convergence is reached across iterations. The convergence threshold
we use is that the maximum change in each βi across iterations must be less than 0.0001 in
absolute value.
    Because the budget shares must sum to one, the system of budget share equations imply the
                                  P14            P14              P14
following parameter restrictions:   i=1 β̂i = 0,  i=1 λ̂i = 0 and  i=1 γ̂i = 0 for all K products.

Without computational constraints, one could impose these parameter restrictions and estimate
the model by maximum likelihood. Given our sample size, this approach is not feasible in our
context. One also could omit one category from the estimation and use these restrictions to
solve for the parameters from the omitted product group. Alternatively, we estimate the model
using all of the product groups and then test the parameters restrictions. In all cases, our
estimates are consistent with these restrictions. 19
   Another identification concern arises when examining the role of purchasing environments
in consumer shopping behavior. Since stores do not locate randomly with respect to consumer
demand, it is very likely that the proximity of different store types is related to unobserved
aspects of consumer demand. To address this problem, we include in equation (6) census-tract-
level means of each of the purchasing environment measures. Thus, the purchasing environment
coefficients are identified off of changes in these environments from store entry and exit over
time. This approach is conceptually similar to controlling for census tract fixed effects (Lecocq
and Robin, 2006), but with thousands of census tracts, it is not possible to include them in the
model. Census-tract-level means control for any unobserved demand heterogeneity that is fixed
over time within tracts and that is correlated with store locations. The identifying assumption
is that store entry and exit are uncorrelated with unobserved aspects of household demand.
Given the myriad controls in our model and the fact that the households in our sample do not
                               P14               P14                   P14
 19 In   particular, we find    i=1   β̂i = 0,    i=1   λ̂i = 0, and    i=1   γ̂i is between 0 and 2×10−7 in absolute value.



                                                                               18
move while they are in the panel, we believe this assumption is plausible.
   The expenditure elasticities and the uncompensated price elasticities play a central role in
our structural demand model. For two products i and j, the procedure described above produces
estimates of β̂i , γ̂i,j , λ̂i . Let Σ̂ be the (partial) asymptotic covariance matrix corresponding to
these three coefficients. The expenditure elasticity for product i is given by:

                                                      βi         2λi
                                      i,h,t = 1 +         +                log(m/a(ph,t )).
                                                     wi,h,t wi,h,t b(ph,t )

The estimated variance of the expenditure elasticity is then given by:

                                2                                             !2
                          1                            2 ln(m/a(p  \  h,t ))                     4 ln(m/a(p  \ h,t ))
   \
 V ar( i,h,t ) =                     V\
                                       ar(βi ) +                                      V\
                                                                                       ar(λi ) +                        \
                                                                                                                      Cov(β i , λi )
                        wi,h,t                                    \
                                                          wi,h,t b(p h,t )
                                                                                                     2      \
                                                                                                    wi,h,t b(ph,t )

The cross-price elasticities are given by:
                                                                                                   !
                βbi wj,h,t    γc                                            \
                                                                   2 ln(m/a(p     h,t )) wi,h,t                  (ln(m/a(p \  h,t ))
                                                                                                                                     2
  i,j,h,t   =−            +
                               i,j               bi
                                    − I(i = j) − λ                                                     − λbi βbj                       ,
                  wi,h,t     wi,h,t                                      \
                                                                        b(p h,t )
                                                                                         wj,h,t                            \
                                                                                                                   wi,h,t b(p h,t )


where I(i = j) = 1 if i = j and 0 otherwise.
Define the following 3 × 1 vector ĝ:
                                                                                                      
                                                         w                 (ln(m/a(p\  h,t ))
                                                                                              2

                                                      − wj,h,t    −   λ̂i           \                 
                                                           i,h,t             wi,h,t b(p h,t )
                                                                                                      
                                  ĝ = 
                                       
                                                                         1
                                                                         wi
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
                                                     \                                                
                                             ln(m/a(p   h,t ))
                                                               (−2wj,h,t                \
                                                                            − β̂j ln(m/a(ph,t ))
                                                      \
                                              wi,h,t b(ph,t )


By the Delta Method, the estimated variance of the cross-price elasticity is (approximately)
given by:
                                                         V\
                                                          ar(i,j ) ≈ ĝ 0 Σ̂ĝ

   Below, we report average elasticities, which are computed over all households and time
periods. Average elasticities are accompanied by average standard errors that are calculated
using these variance formulas. Because the elasticities are functions of the parameters and of
the data, we need to calculate standard errors that incorporate the variability coming from both
of those sources. We do this by first calculating the standard error for each observation, using
the standard errors from the QAIDS model estimates that are clustered at the census tract
level. We then take the average of these standard errors across all households and time periods.
To our knowledge, this is the first analysis to provide standard errors for the average elasticities

                                                                   19
calculated from QAIDS model coefficients that also incorporate geographic clustering.


3     Estimation Results

3.1    Elasticities

Our structural model estimates a 33-equation demand system, which makes the discussion of
over 1000 estimated elasticities inherently difficult. The full set of elasticity point estimates is
available in Appendix Tables A-7, A-8, A-9, while the full set of standard errors is available
from the authors.
    We now take a closer look at the average own-price and expenditure elasticities. Their
point estimates and standard errors are reported in Table 3. A bar chart of these elasticities
is presented in Figure 4. In general, the elasticities are estimated with a very high level of
precision, even though we cluster by census tract.
    The own-price elasticities reveal that most products are fairly price inelastic. Soda, milk and
cold beverages provide the exception. The price elasticity of the two soda groups are -2.26 and
-2.20, and the elasticities for cold beverages range between -1.81 and -2.06. In a review of the
literature, Powell et al. (2013) report an elasticity for sugar-sweetened beverages of about -1.21.
Thus, our estimates show these products to be more elastic than has been found in previous
work. The studies reviewed by these authors estimate the price elasticity from changes in
state level taxes, which are very small and likely to suffer from salience issues. In contrast,
our estimates are identified off of much larger price variation. Table 3 also shows fruits and
vegetables to be rather elastic, with elasticities that range from -0.83 to -1.38.
    At the other extreme, meat, snacks, cereal, and pasta are fairly inelastic. Fruits and vegeta-
bles are between 2-5 times more price elastic than meat, grain/pasta/bread or breakfast cereals.
It also is interesting to note that the elasticities vary substantially both between and within
aggregate categories. Two product groups in the cereal and meat categories (21, 23) have small
positive elasticities but are economically insignificant. One group of packaged meals (group 14)
has a larger own-price elasticity of 0.12, which still is small. As Figure 4 shows, this group also
has a negative expenditure elasticity, suggesting that at least some of the packaged meals can
be thought of as Giffen goods.
    Table 3 reports average expenditure elasticities and standard errors as well, and the results
highlight the importance of including expenditure elasticities in simulating consumer responses
to different food-based taxes. For soda in particular, these elasticities are greater than 4.

                                                 20
These expenditure elasticities indicate that large income effects will generate sizable reductions
in overall expenditures due to a tax on these products that would be missed by examining
substitution patterns alone. We also find that one of the packaged meal categories (14) and
one of the snacks/candy categories (23) are inferior goods, meaning that overall consumption
might increase if you tax these goods. Depending on the size of this response, taxing packaged
meals or snacks/candy could increase total purchases of different nutritional categories. All
other products are normal goods, with income elasticities that vary considerably both between
and within product categories.
   The substantial variation in elasticities within product categories indicates that consumers
respond differently to prices changes for products within a category. While there are many
additional dimensions of the product space that are not explicitly accounted for here, in our
model product groups are distinguished by their location in the nutrition space. Consider the
packaged meals category. Within this category, the k-median algorithm partitions the products
into two groups. By looking at the nutritional characteristics of these groups (Table 2), we see
that these groups are very different. One of the groups has median calories per serving of 330
compared to 1518 in the other group. Similarly, the low-calorie group has substantially lower
amounts of salt, sugar, and fat. Thus, one of the groups can be thought of as the “healthy”
group of products while the other one consists of products which are substantially less healthy
along a number of different dimensions. Interestingly, it is the healthier group of packaged
meals products which is a Giffen good. The variation in elasticities appears to be related to
the underlying nutritional characteristics of the product groups. This begs the questions of
whether there may be a systematic relationship between nutrients and elasticities. We explored
this further in a series of multivariate correlation analyses: products higher in sugar and protein
are significantly more price elastic, while products higher in carbohydrates are less price elastic.
Though descriptive in nature, such correlations suggest that sugar taxes in particular might be
an effective method to alter consumer purchasing behavior.
   In order to get a sense of the patterns of cross-price elasticties, Table 4 presents symmetric
matrices of own and cross-price elasticities for each aggregate category. The diagonals in each
panel show the own-price elasticities (and are identical to those in Table 3), and the off-diagonals
show the cross-price elasticities among all the nutrient clusters within product type. On the
whole, these estimates show little evidence of much within-product substitution behavior. Soda
exhibits the most within-category substitution, with cross-price elasticities of 0.18 to 0.2. The
cross-price elasticities for milk also are sizable, at 0.11 and 0.26. For the remainder of the

                                                 21
products, consumers do not respond to price changes by purchasing more (or less) of the same
product with a different nutritional composition.
   The estimates in Table 4 do not necessarily imply that cross-group substitution patterns are
low, as it could be that substitution is more likely across product types than within product
categories. Appendix Figure A-1 displays the full pattern of cross-price elasticities in a graphi-
cal format. The size of the rectangles corresponds to the magnitude of the cross-price elasticity,
while the color denotes the sign. We notice a broad dispersion of magnitudes and signs for
the off-diagonal elements of the cross-price elasticity matrix, suggesting that the substitution
patterns are indeed more likely to occur across product groups. A close investigation of the
standard errors revels that most of the elasticities also are statistically significant. This em-
phasizes the fact that it is important to model the full range of substitutions when examining
the effect of price-based policy manipulations.
   Furthermore, the complex pattern of complements and substitutes in this large demand
system indicates that policy interventions need to be implemented with care, since the potential
for unanticipated consequences resulting from a price intervention is inherent in the substitution
pattern. In Appendix Figure A-2, we explore the cross-price elasticities in more detail for
product groups 11-14, corresponding to soda and packaged meals. For example, soda is a
substitute good for most other products including fruits and vegetables, breakfast foods, meat
and packaged meals. But, it is a complement for snacks and candy. While packed meals are
own-price inelastic, they are complements for fruits and vegetables and grain/pasta/bread. The
opposing pattern of signs for soda and packaged meals indicates that price changes are likely
to have very different effects when applied to these two product groups. Soda is very own-price
elastic and an increase in the price of soda increases the demand for many other food items. In
contrast, packaged meals are own-price inelastic (and possibly a Giffen good), and an increase
in their price reduces the demand for many other food items.
   It is important to highlight that our cross-price elasticity results do not imply that increasing
the price of goods perceived to be unhealthy, such as soda or packaged meals, necessarily leads
to consumers switching to more healthy options, such as fruits and vegetables. In the case
of soda and packaged meals, we see responses that are polar opposites. Higher soda prices
increase the demand for various other food items, while higher packaged meal prices decrease
the demand for a range of food items. The response to prices increases for all other food
categories is somewhere in between. If we think of the household food consumption bundle
before and after a price increase, we see that a price increase alters the composition of the

                                                  22
bundle in a fairly complex fashion, typically increasing the demand for some product groups
and decreasing the demand for others. The overall impact on nutrients, however, is unclear and
needs to be simulated in a fashion similar to that in the next section of this paper. This also
emphasizes the fact that it is potentially misleading to estimate single product demand models
in order to infer the benefit of a nutrition policy on household nutrient consumption.


3.2    Demographic Heterogeneity and Store Density

Our model estimates also generate a large number of results relating demographic variables to
preferences for the different food groups. While detailed tables are available from the authors,
it is worth pointing out that we find a variety of demographic gradients for the different product
groups. For example, consider income gradients that reflect the extent to which consumption
of the different product groups varies over the income distribution. Our reference category con-
sists of households with income less than $30,000. We find that shares of fruits and vegetables,
packaged meals and snacks/candy increase with income, while soda, meat and milk purchases
decline with income. These gradients point to a complex relationship between the distribution
of nutrients and the distribution of income. Thus, wealthier households spend over 7% more of
their budget both on fresh fruits and vegetables as well as on packaged meals, potentially re-
flecting the presence of opposing forces: increased health awareness but also higher opportunity
cost of time.
   Shares of fruit and vegetables increase with education, while the soda share is uncorrelated
with education, and snack/candy and meat purchases are negatively correlated with educational
attainment. The product shares in the household food budget vary with age as well, with
younger households consuming more fruits and vegetables. The share of consumption decreases
with age but then increases again after retirement. Overall, however, the fruit and vegetable
shares remains lower for households above 65 than for households below 35 years of age. The
shares of soda, packaged meals and snacks consumption increase with age but then decrease
again at retirement. The share of meat consumption increases with age throughout.
   Expenditure shares are strongly associated with female labor supply, with large differences
between households with a working and a non-working female head. 20 Households with a
non-employed female head purchase more soda, fewer packaged meals, and less meat and
snacks/candy. In contrast, non-employment of the male head of household does not have a
statistically significant impact on the budget shares of the different products consumed. The
 20 Note   that households in our data can have both a male and a female head.



                                                               23
presence of young children (under 12 years of age) indicates an increased share of consump-
tion spent on fruits/vegetables, cereals and milk and a lower share of expenditure allocated to
soda, packaged meals or canned foods. This pattern may reflect parental concerns to provide
healthier food options to their children. Note, however, that the higher share of consumption
allocated to cereal is implicitly associated with a higher sugar intake.
   A byproduct of our analysis is the estimate of the role of purchase environments in driving
budget share allocations. The role of purchasing environments in explaining variation in food
purchasing behavior recently has been featured extensively in public policy discussions. While
this paper is not aiming to answer the question of the impact of food environments on nutrition,
it is interesting to note that our estimates do not support a systematic relationship between
store availability and purchased food bundles. Our model estimates the effect of one additional
store of the given type in the given distance from the census tract centroid on the budget
share, conditional on all of the other controls in the model. We find little relationship between
the distance to stores and the consumption shares of the different products. Despite the large
number of observations and the small standard errors, very few coefficients are even statistically
different from zero at conventional levels. Thus, our estimates can rule out even small effects
of purchasing environments on budget shares of these goods.
   Since our estimates are capturing statistical averages for a large, nationally-representative,
mostly urban population with a certain degree of technical sophistication that is required to
participate in the sample, this indicates that the food purchasing environment, as measured by
the store density, is not a primary driver of food consumption and nutrition trends at this level of
aggregation and for these consumers. It is important to note that our paper does not directly
address the impact of “food deserts,” which have been documented in a number of focused
case studies, as they primarily impact low-income consumers. 21 Quantifying the “food desert”
problem is substantially more complicated than measuring store density by different types of
stores, even though store density is one particular aspect of it. In particular, this study does not
capture more subtle aspects of product quality and food choice availability within store types,
which are likely to be an important component of the purchasing environment for low-income
consumers.
  21 An overview of the “food desert” literature that examines the relationship between purchasing environments and shopping

behavior can be found in Bitler and Haider (2011). They conclude that the lack of convincing data has precluded an understanding
of how food deserts affect consumer purchasing behavior and nutrition.




                                                              24
4    Tax Simulations

Using the estimated structural demand model presented above, we construct a number of policy
counterfactuals that have received attention by policymakers. We consider the introduction of
three types of taxes aimed at changing the behavior of households and encouraging healthier
consumption. One type of tax is a product-specific tax, where a product group considered
to have negative health impacts is identified and all products that are part of that group are
taxed proportionally. Currently, legislatures in Hawaii, Oregon and Vermont are considering
bills aimed at taxing soda, and 35 states either have such taxes or include soda as part of the
sales tax base. Given the important role played by packaged meals and snacks in the American
diet and the low nutritional content of these goods, we evaluate the introduction of taxes on
these product groups as well. Similar taxes already exist in Europe.
    We also examine the effect of introducing nutrient-specific taxes, specifically taxes on fat,
sugar, and salt. The taxable amount is directly proportional to the share of the specific ingre-
dient in the product formulation. Consider a 12 fl. oz. can of Coca-Cola. It has 39g of sugar,
45mg of sodium and 0g of fat. This also corresponds to 140 calories. Now consider a 12 fl. oz.
can of Diet Coke. It has 0g of sugar, 40mg of sodium, 0g of fat and 0 calories. A fat tax will
not affect the price of either product, a sugar tax will affect the price of the first product but
not the second product, while a salt tax will affect the price of both products in proportion to
their respective sodium contents. Nutrient-specific taxes have the potential benefit that they
target the harmful nutrients more directly than product-specific taxes, but they also have the
drawback that they might reduce consumption of healthier products due to substitution effects
or due to correlations among different nutrients in these products. The third type of tax we
consider is a tax on SSBs, which can be thought of as a hybrid that targets a subset of products
that contain large amounts of sugar. This tax has received considerable attention in prior work,
and we include it here in order to be able to compare our results with the existing literature.
    Throughout, we simulate the effect of a 20% tax on products and nutrients. Because we
lack data that allow us to model the supply-side, we are not able to consider the incidence of
these taxes. Thus, when we are referring to a “20% tax on soda,” one can view this as a tax on
soda that generates a 20% price increase. While the incidence of any such taxes we simulate
are important in their own right, the existing literature on the incidence of commodity taxation
tends to find tax pass-through rates close to 1 (Harding, Leibtag and Lovenheim, 2012; Kenkel,
2005; Besley and Rosen, 1999). That the incidence of these taxes tends to fall on consumers


                                                25
suggests that ignoring the supply-side is not a large drawback in the short-run. 22 We also
do not consider issues pertaining to the administration of these taxes. This paper is focused
on identifying the expenditure and nutritional effects of these taxes, but we acknowledge that
how such taxes are structured and their administration could be very important in driving any
impacts they may have (Chetty, Looney and Kroft, 2009; Slemrod and Kopczuk, 2002). For
the purposes of this analysis, we assume that taxes are remitted by wholesalers or on the raw
nutrients themselves (e.g., a tax on refined sugar or iodized salt). This would largely eliminate
salience issues because the tax amount would be reflected in the shelf price, but there still
could be complications with evasion and avoidance, particularly if the taxes are not national in
scope.23
    Throughout, we use the estimated structural model to simulate the impact of the taxes
under consideration. We simulate the effect of product-specific taxes by calculating, for each
household month, the effect of a 20% increase in soda, packaged meals or snacks/candy on
expenditures on each product-nutrient cluster group, using the estimates from our demand
model. We then calculate new budget shares and, for each of the 8 nutrient groups, calculate

                                                                                   $
                                  ΔN utrient = ΔExpenditure ∗                            .                                       (9)
                                                                               N utrient

That is, we multiply the estimated change in expenditure for the tax by the per-nutrient price of
the good, separately for each product group. The expenditure changes are adjusted for the fact
that the price of the taxed good is now higher, so we are not attributing increased expenditure
on a good from a price increase to higher consumption. For nutrient-specific taxes, we engage
in a similar exercise, but change the price of the products proportionally with respect to the
amount of the nutrient included in its formulation. For example, a 20% sugar tax will increase
the price of fruits and vegetables by 7.84%, the price of soda by 14.16%, and the price of cereal
by 15.76%.
    Using the average amount of each nutrient in each product-nutrient cluster group, we first
find the average change in price for the group if the price of the given nutrient increased by
20%. We then estimate the effect on expenditures in each group from these price changes
  22 It also is possible that companies might reformulate their products in response to these taxes. We do not have the capability of

including such endogenous responses in our model. Our estimates thus ignore any effects on nutrition that would come from making
given products healthier. One can interpret our results as the effect of a small government or entity (such as a state) imposing a
tax that would be too small to induce producers to reformulate their products. We also note that the nutrients we consider are
very difficult to replace without altering the taste and desirability of most products. Any reformulation likely would increase the
effect of these taxes on nutrition, however.
  23 See Lovenheim (2008); Goolsbee, Lovenheim and Slemrod (2010); Baughman et al. (2001); Lovenheim and Slemrod (2010);

Harding, Leibtag and Lovenheim (2012) for estimates of the extent of cross-state tax avoidance with respect to cigarette and alcohol
regulations.



                                                                 26
and calculate equation (9). The net effect of a given nutrient-specific tax contains own- and
cross-price effects as well as expenditure effects from changes in several different product prices
at once. Without a structural model that allows estimation of these substitution and income
effects linked to nutrition data, simulating nutritional taxes would not be possible.
    In Panel A of Table 5, we present the simulation results for a counterfactual 20% soda tax.
We calculate expenditure, price and nutritional changes for all 33 categories, but we aggregate
them to the original 14 product groups to present results for parsimony. Estimates for the full
set of 33 groups are available from the authors upon request. We report the percent changes
in expenditures and budget shares for each product as well as the overall effect on expenditure
after the imposition of the tax. We further show the changes in nutrients purchased for each
product group and for the overall shopping basket. In the panel titles, we report the average
indirect utility cost of the tax, which is calculated from equation (1) for every household under
both the original and new tax regimes. These indirect utility changes provide a measure of
the utility cost of the product substitutions and changes in expenditure from each tax. 24 All
changes shown are averages over all households and time periods, which are computed at the
individual level and use the full demand system. Thus, we would expect the simulations to
provide more information than is contained in the average price and expenditure elasticities,
as a result of both the aggregation process and the interactions between all products in the
demand system.
    Because of the large expenditure elasticity for soda, a 20% soda tax reduces soda expenditure
by 3.92% and the share of soda in the household budget by 3.43%. This reduces caloric intake
by 2,231 calories and sugar intake by 675g. These changes translate to a reduction in caloric
intake from soda by the equivalent of about 16 cans of Coca-Cola per month. As suggested
by our results on the cross-price elasticities, soda taxes also induce a shift towards milk and
snacks/candy and away from packaged meals and meat. These changes, along with a 1.66%
reduction in total expenditures due to the soda tax, lead to declines in the purchase of each
nutrient group. In particular, calories decline by 4.84% (4,779 calories) and sugar purchases
decline by 10.35% (763.6g), the majority of which come from reductions in soda purchases. De-
clines in fat, salt, cholesterol, carbohydrates and protein also range from 2-4%. The expenditure
and price changes from this tax lead to an average decline in indirect utility of 2.5%.
    In Panel B of Table 5, we compare these simulation results to those obtained from imposing
  24 Our welfare calculations implicitly use a social welfare function that weights each household equally. See Banks, Blundell and

Lewbel (1997) for a thorough treatment of welfare analysis with QAIDS models.




                                                                27
a 20% tax on SSBs. We model this tax as a 20% price increase for all groups that include
sugar-sweetened beverages, as such taxes typically are modeled and levied as a per-product tax
rather than as a proportion of sugar in the product (Brownell et al., 2009; Finkelstein et al.,
2012; Kamerow, 2010). This also makes the SSB and soda taxes more directly comparable.
Because it impacts more products, the SSB tax has a larger impact on the types of products
consumers purchase and on nutrition. A 20% SSB tax reduces total calories purchased by
8.4%, most of which is occurring due to the almost 20% decline in sugar purchases. 25 This
price change also induces a small decline in the other nutrient categories, most of which is due
to income effects. Interestingly, despite the large impact of the SSB tax on consumer purchasing
behavior and nutrition, its effect on indirect utility compared to the soda tax is small, at 2%.
The reason for this result is that by increasing the prices of a broader set of goods, this tax
induces less distortionary substitution behavior that has high utility cost. Taxing the suite of
sugary beverages limits the ability to substitute across these similar products, which produces
larger changes in nutrition at a lower utility cost to consumers.
    The effect of taxing another “unhealthy good,” packaged meal taxes, has a very different
effect than taxing soda. The simulated effect of a 20% packaged meal tax is shown in Panel A
of Table 6. Recall that packaged meal purchases are very own-price inelastic. Thus, households
end up spending 7.96% more on packaged meals, and the share of packaged meals in the overall
budget increases by 5.62%. Due to the patterns of substitution and the fact that our estimates
suggest packaged meals are inferior goods, packaged meal taxes have a small but positive effect
on both total expenditure and on nutritional intake of the household. They also reduce indirect
utility by 1.4%. Total calories increase by about 2.11% and sugar intake increases by 2.25%.
Note, however, that nutrients from packaged meals decline substantially. This reflects two
forces: first, the tax leads to less overall expenditure on packaged goods and second, there is
a sizable shift in expenditure within this category to the healthier group (as it has a positive
own-price elasticity). Thus, packaged meal taxes would reduce the nutrients purchased coming
from packaged meals. However, it would not support the purchase of more nutritious food
bundles overall, even though this product group is quite unhealthy.
    In Panel B, we show the effect of a 20% snack and candy tax. Recall that snacks and candy
are also relatively price inelastic, although less so than packaged meals. A 20% tax on these
goods causes an overall increase in budget share and expenditure, but there is a decline in
  25 This estimate is substantially larger than the closest prior estimate in the literature. Finkelstein et al. (2012) estimates a 20%

SSB tax would decrease per-capita daily calories by 24. Our estimates translate into a daily per-capita reduction of 133 calories.
We believe much of the difference in our estimates can be accounted for by the fact that their model does not allow for income
effects of taxes, which we show are very important, especially for beverages.


                                                                  28
quantity of these items purchased. Calories, fat, sugar and salt, in particular, decline in this
                                                                             TM
product group due to the tax. One small 3.3g Reese’s Peanut Butter Cup            package contains
693 calories, 42.9g of fat, and 495mg of sodium. This tax therefore is the equivalent of reducing
consumption of 1-2 of these products per month. There also is a small shift towards fruits and
vegetables and away from other dairy, canned food/sauces and soda. The overall impact of
the candy/snack tax is to slightly reduce calories by 1.21% (1194.5 calories), fat by 0.63%, and
salt by 1.12%. However, sugar and cholesterol consumption also increase slightly. The overall
effect of this tax on nutrition therefore is somewhat ambiguous in sign, but it is likely to be
small. As with packaged meal taxes, the indirect utility cost of this tax also is modest, at 2%.
Compared with sizable nutritional effects of SSB and soda taxes, taxes on packaged meals and
candy/snacks produce much smaller changes at a similar utility cost.
   One potential complication with our tax simulation approach is that if consumers switch
to lower-priced versions of the same goods, such as generic brands, in response to product or
nutrient taxes, expenditures could decline without affecting nutrition. However, we would be
attributing the resulting expenditure declines to changes in total purchases within each product
group rather than changes in the types of products consumers buy within each group. This
would cause us to over-state the effect of the taxes we study on nutrition. Additional robustness
checks (not reported here), which split the product categories by the median price suggest that
our results are not over-stating nutritional effects due to consumer substitution to cheaper
goods with the same nutritive content.
   We now turn to simulation results from fat, sugar and salt taxes, which are shown in Table 7.
The overall findings shown in the table point to these taxes being much more effective at altering
nutritional bundles than are product-specific taxes, without generating a larger impact on total
expenditures or indirect utility. This is suggestive that these taxes have far more potential
to impact nutrition without causing much larger deadweight loss from distorting purchasing
behavior.
   In Panel A of Table 7, we show the effect of a 20% tax on fat. The fat tax reduces caloric
intake by over 19% (18,984 calories), reduces fat purchases by 30.25% (1,424.5g), decreases
cholesterol by 10.83% (1,223.5g), and reduces sodium by 10.63% (19,913.5mg). Despite these
large changes, average indirect utility only declines by only 2%, which is comparable to the SSB,
soda and candy/snack tax welfare losses. Purchase of dairy and packaged meals are reduced
the most due to a fat tax. Households however increase their expenditure on soda by 3.16% and
on other cold beverages by 1.76%. Such substitution patterns lead fat taxes to only decrease

                                                29
sugar intake by 6%. Expenditure on fruits and vegetables decrease as well by 0.7%, which
together with the substitution to soda suggests fat taxes do not unambiguously support better
nutrition. Again, this result highlights the value of considering substitution effects across goods
in response to food-based taxes.
   Unlike a tax on fat, a 20% sugar tax has a very strong and unambiguously positive effect
on nutrition at a small increase in utility cost of 2.6%. It also has a very small overall effect
on expenditure of -0.64%. Compared to the soda tax, a sugar tax has a large impact on
nutrients purchased. Our estimates show that monthly sugar consumption would drop by
16.41% (1,211.1g), with a 18.54% (18,302.4) decline in total calories. The effect on fat and salt
also are sizable, at 12% and 9.63% respectively. Total consumption of cholesterol and protein
declines significantly as well. As Panel B illustrates, only about 14% of the reduction in sugar
purchases comes from soda, which underscores the limits of taxing only this product. Instead,
households reduce their sugar intake from all product groups. This broad-based reduction
reflects both income and substitution effects: consumers purchase less overall and they also
purchase healthier products. Recall that many goods high in sugar also have sizable amounts
of other nutrients, such as fat and salt. We find that sugar taxes cause households to substitute
both to healthier product groups and to healthier versions of the same product (e.g., diet versus
regular soda).
   The reason that sugar taxes are so effective is the same reason why the nutritional taxes in
general are much more effective at altering nutritive bundles without causing a larger utility
decline: they are very broad based. The vast majority of product groups and of products in
general contain sugar, fat and salt. Sugar in particular is highly prevalent in American foods.
Taxing these nutrients does not allow consumers to substitute to other goods that also contain
these nutrients. Rather, they shift to healthier products and decrease overall consumption.
Despite the fact that these taxes are predicted to cause changes in purchasing behavior that
lead to large nutritional gains, their broad-based nature requires there to be much less of a
behavioral response for a given amount of change in the nutritional bundle than for product-
specific taxes. Thus, they are able to exert a large influence on nutrition at a similar welfare
cost to the product-specific taxes we consider.
   In the last panel of Table 7, we investigate the counterfactual of imposing a 20% salt tax.
Similar to the other nutrient taxes, the overall impact on nutrition is sizable: total salt pur-
chased by the household decreases by 10.0% (18,792mg) per month, which is equivalent to about
8 teaspoons of salt. While the biggest share of the reduction comes from condiments and spices

                                                  30
(including salt products), substantial savings also are achieved from baking goods, snacks, and
grains and pasta. This tax reduces total calories and fat by over 10% as well. However, soda
expenditures increase by 8.3%, which significantly reduces the effect of a salt tax on sugar.
Again, this result underscores the importance of considering substitution behavior in assessing
the effects of a given food-based tax. The cost of this tax in terms of indirect utility also is
low, at 1.2%, suggesting that substantial nutritional gains in many areas could be achieved at
minimal cost with a salt tax.
    The discussion above suggests that when considering the choice between product- and
nutrient-specific taxes, policy makers can achieve substantially larger improvements in nutrition
by implementing nutrition taxes, rather than product taxes. Both sets of taxes alter indirect
utility similarly. But, nutrient taxes have far larger impacts on nutrition, which is the ultimate
goal of these taxes. While there are some unintended consequences of some of these nutrient
taxes, such as higher soda consumption and decreased fruit and vegetable consumption, on the
whole they lead to large reductions in purchases of most nutrient categories. One tax simulation
stands out, however, which is the sugar tax. Not only is the indirect utility cost modest, it
also leads to substantial reductions in the purchased amount of calories, sugar, fat, salt and
cholesterol.


5    Conclusions

This paper investigates the degree to which food taxes can be used to support better nutritional
choices among US households. The last few decades have seen a sharp rise in obesity and
overweight in the US, which is now being referred to as the “obesity epidemic.” With a large
proportion of calories being consumed in the home, there has been a surprising lack of empirical
examination of policy tools that can be used to induce consumers to purchase more nutritious
food.
    One reason for this gap in the literature is the need for detailed data on food purchases,
prices, demographics, local store availability and nutrition as well as a parsimonious way to
model the joint product-nutrient space. We construct the first data set of which we are aware
that contains all of these components over a longer time horizon. We use 7 years of Nielsen
Homescan data, merged with the nutritional content of foods purchased and with store density
information that allows us to examine these policy issues with a level of detail and technical
sophistication that previously were not feasible. One of the central contributions of this paper


                                                31
is to use the UPC-level nutritional information to find distinct nutrient clusters of goods within
each product group that define the types of goods over which consumers can substitute. We
then estimate a large utility-derived demand system, which identifies the price and expenditure
elasticities across 33 product groups at the household-month level. Using our structural demand
estimates, we simulate the effect of 20% product taxes on soda, SSBs, packaged meals, and
candy/snacks and 20% nutrient taxes on fat, salt, and sugar.
   Our main finding is that nutrient-specific taxes have much larger effects on nutrition than
do the product-specific taxes we study. However, they do not cost more in terms of consumer
utility. While a 20% soda tax reduces sugar purchases by 10.35%, it only reduces overall caloric
intake by 4.84%. Taxing packaged meals actually increases slightly overall caloric intake, even
though this product group is the unhealthiest per serving. Taxing snacks/candy also has at
most small impacts on the purchased nutritive bundle.
   In contrast, taxing nutrients has large impacts on nutrition without producing larger welfare
losses than product-specific taxes, largely because of the broad-based nature of these taxes.
Among the three nutrient-specific taxes, sugar taxes stand out as particularly effective. A 20%
sugar tax reduces sugar consumption by 16.41% while also reducing caloric intake by 18.54%
and salt consumption by 9.63%. Consumer indirect utility declines by 2.6% as a result, which
is very similar to the utility cost of a soda tax and SSB tax.
   Overall, our estimates suggest that the use of nutrient-specific taxes could have an important
effect in inducing healthier purchasing behavior among consumers. The results we present are
consistent with theoretical arguments of the value of having broad-based taxes that are harder
to avoid. Nutrients provide such a broad base, and our findings indicate that taxes on nutrients
would do much more to support healthier nutritional choices than would taxes on products.
The focus among public health officials and policy makers on the product-specific taxes (such
as soda taxes) and even on nutrient-specific taxes on a small set of goods (such as an SSB
tax) may be misplaced; broadening the tax base would achieve larger nutritional gains without
causing larger overall distortions in household utility.




                                                32
References

Aguiar, M., and E. Hurst. 2007. “Lifecycle Prices and Production.” American Economic
 Review, 97(5): 1533–1559.

Aguiar, M., and E. Hurst. forthcoming. “Deconstructing Lifecycle Expenditure.” Journal
 of Political Economy. forthcoming.

Andreyeva, T., M.W. Long, and K.D. Brownell. 2010. “The Impact of Food Prices on
 Consumption: A Systematic Review of Research on the Price Elasticity of Demand for Food.”
 American Journal of Public Health, 100(2): 216–222.

Attanasio, O., L. Blow, R. Hamilton, and A. Leicester. 2009. “Booms and Busts:
 Consumption, House Prices and Expectations.” Economica, 76: 20–50.

Banks, J., R. Blundell, and A. Lewbel. 1997. “Quadratic Engel Curves and Consumer
 Demand.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, LXXIX(4): 527–539.

Baughman, R., M. Conlin, S. Dickert-Conlin, and J. Pepper. 2001. “Slippery When
 Wet: The Effects of Local Alcohol Access Laws on Highway Safety.” Journal of Health Eco-
 nomics, 20.

Berry, S., J. Levinsohn, and A. Pakes. 1995. “Automobile Prices in Market Equilibrium.”
 Econometrica, 63(4): 841–890.

Besley, T., and H. Rosen. 1999. “Sales Taxes and Price: An Empirical Analysis.” National
 Tax Journal, 52(2): 157–178.

Bitler, M., and S. Haider. 2011. “An Economic View of Food Deserts in the United States.”
 Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 30(1): 153–176.

Blundell, R., and J.-M. Robin. 1999. “Estimation in Large and Disaggregated Demand
 Systems: An Estimator for Conditionally Linear Systems.” Journal of Applied Econometrics,
 14: 209–232.

Brownell, K.D., T. Farley, W.C. Willett, B.M. Popkin, F.J. Chaloupka, J.W.
 Thompson, and D.S. Ludwig. 2009. “The Public Health and Economic Benefits of Taxing
 Sugar-Sweetened Beverages.” The New England Journal of Medicine, 361: 1599–1605.

Burda, M., M. Harding, and J. Hausman. 2012. “A Poisson Mixture Model of Discrete
 Choice.” Journal of Econometrics, 166: 184–203.

                                           33
Campbell, John, and J. Cocco. 2007. “How do house prices affect consumption? Evidence
 from micro data.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 54(3): 591–621.

Cawley, John. 2010. “The Economics of Childhood Obesity.” Health Affairs, 29(3): 364–371.

Chetty, R., A. Looney, and K. Kroft. 2009. “Salience and Taxation: Theory and Evidence.”
 American Economic Review, 99(4): 1145–1177.

Chouinard, H.H., D.E. Davis, J.T. LaFrance, and J.M. Perloff. 1998. “Fat Taxes: Big
 Money for Small Change.” Forum for Health Economics & Policy, 10(2).

Cutler, D., E. Glaeser, and J. Shapiro. 2003. “Why Have Americans Become More Obese?”
 Journal of Economic Perspectives, 17(3): 93–118.

Deaton, A., ed. 1981. “Theory and Management of Consumer Behavior.” , ed. A. Deaton,
 Chapter Some Engel Curves. Cambridge.

Decoster, A., and F. Vermeulen. 1998. “Evaluation of the Empirical Performance of Two-
 Stage Budgeting AIDS, QUAIDS and Rotterdam Models based on Weak Separability.” Dis-
 cussion Paper, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven.

Dharmasena, S., and O. Jr. Capps. 2012. “Intended and Unintended Consequences of a
 Proposed National Tax on Sugar-sweetened Beverages to Combat the U.S. Obesity Problem.”
 Health Economics, 21(6): 619–756.

Dubois, P., R. Griffith, and A. Nevo. forthcoming. “Do Prices and Attributes Explain
 International Differences in Food Purchases?” American Economics Review. forthcoming.

Duffey, K.J., P. Gordon-Larson, J.M. Shikany, D. Guilkey, D.R. Jr. Jacobs, and
 B.M. Popkin. 2010. “Food Price and Diet and Health Outcomes: 20 Years of the CARDIA
 Study.” Archives of Internal Medicine, 170(5): 420–426.

Einav, L., E. Leibtag, and A. Nevo. 2010. “Recording Discrepancies in Nielsen Homescan
 Data: Are they Present and Do They Matter?” Quantitative Marketing and Economics,
 8(2): 207–239.

Finkelstein, E., C. Zhen, J. Nonnemaker, and J. Todd. 2010. “Impact of Targeted
 Beverage Taxes on Higher- and Lower-income Households.” Archives of Internal Medicine,
 170(2): 2028–2034.



                                            34
Finkelstein, E., C. Zhen, M. Bilger, J. Nonnemaker, A. Farooqui, and J. Todd. 2012.
 “Implications of a Sugar-sweetened Beverage (SSB) Tax When Substitutions to Non-beverage
 Items are Considered.” Journal of Health Economics, 32: 219–239.

Finkelstein, E., I. Fiebelkorn, and G. Wang. 1998. “Annual Medical Spending At-
 tributable to Obesity: Payer and Service-Specific Estimates.” Health Affairs, 28: w822w831.

Flegal, K., M. Carroll, R. Kuczmarski, and C. Johnson. 1998. “Overweight and Obesity
 in the United States: Prevalence and Trends, 1960-1994.” International Journal of Obesity
 and Related Metabolic Disorders, 22: 39–47.

Fletcher, J., D. Frisvold, and N. Tefft. 2010a. “Can Soft Drink Taxes Reduce Population
 Weight?” Contemporary Economic Policy, 28(1): 23–35.

Fletcher, J., D. Frisvold, and N. Tefft. 2010b. “The Effects of Soft Drink Taxation on Soft
 Drink Consumption and Weight for Children and Adolescents.” Journal of Public Economics,
 94(11-12): 967–974.

Goolsbee, A., M.F. Lovenheim, and J. Slemrod. 2010. “Playing With Fire: Cigarettes,
 Taxes, and Competition from the Internet.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy,
 2(1): 131–154.

Griffith, R., L. Nesheim, and M. O’Connell. 2010. “Sin taxes in differentiated product
 oligopoly: an application to the butter and margarine market.” CEMMAP Working Paper
 No. CWP37/10.

Harding, M., E. Leibtag, and M. Lovenheim. 2012. “The Heterogeneous Geographic
 and Socioeconomic Incidence of Cigarette Taxes: Evidence from Nielsen Homescan Data.”
 American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 4(4): 169–198.

Hausman, J. 1978. “Specification Tests in Econometrics.” Econometrica, 46: 1251–1271.

Hausman, J., G. Leonard, and J. Zona. 1994. “Competitive Analysis with Differentiated
 Products.” Annals of Economics and Statistics, 34: 159–180.

Kamerow, D. 2010. “The Case of Sugar Sweetend Beverage Tax.” BMJ, 341: 132–133.

Kenkel, D. 2005. “Are Alcohol Tax Hikes Fully Passed through to Prices? Evidence from
 Alaska.” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 95(2): 273–277.



                                               35
Kuchler, F., A. Tegene, and M.J. Harris. 2005. “Taxing Snack Foods: Manipulating Diet
 Quality or Financing Information Programs?” Applied Economic Perspectives and Policy,
 27(1): 4–20.

Lecocq, S., and J.-M. Robin. 2006. “Estimating Demand Response with Panel Data.”
 Empirical Economics, 31: 1043–1060.

Lin, B.-H., T.A. Smith, J.-Y. Lee, and K.D. Hall. 2011. “Measuring Weight Outcomes for
 Obesity Intervention Strategies: The Case of a Sugar-sweetened Beverage Tax.” Economics
 & Human Biology, 9(4): 329–341.

Lovenheim, M.F. 2008. “How Far to the Border? The Extent and Impact of Cross-border
 Cigarette Smuggling.” National Tax Journal, 61(1): 7–33.

Lovenheim, M.F., and J. Slemrod. 2010. “The Fatal Toll of Driving to Drink: The Effect
 of Minimum Legal Drinking Age Evasion on Traffic Fatalities.” Journal of Health Economics,
 29(1): 62–77.

Must, A., J. Spadano, E. Coakley, A. Field, G. Colditz, and W. Dietz. 1999. “The
 Disease Burden Associated with Overweight and Obesity.” Journal of the American Medical
 Association, 282: 1523–1529.

Mytton, O., D. Clarke, and M. Rayner. 2012. “Taxing Unhealthy Food and Drinks to
 Improve Health.” British Medical Journal, 344: 1–7.

Nestle, M. 2012. “New Data on Calories Reported as Consumed.” Food Politics Blog,
 http://www.foodpolitics.com/2012/07/new-data-on-calories-reported-as-consumed/.

Nevo, A. 2003. “New Products Quality Changes, and Welfare Measures Computed From
 Estimated Demand Systems.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 85: 255–275.

Ogden, C., M. Carroll, L. Curtin, M. Lamb, and K. Flegal. 2010. “Prevalence of High
 Body Mass Index in US Children and Adolescents, 2007-2008.” Journal of the American
 Medical Association, 303(3): 242–249.

Pi-Suyner, F. 1991. “Health Implications of Obesity.” American Journal of Clinical Nutrition,
 53: 1595S1603S.

Powell, L., J.F. Chriqui, T. Khan, R. Wada, and F.J. Chaloupka. 2013. “Assessing
 the Potential Effectiveness of Food and Beverage Taxes and Subsidies for Improving Pub-

                                             36
 lic Health: a Systematic Review of Prices, Demand and Body Weight Outcomes.” Obesity
 Reviews, 14(2): 110–128.

Slemrod, J., and W. Kopczuk. 2002. “The Optimal Elasticity of Taxable Income.” Journal
 of Public Economics, 84(1): 91–112.

Todd, J., L. Mancino, E. Leibtag, and C. Tripodo. 2010. “Methodology Behind the
 Quarterly Food-at-Home Price Database.” USDA Technical Bulletin 1926.

Yen, S.T., B.-H. Lin, D.M. Smallwood, and M. Andrews. 2004. “Demand for Nonal-
 coholic Beverages: The Case of Low-income Households.” Agribusiness, 30(3): 309–321.

Zhen, C., M.K. Wohlgenant, S. Karns, and P. Kaufman. 2011. “Habit Formation
 and Demand for Sugar-Sweetened Beverages.” American Journal of Agricultural Economics,
 93(1): 175–193.




                                           37
          Table 1: Budget Shares and Prices

        Budget     Price Per    Aggregate               Budget
Group   Share       Ounce       Category                Share
  1      0.025       0.107
  2      0.043      0.101       Fruits & Vegetables      0.091
  3      0.023       0.078
  4      0.016       0.029
  5      0.025       0.047
                                Cold Beverages           0.062
  6      0.009       0.035
  7      0.012       0.055
  8      0.002       0.091
  9      0.021       0.308      Warm Beverages           0.034
 10      0.011       0.181
 11      0.031       0.029
                                Soda                      0.053
 12      0.022       0.021
 13      0.020       0.170
                                Packaged Meals            0.075
 14      0.055       0.211
 15      0.037       0.107
 16      0.015      0.130       Grain, Pasta, Bread      0.085
 17      0.033       0.150
 18      0.008       0.130
                                Canned Food, Sauce       0.040
 19      0.032       0.170
 20      0.034       0.161
                                Cereal, Breakfast        0.053
 21      0.019       0.221
 22      0.107       0.171      Other Dairy              0.107
 23      0.064       0.198
 24      0.014       0.159      Meat, Protein            0.127
 25      0.050       0.191
 26      0.020       0.481
                                Condiments, Spices       0.040
 27      0.019       0.210
 28      0.061       0.317
                                Snacks, Candy            0.155
 29      0.095       0.193
 30      0.029       0.024
                                Milk                      0.047
 31      0.018       0.043
 32      0.006       0.064
                                Baking Goods             0.032
 33      0.027       0.206
 Source: Nielsen Homescan data from 2002-2007. Tabulations include
 only those in the 52 identified Nielsen markets.




                               38
   Table 2: Median Nutritional Content (per Serving) of Product-Nutrition Cluster Groups

        Aggregate                               Total      Salt   Sugar     Cholest-    Protein    Calories from      Carbs
Group   Category                   Calories    Fat (g)    (mg)     (g)      erol (g)      (g)         Fat (g)          (g)
  1     Fruits & Vegetables          660          0         50     111         0           8             0             160
  2     Fruits & Vegetables          140          0         35      12         0           4             0              30
  3     Fruits & Vegetables          210          0       1260      10         0           7             0              42
  4     Cold Beverages                 0          0          5       0          0           0             0              0
  5     Cold Beverages               880          0        120     192          0           3             0            219
  6     Cold Beverages              1528          0        995     352          0           0             0            405
  7     Cold Beverages               240          0        298      56          0           0             0             60
  8     Warm Beverages              5000         43         36     684          0           0           656            896
  9     Warm Beverages               200          0         79      23          0           0             0             24
 10     Warm Beverages              1280         33        400     160          0           7           299            224
 11     Soda                           0          0        135       0          6           0             0              0
 12     Soda                          960         0        287     254         25           0             0            272
 13     Packaged Meals               1518        78       4070      16        193          79           713            122
 14     Packaged Meals                330        10        750       7         33          16            90             40
 15     Grain, Pasta, Bread         1540         23       3240      36         0          52            207            288
 16     Grain, Pasta, Bread         1360         10        138      18         0          40             96            267
 17     Grain, Pasta, Bread          960         16       1788      20         0          29            150            176
 18     Canned Food, Sauce           600          0       7564     100         0           0              0            150
 19     Canned Food, Sauce           225          5       1869       5         2           8             50             36
 20     Cereal, Breakfast           1760         20       2450     130         0          45            200            372
 21     Cereal, Breakfast           1080         21        720      54         0          21            189            180
 22     Other Dairy                  760         48        600      16         75          16           420             25
 23     Meat, Protein                480         21        920       3        100         38            182              7
 24     Meat, Protein               3077        1333       851       0       1227         357          11995             0
 25     Meat, Protein               1040         80       3700       8        240         54            724             14
 26     Condiments, Spices           540          0       1120     23          0           0             2             64
 27     Condiments, Spices          1040         72       5250     23          0           0            657            32
 28     Snacks, Candy                433         11        180      28          0           5           100             72
 29     Snacks, Candy               1727         80       1950      18          0          27           720            216
 30     Milk                         2052        80       2056     192        320         129           720            201
 31     Milk                          874        24       1000      96        101          64           209             98
 32     Baking Goods                11520       1344         0       0          0           0          11520             0
 33     Baking Goods                1800         23        937     100          0          12           210            308
 Source: Nielsen Homescan data combined with Gladson and FoodEssentials food label information. Tabulations include only those
 in the 52 identified Nielsen markets.




                                                          39
Table 3: Mean Own Price Elasticities of Demand and Expenditure Elas-
         ticities

               Aggregate             Own Price      Standard      Expenditure      Standard
 Group         Category              Elasticity       Error        Elasticity        Error
 1        Fruits & Vegetables         -1.128          0.004          1.425           0.014
 2        Fruits & Vegetables         -0.830          0.004          1.191           0.015
 3        Fruits & Vegetables         -1.379          0.004          1.491           0.012
 4          Cold Beverages            -1.835          0.004          3.096           0.032
 5          Cold Beverages            -1.895          0.004          2.151           0.018
 6          Cold Beverages            -1.812          0.004          1.719           0.012
 7          Cold Beverages            -2.055          0.006          1.902           0.018
 8         Warm Beverages             -1.521          0.014          1.210           0.010
 9         Warm Beverages             -0.518          0.005          0.322           0.017
 10        Warm Beverages             -0.665          0.010          0.564           0.017
 11              Soda                 -2.260          0.006          4.485           0.044
 12              Soda                 -2.197          0.005          4.122           0.041
 13         Packaged Meals            -0.332          0.004          0.582           0.008
 14         Packaged Meals             0.120          0.005         -0.756           0.018
 15       Grain, Pasta, Bread         -0.845          0.004          1.363           0.010
 16       Grain, Pasta, Bread         -0.647          0.006          0.849           0.013
 17       Grain, Pasta, Bread         -0.292          0.004          0.716           0.010
 18       Canned Food, Sauce          -1.083          0.004          1.158           0.009
 19       Canned Food, Sauce          -0.907          0.003          0.953           0.011
 20        Cereal, Breakfast          -0.244          0.004          0.883           0.011
 21        Cereal, Breakfast           0.022          0.005          0.135           0.013
 22           Other Dairy             -0.731          0.003          0.728           0.008
 23          Meat, Protein             0.011          0.005          0.155           0.015
 24          Meat, Protein            -0.696          0.005          0.846           0.006
 25          Meat, Protein            -0.253          0.004          0.692           0.011
 26       Condiments, Spices          -0.431          0.002          0.269           0.013
 27       Condiments, Spices          -0.669          0.002          0.877           0.010
 28         Snacks, Candy             -0.270          0.004         -0.876           0.015
 29         Snacks, Candy             -0.295          0.004          0.404           0.009
 30               Milk                -1.793          0.003          2.296           0.015
 31               Milk                -1.972          0.004          1.693           0.017
 32          Baking Goods             -1.631          0.004          1.253           0.006
 33          Baking Goods             -0.575          0.003          0.634           0.012
  Source: Authors’ calculations from 2002-2007 Nielsen Homescan data. The sample includes only
  consumers in the 52 identified Nielsen markets. The table shows average elasticities of demand
  and standard errors that are calculated from the QAIDS model parameter estimates.




                                             40
            Table 4: Own and Cross Price Elasticities by Product Categories and Within Categories Groups.

     Aggregate                                 Within Category Group                 Aggregate                               Within Category Group
     Category                  Group         1       2       3       4               Category                    Group          1      2       3
     Fruits & Vegetables         1        -1.128 -0.149 -0.058                       Canned Food, Sauce           18         -1.083 0.024
     Fruits & Vegetables         2         0.023 -0.830 -0.025                       Canned Food, Sauce           19          0.064 -0.907
     Fruits & Vegetables         3        -0.035 -0.105 -1.379
                                                                                     Cereal, Breakfast              20       -0.244    -0.017
     Cold   Beverages             4       -1.835     0.037     0.027       0.019     Cereal, Breakfast              21       0.017     0.022
     Cold   Beverages             5        0.048     -1.895    0.031       0.031
     Cold   Beverages             6        0.079      0.046    -1.812      0.032     Other Dairy                    22       -0.731
     Cold   Beverages             7       -0.035     0.023     0.027      -2.055
                                                                                     Meat, Protein                  23       0.011      0.079     -0.149
     Warm Beverages               8       -1.521     -0.057    -0.092                Meat, Protein                  24       0.175     -0.696     0.044
     Warm Beverages               9        0.019     -0.518     0.010                Meat, Protein                  25       0.028      0.019     -0.253




41
     Warm Beverages              10        0.043     -0.097    -0.665
                                                                                     Condiments, Spices             26       -0.431     0.073
     Soda                        11       -2.260     0.171                           Condiments, Spices             27       0.030     -0.669
     Soda                        12        0.201     -2.197
                                                                                     Snacks, Candy                  28       -0.270    -0.060
     Packaged Meals              13       -0.332     0.031                           Snacks, Candy                  29       0.080     -0.295
     Packaged Meals              14       -0.020     0.120
                                                                                     Milk                           30       -1.793     0.255
     Grain, Pasta, Bread         15       -0.845     -0.001    0.110                 Milk                           31       0.107     -1.972
     Grain, Pasta, Bread         16       -0.019     -0.647    0.055
     Grain, Pasta, Bread         17        0.111      0.094    -0.292                Baking Goods                   32       -1.631    -0.268
                                                                                     Baking Goods                   33       -0.003    -0.575
      Source: Authors’ calculations from 2002-2007 Nielsen Homescan data. The sample includes only consumers in the 52 identified Nielsen markets.
      The table shows average own and cross-price elasticities of demand that are calculated from the QAIDS model parameter estimates. The table
      reports the diagonal matrix elements of the full elasticity matrix corresponding to the cross price elasticities of a given product group with respect
      to other product groups in the same aggregate product category.
              Table 5: Tax Simulations – Product Taxes on Soda and Sugar-Sweetened Beverages

                                                      Panel A: 20% Soda Tax    (Indirect Utility Cost = 2.5%)
                          %Δ         %Δ       %Δ                  Calories      Total    Carbo-               Pro-       Chole-
Category                 Expend.     Share    Price     Calories from Fat        Fat    hydrates    Sugar      tein      sterol      Salt
Fruits & Vegetables       -1.15       1.13    0.00        -41.6       0.0         0.0      -9.4       -4.3     -0.8         0.0      -10.2
Cold Beverages            -0.72       0.95    0.00        -38.4        0.0        0.0     -11.2       -9.5     -0.1         0.0      -29.9
Warm Beverages            -1.69      -1.47    0.00       -270.5      -53.6       -3.2     -36.5      -25.9     -0.3         0.0      -29.2
Soda                      -3.92      -3.43    20.00     -2231.1        0.0        0.0    -634.6     -674.7      0.0       -66.5     -869.3
Packaged Meals            -2.98      -1.84    0.00       -180.3      -66.9       -7.3     -17.6       -3.0     -9.2       -22.4     -472.0
Grain, Pasta, Bread       -1.09       0.81    0.00       -154.4      -27.2       -2.9     -28.4       -3.6     -4.7         0.0     -331.0
Canned Food, Sauce        -1.02      -0.15    0.00        -28.7       -3.3       -0.4      -5.3       -2.1     -0.6        -0.2     -336.7
Cereal, Breakfast         -2.92      -1.36    0.00       -330.9      -37.6       -4.1     -64.0      -20.5     -7.5         0.0     -399.4
Other Dairy               -0.94       0.53    0.00        -76.0      -35.7       -4.0      -5.0       -3.3     -2.5        -7.4      -59.1
Meat, Protein             -1.36      -1.39    0.00       -902.7    -3019.4     -335.7      -3.4       -1.6    -94.3      -301.6     -896.4
Condiments, Spices        -0.99       0.48    0.00        -43.8      -15.4       -1.7      -3.1       -1.5      0.0        0.0      -179.6
Snacks, Candy             -0.88       0.89    0.00        -92.3      -34.9       -3.9     -11.9       -2.5     -1.5         0.0      -93.5
Milk                      -0.26       1.41    0.00        -12.4       -2.7       -0.3      -1.5       -1.1     -0.9        -1.6      -11.9
Baking Goods              -1.61       0.24    0.00       -376.6     -213.2      -24.4     -29.3      -10.1     -1.2         0.0      -81.3

Total                       1.66                      -4779.8      -3510.0  -387.9     -861.3     -763.6 -123.6           -399.7   -3799.5
Percent                                                 -4.84        -7.37   -7.31      -5.67     -10.35   -3.70           -3.54    -2.03
                                                  Panel B: 20%    Tax on SSBs (Indirect Utility Cost = 2.0%)
                          %Δ         %Δ       %Δ                   Calories  Total    Carbo-               Pro-          Chole-
Category                 Expend.     Share    Price Calories      from Fat    Fat    hydrates     Sugar     tein         sterol      Salt
Fruits & Vegetables       -0.49       0.92    0.00      -17.6          0.0     0.0       -4.0      -1.9     -0.3            0.0       -1.4
Cold Beverages            -0.76       0.03    14.90 -1602.3            0.0     0.0     -422.7     -368.5    -2.6            0.0    -1224.6
Warm Beverages            -0.57      -1.22    20.00 -3258.5         -652.9   -40.1     -442.4     -313.2    -4.1            0.0     -365.0
Soda                      -7.26      -7.60     8.34   -2832.2          0.0     0.0     -797.5     -750.5     0.0          -73.3     -790.7
Packaged Meals            -0.62      -0.33     0.00     -39.8        -15.1    -1.7       -3.8      -0.6     -2.0           -5.0     -104.9
Grain, Pasta, Bread       -0.33       0.71    0.00      -44.4         -8.0    -0.9       -8.2      -1.1     -1.4            0.0     -105.0
Canned Food, Sauce        -0.36      -0.36    0.00      -10.7         -1.1    -0.1       -2.0      -0.9     -0.2           -0.1     -131.4
Cereal, Breakfast         -0.70       0.02    0.00      -78.6         -8.6    -0.9      -15.2      -4.9     -1.8            0.0      -97.6
Other Dairy               -0.23       0.37    0.00      -18.8         -8.8    -1.0       -1.2      -0.8     -0.6           -1.8      -14.6
Meat, Protein             -0.28       0.11    0.00     -239.6       -845.6   -94.0       -0.8      -0.4    -25.4         -81.5      -212.9
Condiments, Spices        -0.21       0.39    0.00      -10.1         -4.3    -0.5       -0.6      -0.3      0.0           0.0       -45.7
Snacks, Candy             -0.13       0.76     0.00     -16.4         -6.4    -0.7       -2.1      -0.4     -0.3            0.0      -17.5
Milk                      -0.06       0.72     0.00      6.6           2.9     0.3        0.6       0.8      0.4            1.1        8.4
Baking Goods              -0.51       0.47     0.00    -174.5       -121.5   -14.0       -8.4      -2.9     -0.3            0.0      -23.2

Total                       1.66                        -8337.0     -1669.3    -153.4     -1708.2    -1445.4     -38.7    -160.6   -3126.2
Percent                                                  -8.44       -3.50      -2.89      -11.25     -19.59     -1.16     -1.42    -1.67
          Source: Nielsen Homescan data. Indirect utility costs are calculated using equation (1). We calculate V for each household under the old an
          new price regimes; percent change in average indirect utility over all households and time periods are shown.




                                                                    42
                    Table 6: Tax Simulations – Product Taxes on Packaged Meals and Snacks

                                             Panel A: 20% Packaged Meal       Tax (Indirect Utility Cost =    1.4%)
                          %Δ         %Δ       %Δ               Calories        Total    Carbo-                Pro- Chole-
Category                 Expend.     Share    Price Calories from Fat           Fat    hydrates Sugar          tein sterol        Salt
Fruits & Vegetables        3.61       2.51    0.00     171.6      0.0           0.0      38.1       15.8        3.7    0.0       412.0
Cold Beverages             1.61      -0.09    0.00     122.8       0.0           0.0      34.2       29.2       0.2    0.0        98.8
Warm Beverages             0.56      -2.54    0.00     214.1      40.0           1.8      28.2       18.7       0.1    0.0        10.3
Soda                       2.74      -0.14     0.00     212.2      0.0           0.0      60.6       66.9       0.0    6.6        90.8
Packaged Meals             7.96       5.62    20.00    -897.8   -347.6         -38.0     -82.3      -13.4     -45.1 -113.1      -2381.7
Grain, Pasta, Bread        1.87       0.41    0.00     363.9     48.0           5.1      66.3         7.3     10.3     0.0       430.3
Canned Food, Sauce         0.25      -2.21    0.00       10.9     0.4           0.0        2.2        1.2       0.1    0.0       155.7
Cereal, Breakfast          2.10       0.32    0.00     220.2     26.5            2.9     42.3       13.4        5.0    0.0       252.5
Other Dairy               -0.42      -2.27    0.00      -33.7    -15.9          -1.8      -2.2       -1.5      -1.1   -3.3       -26.2
Meat, Protein              0.76      -0.46    0.00     308.4    1058.6         117.7       1.1        0.5      33.6  105.4       248.3
Condiments, Spices        -0.62      -2.47    0.00      -17.9     4.4           0.5       -2.7       -1.1       0.0   0.0         -8.9
Snacks, Candy             -0.11      -1.68    0.00      -37.0    -15.7          -1.8      -4.5       -0.2      -0.7    0.0       -46.4
Milk                       2.38       0.66     0.00     222.3     65.5           7.3      25.1       22.6      14.9   30.4       237.8
Baking Goods               1.80       0.29    0.00     1220.7   1022.3         118.3      18.8        6.5       0.8    0.0        52.2

Total                      -1.70                    2080.5    1886.5   212.2     225.1     166.0              21.9     26.0      -474.4
Percent                                               2.11      3.96    4.00     1.48       2.25              0.65     0.23       -0.25
                                           Panel B: 20% Snack, Candy Tax (Indirect Utility Cost =            2.0%)
                          %Δ         %Δ     % Δ Calories      Total             Carbo-                        Pro-    Chole-
Category                 Expend.     Share Price Calories from Fat      Fat    hydrates Sugar                 tein    sterol      Salt
Fruits & Vegetables        0.79       0.67  0.00      69.9       0.0     0.0     16.0        7.0               1.2      0.0       177.9
Cold Beverages             1.00       0.25  0.00      68.4       0.0     0.0     18.7       16.2               0.2      0.0        34.2
Warm Beverages             0.41      -1.76  0.00     278.2      51.5     2.2     36.5       23.7               0.1      0.0         9.6
Soda                       0.34      -1.55  0.00       7.7       0.0     0.0       2.4       4.3               0.0      0.4         8.8
Packaged Meals            -0.28      -1.52  0.00      22.7      12.2     1.3       0.9       0.0               1.0      3.3        67.7
Grain, Pasta, Bread       -0.24      -0.73  0.00     -11.6      -5.3    -0.6      -2.4      -0.6              -0.6     0.0       -110.8
Canned Food, Sauce         0.37      -1.16  0.00      10.3       1.2     0.1       1.9       0.7               0.2      0.1       120.5
Cereal, Breakfast          0.39      -0.42  0.00      42.8       4.8     0.5       8.3       2.7               1.0      0.0        52.0
Other Dairy               -1.00      -1.92  0.00     -81.0     -38.1    -4.2      -5.4      -3.5              -2.7     -7.9       -63.0
Meat, Protein             -0.95      -1.31  0.00     115.2    789.3     87.7      -1.1      -0.4              14.6     50.1       -73.2
Condiments, Spices        -0.64      -1.56  0.00     -23.2      -2.5    -0.3      -2.4      -1.1               0.0     0.0        -61.1
Snacks, Candy              4.71       4.04 20.00 -2149.3      -847.0   -94.7    -271.6     -42.9             -35.8     -0.2     -2359.1
Milk                       1.28       0.52  0.00     104.3      29.5     3.3     11.9       10.4               7.0     14.1       109.8
Baking Goods               0.11      -0.44  0.00     351.0     330.6    38.4      -3.0      -1.0              -0.1      0.0        -8.4

Total                      -0.74                        -1194.5      326.3      33.6      -189.5     15.6     -14.0    60.0     -2095.1
Percent                                                  -1.21       0.68       0.63       -1.25     0.21     -0.42    0.53      -1.12
          Source: Nielsen Homescan data. Indirect utility costs are calculated using equation (1). We calculate V for each household under the old an
          new price regimes; percent change in average indirect utility over all households and time periods are shown.




                                                                    43
                                   Table 7: Tax Simulations – Nutrient Specific Taxes

                                                        Panel A: 20% Fat Tax     (Indirect Utility Cost   = 2.0%)
                          %Δ         %Δ        %Δ                  Calories        Total     Carbo-                  Pro-    Chole-
Category                 Expend.     Share     Price     Calories from Fat          Fat     hydrates      Sugar       tein   sterol       Salt
Fruits & Vegetables       -0.70      -0.29     8.37       -284.9       0.0           0.0      -61.1        -24.4      -7.4      0.0      -521.9
Cold Beverages             1.76       1.56      0.10       132.5        0.0          0.0       36.7         31.4       0.2      0.0       117.9
Warm Beverages             0.34      -1.30      4.90     -1921.4     -382.4        -20.9     -260.2       -173.4      -1.8      0.0      -138.6
Soda                       3.16       1.77      0.00       207.7        0.0          0.0       59.5         69.0       0.0      6.8        99.2
Packaged Meals            -0.23      -0.93      6.59      -581.3     -233.0        -25.4      -50.5         -7.9     -28.8    -74.2     -1559.4
Grain, Pasta, Bread        0.00       0.04     12.14     -2061.9     -308.3        -32.9     -378.2        -44.1     -60.7      0.0     -3315.2
Canned Food, Sauce         0.37      -0.63      2.79       -68.2       -7.7         -0.8      -12.7         -5.0      -1.3     -0.5      -805.4
Cereal, Breakfast         -0.03      -0.29      6.72      -723.0      -87.4         -9.6     -138.9        -44.0     -16.5     0.0       -826.4
Other Dairy               -0.67      -1.06     18.76     -1561.6     -734.0        -81.5     -103.1        -67.2     -52.4   -152.3     -1214.0
Meat, Protein             -0.35      -0.45     16.07     -2903.5    -6691.1       -744.5      -21.4        -10.3    -266.5   -860.5     -4940.0
Condiments, Spices        0.56        0.17     14.93      -648.8     -248.8        -27.6      -43.3        -21.9       0.0     0.0      -2788.5
Snacks, Candy             -0.06      -0.16     11.77     -2375.8     -972.2       -108.9     -294.3        -30.8     -40.7     -0.1     -2800.2
Milk                       0.42       0.20     11.91     -1046.8     -304.2        -33.9     -118.6       -105.8     -70.5   -142.7     -1114.0
Baking Goods               1.74       1.73      7.10     -5147.6    -4487.8       -519.8      -38.6        -13.3      -1.6      0.0      -107.0

Total                      -0.20                         -18984.4 -14456.9 -1605.9       -1424.5    -447.6 -548.0            -1223.5    -19913.5
Percent                                                    -19.23    -30.35   -30.25       -9.38     -6.07   -16.38           -10.83     -10.63
                                                       Panel B: 20% Sugar Tax (Indirect Utility Cost = 2.6%)
                          %Δ         %Δ        %Δ                  Calories   Total      Carbo-               Pro-           Chole-
Category                 Expend.     Share     Price     Calories from Fat      Fat     hydrates    Sugar      tein          sterol       Salt
Fruits & Vegetables       -2.53      -2.55     7.84        -745.7      0.0      0.0       -174.1     -82.2    -10.9             0.0      -864.2
Cold Beverages             6.44       5.75     14.06      -1326.3       0.0      0.0      -349.5    -302.6     -1.5             0.0     -1319.5
Warm Beverages             1.24      -0.86     13.90      -2041.9    -462.7    -35.9      -294.2    -209.8     -4.4             0.0      -339.8
Soda                      11.52       9.53     14.16       -606.2       0.0      0.0      -170.8    -162.0      0.0           -15.8      -173.2
Packaged Meals            -0.81      -1.94      1.84       -135.3     -48.2     -5.3       -13.9      -2.4     -7.0           -16.5      -349.9
Grain, Pasta, Bread        0.00      -0.40      7.98      -1479.5    -206.1    -21.9      -269.4     -30.1    -42.1            0.0      -1910.4
Canned Food, Sauce         1.34      -0.11      5.84       -220.2      -5.7     -0.6       -45.5     -25.8     -1.0            -0.4     -3248.8
Cereal, Breakfast         -0.09      -0.80     15.76      -1749.8    -196.1    -21.3      -338.7    -108.5    -39.9            0.0      -2133.1
Other Dairy               -2.43      -3.24      5.24       -620.4    -291.6    -32.4       -41.0     -26.7    -20.8           -60.5      -482.3
Meat, Protein             -1.25      -1.71      5.00       -317.8     936.4   103.7         -8.6      -3.7    -18.5           -45.8     -1321.9
Condiments, Spices        2.05        1.20     12.63       -426.2    -106.6    -11.8       -36.1     -16.8      0.0            0.0      -1488.1
Snacks, Candy             -0.86      -1.40     10.47      -1979.3    -800.2    -89.6      -246.8     -30.2    -33.6            -0.1     -2280.3
Milk                       1.52       0.86     20.29      -1748.4    -511.0    -57.0      -197.7    -177.2 -117.6            -238.8     -1865.0
Baking Goods               6.57       6.09     13.18      -4905.4   -4018.5   -464.9       -96.2     -33.2     -4.0             0.0      -266.7

Total                      -0.64                      -18302.4   -5710.3          -636.9    -2282.5    -1211.1      -301.2    -378.0    -18043.3
Percent                                                 -18.54    -11.99          -12.00     -15.03     -16.41       -9.00     -3.34      -9.63
                                                     Panel C: 20% Salt Tax       (Indirect Utility Cost = 1.2%)
                          %Δ         %Δ        %Δ                Calories         Total     Carbo-                  Pro-     Chole-
Category                 Expend.     Share     Price  Calories from Fat             Fat    hydrates     Sugar        tein    sterol       Salt
Fruits & Vegetables       -1.83      -1.67      3.64    -294.5      0.0             0.0       -61.2      -18.4       -9.4       0.0     -1714.0
Cold Beverages             4.63       4.15      1.60     121.3      0.0              0.0       35.7       30.3        0.3       0.0        47.2
Warm Beverages             0.89      -1.02      1.75      3.9      -15.8            -3.6       -4.7       -5.2       -0.6       0.0       -43.1
Soda                       8.29       6.55      1.19     400.2      0.0              0.0      115.1      137.3        0.0      13.6       204.0
Packaged Meals            -0.58      -1.54      6.64    -568.7    -224.9           -24.5      -50.5       -8.0      -28.4     -72.2     -1518.9
Grain, Pasta, Bread       -0.01      -0.23      6.16   -1186.7    -160.2           -17.0     -214.0      -23.1      -32.6      0.0      -1229.8
Canned Food, Sauce         0.96      -0.30     13.87    -379.4     -39.7            -4.2      -71.2      -29.4       -6.7      -2.8     -4591.1
Cereal, Breakfast         -0.07      -0.59      9.69   -1102.0    -116.3           -12.5     -214.5      -69.3      -25.0      0.0      -1405.7
Other Dairy               -1.75      -2.39      5.85    -613.2    -288.2           -32.0      -40.5      -26.4      -20.6     -59.8      -476.7
Meat, Protein             -0.90      -1.21      8.70   -1002.8    -164.0           -19.0      -14.4       -7.2      -61.3    -213.6     -3331.0
Condiments, Spices        1.48        0.82      9.56    -405.3    -197.1           -21.9      -21.4      -11.9        0.0      0.0      -1994.7
Snacks, Candy             -0.62      -0.98      7.17   -1755.8    -724.7           -81.2     -216.5      -19.9      -30.3       0.0     -2102.6
Milk                       1.09       0.62      7.12    -562.6    -164.5           -18.3      -63.6      -57.0      -37.8     -76.9      -600.2
Baking Goods 4.66          4.38       6.77    -3149.9 -2793.2     -323.7           -12.8       -4.4       -0.5        0.0     -35.5

Total                      -0.46                         -10495.5     -4888.7     -558.0      -834.5      -112.7    -252.9    -411.7    -18792.1
Percent                                                   -10.63       -10.26     -10.51       -5.49       -1.53     -7.56     -3.64     -10.03
          Source: Nielsen Homescan data. Indirect utility costs are calculated using equation (1). We calculate V for each household under the old an
          new price regimes; percent change in average indirect utility44
                                                                        over all households and time periods are shown.
                  Figure 1: Silhouette values for soda products by UPC for k = 2 clusters.




Figure 2: Graphical representation of food expenditures on the 14 major product categories in the sample.
          The size of the squares is proportional to the budget share of the corresponding product. The
          budget share is given in % under each product category name. The color shading of each rectangle
          corresponds to the price per ounce of products in each of the categories. The price per ounce in $ is
          also reported under the budget share for each category.




                                                      45
Figure 3: Number of calories per serving for each of the 33 product groups resulting from the partition of
          14 major food categories into nutrition based groups. Colors and labels denote the 14 product
          categories. For example, groups 11 and 12 correspond to the 2 partitions of the soda category. The
          groups within each product category are distinguished by their nutritional composition and are not
          separately named.




                                                    46
Figure 4: Own Price and Expenditure Elasticities by Product Groups and Aggregate Categories. For each
          group we report both elasticities. The top bar in each group corresponds to the own price elasticity.




                                                      47
Table A-1: Descriptive Statistics of Analysis
           Variables

 Variable                     Mean                     SD
 Household Income
 <$30,000                     0.247                  0.431
 $30,000-$45,000              0.207                  0.405
 $45,000-$70,000              0.261                  0.439
 ≥$70,000                     0.285                  0.451
 Head Education
 Less Than HS                 0.033                  0.178
 HS Graduate                  0.254                  0.436
 Some College                 0.320                  0.466
 BA+                          0.393                  0.488
 Female Head Age
 <35                          0.073                  0.260
 35-49                        0.323                  0.268
 50-64                        0.371                  0.483
 ≥65                          0.233                  0.423
 Male Head Age
 <35                          0.062                  0.242
 35-49                        0.325                  0.469
 50-64                        0.366                  0.481
 ≥65                          0.246                  0.431
 Race
 White                        0.811                  0.391
 Hispanic                     0.062                  0.240
 Black                        0.103                  0.304
 Asian                        0.025                  0.155
 Kids Over 12?                0.153                  0.360
 Kids Under 12?               0.167                  0.373
 Married                      0.579                  0.494
 Female Labor Supply
 Part Time                    0.163                  0.370
 Full Time                    0.424                  0.494
 Not Employed                 0.368                  0.482
 Male Labor Supply
 Part Time                    0.068                  0.252
 Full Time                    0.614                  0.487
 Not Employed                 0.318                  0.466
 Male Household Head          0.278                  0.448
 Female Household Head        0.107                  0.309
 Number of Household Members
 1                            0.268                  0.443
 2                            0.394                  0.489
 3                            0.144                  0.351
 4                            0.120                  0.325
 5                            0.049                  0.215
 6+                           0.025                  0.157
 Number of Transactions    89,627,027
 Number of Household-Years   162,195
 Number of Aggregate Obs.  21,145,678
  2002-2007 Nielsen Homescan data. Head Education refers
  to female household head if a female household head is
  present. In the cases in which no female household head
  is present, this variable refers to the male household head.




                            48
       Table A-2: Transaction-nutrition Matching Statistics by Year

Year   Direct     Match 1      Match 2      Match 3      Match 4      Match 5      Unmatched
2002   68.04%     13.92%       11.15%        4.05%        1.33%        1.53%         4.49%
2003   68.92%     13.42%       10.60%        4.24%        1.24%        1.59%         4.34%
2004   64.02%     15.67%       12.32%        4.97%        1.27%        1.76%         2.28%
2005   64.79%     15.42%       11.56%        5.18%        1.26%        1.78%         2.19%
2006   65.77%     15.41%       10.70%        5.14%        1.18%        1.80%         3.05%
2007   64.97%     15.83%       10.85%        5.24%        1.29%        1.81%         2.33%
 The table shows the percent of the transaction sample that is matched to the nutrition data under
 each of the matching sets.
 Direct matches are products that are matched directly based on UPC or based on product name
 for “random weight” products such as fruits, vegetables and meats.
 Match 1 = Assign Nielsen products the average per-serving nutrient characteristics among products
 with exact matches based on “product module,” size, type, brand, product, flavor, variety and
 formula.
 Match 2 = Assign Nielsen products the average per-serving nutrient characteristics among products
 with exact matches based on “product module,” size, type, and product.
 Match 3 = Assign Nielsen products the average per-serving nutrient characteristics among products
 with exact matches based on “product module” and size.
 Match 4 = Assign Nielsen products the average per-serving nutrient characteristics among products
 with exact matches based on “product module,” type, brand, flavor, product, formula, and variety.
 Match 5 = Assign Nielsen products the average per-serving nutrient characteristics among products
 with exact matches based on “product module,” type, product, and formula.
 Unmatched = Percent of transactions from raw data within the 52 markets that cannot be matched
 to nutritional information.




                                              49
                                        Table A-3: First Stage Log Price Estimates

Ind. Var.                                         Dependent Variable Group
 Group         1        2         3         4         5       6       7            8         9         10       11
    1        0.999    0.006     0.004     0.001     0.002   0.000   0.000        0.000     0.002     0.001    0.002
    2        0.008    0.998     0.009     0.003     0.005   0.002   0.003        0.000     0.007     0.004    0.004
    3        0.006    0.007     0.994     0.002     0.002   0.001   0.002        0.001     0.003     0.003    0.001
    4       -0.001   -0.001     0.000     1.015     0.000   0.000   0.000        0.000    -0.001     0.000   -0.001
    5        0.001    0.002     0.002     0.002     1.013   0.001   0.003        0.000     0.002     0.002    0.002
    6        0.001    0.001     0.003     0.001     0.001   1.014   0.001        0.001     0.001     0.002    0.000
    7        0.000    0.000     0.001    -0.001     0.001   0.000   1.008        0.000     0.001     0.001    0.000
    8       -0.003   -0.006    -0.004    -0.004    -0.005 -0.006 -0.005          1.001    -0.004    -0.001   -0.004
    9       -0.001   -0.002    -0.001     0.000     0.000   0.000   0.000        0.000     0.996     0.000    0.000
   10        0.001    0.000     0.000    -0.001     0.000   0.000   0.001        0.000     0.004     0.994    0.000
   11        0.001    0.000     0.002     0.001     0.001   0.000   0.001        0.000     0.002     0.001    1.015
   12       -0.001   -0.001    -0.001     0.000     0.000   0.001   0.000        0.000     0.001     0.001    0.002
   13       -0.001   -0.002    -0.003    -0.002    -0.002 -0.002 -0.002          0.000    -0.003    -0.001   -0.002
   14        0.009    0.011     0.007     0.002     0.003   0.002   0.001        0.000     0.004     0.002    0.003
   15        0.007    0.009     0.005     0.001     0.003   0.002   0.002        0.000     0.005     0.002    0.003
   16        0.001    0.001     0.003     0.000     0.001   0.000   0.001        0.000     0.000     0.001    0.001
   17        0.006    0.007     0.003     0.000     0.002   0.001   0.001        0.000     0.002     0.001    0.000
   18        0.000   -0.001     0.001    -0.001     0.000   0.000   0.000        0.000     0.000     0.000   -0.001
   19        0.002    0.003     0.003     0.000     0.001   0.000   0.000        0.000     0.002     0.001    0.000
   20        0.002    0.002    -0.001    -0.001    -0.002 -0.001 -0.001          0.000    -0.001    -0.001   -0.001
   21        0.000    0.000    -0.002     0.000    -0.001 0.000 -0.002           0.000    -0.001    -0.002    0.000
   22        0.011    0.017     0.010     0.003     0.008   0.003   0.004        0.000     0.009     0.004    0.005
   23        0.000    0.005     0.004     0.001     0.002   0.001   0.001        0.000     0.002     0.001    0.002
   24       -0.009   -0.008    -0.007    -0.004    -0.006 -0.004 -0.004          0.000    -0.008    -0.003   -0.004
   25        0.001    0.003     0.002     0.000     0.001   0.001   0.000        0.000     0.000     0.000    0.000
   26        0.002    0.003     0.002     0.000     0.001   0.000   0.001        0.000     0.002     0.001    0.000
   27        0.002    0.003     0.002     0.000     0.001   0.000   0.000        0.000     0.001     0.000    0.001
   28        0.000    0.000    -0.001     0.000    -0.001 0.000     0.000        0.000     0.000     0.000    0.000
   29        0.016    0.020     0.011     0.003     0.008   0.004   0.004        0.001     0.009     0.004    0.006
   30        0.003    0.004     0.005     0.002     0.004   0.001   0.002        0.000     0.003     0.002    0.002
   31       -0.001   -0.001    -0.001     0.001     0.000   0.000 -0.001         0.000     0.001     0.001    0.001
   32        0.000   -0.001     0.001     0.000    -0.001 0.000     0.001        0.001     0.001     0.002   -0.001
   33        0.000    0.001     0.000     0.000     0.000   0.000   0.000        0.000     0.001     0.000    0.001
        Source: Nielsen Homescan data. Each column represents a separate regression with the log price
        of the product category as the dependent variable. All estimates include month, year and market
        fixed effects. Standard errors are available upon request.




                                                                  50
                                   Table A-4: First Stage Log Price Estimates (continued)

Ind. Var.                                         Dependent Variable Group
 Group        12       13         14        15        16     17       18            19        20        21        22       23
    1       0.001     0.001     0.003     0.003     0.002  0.003    0.001         0.003     0.003     0.002     0.003    0.004
    2        0.003    0.003     0.008     0.010     0.008  0.011    0.005         0.011     0.007     0.006     0.010    0.010
    3        0.001    0.002     0.004     0.006     0.005  0.006    0.003         0.006     0.003     0.003     0.003    0.005
    4        0.000    0.000    -0.001    -0.001     0.000 -0.001 0.001            0.000    -0.001     0.000    -0.001   -0.001
    5        0.002    0.001     0.003     0.002     0.003  0.002    0.001         0.003     0.003     0.003     0.002    0.001
    6        0.001    0.001     0.000     0.003     0.002  0.002    0.003         0.002     0.001     0.001     0.002    0.002
    7        0.000    0.001     0.001     0.000     0.001  0.000    0.001         0.001     0.001     0.001     0.000   -0.001
    8       -0.004    0.002    -0.004    -0.007    -0.005 -0.006 -0.002          -0.005    -0.002    -0.001    -0.005   -0.008
    9        0.000    0.000    -0.001     0.000    -0.001 0.000 -0.001           -0.001     0.000     0.000    -0.001    0.000
   10        0.000    0.000     0.000     0.000     0.000  0.000 -0.001           0.000    -0.001     0.000     0.000    0.001
   11        0.002    0.002     0.002     0.001     0.001  0.000    0.002         0.002     0.002     0.002     0.001    0.001
   12        1.013    0.000    -0.001     0.000     0.001  0.000    0.000        -0.001    -0.002    -0.001     0.000   -0.001
   13       -0.002    0.984     0.000    -0.002    -0.003 -0.001 -0.003          -0.003    -0.002    -0.001    -0.003   -0.004
   14        0.003    0.003     0.986     0.011     0.007  0.011    0.004         0.008     0.005     0.004     0.009    0.013
   15        0.003    0.003     0.006     0.978     0.004  0.006    0.003         0.006     0.005     0.004     0.007    0.008
   16        0.000    0.001     0.003     0.000     0.994  0.002    0.001         0.003     0.002     0.002     0.001    0.002
   17        0.001    0.001     0.005     0.006     0.004  0.975    0.002         0.004     0.005     0.003     0.005    0.006
   18       -0.001    0.001     0.000     0.000     0.000  0.000    0.998         0.002     0.000     0.000     0.000    0.001
   19        0.001    0.001     0.002     0.003     0.002  0.004    0.001         0.991     0.003     0.002     0.003    0.003
   20       -0.002    0.001     0.000     0.001    -0.001 0.001 -0.001           -0.002     0.983     0.001    -0.001    0.000
   21        0.000    0.000     0.000    -0.001    -0.001 0.000 -0.001           -0.002     0.000     0.983    -0.001    0.001
   22        0.006    0.003     0.012     0.017     0.011  0.018    0.005         0.013     0.012     0.008     0.997    0.021
   23        0.002    0.001     0.005     0.007     0.005  0.007    0.003         0.006     0.004     0.003     0.007    0.979
   24       -0.005   -0.001    -0.007    -0.007    -0.007 -0.008 -0.006          -0.009    -0.005    -0.004    -0.008   -0.007
   25        0.001    0.002     0.002     0.006     0.001  0.005    0.001         0.002     0.003     0.001     0.003    0.007
   26        0.001    0.001     0.001     0.003     0.002  0.003    0.001         0.002     0.002     0.002     0.003    0.003
   27        0.001    0.001     0.001     0.003     0.002  0.002    0.002         0.002     0.001     0.001     0.002    0.002
   28        0.001   -0.001     0.000     0.000     0.002  0.001    0.000         0.000    -0.001     0.000     0.002    0.002
   29        0.005    0.005     0.014     0.021     0.013  0.020    0.006         0.013     0.013     0.010     0.017    0.019
   30        0.002    0.002     0.006     0.005     0.006  0.006    0.004         0.006     0.007     0.006     0.006    0.006
   31        0.000    0.000     0.001    -0.002    -0.002 -0.002 -0.001          -0.001     0.000     0.001    -0.002   -0.004
   32       -0.001    0.001    -0.001    -0.001     0.001  0.000    0.003         0.000    -0.001     0.000    -0.001    0.001
   33        0.000    0.000     0.000     0.001     0.001  0.001    0.000         0.001     0.000     0.000     0.001    0.002
             Source: Nielsen Homescan data. Each column represents a separate regression with the log price
             of the product category as the dependent variable. All estimates include month, year and market
             fixed effects. Standard errors are available upon request.




                                                                       51
                          Table A-5: First Stage Log Price Estimates (continued)

Ind. Var.                                     Dependent Variable Group
 Group        24        25         26        27      28      29       30             31        32        33
    1        0.003     0.003     0.002     0.003   0.003   0.003    0.002          0.001     0.000     0.002
    2       0.000      0.007     0.012     0.009   0.010   0.008    0.002          0.005     0.002     0.009
    3       0.003      0.005     0.007     0.006   0.004   0.004    0.000          0.002     0.001     0.005
    4       0.000      0.000     0.000     0.000 -0.001 -0.001 0.000              -0.001     0.000     0.000
    5       0.001      0.001     0.003     0.003   0.003   0.002    0.001          0.002     0.000     0.003
    6       0.002      0.003     0.004     0.003   0.001   0.001    0.002          0.001     0.001     0.001
    7       0.000      0.000     0.002     0.001   0.000   0.000    0.001          0.000     0.000     0.001
    8       0.005     -0.006    -0.005    -0.004 -0.005 -0.004 0.000              -0.005    -0.001    -0.003
    9       0.000     -0.001     0.000    -0.001 0.000 -0.001 0.000               -0.001    0.000      0.000
   10        0.001     0.001     0.002     0.000   0.001   0.000    0.000         -0.001     0.000     0.000
   11        0.001     0.001     0.001     0.001   0.001   0.000    0.001          0.001     0.000     0.001
   12        0.001     0.000     0.001     0.001   0.000 -0.001 -0.001             0.000     0.000     0.000
   13       -0.001    -0.001    -0.003    -0.002 -0.003 -0.002 -0.002             -0.002    -0.001    -0.003
   14        0.006     0.009     0.009     0.007   0.008   0.008    0.003          0.003     0.001     0.005
   15        0.002     0.008     0.007     0.007   0.005   0.007    0.002          0.001     0.001     0.005
   16        0.001     0.001     0.003     0.002   0.003   0.002    0.001          0.000     0.000     0.003
   17        0.002     0.006     0.006     0.004   0.005   0.005    0.001          0.001     0.000     0.003
   18        0.001     0.002     0.004     0.003   0.000   0.000 -0.001            0.000     0.000     0.001
   19        0.001     0.003     0.003     0.002   0.002   0.002    0.001          0.001     0.000     0.002
   20        0.000     0.001     0.000    -0.001 0.000     0.000    0.001         -0.002    -0.001    -0.001
   21        0.002     0.000    -0.001    -0.001 0.000 -0.001 0.000               -0.002     0.000    -0.002
   22        0.007     0.016     0.016     0.012   0.017   0.016    0.006          0.007     0.002     0.010
   23        0.001     0.008     0.007     0.004   0.007   0.005    0.002          0.003     0.001     0.004
   24        0.980    -0.005    -0.008    -0.008 -0.007 -0.008 -0.002             -0.005    -0.001    -0.008
   25        0.001     0.977     0.004     0.003   0.002   0.004    0.001          0.000     0.000     0.002
   26        0.001     0.002     0.955     0.002   0.003   0.002    0.001          0.001     0.000     0.002
   27        0.001     0.002     0.003     0.976   0.002   0.002    0.000          0.001     0.001     0.002
   28        0.001     0.000     0.002    -0.001 0.986     0.004    0.000          0.000     0.000     0.001
   29        0.007     0.018     0.017     0.013   0.020   0.995    0.004          0.006     0.002     0.010
   30        0.002     0.003     0.005     0.004   0.005   0.005    1.003          0.008     0.001     0.005
   31       -0.002    -0.003    -0.002    -0.001 -0.001 -0.002 -0.002             1.014      0.000    -0.001
   32        0.004     0.001     0.003     0.003 -0.001 -0.001 -0.001             -0.001     1.003     0.001
   33        0.001     0.001     0.003     0.002   0.001   0.001    0.000          0.000     0.000     0.985
    Source: Nielsen Homescan data. Each column represents a separate regression with the log price
    of the product category as the dependent variable. All estimates include month, year and market
    fixed effects. Standard errors are available upon request.




                                                              52
Table A-6: First Stage Expenditure Esti-
           mates

         Dep. Var: Ln(Expenditure)
 Independent Variable            Estimates
                                 13.394∗∗
 Ln(Market Income)
                                 (0.203)
                                 -0.541∗∗
 Ln(Market Income)2
                                 (0.012)
                                   0.584∗∗
 Ln(Market HPI)
                                 (0.101)
                                   0.178∗∗
 Ln(Market HPI)2
                                 (0.004)
                                   4.665∗∗
 Ln(Market Unemployment)
                                 (0.075)
                                   0.020∗∗
 Ln(Market Unemployment)2
                                 (0.003)
                                 -0.239∗∗
 Ln(Income)*Ln(HPI)
                                 (0.011)
                                 -0.038
 Ln(Unemployment)*Ln(HPI)
                                 (0.005)
                                 -0.427∗∗
 Ln(Unemployment)*Ln(Income)
                                 (0.007)

 F-Statistic of Instruments:                  24.92
   “Market Income” is MSA-by-year real income per
   capita, “HPI” is the MSA-by-quarter housing price
   index from the Federal Housing Finance Agency Re-
   peat Sales Index, and “Market Unemployment” is
   the MSA-by-month unemployment rate. All esti-
   mates include market, month and year fixed effects as
   well as the demographic controls included in the de-
   mand model. Standard errors clustered at the Cen-
   sus tract level are in parentheses: ** indicates sig-
   nificance at the 5% level and * indicates significance
   at the 10% level. The F-statistic shows the test for
   joint significance of the instruments.




                          53
              Table A-7: Own and Cross-Price Elasticities of Demand (ij )

                                                     i
 j      1        2        3         4         5         6        7         8         9        10        11
 1   -1.128   -0.149   -0.058     0.046     0.049     0.012    0.041     0.001     0.016    0.016     0.033
 2    0.023   -0.830   -0.025     0.059     0.036     0.008    0.061    -0.014     0.013    0.031    -0.014
 3   -0.035   -0.105   -1.379     0.072     0.042     0.034    0.053     0.004     0.026    0.026     0.081
 4    0.029    0.032    0.030    -1.835     0.037     0.027    0.019     0.016     0.005    0.000     0.071
 5    0.004    0.023    0.037     0.048    -1.895     0.031    0.031     0.017     0.057    0.023     0.125
 6    0.013    0.051    0.012     0.079     0.046    -1.812    0.032     0.017     0.034   -0.002     0.135
 7    0.022    0.046    0.035    -0.035     0.023     0.027   -2.055     0.032     0.021    0.007     0.031
 8   -0.082   -0.091   -0.013    -0.085    -0.033     0.139    0.146    -1.521    -0.057   -0.092    -0.125
 9   -0.002    0.010   -0.004    -0.011    -0.021    -0.006   -0.016     0.019    -0.518    0.010    -0.048
10    0.000   -0.005   -0.002    -0.005     0.002     0.017    0.016     0.043    -0.097   -0.665    -0.015
11    0.091    0.076    0.049     0.083     0.113     0.057    0.087     0.029     0.054    0.037    -2.260
12    0.094    0.122    0.040     0.109     0.036     0.049    0.065     0.013     0.046    0.002     0.201
13   -0.056   -0.104   -0.003    -0.080    -0.063     0.030   -0.006     0.060    -0.010   -0.012    -0.153
14   -0.079   -0.021   -0.025    -0.035    0.009     -0.044    0.008    -0.016    -0.028   -0.013    -0.123
15   -0.030   -0.011    0.071    -0.015     0.013    -0.006   -0.004    -0.015     0.012    0.015    -0.088
16   -0.046   -0.119   -0.085     0.035    -0.015    -0.001    0.030     0.005     0.004   -0.009     0.061
17   -0.055   -0.052    0.041    -0.080    -0.005    -0.033   -0.043    -0.012     0.005    0.013    -0.170
18    0.031    0.044   -0.005     0.007     0.016     0.030    0.031     0.025     0.022    0.017    -0.037
19   -0.034    0.009    0.057    -0.044    -0.019    -0.008   -0.018    -0.003     0.005    0.002    -0.045
20   -0.065   -0.092   -0.061    -0.133    0.044     -0.011   -0.038     0.004     0.011   -0.002    -0.283
21   -0.042   -0.085   -0.057     0.033     0.018    -0.014    0.044     0.017    -0.021   -0.016    -0.054
22   -0.105    0.017    0.004     0.050    -0.012    -0.006    0.010    -0.029    -0.033   -0.013     0.009
23   -0.002    0.126   -0.058    -0.024    -0.020    -0.032   -0.013    -0.030    -0.048   -0.029    -0.130
24    0.010    0.032   -0.054    -0.176    -0.095     0.039   -0.009     0.208     0.004   -0.044    -0.288
25   -0.057   -0.022   -0.051    -0.127    -0.052    -0.016   -0.083    -0.014    -0.040   -0.018    -0.178
26    0.027    0.086    0.052    -0.007     0.011     0.002    0.003     0.002    -0.006   -0.002    -0.044
27   -0.001    0.017    0.036    -0.015     0.000     0.005   -0.004     0.005    -0.005    0.006    -0.032
28   -0.032    0.011   -0.065     0.024    -0.079    -0.046    0.016    -0.014     0.001   -0.022     0.066
29   -0.104   -0.103   -0.081     0.045     0.000    -0.007    0.025    -0.034    -0.060   -0.017     0.036
30    0.011    0.066    0.066     0.127     0.023     0.036    0.100     0.022     0.058    0.025     0.191
31    0.027   -0.021    0.032     0.009    -0.043     0.026    0.059     0.041     0.011    0.015     0.016
32    0.006    0.004   -0.033     0.074     0.047     0.059    0.075     0.055    -0.023   -0.017     0.042
33   -0.005    0.018    0.006     0.012    -0.023    -0.003   -0.006    -0.001    -0.011    0.007     0.004

 Source: Authors’ calculations from 2002-2007 Nielsen Homescan data. The sample includes only consumers in the
 52 identified Nielsen markets. The table shows average own and cross-price elasticities of demand. The i good
 represents the quantity good and the j good is the price good.




                                                    54
     Table A-8: Own and Cross-Price Elasticities of Demand (ij ) - continued

                                                   i
 j      12       13        14        15        16         17       18        19        20        21
 1    0.030    0.003     0.074    -0.018    -0.011      0.000   -0.020    -0.006     0.049     0.049
 2   -0.093    0.010     0.159    -0.087    -0.030     -0.056   -0.020     0.009    -0.003     0.050
 3    0.062    0.037     0.160    -0.007    -0.117     -0.031   -0.039    -0.114     0.030     0.011
 4    0.050    0.004    -0.004     0.018     0.007      0.003    0.015     0.022     0.005    -0.017
 5    0.070    0.037     0.004     0.003    -0.003     -0.033    0.041    -0.012    -0.031    -0.026
 6    0.087   -0.039     0.021     0.004     0.011      0.013   -0.017     0.016    -0.016     0.007
 7    0.050   -0.001    -0.018     0.036     0.010      0.011    0.026     0.016     0.000    -0.045
 8   -0.049   -0.129     0.007     0.023     0.043      0.074    0.039     0.013    -0.033    -0.116
 9   -0.053   -0.030    -0.058    -0.008    -0.008     -0.018    0.002     0.001    -0.003    -0.002
10   -0.028   -0.028    -0.046    -0.002    -0.011     -0.021    0.010     0.001     0.004    -0.025
11    0.171    0.010    -0.006     0.049     0.031      0.008    0.018     0.042     0.044     0.017
12   -2.197   -0.001     0.020    -0.017    -0.028     -0.050    0.003     0.015     0.049     0.073
13   -0.098   -0.332     0.031    -0.011    -0.038     -0.028    0.011    -0.034    -0.026    -0.057
14   -0.114   -0.020     0.120    -0.071    -0.023     -0.012   -0.069     0.015    -0.044     0.001
15   -0.033    0.012     0.068    -0.845    -0.001      0.110    0.021     0.118    -0.015     0.052
16    0.065    0.015     0.152    -0.019    -0.647      0.055   -0.062    -0.139    -0.016     0.004
17   -0.080   -0.002     0.013     0.111     0.094     -0.292   -0.005     0.090    -0.031    -0.001
18   -0.022   -0.041    -0.002    -0.017     0.008     -0.033   -1.083    0.024     -0.004    -0.001
19   -0.009   -0.008    -0.047     0.018     0.002      0.021    0.064    -0.907    -0.042    -0.029
20   -0.179   -0.039     0.031    -0.024    -0.026     -0.018   -0.034    -0.002    -0.244    -0.017
21   -0.120   -0.046     0.061    -0.057    -0.021     -0.007   -0.057    -0.022     0.017     0.022
22    0.000   -0.046    -0.085    -0.031     0.059      0.026   -0.001     0.054    -0.164    -0.090
23   -0.102   -0.069    -0.013    -0.067    -0.041     -0.028   -0.077    -0.073    -0.083     0.017
24   -0.177   -0.064    -0.082    -0.029    -0.035     -0.017    0.003    -0.059    -0.052    -0.087
25   -0.098   -0.043    -0.067     0.000    -0.052     -0.009   -0.039    -0.054    -0.064    -0.036
26   -0.029   -0.059    -0.132    -0.035     0.017     -0.033   0.041      0.045    -0.073    -0.044
27   -0.019   -0.023    -0.027    -0.020    -0.002     -0.012    0.023     0.041    -0.017    -0.008
28   -0.028   -0.087    -0.073    -0.107    -0.013     -0.045   -0.038    -0.051    -0.079     0.012
29    0.066   -0.074    -0.094    -0.117    -0.114     -0.077   -0.057    -0.061    -0.122    -0.024
30    0.130    0.009     0.075    -0.037     0.035     -0.009    0.037     0.060    -0.194    -0.042
31   -0.007    0.056     0.002    -0.015    -0.013     -0.060    0.058     0.016    -0.020    -0.025
32    0.022    0.008     0.177    -0.016    -0.019      0.026   -0.056     0.030     0.048     0.053
33   -0.069   -0.005     0.004    -0.032    -0.031     -0.020    0.003     0.012    -0.024     0.008

 Source: Authors’ calculations from 2002-2007 Nielsen Homescan data. The sample includes only consumers
 in the 52 identified Nielsen markets. The table shows average own and cross-price elasticities of demand.
 The i good represents the quantity good and the j good is the price good.




                                                  55
              Table A-9: Own and Cross-Price Elasticities of Demand (ij ) - continued

                                                       i
 j      22        23       24         25        26        27        28        29        30         31        32        33
 1   -0.006    -0.074   -0.043     -0.050     0.001    -0.029     0.116     0.059    -0.006      0.013    -0.004    -0.009
 2    0.013    -0.049   -0.004     -0.084     0.030    -0.034     0.027    -0.031    -0.029      0.055    -0.013    -0.085
 3    0.025    -0.112   -0.010     -0.047    -0.038    -0.021     0.095     0.065     0.013      0.025     0.009    -0.076
 4    0.023     0.028    0.008      0.026     0.014     0.018    -0.032     0.012     0.031      0.018     0.015     0.009
 5    0.026     0.049    0.017      0.084     0.003     0.055     0.036     0.040     0.014     -0.031     0.036     0.035
 6    0.032     0.015    0.004     -0.028     0.015    -0.005     0.017    -0.007     0.031      0.039     0.018     0.035
 7    0.037     0.052    0.013      0.060     0.023     0.036    -0.035     0.016     0.029      0.038     0.040     0.058
 8    0.033     0.068   -0.116      0.106     0.044     0.025     0.165     0.082     0.003      0.047     0.188     0.111
 9   -0.008    -0.017   -0.013     -0.010     0.012     0.003    -0.027    -0.028    -0.005      0.024     0.011     0.027
10    0.001    -0.016   -0.015     -0.007    -0.002     0.000    -0.010    -0.004    0.018       0.042     0.028    -0.016
11    0.012     0.069    0.012      0.016     0.034     0.004    -0.024    -0.011     0.059      0.065     0.047     0.054
12    0.050     0.035   -0.003     -0.004     0.047     0.032    -0.026    -0.028     0.031      0.035     0.031     0.025
13   -0.029    -0.029   -0.034     -0.018    -0.012    -0.004     0.014     0.027    -0.036     -0.088     0.022    -0.001
14   -0.032    -0.075   -0.051     -0.137    -0.002    -0.093    -0.038    -0.093    -0.074      0.036    -0.057    -0.088
15    0.000    -0.050   -0.008     -0.115    -0.007    -0.020     0.020    -0.038    -0.045     -0.024    -0.010     0.010
16   -0.029    -0.072   -0.022     -0.048    -0.040    -0.071     0.156     0.027    -0.001      0.011    -0.021    -0.080
17   -0.018    -0.077   -0.017     -0.135     0.001    -0.020     0.025    -0.044    -0.060     -0.007    -0.018     0.010
18    0.017    -0.014   -0.004     -0.059    -0.012    -0.055     0.027     0.003     0.008      0.000     0.034     0.020
19    0.003     0.019    0.011      0.023     0.014     0.035    -0.011    -0.003    -0.021     -0.016     0.003     0.029
20   -0.021    -0.047   -0.018     -0.062    -0.002    -0.031     0.053    -0.005    0.048      -0.018    -0.019     0.003
21   -0.029    -0.093   -0.044     -0.098    -0.033    -0.062     0.099    -0.013    -0.027      0.010    -0.033    -0.065
22   -0.731     0.023    0.016      0.006     0.006     0.007    -0.069    -0.076    -0.055      0.019    -0.013    -0.112
23   -0.041     0.011    0.079     -0.149    -0.029    -0.073    -0.062    -0.126    -0.042      0.018    -0.036    -0.129
24   -0.029     0.175   -0.696      0.044    -0.006    -0.012     0.036     0.004    -0.115     -0.027     0.098     0.055
25    0.011     0.028    0.019     -0.253    -0.019    -0.023    -0.041    -0.023    -0.037     -0.070    -0.005    -0.042
26    0.011    -0.008   -0.007     -0.026    -0.431     0.073    -0.090    -0.075    -0.007      0.022     0.037     0.140
27   -0.009    -0.017   -0.001     -0.024     0.030    -0.669    -0.021    -0.024    -0.011     -0.014     0.018     0.036
28   -0.012    -0.070   -0.030     -0.093     0.004    -0.036    -0.270    -0.060    -0.038      0.013    -0.028     0.028
29   -0.044    -0.186   -0.045     -0.163    -0.036    -0.061     0.080    -0.295    -0.080     -0.006    -0.035    -0.101
30   -0.007     0.077    0.014      0.032     0.036     0.037     0.077     0.030    -1.793      0.255     0.036    -0.005
31   -0.012     0.051    0.010      0.090     0.011     0.062     0.059     0.071     0.107     -1.972     0.040     0.009
32    0.020    -0.027   -0.034     -0.070    -0.021    -0.057     0.079     0.049     0.016      0.024    -1.631    -0.268
33   -0.001    -0.026   -0.013     -0.033     0.003     0.015    -0.008    -0.032    -0.013     -0.009    -0.003    -0.575

 Source: Authors’ calculations from 2002-2007 Nielsen Homescan data. The sample includes only consumers in the 52 identified
 Nielsen markets. The table shows average own and cross-price elasticities of demand. The i good represents the quantity good
 and the j good is the price good.




                                                           56
Figure A-1: Pattern of cross price elasticities. Rows correspond to product groups i and columns correspond
            to groups j. The size of the rectangles corresponds to the magnitude of the elasticity. The color
            corresponds to the sign. Own price elasticities are excluded from the plot.




                                                     57
Figure A-2: Pattern of cross price elasticities for product groups 11-14, corresponding to soda and packaged
            meals. Rows correspond to product groups i and columns correspond to groups j. The size of
            the rectangles corresponds to the magnitude of the elasticity. The color corresponds to the sign.
            Own price elasticities are excluded from the plot.




                                                     58
