                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        DIRECT TO CONSUMER ADVERTISING OF PHARMACEUTICAL DRUGS:
                       INFORMATION AND PERSUASION

                                             Talia Bar
                                           Dean R. Lillard

                                        Working Paper 19794
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19794


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2014




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Talia Bar and Dean R. Lillard. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Direct to Consumer Advertising of Pharmaceutical Drugs: Information and Persuasion
Talia Bar and Dean R. Lillard
NBER Working Paper No. 19794
January 2014
JEL No. I18,L15,L65,M37

                                            ABSTRACT

We formally model direct to consumer advertising (DTCA) of prescription drugs and examine factors
that determine a pharmaceutical firm’s DTCA strategy. We highlight how the profitability of DTCA
varies with the characteristics of the condition that the advertised drug treats, the incidence of the
condition,and the signal value of symptoms, and risk factors. We account for the potential information
benefitsfrom DTCA as well as its potential to persuade consumers. From a welfare perspective there
can betoo much or too little private investment in advertising. Welfare is more likely to increase
when thepopulation is uninsured.


Talia Bar
Department of Economics
University of Connecticut
365 Fairfield Way Unit 1063
Storrs, CT 06269-1063
talia.bar@uconn.edu

Dean R. Lillard
Department of Human Sciences
The Ohio State University
1787 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
lillard.13@osu.edu
1    Introduction

Spending on direct to consumer advertising (DTCA) of prescription drugs has risen sharply

over the past twenty years. Annual expenditures for television advertising have increased

from around 400 million dollars in 1986 to a peak of around 5.4 billion in 2006. Since then,

it has declined to roughly 3.5 billion dollars in 2012 (Pharma Marketing 2013). DTCA

remains a subject of controversy and intense policy debates, in part because of its potential

to broadly a¤ect behavior in ways that are still not fully understood. Much of the extant

research is empirical. Our paper theoretically models a pharmaceutical …rm’s choice of

DTCA spending, and the e¤ects of DTCA on consumers’behavior, and on social welfare.

Our model highlights some of the special features of advertising in the pharmaceutical

industry.

    The economics literature di¤erentiates between informative and a persuasive advertis-

ing. For drugs, advertising likely plays both roles. Drug advertising informs if, after seeing

it, more consumers know about a health condition and the available treatments; it per-

suades if it causes consumers to believe they will enjoy a higher than the true bene…t from

the advertised drug.

    An important way in which DTCA of drugs di¤ers from advertising of other goods

is that physicians play an important role in determining demand for drugs, particularly

prescription drugs. To keep a body healthy one sometimes requires specialized knowledge.

Because this knowledge is costly to get, consumers have incentives to hire an agent, the



                                              3
physician, who has the knowledge to diagnose conditions that cause poor health and to

prescribe e¤ective treatments. In the case of advertising of a prescription drug, information

does not lead the consumer directly to the purchase of the drug but rather to visit a

doctor who provides information that consumers (potentially) use to choose an alternative

treatment. Even if DTCA persuades consumers to want the drug, the doctor does not

necessarily prescribe it. Our analysis of DTCA accounts for both consumer behavior and

physicians’prescribing practices.

       The pro…tability of DTCA of a drug depends on characteristics of the condition it treats.

First, the prevalence of the condition matters. Second, a consumer’s expected bene…t from

treatment depends on the nature and severity of the symptoms or risk factors associated

with the particular condition.1 When healthy people are less likely to have the symptoms

or risk factors associated with the condition the advertised drug treats, the presence of

symptoms more clearly signal that a person needs treatment. We show that expenditure

on direct to consumer advertising is higher when the prevalence of the condition is high

and when signals are more informative in the above sense.

       We consider the welfare implications of DTCA. When advertising informs, it may reduce

the extent to which people with given conditions go untreated. In doing so, informative

advertising can enhance welfare. If advertising persuades, it can distort what people per-

ceive as best for them and lead them to choose treatments that are either ine¤ective or that

   1
    Evidence in Iizuka (2004) suggests that …rms are more likely to advertise drugs that the FDA rates as
a high priority and in markets where target conditions are more prevalent.




                                                   4
waste resources. This could lead to a welfare loss. At the same time, persuasive advertising

might improve welfare if it gets sick consumers to seek medical care. In some cases, the

advertising for one drug may persuade consumers to seek medical care, even though they

will receive a di¤erent more suitable treatment. Donohue et al. (2004) present evidence

suggestion that DTCA of anti-depressant drugs increases the number of people who are

diagnosed with depression and who began treatment with medication, and some evidence

of an increase in the number of patients who received the medically appropriate duration of

treatment. Among the population at any given time, some consumers are sick but do not

seek medical care. If the price consumers pay for the drug and for doctor visits exceeds the

marginal cost, then too few consumers get treated compared to the social optimum. In this

case, persuasive advertising can enhance welfare if it induces those consumers to seek care.

This positive e¤ect of DTCA on welfare is more likely when consumers do not have health

insurance and when doctors reliably serve their role as gatekeepers. While less evidence

is available to test whether DTCA induces new doctor visits, available evidence suggests

that DTCA improves some treatment outcomes. Bradford et al. (2010) …nd that patients

exposed to higher DTCA more rapidly adopt an advertised treatment when they are better

clinical candidates for that pharmaceutical treatment. And patients whose clinical pro…le

recommends against being prescribed the treatment are less likely to get that treatment

in areas with higher DTCA for the drug. On the other hand, we argue that when the

population has health insurance, and consumers do not account for the full social cost of

the drug and doctor visit, then DTCA is more likely to be excessive from a social point of

                                             5
view.

   Theoretical models of DTCA are sparse. A notable exception is Brekke and Kuhns

(2006) who focus on informative advertising and the complementarity between DTCA and

money spent on marketing of drugs directly to physicians (known as “detailing”). Existing

empirical studies …nd that DTCA raises sales in a therapeutic drug class but not market

share of particular advertised anti-depressant medications (Rosenthal et al., 2003), sta-

tins (Wosinska, 2005), and antihistamines (Iizuka and Jin, 2007). These …ndings may be

consistent with an informative view because advertising informs previously undiagnosed

consumers about a health condition and the availability of treatments. Iizuka (2004) …nds

that new drugs and drugs for under-treated diseases are more frequently advertised. More

direct survey data also suggests that DTCA informs. Two studies (Aikin et al., 2004 and

Weissman et al., 2004) surveyed physicians to document whether doctors perceived their

patients to be demanding more information in the period that DTCA was increasing. Ac-

cording to these studies 71 percent of doctors reported increases in the number of patients

who were gathering information about prescription drugs. There is also some empirical evi-

dence that advertising might persuade. Weissman et al. (2004) …nd that 18% of physicians

surveyed perceived DTCA to have caused problems in their doctor-patient interactions.

Of these physicians, 41% spent time correcting misconceptions; 78.6% thought DTCA en-

couraged (patients to request) unnecessary treatment; 26% thought DTCA caused their

patients to ask for an inappropriate drug. These results may not contradict the evidence

of the informative nature of DTCA, because even if DTCA persuades, a particular adver-

                                            6
tised drug is not necessarily prescribed in part because doctors act as gatekeepers between

consumers and …rms. Bradford and Kleit (2011) …nd that advertising reduces switching be-

tween brands, leads consumers to continue to use the drugs, and that consumers do respond

to credible information in advertisements - in the form of Food and Drug Administration

warnings. So, available evidence supports the hypothesis that both e¤ects operate.

    In this paper we model DTCA as both informative and persuasive, thus accounting for

both roles established in the previous literature. Section 2 presents the model in particular,

our assumptions on the health condition and treatments, on individuals, doctors, the phar-

maceutical company and the e¤ects of advertising. Section 3 derives our results. Section

4 highlights areas that empirical research might fruitfully pursue to empirically estimate

particular e¤ects of DTCA.



2    The Model

Our model considers a single health condition for which there are two alternative treat-

ments. One treatment is supplied by a pro…t maximizing pharmaceutical drug company

that advertises directly to consumers. The other treatment is not advertised. There is a

population of heterogeneous individuals. To be diagnosed and treated an individual must

consult with a physician. Advertising has two potential e¤ects, it informs consumers and it

persuades them. We describe below our assumptions about individuals, the pharmaceutical

company, and doctors.



                                              7
2.1        Individuals

Our economy consists of a continuum of heterogeneous individuals. A fraction q 2 (0; 1)

of the population has a health condition (health status I = sick), and the rest 1                           q of

the population is healthy (health status I = healthy). Individuals di¤er in how much

information they have (on the condition and the available treatments), and also in how

they respond to treatments.

        Each individual obtains a signal S which can take a value h or s: The signal s can

be symptoms or observed risk factors that in‡uence people’s beliefs about whether they

might need a treatment. We assume that a sick person always obtains the signal s (has

symptoms), and a healthy person has a probability                   2 ( 21 ; 1] of obtaining the signal h (no

symptoms).2 Thus,



               prob(S = sjI = sick) = 1 and prob(S = hjI = sick) = 0.                                        (1)

               prob(S = sjI = healthy) = 1                   and prob(S = hjI = healthy) =                   (2)



The signal is more informative the higher : If                   = 1; a health person never experiences

the associated symptoms.

        An individual who visits the doctor can receive no treatment, or one of two available

treatments: treatment 2 f0; 1; 2g. Treatment 1 is a prescription drug. This treatment

    2
        Our results remain qualitatively the same if we generalize this assumption so that there is a probability
             1
1        s > 2 that a sick person obtains the signal s:




                                                         8
is supplied by a pro…t maximizing pharmaceutical company that may choose to advertise

the drug directly to consumers. The alternative treatment 2 is not advertised. It can be

a therapeutic life style change or another competitively supplied treatment for the same

condition.

    Individuals are heterogeneous in their bene…ts from treatments. For example, indi-

viduals may be expected to respond di¤erently to the treatments depending on health

determinants such as age, gender, being a smoker, use of other drugs, preferences related

to life style changes, health measures such as level of cholesterol and so on. For simplicity

we assume these factors can be summarized with a single index x 2 [0; 1]; which we refer

to as the patient’s type. We denote the bene…t (net of all side e¤ects and risks associated

with the treatment) over the no treatment option for a sick individual who has type x by

bt (x) for t 2 f1; 2g: The higher x the more bene…cial treatment 2 is, and the less bene…cial

treatment 1 is:
                                  db1 (x)         db2 (x)
                                          < 0 and         > 0:
                                    dx              dx

    Facing a price pt a sick individual’s bene…t from treatment t net of its price is given by

(bt (x)   pt ) : All sick individuals are better o¤ with their most preferred treatment than

without any. An individual with type x = 0 is better o¤ when prescribed treatment 1, and

an individual with type x = 1 is better o¤ when prescribed treatment 2.



                    b2 (0)   p2 > b1 (0)   p1 and b2 (1)   p2 < b1 (1)   p1 :



                                                9
   An individual draws her type x independently from a distribution with a cumulative

distribution function F (x); and a density f (x). Healthy individuals are assumed to have a

negative net bene…t from treatment.

   A fraction    of individuals are informed, they are aware of the existence of the health

condition, the implications of the signal and the availability of treatments. A fraction 1

are uniformed.

   An uninformed individual who has the symptoms visits the doctor if her bene…t from

going to a doctor, denoted by Us ; exceeds the cost. A condition that is associated with

more severe symptoms has a higher Us and the individual would be more likely seek a

doctor’s advice. Note that severe symptoms are not necessarily more accurate. High fever

or strong pain, for example, may be severe symptoms and are likely to induce even an

uninformed individual to visit the doctor, but these symptoms may be weak signals for a

speci…c condition (say the ‡u). On the other hand, a risk factor which is a good predictor

of the health condition might not be “severe” in the sense that the person might not

experience any major discomfort and would not likely visit the doctor if uninformed.

   An informed individual observes her signal, she updates the probability of being sick.

We use the distribution of signals de…ned in (1) and in (2), and Bayes rule, to derive the




                                             10
probability that a person is sick given her signal:


                                    prob(I = sick \ S = s)                          q
      qs = prob(I = sickjS = s) =                          =                                             (3)
                                          prob( S = s)       q + (1                 q) (1           )
                                    prob(I = sick \ S = h)
      qh   = prob(I = sickjS = h) =                        = 0:
                                           prob(S = h)


   An individual who visits a doctor must pay direct and indirect costs. If the person is

uninsured, she pays the fee doctor charges for an o¢ ce visit. If she is insured, she pays

the amount of the co-payment. An individual also pays indirectly if the visiting the doctor

causes disutility or because she has a high opportunity cost of the time she must spend.

Each person’s total cost of a doctor visit is independently drawn from a distribution with

density g(") and a cumulative distribution function G(") on [0; "]. To be diagnosed and

treated a consumer must …rst visit a physician. Consumers weigh the cost of a visit against

the perceived bene…t they expect to receive if they are treated.


2.2   Pharmaceutical company and DTCA

To model the informative nature of advertising, we assume a share                 of individuals are

informed. These individuals are aware of the condition and its possible treatments. Ad-

                                                                                                0
vertising increases the share of informed consumers,              = (A) where (0)         0,        (A) > 0

            0                                    00
with lim        (A) = 0; at a decreasing rate,        (A)    0:
      A!1

   To model the persuasive nature of advertising, we assume advertising increases the
                                                 @b1 (x;A)                               @b21 (x;A)
perceived bene…t from the advertised drug           @A       > 0; at a decreasing rate      @A2
                                                                                                    .   This


                                                 11
                                                              @b1 (x;A)
e¤ect vanishes as advertising becomes very high lim              @A       = 0: We assume for simplicity
                                                      A!1

that all informed individuals are exposed to advertising:


2.3   Physicians

When physicians treat patients they learn whether patients are insured, they diagnose each

person’s condition, and they determine the best treatment for a patient of a given type x.

Physicians act as agents on behalf of their patients. Although we assume all physicians are

equally quali…ed, there are two types of physicians that di¤er in their prescribing behavior.

   Physicians of the …rst type, “unpersuaded physicians”, prescribe the drug independently

of the patient’s exposure to advertising. That is, these physicians prescribe the treatment

that yields the highest pre-DTCA net bene…t. They choose a treatment independently of

whether and how much the …rm has advertised that treatment. Physicians of this type

follow a decision rule given by:

                            8
                            >
                            >
                            >
                            >         no treatment             if         I = healthy
                            >
                            >
                            <
              treatment =        advertised drug    if                 I = sick; x      x0          (4)
                            >
                            >
                            >
                            >
                            >
                            >
                            : alternative treatment if                 I = sick; x > x0

where x0 solves

                                   b1 (x0 )   p1 = b2 (x0 )     p2 :                                (5)


   The second type of physician, “persuaded physicians”, prescribes according to con-



                                                 12
sumers’ perceived bene…ts, which are potentially a¤ected by DTCA. They prescribe the

treatment that yields the highest perceived post-DTCA bene…t. Their choice of treatment

is given by:

                             8
                             >
                             >
                             >
                             >       no treatment              if          I = healthy
                             >
                             >
                             <
               treatment =        advertised drug    if               I = sick; x        f0
                                                                                         x    (6)
                             >
                             >
                             >
                             >
                             >
                             >
                             : alternative treatment if                             f0
                                                                      I = sick; x > x

      f0 solves
where x

                                 b1 (f
                                     x0 ; A)   p1 = b2 (f
                                                        x0 )        p2 :                      (7)


When there is no DTCA (A = 0) both types of doctors prescribe the same treatment

      f0 ) because perceived and actual bene…ts are the same. As advertising level increases,
(x0 = x

f0 increases, and more patients are prescribed treatment 1. Individuals draw a doctor type
x

at random, a persuaded physicians with probability ; and an unpersuaded physicians with

a probability 1    .


2.4   Timing

At …rst, nature draws all random variables for each individual: health condition I (sick

or health), type x (determining bene…t from treatment), signal S (symptoms of being

ill), doctor type (persuaded physicians or unpersuaded), and the cost of a doctor visit ".

The pharmaceutical company decides how much to spend on DTCA. Some individuals are



                                                13
exposed to DTCA and become informed. All individuals observe their signal and cost of a

doctor visit. Based on her signal, the cost of doctor visit and her information, an individual

decides whether or not to visit a doctor. Doctors diagnose the condition and prescribe a

treatment.



3     Analysis

3.1   Individual decisions to visit the doctor

An individual chooses to visit a doctor if, given the information she has, she expects the

bene…t to exceed the cost. Using (4) and (6), which describe the treatment choice of each

doctor type, we can express what bene…t each person perceives she will get if she visits a

doctor. An informed sick person perceives an expected net bene…t of:

                 2         0x                                                                1 3
                            Z0                                 Z1
               6 (1       )@   [b1 (x; A)     p1 ] f (x)dx +           [b2 (x)     p2 ] f (x)dxA 7
               6                                                                                  7
               6                                                                                  7
               6      |
                           0
                                                         {z
                                                                  x0
                                                                                                } 7
               6                                                                                  7
               6    0                           if unpersuaded doctor                        1 7
        B(A) = 6
               6
                                                                                                  7:
                                                                                                  7    (8)
               6      Zxf0                                  Z1
               6 + B                                                                         C 7
               6    @ [b1 (x; A)            p1 ] f (x)dx +        [b2 (x)        p2 ] f (x)dxA 7  7
               6                                                                                  7
               4        0                                    f0
                                                             x                                    5
                    |                                 {z                                      }
                                              if persuaded doctor



    An individual who observes a signal S and who sees DTCA level A perceives the

expected bene…t from a doctor visit as:



                              Vs (A) = qs B(A) and Vh (A) = 0:                                         (9)

                                                14
   where, qs is given by (3).

   An individual whose signal is h will not visit the doctor. An individual who has a

signal s and draws a disutility " from doctor visits will visit the doctor if she is informed

and

                                         Vs (A)       ":                                    (10)


or if she is uninformed and

                                           Us        ":


We assume Vs (0)    Us so that for any advertising level informed consumers are at least as

likely to visit a doctor as uninformed consumers.

   In our …rst lemma we state how (given a signal s) the expected bene…t from a doctor

visit depends on the level of advertising, and on the characteristics of the health condition.

These relationships will prove useful later.


Lemma 1 An informed individual’s perceived bene…t from going to the doctor when she

has symptoms, Vs (A); increases with advertising A: For any level of DTCA A > 0; this

perceived bene…t increases with q (the prevalence of the condition), with      (share of doctors

who prescribe according to consumers”preferences) and with          (the accuracy of the signal).

The marginal e¤ ect of advertising Vs0 (A) also increases with q;     and :


   All proofs are provided in the appendix.




                                                15
3.2   Volume of doctor visits

Individuals with a signal h do not visit the doctor. The probability that an individual with

a signal s visits the doctor is G (Us ) if she is uninformed and G [Vs (A)] if she is informed.

The expected volume of doctor visits is therefore given by:



               Ddoc (A) = prob(S = s) f (A)G [Vs (A)] + (1       (A))G (Us )g :           (11)



Proposition 1 The volume of o¢ ce visits Ddoc (A) increases with the level of DTCA A.


   There are two reasons for the positive e¤ect of advertising on doctor visits: DTCA

increases the share of informed individuals (which has an overall positive e¤ect since in-

formed individuals are more likely to visit a doctor) and it increases the propensity of

informed individuals to visit the doctor.


3.3   E¤ect of DTCA on Demand for Treatment

We have assumed consumers need a doctor to prescribe their treatment and that doctors

only prescribe to sick individuals. Therefore, demand for either treatment depends on the

volume of sick people who see a doctor. Uninformed individuals do not ask for a speci…c

treatment, they get prescribed according to the threshold x0 : Informed individuals ask the

doctor about the advertised treatment, if they are seen by a persuaded doctor, they are

                                                       f0 .
prescribed according to the higher persuaded threshold x



                                              16
   Treatment 1 is prescribed to individuals who have the condition, who went to see a

doctor and whose type x is such that their doctor chooses treatment 1 over treatment 2.

Therefore, consumers demand the advertised drug (treatment 1) according to:



  D1 (A) = (A)qG [Vs (A)] fF (x0 ) + [F (f
                                         x0 )        F (x0 )]g + (1    (A))qG (Us ) F (x0 )   (12)



Proposition 2 Demand for drug 1 (the advertised treatment) increases with DTCA.


   The increase in demand results from two e¤ects: direct to consumer advertising in-

creases the fraction of informed consumers who are more likely to seek medical advice, and

it increases the share of consumers who go to the doctor and are prescribed the drug due

to the persuasive e¤ect of advertising.

   Consumers demand for the alternative treatment is:



D2 (A) = (A)qG [Vs (A)] [1    F (x0 )     (F (f
                                              x0 )    F (x0 ))] + (1   (A))qG (Us ) [1    F (x0 )] :

                                                                                              (13)

   DTCA of treatment 1 a¤ects the volume of treatment 2 prescriptions in two opposing

ways: (i) a positive market expansion e¤ect –DTCA induces more people to visit a doctor,

some of whom will be prescribed treatment 2; (ii) a negative business stealing – DTCA

persuades some consumers who would otherwise get treatment 2 to ask their doctors for

treatment 1. If    (the share of persuaded doctors) is small then this “business stealing”

e¤ect is small and the market expansion e¤ect dominates. In this case, DTCA increases


                                              17
the demand for treatment 2 – some consumers who would have gone untreated without

DTCA now get treatment.


Proposition 3 DTCA of treatment 1 has an ambiguous e¤ ect on the demand for treatment

2. If    (the share of persuaded doctors) is small enough then demand for treatment 2

increases with DTCA of treatment 1.


3.4     Choice of DTCA

A pharmaceutical company supplies treatment 1. The cost of the treatment is c1 : In the

pharmaceutical industry there is generally prices are often negotiated with large buyers

(see Berndt, 2002). Insurance coverage and drug prices may be set in long term contracts.

Insured consumers might pay a constant price (uniformly set for many drugs). The price the

pharmaceutical company receives for the drug does not generally equal the price consumers

pay. In light of these issues, we adopt the simplifying assumption that the price of the drug

and insurance contracts are determined before the …rm chooses its advertising level. We

focus on the choice of advertising expenditure A given the price the …rm negotiated and

the prices consumers face. Let the price of the drug received by the …rm be P; and denote

demand as a function of this price and advertising by D1 (P; A). In the next subsection we

consider the e¤ects of advertising on drug price.

   Pro…ts for a given level of advertising are given by



                               (A) = (P    c1 )   D1 (P; A)   A

                                             18
The pharmaceutical …rm that supplies treatment 1 drug maximizes pro…ts with an optimal

choice of DTCA expenditure A:



                                   max [(P      c1 )        D1 (P; A)   A]
                                    A 0



       Assume (P    c1 ) D10 (P; 0) > 1 so that pro…t is increasing at A = 0;3 given our previous

assumptions, D10 (P; A) ! 0 when A ! 1 so that pro…t is decreasing for A ! 1. Hence,

the level of advertising that maximizes pro…t is interior and must satisfy the …rst order

condition,
                                                        @D1 (P; A)
                              F OC = (P        c1 )                     1 = 0:
                                                          @A

       Comparative statics with respect to any parameter                2 f ; q; ; Us g keeping the other

parameters constant can be found by implicit di¤erentiation:


                               @F OC(A; ) dA @F OC(A; )
                                            +           = 0:
                               |   @A
                                   {z   }d       @



                                                                             @F OC(A)
       From the second order condition of pro…t maximization,                   @A      < 0: Therefore,


                        dA                @F OC(P; A; )                      @D12 (P; A; )
                sign          = sign                              = sign                      :
                        d                      @                                @ @A


Proposition 4 The pro…t maximizing level of advertising A decreases with Us (the propen-

   3
   This will hold true when, as A gets close to 0; advertising has a su¢ ciently large marginal e¤ect on the
number of informed consumers, and or on their perceived bene…t from advertising.


                                                       19
sity of uninformed to visit the doctor). Assume the density of doctor visit costs is non-

decreasing, g 0 (e)   0 (e.g., for a uniform distribution), then the pro…t maximizing level of

advertising A increases with       (proportion of doctors who serve persuaded consumers); q

(prevalence of the disease); and     (the probability that a healthy person does not have the

symptoms).


    We describe below the intuition for these …ndings. As we discussed earlier, DTCA

increases pro…ts in two ways: by expanding the market – increasing the number of in-

dividuals seeking medical care; and by business stealing – attracting more individuals to

the advertised treatment instead of the alternative treatment. Because only doctors who

accede to the wishes of persuaded consumers alter their prescribing behavior in favor of the

advertised drug, advertising is more e¤ective if there are more doctors of this type (if    is

high). Therefore, we …nd higher investment in advertising when there are more persuaded

doctors. Observe that the presence of internet prescription services might be an example

of an increase in : The share of persuaded doctors can also be linked to detailing e¤orts

(advertising to doctors).

    Advertising increases with the prevalence of the condition. This result occurs because

the potential market is larger and the expected bene…t of each informed individual from

going to the doctor is higher the more likely she would need treatment. Advertising level

is higher the higher is ; which measures the accuracy the signal. That is, when a healthy

person is less likely to have the symptoms associated with the conditions, pro…t maximizing



                                              20
spending on DTCA is higher.4 The parameter Us captures how likely uninformed individ-

uals are to visit a doctor when they have a signal s. Us will be higher when symptoms are

more severe. DTCA decreases with Us because if individuals visit the doctor even when

they are uninformed there is less incentive to inform them.

       Our …ndings suggest that empirical research would bene…t from carefully characterizing

symptoms of di¤erent diseases or conditions because observed DTCA spending is likely to

systematically vary with the nature of the symptoms.


3.5      Price

We have shown that for any given price, the demand for the advertised drug increases

with DTCA. This could strengthen the …rm’s bargaining position in price negotiations,

which could result in a higher price. Formally modeling price negotiations between a

pharmaceutical company and large buyers is beyond the scope of our paper. Instead,

in this section, we illustrate the possible e¤ects of advertising on drug price in a simple

monopoly pricing model. The …rm solves:



                              max [(P      c1 )   D1 (P; A (P ))     A (P )] ;
                              P 0


   4
    In complementary analysis we generalize the model to allow for a probability s 1 that a sick person
has the symptoms: Advertising increases with s if the propensity of uninformed individuals to visit the
doctor Us is small enough. For large values of Us ; A ( s ) is U -shaped. Large values of Us ; corresponds to
severe symptoms that cause even uninformed consumers to visit the doctor. In this case, more informative
signals will cause advertising to fall.




                                                     21
where A (P ) denotes the optimal advertising expenditure for a price P . The …rst order

condition for pro…t maximization is


                                 @D1 (P; A (P ))                        @D1 (P; A (P ))           dA (P )
D1 (P; A (P )) + (P       c1 )                   + (P          c1 )                       1               = 0:
                                      @P                                     @A                    dP
                                                  |                       {z                  }
                                                                            =0


       The last term vanishes when advertising is chosen optimally. This …rst order can be

rearranged to imply the standard inverse elasticity rule:


                                  1              1                 (P       c1 )
                                     =    @D1 (P;A)
                                                               =                   :
                                 j"j                   P                P
                                            @P      D1 (P;A)



       If the elasticity of demand is lower when the pharmaceutical …rm engages in DTCA

then the …rm will choose a higher price than without DTCA. The persuasive nature of

advertising, as well as the increase in quantity demanded for every given price both con-

tribute to higher demand elasticity.5 Indeed, some evidence suggests that DTCA may raise

the price a …rm can charge for the advertised drug. In an empirical investigation, Dave

and Sa¤er (2012) …nd that DTCA contributes to a growth in drug expenditures, and that

two-thirds of this impact is driven by higher demand and the remainder due to higher

prices.

   5
    In the model, the e¤ect of advertising on demand elasticity can depend on the distribution functions F
and G, and on the functional forms of (A) and bt (x; A) : For uniform distributions, linear bene…t functions
and a …xed number of informed consumers it can be shown that demand elasticity is higher with advertising
than without advertising.




                                                     22
3.6    Social Welfare

In this section we discuss the e¤ects of direct to consumer advertising on social welfare.

We argue that, from a social perspective, the privately chosen level of DTCA can either

be excessive or insu¢ cient. Whether DTCA is excessive will depend on the nature of

advertising (informative or persuasive), the prevalence of persuaded doctors and on whether

consumers are insured. Let social welfare be the sum of the pro…t of the company selling

treatment 1 drug (pro…t from the other treatment is zero) and the social consumer surplus.

Social consumer surplus accounts for the actual (not persuaded) bene…ts and true social

cost of the drug and of doctor visits.



                                    W (A) =      (A) + CS (A) :



    If W 0 (A ) < 0 then social bene…t will (locally) increase if DTCA falls. In this case

we say that the private level is excessive or too high. If W 0 (A ) > 0 social bene…t will

(locally) increase if DTCA rises. In this case we say private spending is insu¢ cient or too

low. The private level of advertising A is such that          0 (A   ) = 0: Evaluating W 0 (A) at the

private level of advertising A we have W 0 (A ) = CS 0 (A ).6 We argue that the sign of

W 0 (A ) is ambiguous.

    Suppose, that drug advertising is persuasive (increases perceived bene…ts) but not in-

   6
     We ignore any disutility a consumer might experience when she sees DTCA. We assume that, if such
disutility were severe enough, …rms would refuse to air those advertisements. Consequently, seeing more
DTCA does not reduce the consumers’time viewing favorite shows.



                                                  23
formative (does not change the share of informed consumers), and that the population is

insured. Consumers who go to the doctor overestimate the bene…t of doing so (due to

the persuasive nature of advertising) and underestimate the cost of the visit (because of

insurance). As advertising increases, more consumers go to the doctor. For the marginal

consumers, persuaded bene…ts equal the costs of the doctor visit and the drug, but social

bene…ts are lower than private bene…ts and social costs higher than private costs, therefore,

social consumer surplus declines, CS 0 (A ) < 0. Hence, W 0 (A ) < 0, the private level of

advertising is excessive. Under this scenario, if the A¤ordable Care Act successfully insures

every US citizen it will be more likely that private spending on DTCA would be excessive,

especially if advertised drugs treat well-known conditions and the DTCA does not convey

much information (for example, because the treatments have been in the market for a while

and the role of information is small). When comparing the potential social welfare gains

and losses in countries considering whether or not to allow DTCA, our model suggests that

all else equal, the potential welfare gains are lower in countries that have universal health

insurance coverage.

   If the share of insured consumers is high and the di¤erence between the price paid by

consumer for the drug and the price paid to the drug company is high, then even informative

advertising can be excessive. A policy change that signi…cantly increases the share of

insured individuals in the population could thus change the level of private advertising

from being insu¢ cient to being excessive even if advertising is only informative. The

di¤erence between the seller and the buyer price can however be lower in countries that

                                             24
aggressively negotiate drug prices, mitigating the associated distortion in advertising levels.

    When consumers are uninsured and the …rm has market power, consumers pay a price

that exceeds the marginal cost of the drug. In this case, absent DTCA there is underpro-

vision of treatment. DTCA can increase welfare by increasing doctor visits and treatment.

Informative and even persuasive advertising can increase e¢ ciency as it increases demand

for doctor visits and treatments.

    An additional source of social cost of DTCA might be the increase in drug prices. Note

however that if the majority of the population is insured this may not be a signi…cant cost,

because in this case higher prices would not result in underproduction of the drug.



4    Concluding remarks

We summarize our …ndings and suggest some limitations of the model and directions for

future work. This paper modeled DTCA as informative and persuasive. Exposure to DTCA

brings more people to see doctors and to get treatment through two possible channels:

    (i) more individuals become aware of the condition and the availability of treatment;

    (ii) advertisements persuade consumers that the bene…ts of the drug are higher than

they actually are.

    The persuasive aspect of advertising is mitigated by the fact that prescription drugs

have doctors as gatekeepers. DTCA will increase the demand for the advertised drug.

Its e¤ect on the demand for an alternative treatment is ambiguous – demand for the



                                              25
alternative treatment may increase due to the information e¤ect, and even due to persuasion

as long as a large share of the doctors continue prescribing the most appropriate treatment,

which, in some cases, is the alternative treatment. If a large share of doctors prescribe

according to consumers’persuaded bene…ts, then a decline in the demand for the alternative

treatment may arise due to a change in treatment choice from the alternative treatment

to the advertised drug. Such distortion in treatment choice can generate welfare losses.

   DTCA will be more pro…table when a large share of potential consumers are unaware

of the condition and its treatment, and also when the prevalence of the condition in the

population is high. For conditions associated with more informative symptoms, more indi-

viduals who have symptoms will seek doctor’s advice. The pro…tability of advertising also

depends on the share of the population that is insured. When more individuals are insured

a larger share will respond to advertising by going to the doctor and getting treatment,

making advertising more pro…table. Advertising is also more pro…table the larger the share

of doctors who prescribe a drug requested by their persuaded consumers. In our model we

have taken the share of persuaded doctors as exogenously given. This share, however, might

be higher with large detailing e¤orts. Our …nding that DTCA increases with the share of

persuaded doctor is consistent with Brekke and Kuhns (2006) …ndings that detailing and

DTCA are complementary. Policies aimed at monitoring doctors’prescribing behavior or

providing guidance for when to favor the alternative treatment over the advertised one

can help keep the share or persuaded doctors lower, and avoid the prescribing distortion

associated with persuasive DTCA. We noted that, absent careful regulatory attention, the

                                            26
presence of internet prescription drug dispensaries may lead to welfare losses.

   Health insurance can create a gap between the price consumers pay and the price the

seller obtains. Similar gaps exist for the cost of doctor visits. When a large share of

consumers have health insurance that covers some of their drug and doctor visit expenses,

DTCA is more likely to be too high from a social perspective. In such situation, even

informative advertising can create welfare losses. However, when consumers are largely

uninsured, drug prices that exceed the marginal cost of production can result in under

provision of the drug. Increased demand, even if it resulted from an increase in perceived

bene…ts, might e¢ ciently increase use of the drug.

   A positive e¤ect of DTCA that was not accounted for here is the potential positive e¤ect

on drug R&D investments. If DTCA increases anticipated pro…ts for the pharmaceutical

company then it could potentially induce more R&D investment. We also ignored the

possibility that DTCA helps consumers adopt or maintain new healthier behavior. It

might do so because it reminds them frequently of the bene…ts of the healthy behavior.

Some evidence supports this idea. For example, Avery et al. (2007) show that DTCA

advertising of pharmaceutical smoking cessation products induces smokers to attempt to

quit and to successfully quit, even when they do not use a smoking cessation product to

do so.

   Despite these omissions, our model provides a formal framework that researchers can

use to guide empirical investigations of various aspects of the market for prescription drugs

when …rms may advertise those drugs directly to consumers. The predictions of the model,

                                             27
especially those that are ambiguous, need to be empirically tested. That work remains for

future research.




                                           28
5    Appendix

Proof of Lemma 1. By de…nition of Vs (A) we have

                               2                                                            3
                                         xR0                       f
                                                                   R0
                                                                   x
                                               @b1 (x;A)                @b1 (x;A)
                               6 (1    )          @A f (x)dx   +           @A f (x)dx       7
                               6         0                         0                        7
     Vs0 (A)         0         6
               = qs B (A) = qs 6                                                            7 > 0:    (14)
                                                                                            7
                               4 + f[b1 (f
                                         x0 ; A)     p1 ] [b2 (f
                                                               x0 )              x0 ) df
                                                                         p2 ]gf (f     x0   5
                                    |                  {z                    }        dA
                                                        =0



                                                            f0 a consumer is indi¤erent
Because perceived bene…ts increase with advertising, and at x

between the two drugs, Vs0 (A) > 0:

    We derive the e¤ects of parameters on Vs (A) for a given A: Note that qs is a function

of the parameters q;      as given in (3), but B(A) does not depend on these parameters. We

di¤erentiate each of the functions of interest with respect to each parameter


     d                        (1
                               )
        Vs (A) =                         B(A) > 0:
     dq           (q + (1 q) (1      ))2
     d                   q(1 q)
         Vs (A) =                        B(A) > 0:
    d             (q + (1 q) (1      ))2
                                 20 xf                                                          13
                                   Z0
     d               dB(A)       4@
         Vs (A) = qs        = qs       f[b1 (x; A) p1 ]            [b2 (x)     p2 ]g f (x)dxA5 > 0:
    d                 d
                                         x0



                         f0 ) the person’s perceived bene…t from treatment 1 is higher than
Since in the range (x0 ; x

the bene…t from treatment 2.




                                                   29
   Finally, we derive the e¤ects of these parameters on Vs0 (A) :


                    d 0                        (1 )
                      V (A) =                                          B 0 (A) > 0:
                    dq s              (q + (1 q) (1              ))2
                     d 0                     q(1 q)
                      V (A) =                                          B 0 (A) > 0:
                    d s               (q + (1 q) (1              ))2
                                               2 xf                    3
                                                Z0
                     d 0         dB 0 (A)           @b 1 (x; A)
                      V (A) = qs          = qs 4                f (x)dx5 > 0:
                    d s            d                    @A
                                                            x0




Proof of Proposition 1. We rearrange Ddoc (A) in (11) to obtain



              Ddoc (A) = prob(S = s) f (A) [G (Vs (A))                     G (Us )] + G (Us )g :



Di¤erentiating with respect to A;


     d                                                    dVs (A)           0
       Ddoc (A) = prob(S = s)             (A)g (Vs (A))           +             (A) [G (Vs (A))    G (Us )] :
    dA                                                      dA


                                      0                   dVs (A)                       d
Since [G (Vs (A))     G (Us )] > 0;       (A) > 0 and       dA         > 0 we have     dA Ddoc (A)   > 0:


Proof of Proposition 2.           We rearrange equation (12) which de…nes the demand to

obtain:



D1 (A) = q (A) (G [Vs (A)]      G (Us )) F (x0 )+q         (A)G [Vs (A)] [F (f
                                                                             x0 )          F (x0 )]+qG (Us ) F (x0 ):




                                                    30
   We di¤erentiate D1 (A) with respect to A :


      dD1 (A)                                 dVs (A)
                = q             (A)g (Vs (A))           + 0 (A) [G (Vs (A)) G (Us )] F (x0 )                     (15)
        dA                                       dA
                                                  dVs (A)
                         +q        (A)g [Vs (A)]           + 0 (A)G [Vs (A)] [F (f
                                                                                 x0 ) F (x0 )]
                                                    dA
                                                       df
                                                        x0
                         +q      (A)G [Vs (A)] f (f
                                                  x0 )     :
                                                       dA


                          f0 as de…ned in (7):
Implicitly di¤erentiating x


                             df
                              x0   @b1 (f
                                        x0 ; A)      db2 (f
                                                          x0 )          b1 (f
                                                                            x0 ; A)
                                 =                                                     > 0:
                             dA        @A              dx                   @x


                         0                                         dVs (A)
We also know that            (A) > 0; Vs (A) > Us , and              dA      > 0. All the terms in the derivative

of D1 (A) are positive and hence, demand for treatment 1 is increasing in A.

Proof of Proposition 3. Rearrange D2 as given in (13).



D2 (A) = q (A) (G [Vs (A)]          G (Us )) [1     F (x0 )] q              (A)G [Vs (A)] (F (f
                                                                                              x0 )    F (x0 ))+qG (Us ) [1   F (x0 )] :



Di¤erentiating the demand we …nd,


dD2 (A)                                dVs (A)            0
          = q       (A)g (Vs (A))              +              (A) [G (Vs (A))       G (Us )] [1      F (x0 )]
  dA                                     dA
                     0                                                                        dVs (A)
                q        (A)G [Vs (A)] [F (f
                                           x0 )       F (x0 )]          q     (A)g [Vs (A)]           [F (f
                                                                                                          x0 )   F (x0 )]
                                                                                                dA
                                                  df
                                                   x0
                q    (A)G [Vs (A)] f (f
                                      x0 )            :
                                                  dA



                                                              31
The terms in the …rst line are all positive and capture the informative e¤ects of advertising.

The terms in the second and third line are negative for         > 0 and capture the business

stealing e¤ects of advertising. The overall e¤ect is ambiguous. For              = 0; there is no

business stealing e¤ect and demand for treatment 2 increases with advertising. When

advertising is not informative,


                                                                           dA             @D12 (A)
Proof of proposition 4. We argued that for any parameter ; sign            d     = sign    @ @A      :

Recall that by lemma 1, Vs (A) and Vs0 (A) increase with q; ; and ; but do not depend on
                                                   @D1 (A)
Us . We consider the e¤ect of each parameter on      @A      as given in (15):

   Using the results of lemma 1 we observe that if g 0 (V )       0 (e.g. uniform distribution)

then all the terms in (15) are increasing with ;      and q and hence,


                                      dA          @D12 (A)
                              sign           =             > 0:
                                       d           @ @A
                                      dA          @D12 (A)
                              sign           =             > 0:
                                       dq          @q@A
                                      dA          @D12 (A)
                              sign           =             > 0:
                                       d           @ @A


   The e¤ect of Us :


                      dA               @D12 (A)
               sign          = sign               =    q 0 (A)g (Us ) F (x0 ) < 0:
                      dUs              @Us @A




                                             32
6      References

Aikin K, Swasy J, and Braman A. 2004. “Patient and Physician Attitudes and Behaviors

Associated With DTC Promotion of Prescription Drugs,”Summary FDA Survey Research

Results, http://www.fda.gov/downloads/AboutFDA/CentersO¢ ces/CDER/ucm109875.pdf

    Avery, Rosemary, Kenkel, Donald, Lillard, Dean, and Mathios, Alan. 2007. “Private

Pro…ts and Public Health: Does DTC Advertising of Smoking Cessation Products Encour-

age Smokers to Quit?” Journal of Political Economy. Vol. 115 (3): 447-481 (also NBER

working paper 11938).

    Brekke, K. R., Kuhn, M. “Direct to Consumer Advertising in Pharmaceutical Markets.”

Journal of Health Economics, Vol. 25 (2006), pp. 102-130.

    Bradford, D., Kleit, A. 2011. “Can Credence Advertising E¤ects Be Isolated? Can

They Be Negative?: Evidence from Pharmaceuticals,” Southern Economic Journal, Vol.

78 (1): 167-190.

    Bradford, D., Kleit, A., Nietert, P, Ornstein, S. 2010. “The E¤ect of Direct to Consumer

Television Advertising on the Timing of Treatment,” Economic Inquiry, Vol. 48 (2): 306-

322.

    Dave, D. and Sa¤er, H. 2012. “Impact of Direct-to-Consumer Advertising on Pharma-

ceutical Prices and Demand,” Southern Economic Journal, Vol. 79 (1): 97-126.

    Donohue, J.M., Berndt, E.R., Epstein, A.M., Rosenthal, M.B., Frank, R.G. 2004. “Ef-

fects of Pharmaceutical Promotion on Adherence tox Guideline Treatment of Depression.”



                                             33
Medical Care, 42(12): 1176-1185.

   Iizuka, T. 2004. “What Explains the Use of Direct-to-Consumer Advertising of Pre-

scription Drugs?” Journal of Industrial Economics, vol. LII No. 3, p349-379.

   Iizuka T. and Jin G. 2007. “Direct to Consumer Advertising and Prescription Choice”

The Journal of Industrial Economics, Volume 55, Issue 4, page 771.

   Pharma Marketing. 2013. “DTC Not As Dead As We Thought... But Digital Ad

Spending Down One-Third!”Available at: http://forums.pharma-mkting.com/showthread.php?p=90385.

Accessed November 11, 2013.

   Rosenthal M., Berndt E., Donohue J, Epstein A, Frank R. 2003. “Demand E¤ects of

Recent Changes in Prescription Drug Promotion,” Frontiers in Health Policy Research,

6(1), pp. 1-26.

   Weissman J., Blumenthal D., Silk A, Zapert K, Newman M, Leitman R, Feibelmann,

S. 2004. “Physicians Report on Patient Encounters Involving Direct-to-Consumer Adver-

tising,” Health A¤ airs, 28, w4-219.

   Wosinska, Marta. 2005. “Direct-to-Consumer Advertising and Therapy Compliance.”

Journal of Marketing Research, Vol. 42, No. 3, pp. 323-332.




                                           34
