                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    WHEN REAL ESTATE IS THE ONLY GAME IN TOWN

                                           Hyun-Soo Choi
                                           Harrison Hong
                                            Jeffrey Kubik
                                        Jeffrey P. Thompson

                                        Working Paper 19798
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19798


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2014




Choi acknowledges support from the Sim Kee Boon Institute, Singapore Management University.
We thank Tim Loughran, Chris Mayer, Wenlan Qian, Jeremy Stein, and seminar participants at Dartmouth,
Notre Dame, the CICF 2013 conference, and the NBER behavioural finance meeting for helpful comments.
The analysis and conclusions set forth are those of the authors and do not indicate concurrence by
other members of the research staff, the Board of Governors, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Hyun-Soo Choi, Harrison Hong, Jeffrey Kubik, and Jeffrey P. Thompson. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
When Real Estate is the Only Game in Town
Hyun-Soo Choi, Harrison Hong, Jeffrey Kubik, and Jeffrey P. Thompson
NBER Working Paper No. 19798
January 2014, Revised January 2014
JEL No. G02,G11,G12,R21,R3

                                             ABSTRACT

Using data on household portfolios and mortgage originations, we find that households residing in
a city with few publicly traded firms headquartered there are more likely to own an investment home
nearby. Households in these areas are also less likely to own stocks. This only-game-in-town effect
is more pronounced for households living in high credit quality areas, who can access financing to
afford a second home. This effect also becomes pronounced for households living in low credit quality
areas after 2002 when securitization made it easier for these households to buy second homes. Cities
with few local stocks have in equilibrium higher price-to-rent ratios, making it more attractive to rent,
and lower (primary residence) homeownership rates.


Hyun-Soo Choi                                       Jeffrey Kubik
Singapore Management University                     Maxwell School
Singapore                                           Syracuse University
hschoi@smu.edu.sg                                   426 Eggers Hall
                                                    Syracuse, NY 13244
Harrison Hong                                       jdkubik@maxwell.syr.edu
Department of Economics
Princeton University                                Jeffrey P. Thompson
26 Prospect Avenue                                  Federal Reserve Board
Princeton, NJ 08540                                 Washington, DC
and NBER                                            jeffrey.p.thompson@frb.gov
hhong@princeton.edu
1.        Introduction

According to the National Association of Realtors’ Home Buyers Survey of 2012, investment
homes, defined as homes bought for investment as opposed to occupation by the owner,
represented around 22% of the residential sales market or around one million homes annually
between 2003 and 2011. Investment homes are distinct from vacation homes, where the owner
lives part-time. They are bought to generate rental income and typically face higher interest
rates and more stringent collateral requirements than either primary residences or vacation
homes because banks view them as speculative investments akin to stocks. Households
characterize these purchases in the same way that they describe their purchases of IBM or
Microsoft.
       Investment homes are a sizeable part of the real estate market; and as can be seen in
Table 1, demand for these homes played a big role in the recent housing cycle of 2002-
2007. During the peak real estate bubble year of 2005, investment homes rose from typically
being around 17% the market for residential sales to 28%. Around 12% were vacation
homes and the remaining 60% were primary residences. Studies of this recent housing cycle,
including Chinco and Mayer (2012), Li and Gao (2013), and Haughwout, Lee, Tracy, and
van der Klaauw (2011), argue that speculative investment home purchases contributed to
the the dramatic price run-ups in certain areas like Las Vegas and Phoenix. These findings
suggest that studying the determinants of investment home or speculative purchases might
be important for understanding real estate price cycles. Yet, the focus of research in the
last twenty years in real estate economics has been on owner-occupied homes or primary
residences.1
       As such, we undertake a study of the determinants of investment home purchases in which
we view these purchases through the lens of investing as opposed to owner occupation. Our
   1
    For example, hedonics such as location or other housing amenities have been used to explain the cross-
sectional variation in prices of primary homes (Glaeser (2007)). Moreover, even work on volume dynamics
in housing markets and the rent versus buy decision have typically taken the motive for home purchases as
one of owner occupation (Case and Shiller (1989), Stein (1995) and Sinai and Souleles (2005)).



                                                    1
analysis is motivated by a large literature on household finance that has greatly informed us
on how households actually make investment decisions. We build on one of the most robust
facts about household investment behavior, which is that they are locally biased. Households
do not diversify but rather hold concentrated positions in stocks headquartered within 60
miles of where they live (see, e.g., Grinblatt and Keloharju (2001), Huberman (2001)). This
local bias can be driven by familiarity bias or other informational frictions, whereby investors
have both a small radius with which they search for investment opportunities and feel most
comfortable with investments they know first hand. This local bias was originally discovered
and characterized by French and Poterba (1991) as the international home bias puzzle for
the lack of international diversification by equity investors.
   Our premise is that investment homes are the ultimate locally-biased or home-biased
investment. Familiarity bias or informational friction stories that characterize stock invest-
ments are even more relevant for investment homes because the owners have the tangibility
of the home nearby. Indeed, real estate is often cast as an investment akin to gold in terms
of its feeling of safety for households in under-developed or volatile financial markets. More
concretely, one can think of some households as deriving utility from ownership, whether it
is their primary residence or an investment home which they rent out. This utility might
come from the status of ownership. Or it might come from the joys of having something
to do such as collecting rents, much like a hobby. This latter motivation then provides an
additional reason for why the local bias of investment homes is even stronger than equities
since proximity to the investment home cuts down on the transportation cost of being a
landlord.
   Our hypothesis is that stocks headquartered nearby compete for the households’ attention
and lead to less ownership of investment homes. Their hobby becomes trading stocks rather
than renting out investment homes. Importantly, we view our hypothesis as not primarily
one of diversification since households tend not to diversify but one of attention and effort
in which households derive utility from owning a home and the extra utility they get from


                                               2
homeownership is less if they have better substitutes such as trading stocks in the way
described by Barber and Odean (2008).
   Using data from the same National Realtors’ Survey, we first document that purchases of
investment homes are, if anything, more locally biased than equity investments. Panel B of
Table 1 reports the distribution of distances between the primary residence and the owner’s
investment home versus vacation home. The median distance of the investment home from
the buyers’ primary residence is 25 miles. In contrast, the median distance of vacation homes
is 305 miles. Indeed, Chinco and Mayer (2012) in a study of the top 20 MSAs confirm that
most second home purchases are taken by households whose primary residence is in the same
MSA. We will use this fact in interpreting our regressions below.
   We then use two sources of data to test our hypothesis. The first is the Federal Reserve
Boards Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF), which samples a cross-section of roughly 5,000
to 6,000 households once every few years. We use the 1995, 1998, 2001, 2004, 2007, and
2010 waves. We know the MSA, zip-code and county where the household lives and have
detailed data to construct their portfolio holdings including investment homes. We also
have a host of demographic information to use in our analysis. We can distinguish between
investment versus vacation homes and primary residences as well as capture the stock in-
vestments of these households. We calculate for each household whether or not they HAVE
INVESTMENT REAL ESTATE, the value of its investment homes or vacation homes as a
fraction of its total assets as well as its investments in stocks as a fraction of total assets (%
INVESTMENT REAL ESTATE IN TOTAL ASSETS, % VACATION HOME IN TOTAL
ASSETS, % DIRECTLY-HELD STOCKS IN TOTAL ASSETS).
   The second is the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) mortgage origination data.
HMDA keeps track of all mortgages originated in the U.S. from the period of 1998-2011. We
measure as our dependent variable, %NON-OCCUPIED MORTGAGES, the amount of non-
owner occupied home purchases as a fraction of total mortgages originated in a Metropolitan
Statistical Area (MSA) each year over this time period. While we do not know where


                                                3
the household that originated the mortgage lives, the survey evidence indicates that the
preponderance of the investment homes are owned by households whose primary residence
is also that MSA.
   Our independent variable of interest, the supply of publicly available firms in an MSA,
is the RATIO variable first used by Hong, Kubik, and Stein (2008). It is the ratio of the
total book market value of firms headquartered in an MSA to the income in that MSA. They
show that RATIO in an area is inversely related to the price-to-book of companies in that
area. Moreover, most of the variation in their RATIO variable comes from the book value
of firms headquartered in an area. That is, areas with fewer companies have higher prices
for their stocks due to an only-game-in-town effect. In particular, they find that RATIO is
closely correlated with population density in the state but is unassociated with the economic
growth prospects in area. Their focus is on RATIO at the state level.
   In our empirical designs involving the SCF and HMDA data, given that the bias of
investment homes is even more local than for equity investments, we focus our analysis at
the MSA level and even at the finer county level. Using the Survey of Consumer Finances
data, we regress the fraction of a household’s portfolio in investment real estates on household
characteristics and the RATIO in the MSA that the household resides. We find effects that
are economically important and statistically significant. Households in low RATIO cities
have an investment real estate portfolio weight that is 15% higher than the mean of the
sample. They also have a lower exposure to stocks than other households, consistent with
our premise that households indeed look to real estate investments when there are few public
equity opportunities around.
   Of course, these regressions suffer from a potential omitted variables bias. To address
this concern, we observe that our causal mechanism is premised on households being able
to afford investment homes, which are obviously much more costly than simply opening a
brokerage account and buying stocks. So if our relationship between public equity supply
nearby and investment homes is really due to this substitution effect between investment


                                               4
homes and stocks, then we expect our only-game-in-town effect to be stronger for households
with access to financing.
   While we do not have data on the credit scores of our households, we build on earlier
work by Mian and Sufi (2009), who find that the credit quality of households are clustered
by MSA and county. We measure the credit quality of different MSAs and counties using
the volume of sub-prime loan originations (identified using a standard methodology in the
literature) in a county from the HMDA data. We can use this geographic information to
identify the credit quality of households by the MSA or county where they live. We then
calculate a difference-in-differences estimate in which we show that this only-game-in-town
effect is more pronounced for households living in low sub-prime MSAs or counties where
households can more easily access credit to afford investment homes to begin with.
   Moreover, Mian and Sufi (2009) argue that certain sub-prime areas which did not get
access to financing pre-2002 got significant access after 2002 as a result of securitization and
the disintermediation of the credit process. Consistent with this perspective, Haughwout,
Lee, Tracy, and van der Klaauw (2011) find that lax credit screening after 2002 allowed many
households living in the sub-prime areas like Las Vegas and Phoenix to use a sub-prime loan
to purchase second homes.
   So we can then calculate a triple difference estimate in which we take advantage of the
fact that there was a sub-prime lending boom after 2002, which Mian and Sufi (2009) and
many others took to be a global shock that plausibly is exogenous to our relationship of
interest. In other words, previously high sub-prime MSAs or counties started looking more
like low sub-prime MSAs or counties after 2002. We show that high sub-prime MSAs or
counties exhibited a significantly bigger only-game-in-town effect after 2002, consistent with
our conjecture.
   While the SCF data has detailed demographic information about households, we would
like to know if this effect is important at an aggregate level. This is where the HMDA
data is helpful since it contains most of the mortgage originations in the real estate market,


                                               5
especially in larger city centers or MSAs, which is the focus of our paper. Using the HMDA
data, we regress the log of %NON-OCCUPIED MORTGAGES on the log of RATIO at the
MSA level controlling for a host of MSA level characteristics such as unemployment and
the elasticity of land supply as measured by Saiz (2010). We find that when the supply or
RATIO is low, ownership of investment homes, %NON-OCCUPIED MORTGAGES, is high.
We show graphically that the log specification fits the relationship between the ownership
for investment homes in an MSA and the supply of stocks in that MSA very well as the
relationship is highly non-linear.
   A one standard deviation increase in the log of RATIO leads to a decrease in invest-
ment home demand that is 30% of the left-hand side variable’s standard deviation. This
economic effect is robust across different empirical specifications including one where we
collapse our observations by averaging across the sample to obtain an average log %NON-
OCCUPIED MORTGAGES and an average log RATIO and simply run a cross-sectional
regression rather than a panel regression with clustering of standard errors by MSA. We
then consider a number of robustness checks and confirm our results, including dealing with
potential measurement error associated with mistaking investment for vacation homes or
controlling for housing affordability in different areas. Moreover, we apply the same triple
difference identification strategy and obtain similar results to those using SCF.
   Given these HMDA results suggest that the only-game-in-town effect might have aggre-
gate consequences, we develop a simple reduced model to understand the price implications
of this only-game-in-town effect for investment homes. We assume that households have
heterogeneous preferences for owning versus renting. Some prefer to own (perhaps for status
or hobby reasons) while others prefer to rent even holding fixed prices for owning versus
renting. Our only-game-in-town effect can be captured by the behavioral assumption that
the utility households derived from owning is lower when there are more stocks nearby. With
this reduced form behavioral assumption, we then solve for the equilibrium home prices and
tenure choice in the presence of this only-game-in-town effect.


                                              6
   In equilibrium, when real estate is the only game in town, some households in an MSA
are more apt to own an investment home (i.e. two homes including their primary residence)
but that means some other households have to optimally want to rent rather than own. We
show that this only-game-in-town demand for investment homes leads to higher price-to-rent
ratios of homes in cities with few public firms, which then makes renting more attractive and
allows markets to clear. Cities with few local stocks also then have lower (primary residence)
homeownership rates, defined as the fraction of dwellings in a city in which the occupant is
also the owner.
   Importantly, we regress the log of the price-to-rent ratio on log RATIO and find a sub-
stantially higher price-to-rent ratios in MSAs with few local stocks. Moreover, consistent
with our triple difference identification strategy above, we also find that high sub-prime cities
with few local stocks experience the biggest price run-ups after 2002 when credit constraints
got relaxed for them. We also gather data on homeownership rates from the Integrated
Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS) from 2005 to 2012. We regress the log of (primary)
homeownership rate on log RATIO and find a substantially lower homeownership rates in
MSAs with few local stocks, consistent with our hypothesis.
   Our paper is related to a recent set of papers, Chinco and Mayer (2012), Li and Gao
(2013), and Haughwout, Lee, Tracy, and van der Klaauw (2011), who collectively offer
convincing evidence that households who buy investment homes behave more like speculators
than households who buy for occupancy. Our study complements theirs in linking the second
home purchase decision to local bias. Notably, Chinco and Mayer (2012) examine the impact
of out of town buyers of second homes on home prices in 21 MSAs. Their study, consistent
with the survey evidence and the premise of our study, documents that out of town buyers
are typically a small fraction of second home purchases though it did rise significantly in
some of the Sand or vacation cities like Phoenix and Las Vegas during the bubble period.
This is one reason we drop the vacation MSAs in our HMDA analysis. Yet this small fraction
of buyers was very informative for higher home price appreciation, which they attributed to


                                               7
out of town buyers being noise traders and their trend chasing causing housing bubbles.
     Our paper is related to recent work on the speculative motive behind home purchases and
home improvements including Choi, Hong, and Scheinkman (2013) and Gyourko and Saiz
(2004). Glaeser, Gyourko, and Saiz (2008) also argue that the speculative motive behind
the housing bubble was especially powerful in low supply elasticity states (such as New York
and California where land is limited and zoning and development rules are stricter) in which
supply could not quickly adjust to the rising home prices.
     Our paper proceeds as follows. The results using the Survey of Consumer Finances data
are presented in Section II. The empirical results using the HMDA mortgage origination
data is presented in Section III. Equilibrium implications are modeled and tested in Section
IV. We conclude in Section V.



2.      Results Using Survey of Consumer Finances

2.1.     Data

As a survey of household finances and wealth, the SCF includes some assets that are broadly
shared across the population (bank savings accounts) as well some that are held more nar-
rowly and that are concentrated in the tails of the distribution (direct ownership of bonds).
To support estimates of a variety of financial characteristics as well as the overall distribution
of wealth, the survey employs a dual-frame sample design.
     A national area-probability (AP) sample provides good coverage of widely spread char-
acteristics. The AP sample selects household units with equal probability from primary
sampling units that are selected through a multistage selection procedure, which includes
stratification by a variety of characteristics, and selection proportional to their population.
     Because of the concentration of assets and non-random survey response by wealth, the
SCF also employs a list sample which is developed from statistical records derived from tax




                                                8
returns under an agreement with Statistics of Income (SOI).2 (See Kennickell (2000) for
additional details on the SCF list sample.) This list sample consists of households with a
high probability of having high net worth.3
       The SCF joins the observations from the AP and list sample through weighting.4 The
weighting design adjusts each sample separately using all the useful information that can be
brought to bear in creating post-strata. The final weights are adjusted so that the combined
sample is nationally representative of the population and assets. These weights are used in
all regressions.


2.2.       Merging RATIO with SCF

RATIO is available at the MSA-level and is merged into the SCF data in the following way. A
new MSA variable is created in the SCF using a state and county fips to MSA correspondence
consistent with the geography used in calculating RATIO. The RATIO variable, for the years
1995, 1998, 2001, 2004, 2007, and 2010, is merged into the SCF data by MSA and year.5
       For the available years (triennial between 1995 and 2010), there are 363 total MSAs. Of
those 363 MSAs, 133 are also included at some point in the SCF sample. 230 of those MSAs
are not in the SCF sample. Not all households sampled in the SCF, however, reside in MSAs.
15 percent of SCF households are located in either rural areas, or in cities that are not part
of MSAs. Of the MSAs that are in the SCF sample, 38 do not have RATIO data available.
       Ultimately, there are 22,178 households in MSAs with RATIO data available sampled by
   2
     See Wilson and William J. Smith (1983) and Internal Revenue Service (1992) for a description of the
SOI file. The file used for each survey largely contains data from tax returns filed for the tax year two years
before the year the survey takes place. See Kennickell (1998) for a detailed description of the selection of
the 1998 list sample.
   3
     For reasons related to cost control on the survey, the geographic distribution of the list sample is
constrained to that of the area-probability sample.
   4
     The evolution of the SCF weighting design is summarized in Kennickell (2000), with additional back-
ground by Kennickell and Woodburn (1992).
   5
     Starting in the 2001, the public-use version of the SCF does not included any geographic identifiers.
Prior to 2001 the public-use version only included the very broad 9-level Census Division code. There is an
internal version of the survey, however, that is available only to the Board of Governors economists working
on the SCF that has MSA-level (and lower levels of geography including zip-code and county) identification
of where the household resides. These geographic variables were used to merge the RATIO variable into the
SCF.

                                                      9
the SCF between 1995 and 2010 that are used in this portion of the analysis. Because of
the multiple imputation process (five implicates to generate a distribution for the imputed
values) for missing values, there are 110,890 household-level records in the data. Standard
errors in the SCF regressions are based on weighted data, and also are adjusted for the
multiple implicates.
   The key independent variable of interest is log RATIO, which is the log of the ratio
of the total book value of firms headquartered in a MSA to the income in that MSA as
in Hong, Kubik, and Stein (2008). Due to the MSAs with RATIO equal to zero, we add
0.00001 to RATIO before we take logs. The scaling is arbitrary and does not materially
affect our conclusions. In additional analysis below, we experiment with different cut-offs on
income. MSAs with higher income all have non-zero RATIO and our effects are if anything
even stronger. As we show below, there is much more variation in the BOOK PER CAPITA
across MSAs than there is in the INCOME PER CAPITA. This is consistent with the point in
Hong, Kubik, and Stein (2008) that RATIO is essentially variation in BOOK PER CAPITA.
We could have simply used this as the proxy for supply of stocks in each MSA instead of
RATIO and simply control for INCOME PER CAPITA on the right hand side in making
our inferences.


2.3.    Definitions of Investment Real Estate and Vacation Homes

All dependent variables are represented as shares—they sum the dollar value of the house-
holds portion of all investment or vacation properties, and divide by either total assets or
by total real estate assets. Investment real estates are aggregated from the following sub-
categories given by the SCF in the “property type” variable (x1703, x1803, and x1903):
code 11 (land only: lot, tract, acreage; building lots,“farmland”); code 13 (substantial land
and other type of structure); code 15 (recreational property; sports field; golf course); code
24 (mobile home park); code 40 (one single family home); code 41 (multiple single fam-
ily homes); code 42 (duplex 2 unit residence); code 43 (triplex); code 44 (fourplex); code


                                             10
45 (5 or more); code 46 (apartment house, units unknown, rental units, or property nfs);
code 47 (other business commercial property); code 48 (business/commercial and residential
combination); code 49 (condo; co-op); and code 50 (residential, nec.).
   %INVESTMENT REAL ESTATE IN TOTAL ASSETS is then the dollar value of invest-
ment real estates divided by the household’s total assets. We also calculate %INVESTMENT
REAL ESTATE IN REAL ESTATE ASSETS in which the denominator is the value of only
the household’s real estate assets as opposed to all its assets. Vacation homes are aggregated
from the following categories reported by SCF: code 21 (seasonal/vacation); code 25 (time
share); code 12 (substantial land and seasonal or other residence); and code 999 (other vaca-
tion home mapped from the mop-up). Analogously, we calculate %VACATION HOME IN
TOTAL ASSETS. We also have data on how much households own of stocks. As such, we
calculate % DIRECTLY-HELD STOCK HOLDINGS IN TOTAL ASSETS as the fraction
of directly-held stock holdings in household’s total asset.
   We report in Table 2 the summary statistics of the Survey of Consumer Finance for
1995, 1998, 2001, 2004, 2007, 2010 waves. % INVESTMENT REAL ESTATE IN TOTAL
ASSETS, the fraction of investment real estate in household’s total asset, has a mean of 0.03
with a standard deviation of 0.09. % INVESTMENT REAL ESTATE IN REAL ESTATE
ASSETS, the fraction of investment real estate in household’s total real estate asset, has a
mean of 0.08 with a standard deviation of 0.2. % VACATION HOME IN TOTAL ASSETS,
the fraction of vacation home in household’s total asset, has a mean of 0.01 with a standard
deviation of 0.04. Among our sample of households, they are more apt to have an investment
real estate than a vacation home. % DIRECTLY-HELD STOCKS IN TOTAL ASSETS, the
fraction of directly-held stock holdings in household’s total asset, has a mean of 0.02 with a
standard deviation of 0.08.
   In addition to these share variables, we also create related dummy variables to capture
whether households have any investment real estate, vacation home or directly-held stocks.
HAVE INVESTMENT REAL ESTATE equals one if the household has any investment real


                                              11
estate and zero other wise. The mean is 0.13 with a standard deviation of 0.34. So 13% of
our households own some investment real estate. HAVE VACATION HOME equals one if
the household has a vacation home and zero other wise. The mean is 0.06 with a standard
deviation of 0.23. HAVE DIRECTLY-HELD STOCKS equals one if the household has any
directly-held stock and zero otherwise. The mean is 0.21 with a standard deviation of 0.4.
Overall, our households are more likely to have stocks than investment homes and more
likely to have investment homes than vacation homes.
   In Table 2, we also report summary statistics for our right-hand side variables. Log
RATIO is the log ratio of the total book market value of firms headquartered in a MSA to
the income in that MSA. The mean of Log RATIO is -1.53 with a standard deviation of
1.29. These figures are fairly similar to those reported for the HMDA sample below. This
is reassuring since we ideally want comparable samples so that we can more easily evaluate
the consistency of our results across HMDA and SCF. Even though we are measuring very
different objects on the left hand side (mortgage originations versus household portfolios),
we expect these numbers to be line up. UNEMP is unemployment rate from the Bureau of
Labor Statistics. The mean is 5.54 and standard deviation is 2.25. HOME PRICE INDEX
is the Federal Housing Finance Agency(FHFA) Housing Price Index at the MSA level has a
mean of 160 with a standard deviation of 52.09. PAST PRICE APPRECIATION is the past
                                                                               HP It −HP It−1
home price appreciation over a year using the FHFA House Price Index, where       HP It−1
                                                                                              .
It has a mean of 0.04 and a standard deviation of 0.06.
   FAMILY SIZE is the number of people in each Primary Economic Unit. Our households
have around 2.43 members with a standard deviation of 1.4. Log HOUSEHOLD INCOME
has a mean of 10.84, which is around 51 thousand dollars. The SCF Survey is ideal for our
study since we have higher net worth households who are most likely to be able to purchase
an investment real estate. Table 7 also reports the breakdown of AGE of the head of each
household. Most of our sample is below 55 years of age. But the sample is meant to be
nationally representative and as such we see a distribution across the age cohorts. We also


                                            12
break down RACE. 73% of the households are white. 14% are black. Hispanics account for
9% of the households and Asians or others account for the remaining 4%.
   In Table 2, we also break down EDUCATION. 13% have less than a high school education.
29% have high school or GED equivalent. 25% went to some college but do not have a
Bachelor’s degree. 20% have a Bachelor’s degree. 7% have a Master’s degree and 6% have a
PhD. FAMILY STRUCTURE is reported. This breaks down situations like whether or not
the couple is married and have children. Here LWP stands for the“living with partner” in the
FAMILY STRUCTURE variable. We also have data on the NET WORTH of households in
our sample, which we break up into quintiles or CATEGORY. We report the sum statistics
by the five groups to give a sense of the range of the distribution. There is clearly significant
variation in household net worth. Our richest CATEGORY 5 has a mean of around 3.5
million dollars with a standard deviation of around 10 million dollars. UNATTACHED
FEMALE is the gender variable for Primary Economic Unit head, which is equal to 1 for
un-partnered females and zero for everybody else. Around 27% of the households fit this
designation with a standard deviation of 44%.


2.4.    Portfolio Tilt to Investment Real Estate

We begin in Table 3 by reporting the household-level panel Logit regression results of our var-
ious dummy variables for investment real estate, vacation home and stock ownership. House-
hold level control variables include AGE, EDUCATION, FAMILY STRUCTURE, RACE,
UNATTACHED FEMALE, log HOUSEHOLD INCOME and NET WORTH CATEGORY.
MSA-level control variables include unemployment rate, home price index, and past home
price appreciation. AGE, EDUCATION, FAMILY STRUCTURE, and RACE are not re-
ported for brevity.
   In column (1), the dependent variable is the dummy variable HAVE INVESTMENT
REAL ESTATE. The coefficient in front of log RATIO is -0.092 with a t-statistic of -2.52.
Consistent with out only-game-in-town hypothesis, households are much less likely to own


                                               13
an investment real estate if they live in a high RATIO MSA. The marginal probability
is -0.0087. Given that the unconditional probability is around 0.13, this is an economic
significant effect. Continuing on Column (1), UNATTACHED FEMALE is also less likely
to have an investment real estate. Higher household income increases the chances of having
an investment real estate and so does having higher NET WORTH. The excluded group
is the lowest NET WORTH CATEGORY 1. Notice that we can compare the economic
significance of our log RATIO variable to these other covariates by comparing their marginal
probabilities. For instance, household income has a marginal probability of around 0.024.
So our marginal probability from log RATIO is around half the size of household income.
Given that we would expect household income to be a significant determinant of having an
investment real estate, our effect would seem to be economic interesting in comparison.
   In column (2), we report the results for the propensity of households to have a vacation
home. Notice now that log RATIO has no effect. But the other covariates such as log
Household Income continue to have an effect. This is then reassuring that our RATIO
variable is really picking up what we want in terms of influencing investment real estates.
   In column (3), we report the results for the propensity to have directly-held stocks. Recall
that our hypothesis postulates that in MSAs with fewer stocks nearby, households are less
likely to have directly-held stocks in their portfolio. This is the premise of the substituting
toward investment real estates in MSAs with few stocks. Consistent with our hypothesis,
the coefficient of interest is 0.0776 with a t-statistic of 3.452. The marginal probability is
around 0.01. We find indeed then that in MSAs with more stocks, households are more
likely to own stocks. Since we already established in these MSAs that they are less likely
to have investment real estate, we have now fully confirmed our hypothesis. Notice again
that households with higher incomes are more likely to tilt toward stocks, while unattached
females are less likely to tilt toward stocks.
   One might worry that our findings in column (3) is somehow hard-wired. If we know
that an MSA has fewer stocks, does not that mean that households there are less likely


                                                 14
to be tilted toward stocks? So is there any information here? The investment real estate
regressions result would seem to be more kosher in comparison. Notice that it is possible for
the stocks headquartered in an MSA to be held by households in other areas, even if there is
local bias. The effect of local bias is not one of complete segmentation. In other words, it is
not a fait accompli that we had to find the result in column (3). Moreover, it is not obvious
that with a lower supply of equities, the shares of these stocks could not be entirely held by
locals, giving us a negative rather than a positive coefficient of interest.
   In Table 4, we report the household-level panel Tobit regression results of % share of
investment real estate, vacation home, and stock holdings in households’ asset on log RATIO.
Column (1) reports the regression result of % share of investment real estate in total asset(%
INVESTMENT REAL ESTATE IN TOTAL ASSET) on log RATIO with household-level
and MSA-level control variables.
   Notice that the coefficient of interest in front of log RATIO is -0.0107 with a t-statistic of
-1.652. This is a sizeable economic effect when we consider that we have in our survey very
wealthy households with lots of assets. This effect lines up well with the fact that there are
far fewer investment home mortgages originated in MSAs with lots of local equity investment
opportunities. Some of the other covariates also attract statistically significant coefficients
as before. Households with higher net worth also are more likely to have investment real
estates. Unattached females are less likely to have investment real estate.
   Column (2) reports the regression result of % share of investment real estate in total real
estate asset (% INVESTMENT REAL ESTATE IN REAL ESTATE ASSET) on log RATIO
and the same set of controls. Qualitatively, the results are similar to column (1). The
coefficient of interest is -0.0167 with a t-statistic of 1.249. The significance is smaller than
when we scale by total assets but the conclusion is similar. Again, the higher household net
worth leads to greater assets held in investment real estates while unattached female leads
to less. Comparing the economic significance across these key variables, we find that our
only game in town effect is again sizeable when measured relative to household new worth.


                                               15
   Column (3) reports the regression result of % share of vacation home in total asset(%
VACATION HOME IN TOTAL ASSET) on log RATIO with controls. Consistent with
our earlier findings, we find no effect for vacation homes as we expect. Importantly, we
now find that the higher is the UNEMP in an MSA the lower the vacation home purchases
of households living there. Higher household new worth again contributes significantly to
households owning a vacation home. One take-away from our analysis is that our only-game-
in-town effect is really tied to investment real estates, especially if we contrast the fact that
we still get a sizeable effect from household net worth on vacation home purchases.
   Column (4) reports the regression result of % stocks holdings in total asset(%STOCK
HOLDINGS IN TOTAL ASSET) on log RATIO and the same controls as in the earlier
columns. We draw similar conclusions as in Table 11, confirming the ancillary prediction of
our hypothesis that households when they own less investment real estates are more likely
to own stocks.


2.5.    Diff-in-Diff-in-Diff Estimates Using Credit Constraints

The premise of our hypothesis is that locally-biased households invest in local homes when
stocks are not locally available. But of course, buying a home is much more expensive to
simply opening a brokerage account and investing in some stocks. Credit constraints is a
key factor, which is much more likely to affect households with lower income. So we can use
credit constraints as a means to achieve better identification. We expect our only-game-in-
town effect to be more prevalent for households living in high credit quality counties than
in low credit quality counties. In other words, if we ran our earlier regressions separately
for high and low credit quality MSAs or counties, we expect the bulk of our effect to be
concentrated in high quality MSAs or counties.
   We define the credit quality of an MSA or county using the volume of sub-prime lending
from the HMDA data. We know from the HMDA data the loans that are labeled sub-
prime. There are two major ways to identify sub-prime loans in the HMDA: 1) using the


                                               16
rate spread data in HMDA, or 2) using the Sub-prime and Manufactured Home Lenders
list by the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). Since the rate spreads
are only available from 2004 and the HUD list is only available up to 2005, we identify the
subprime by the HUD list before 2004 and use the rate spreads after 2004. As a result, we
can calculate for different MSAs or counties the fraction of originations that are sub-prime
in each year and then calculate the average sub-prime fraction for each MSA or county over
the 2002-2007. Based on this average, we can create tercile groups based to label MSAs or
counties as low, medium and high sub-prime MSAs or counties.
   An indicator variable for a high sub-prime lending MSA or county is our measure of
poor credit quality. Even better than this, we are fortunate that over our sample period
the United States experienced a sub-prime credit lending boom for low income households.
We know from the work of Mian and Sufi (2009) that sub-prime lending in certain MSAs or
counties peaked in the years of 2002-2007. So we can do a diff-in-diff-in-diff estimate in which
we expect our only-game-in-town effect to be bigger for high sub-prime county households
in the years after 2002 than before 2002.
   It is to an estimate of this result that we now turn in Table 5, where we formally estimate
the triple-difference estimate. We create a variable I Subprime MSA as being equal to 1 if
the MSA is in the top tercile of MSAs in terms of sub-prime origination. We also have an
indicator variable for after 2002, I after2002 equals 1 if the year is after 2002 and zero other-
wise. We then run our baseline regressions from Table 3 with HAVE INVESTMENT REAL
ESTATE and % INVESTMENT REAL ESTATE IN TOTAL ASSETS on the left hand side
and log RATIO, I Subprime MSA, and I after2002 and these three variables interacted. The
coefficient of interest is in front of the double interaction term log RATIO * I Subprime MSA
and the triple interaction term log RATIO * I Subprime MSA * I after2002. We expect the
coefficient in front of the double interaction term to be positive and the latter to be negative.
These results are presented in Panel B. Instead of a subprime indicator, we also present in
Panel A the same regression results where we sort MSAs into high, medium and low income


                                               17
based on the same tercile cut-offs for income. Subprime areas are fairly correlated with low
income but they are not the same thing. We want to make this point clear in Panel A. We
typically find stronger results when we use the subprime indicator than income indicator.
   This is indeed what we find. From Panel B column (1) in which the dependent variable
is HAVE INVESTMENT REAL ESTATE, notice that the coefficient of log RATIO is -.0127
with a t-statistic of 2.424. This is consistent with the earlier table in that households in
MSAs with lots of supply of equities nearby are less likely to own investment real estate.
The coefficient in front of the log RATIO * I Subprime MSA term is positive with a coefficient
of .0125 and a t-statistic of 1.395. This means that the effect of log RATIO is weaker in
high subprime MSAs where households are less able to borrow, consistent with the premise
of our identification strategy. This term is the right sign but not precisely estimated. This
is somewhat expected in triple difference estimation strategies. The crucial term for us
is the log RATIO * I subprime MSA * I after2002 term. This term attracts a negative
coefficient of -.0228 with a t-statistic of -3.188. The economic and statical significance is
large. Notice after 2002, high subprime MSA households experienced almost as big if not
bigger only-game-in-town effect as low subprime MSA households.
   We obtain the same results in column (2) when we use % of INVESTMENT REAL
ESTATE IN TOTAL ASSETS. The coefficient in front of log RATIO is -.00259 with a t-
statistic of -2.447. The coefficient in front of log RATIO * I Subprime MSA is .00238 with a
t-statistic of 1.53. Finally, the coefficient in front of the triple interaction term log RATIO *
I subprime MSA * I after 2002 term is again negative at -.00445 with a t-statistic of 2.181.
This coefficient is less precisely estimated than the one in column (1) but together they paint
a supportive picture for our hypothesis. From Panel A, we see that we get largely similar
results as Panel B, though less statistically and economically significant since income is not
a perfect proxy for access to financing.
   This set of diff-in-diff-in-diff estimates is consistent with our conjecture that the only-
game-in-town effect is most pronounced for high credit quality households since lower credit


                                               18
quality households cannot borrow to buy homes even if there are no stocks headquartered
in the neighborhood. This result speaks directly to our conjecture that the local supply of
equity is affecting the demand for local investment homes. We can now interpret our OLS
regressions more comfortably as causal since whatever omitted variables bias has to work
through only high credit quality MSAs but not after 2002. In other words, the fact that
MSAs with firms headquartered there also have less investment homes cannot be driven by
omitted variables bias unless that bias also explains why it only affects high credit quality
households which are the ones most likely to be able to borrow to buy investment homes
but not after 2002 when even low credit quality households can borrow.
   In Table 6, we refine our analysis in Table 5 even further by focusing on a finer unit
of analysis, that of the county instead of an MSA. The HMDA data allows us to calculate
volume of subprime originations at the county level. Using the same tercile splits as before,
we find very similar results as using MSA. We conduct this analysis because we might worry
that MSA is too broad a category for capture credit score features and credit quality of
households might be more accurately captured at the county level.


2.6.    Alternative Definitions of What Constitutes Investment Real

        Estate

As a robustness check of our results, we consider different definitions of investment real estate.
First, we define investment real estate as strictly residential. Specifically, we consider the
following subset of codes: code 24 (mobile home park); code 40 (one single family home);
code 41 (multiple single family homes); code 42 (duplex 2 unit residence); code 43 (triplex);
code 44 (fourplex); code 45 (5 or more); code 46 (apartment house, units unknown, rental
units, or property nfs); code 48 (business/commercial and residential combination); code 49
(condo; co-op); and code 50 (residential, nec.). Second, the SCF asks whether the household
or Primary Economic Unit (PEU) earns any money (and how much) from other real estate.
This definition of investment real estate simply takes the asset value for those other properties

                                               19
that are generating income for the PEU. We find that both definitions show similar results
to our original definition above.



3.      Results Using HMDA

3.1.     Data

Our data on mortgage originations comes from the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA).
This data covers the period of 1998 to 2011 and includes all mortgage originations in the
U.S. by MSA. This data further breaks down whether the mortgage is intended for a pri-
mary residence or a non-owner occupied house. It also gives us detailed information on the
mortgage contract such as the interest rate and loan value. We also use the COMPUSTAT
for the total book value of firms headquartered in a city. We use the home price index from
the Federal Housing Finance Agency and the fair market rent from the U.S. Department
of Housing and Urban Development. Our other demographic data are from the Bureau of
Labor Statistics and the Bureau of Economic Analysis.
     Table 7 collects the summary statistics for our main variables of interest. The summary
statistics are reported by MSA level. The NON-OWNER OCCUPIED HOME PURCHASE
AMTO has a mean of 198 million dollars with a standard deviation of 603 million dollars.
The TOTAL HOME PURCHASE AMTO for all mortgage originations for home purchase
regardless of type is 1.67 billion dollars with a standard deviation of 5.24 billion dollars. The
%NON-OCCUPIED MORTGAGES is the ratio of the non-owner occupied originations for
home purchase to total originations for home purchase in each MSA. It has a mean of 14%
with a standard deviation of 10%. This is our dependent variable of interest.
     The mean of log RATIO is -6.33 with a standard deviation of 4.68. We also report the
BOOK PER CAPITA, which is the total book value of firms headquartered in each MSA
divided by the population of that MSA. BOOK PER CAPITA has a mean of 5355 dollars
with a standard deviation of 16,474 dollars. INCOME PER CAPITA has a mean of 31,463


                                               20
dollars with a standard deviation of 7222 dollars. In addition, we report summary statistics
for the key covariates. PAST PRICE APPRECIATION has a mean of 3.18% per annum
with a standard deviation of 6.65%. The log of population, log POP, has a mean of 12.63
with a standard deviation of 1.06. Unemployment, UNEMP, has a mean of 5.92% and a
standard deviation of 2.78%. Elasticity is the Saiz (2010) land supply elasticity index, which
captures how easy it is to build. The higher the elasticity the easier it is to build. It has a
mean of 2.52 with a standard deviation of 1.42. The Housing Affordability Index is from the
National Association of Realtors, which is available only from 2009 to 2011.6 The Housing
Affordability Index measures whether or not a family with median income could qualify for a
mortgage loan on a median-priced home. Higher index indicates that a median-priced home
is more affordable to a median income family. The Housing Affordability Index has a mean
of 130.6 with a standard deviation of 38.83. Finally, the log of the price-to-rent ratio, log
PR, has a mean of -1.5 with a standard deviation of 0.23.


3.2.       Baseline Regressions

In Table 8, we report the baseline regression results of the log of the percentage of non-owner
occupied mortgage originations (log %NON-OCCUPIED MORTGAGES) on log RATIO.
Columns (1)-(3) report the panel regression estimates using MSA-level samples with yearly
observations from 1998 to 2011. Column (1) reports the univariate regression. The coefficient
on RATIO is -0.0366 with a t-statistic of -7.481. The standard errors are clustered by
MSA. The economic significance is calculated as a one-standard deviation movement of the
log RATIO times the coefficient of interest divided by the standard deviation of the left
hand side variable. In column (1), a one standard deviation increase in log RATIO leads
to a fall of log %NON-OCCUPIED MORTGAGES that is 28% of its standard deviation.
This is a sizeable move. Columns (2)-(3) report the multivariate regression results. We
introduce controls including year fixed effects, unemployment rate (UNEMP) and housing
  6
      http://www.realtor.org/topics/housing-affordability-index


                                                     21
supply elasticity (Elasticity) from Saiz (2010). These specifications produce almost identical
estimates to the univariate regression. It is interesting to observe from column (3) that MSAs
with lower supply elasticity have higher %NON-OCCUPIED MORTGAGES. But this co-
variate only makes our only-game-in-town effect stronger since our coefficient rises to -0.04
with a t-statistic of -5.9 in column (3).
   In columns (4)-(6), rather than running a panel regression, we take the average of all the
variables over our sample period and report the results of a pure cross-sectional regression.
Hong, Kubik, and Stein (2008) show that RATIO is highly persistent over time; hence,
collapsing the panel regression in a pure cross-section might generate a better specification.
Column (4) reports the univariate regression. The coefficient is -0.0603 with a t-statistic of
-4.406. The economic significance is now -0.23. That is, a one standard deviation movement
in log RATIO leads to a fall of log %NON-OCCUPIED MORTGAGES that is 23% of the
standard deviation of the left-hand side variable. Columns (5)-(6) report the multivariate
regression results and we obtain similar results to those in column (4).
   In Figure 1, we plot the relationship between log %NON-OCCUPIED MORTGAGES on
the y-axis and the log RATIO on the x-axis for the regression specification in column (4).
One sees a very clear linear and downward sloping relationship between these two variables.
Indeed, this implies that a plot of the levels of these two variables (raw rather than in logs)
is non-linearly and negatively related. Moreover, notice that since we have many MSAs with
zeros, there is a vertical line of observations to the far left of the graph. It is easy to see that
these observations are not qualitatively driving our results since removing the vertical line
would not significantly change the inference that the slope of the fitted line is negative. We
show that this is the case below.


3.3.    Decomposing RATIO

In Table 9, we report the regression results in which we decompose the RATIO variable
into BOOK PER CAPITA and INCOME PER CAPITA. The left-hand side variable (log


                                                22
%NON-OCCUPIED MORTGAGES) is the log ratio of non-owner-occupied mortgage origi-
nations for home purchase to total mortgage origination for home purchase. Right-hand side
variables are now the log of book value per capita (log BOOK PER CAPITA) and the log
of per capita income (log INCOME PER CAPITA). In other words, rather than regressing
log %NON-OCCUPIED MORTGAGES on log RATIO, we regress log %NON-OCCUPIED
MORTGAGES instead on log BOOK PER CAPITA, the numerator of log RATIO, and log
INCOME PER CAPITA, the denominator of log RATIO. This regression specification tells
us whether the effects of RATIO on %NON-OCCUPIED MORTGAGES is coming from
the supply of public equity, that is the BOOK PER CAPITA, or the income of the region,
INCOME PER CAPITA.
   Columns (1)-(2) report the panel regression using MSA-level samples from 1998 to 2011.
Control variables include unemployment rate (UNEMP) and housing supply elasticity from
Saiz (2010). The estimates in column (1) suggest that all the effects are coming from log
BOOK PER CAPITA. The coefficient on log BOOK PER CAPITA in column (1) is -
0.0129 with a t-statistic of -4.549. The implied economic significance is 21% of the left-hand
side variable. In contrast the coefficient on log INCOME PER CAPITA is not statistically
significant. In column (2), the coefficient of log INCOME PER CAPITA becomes statistically
significant but is wrong-signed when we include Elasticity, however. We expect that MSAs
with higher income have a lower RATIO (or less effective supply of stocks to go around
given the income) and hence more investment home purchases. Instead, we find that high
per capita income MSAs have less investment home purchases.
   Columns (3)-(4) report the pure cross-sectional regression on the averaged observations
across the sample period. Again, we see that the coefficient on log BOOK PER CAPITA is
large and statistically significant. The coefficient on log INCOME PER CAPITA is again
wrong-signed and insignificant. But the coefficient becomes statistically significant when we
include Elasticity.
   The results in this table show our results are not driven by strange specification assump-


                                             23
tions. It is fairly robust to different parameterizations, with most of the effect coming from
the supply of public equities as captured by log BOOK PER CAPITA.


3.4.    Additional Controls for Population Density, Price Apprecia-

        tion, and Housing Affordability Index

In Table 10, we augment our baseline regression specification from Table 8 by examining
what happens when we control for a variety of factors. In column (1), we add population
density of a city, measured by log of MSA population, to our regression specification. Hong,
Kubik, and Stein (2008) show that log POP and RATIO are highly correlated because the
book value of firms are lower in less populated areas. They argue that log POP might be an
instrument for RATIO.
   We report in column (1) the regression results of the percentage of non-owner occupied
mortgage originations on RATIO, controlling the log number of population (logPOP). Col-
umn (1) reports the panel regression using MSA-level samples from 1998 to 2011. Controls
include unemployment rate (UNEMP) and housing supply elasticity (Elasticity). The coef-
ficient on log RATIO (-0.0275) is still statistically and economically significant even with log
POP in the regression. The coefficient on log POP (-0.107) is also statistically significant
and attracts the same sign as log RATIO as we expect given the findings in Hong, Kubik,
and Stein (2008).
   In column (2), we report the regression results of the percentage of non-owner occupied
mortgage originations on RATIO after dropping vacation MSAs. Vacation MSAs are the
popular vacation home areas listed from CNBC, Barron, and Forbes. Column (2) report the
panel regression using MSA-level sample from 1998 to 2011. The coefficient of interest is
-0.0391 with a t-statistic of -6.048. It is virtually identical to that reported in Table 8.
   In columns (3)-(4), we report the regression results of the percentage of non-owner occu-
pied mortgage originations on RATIO, controlling for home price appreciation. The idea is
that the amount of investment home purchases are likely to depend and be positively cor-

                                               24
related with home price movements. We want to see whether our coefficient on log RATIO
is picking up some of the explanatory power of these trends in home prices. This is unlikely
because RATIO is quite persistent over time, but it would nonetheless be comforting to
verify.
   In column (3), we control the future home price appreciation(FUTURE PRICE APPRE-
                                                                HP It+1 −HP It
CIATION), where FUTURE PRICE APPRECIATIONt =                        HP It
                                                                                 (where HPI is the
annual house price index value of the MSA). Again, the coefficient of interest in front of log
RATIO is if anything a bit stronger than the results presented in Table 8.
   In column (4), we control for past home price appreciation(PAST PRICE APPRECI-
                                                       HP It −HP It−1
ATION), where PAST PRICE APPRECIATIONt =                  HP It−1
                                                                      .   We get statistically and
economic significant estimates of the coefficient on log RATIO that are again almost identical
to the results presented in Table 8.
   In columns (5)-(8), we report the regression results of the percentage of non-owner-
occupied mortgage originations on RATIO, controlling for the Housing Affordability Index
from the National Association of Realtors. We want to see how the investment home pur-
chases are related to the regional mortgage availability and how our coefficient on log RATIO
is affected. We use the Metropolitan series of the Housing Affordability Index which gives
us affordability in different MSAs.
   In columns (5)-(6), we control for this index. Other control variables include unem-
ployment rate(UNEMP) and housing supply elasticity(Elasticity). Again, the coefficient of
interest in front of log RATIO is if anything a bit stronger than the results presented in
Table 8. We also find that the coefficient on the Housing Affordability Index is negative and
statistically significant. This means that the percentage of non-owner-occupied mortgage
originations is negatively associated with housing affordability in the city. However, the
coefficient becomes insignificant when we include Elasticity.
   In columns (7)-(8), we take the time series average of this Metropolitan Index for years of
2009 to 2011 and assume that in earlier years each MSA has an affordability index equal to


                                             25
their 2009 to 2011 time series average. We call this Housing Affordability Index Backfilled.
We find similar results.


3.5.       Owner Occupied Originations

In Table 11, instead of the fraction of investment home mortgages to total mortgages on
the left-hand side, we study instead the amount of owner-occupied mortgage originations.
The idea is for us to check to see whether log RATIO influences owner-occupied originations
at all. We ideally would not want to find any effect since our hypothesis pertains only to
non-owner occupied homes. If we found a significant effect, this might raise other alternative
stories.
   Our prior is that RATIO should have no effect on primary residences since we know
RATIO is inversely related to the fraction of investment home mortgages to total mortgage
origination. Since total mortgage origination is the sum of owner-occupied and non-owner
occupied mortgages, the fact that we find RATIO has an effect on this fraction should mean
it should have little effect on owner occupied originations. Otherwise this movement might
offset any effects we see in non-owner occupied originations.
   But just to check, we report the regression results of the owner-occupied mortgage orig-
inations on RATIO in Table 11. The left-hand side variable (log OWNER OCCUPIED
MORTGAGES) is the log amount of owner-occupied mortgage originations for home pur-
chase. The independent variables are the same as before. Columns (1)-(3) report the panel
regression using MSA-level samples from 1998 to 2011. Column (1) reports the univariate
regression. The coefficient is 0.172 with a t-statistic of 14.39.
   However, this coefficient declines significantly once we control for covariates in columns
(2)-(3). The effect of log RATIO on owner-occupied originations as we expect is negligible.
While the effect is very precisely measured, the economic significance is tiny. The coefficient
of interest in column (3) is 0.0106 and the economic significance is a tiny 0.03. Columns (4)-
(6) report the cross-sectional regression by averaging observations across the sample period.


                                               26
The results largely reinforce the fact that RATIO primarily influences non-owner occupied
mortgage origination.


3.6.     Diff-in-Diff-in-Diff Estimates Using Credit Constraints

It is to a more formal estimate of this result that we now turn in Table 12, where we formally
estimate the triple-difference estimate for Table 5. We create a variable I Subprime MSA as
being equal to 1 if the MSA is in the top tercile of MSAs in terms of sub-prime origination.
We also have an indicator variable for after 2002, I after2002 equals 1 if the year is after 2002
and zero otherwise. We then run our baseline regressions with log of non-owner occupied
mortgages on the left hand side and log RATIO, I Subprime MSA and I after2002 and these
three variables interacted. The coefficient of interest is in front of the triple interaction term:
log RATIO * I Subprime MSA * I after2002. We expect the coefficient in front of the term
to be negative. That is, we expect that log RATIO has more of a negative effect for high
sub-prime MSAs compared to low sub-prime MSAs after 2002. This is indeed what we find.
The coefficient in front of the term has a coefficient of -0.0131 and a t-statistic of -1.692.
It is very comforting that both triple difference estimates of interest are economically and
statistically significant, just as we had found earlier using the SCF data.



4.      Pricing and Homeownership Rate Implications

Having established that households living in MSAs with less local stocks are more likely to
buy investment homes, we turn to an analysis of the equilibrium implications of local bias
of investment homes. This equilibrium analysis necessarily involves the modeling of tenure
choice (renting versus owning) and investment home choice (owning one versus two homes).
Our model is a simple extension of Sinai and Souleles (2005).
     We assume that there are two periods, t = 0, 1. There are N identical homes. Assume
that it costs P0 to own a house at t = 0 and it can be sold at P˜1 at t = 1, with mean


                                                27
E(P˜1 ) and variance V ar(P˜1 ). A house can be rented out at R from t = 0 to t = 1. There
are N households, who have mean-variance expected utility with γ. Each household has to
either own or rent one of the homes. If a home is rented, then one of the households must
own two homes. Assume that there exist two types of households, in equal fractions in the
economy: those who get extra utility from owning home (O) and those who does not get any
extra utility from owning home (R). That is, O-type agents will get extra expected return
from owning a home, UO . The extra expected return is lower for second home, αUO with
0 < α < 1.
     All households are endowed with local stock wealth (Q̃), with mean E(Q̃) = 0 and
variance V ar(Q̃) = V ar(bũ) = b2 σ 2 , where b is constant and V ar(ũ) = σ 2 . The parameter
b corresponds to the supply of local stocks in an MSA. Small b corresponds to lower supply
MSAs. We assume that stock values and home prices are positively correlated, Cov(P˜1 , Q̃) >
0.
     Our only-game-in-town effect for investment homes, as motivated in the Introduction,
corresponds to the following assumption: α, the utility obtained from the investment home
is a decreasing function of b. When there are more stocks locally, the utility households
derive from owning an investment home are lower.
     We solve for the equilibrium home prices and tenure choice in the presence of this only-
game-in-town effect. In equilibrium, when real estate is the only game in town, O-households
in an MSA are more apt to own an investment home (i.e. two homes including their primary
residence) but that means R-households have to optimally want to rent rather than own. We
show that this only-game-in-town demand for investment homes leads to higher price-to-rent
ratios of homes in cities with few public firms, which then makes renting more attractive and
allows markets to clear. It also leads to a lower homeownership rate, defined as the fraction
of dwellings or homes in a city in which the occupant is also the owner. Note that someone
who owns a primary residence and an investment home is only counted as a homeowner for
his primary residence but his investment home is non-owner occupied or counted as rented.


                                              28
   For the equilibrium with R-type agents renting and O-type agents owning 2 homes in
equilibrium, the following three conditions should hold. First, Equation (1) below indicates
the condition so that R-type agents prefer renting to owning. Second, Equation (2) indicates
the condition such that O-type agents will prefer owning to renting. Third, O-type agents
must be indifferent between owning two houses and owning one house, which is Equation
(3).




                             E0 [U R (W − R + Q̃)] > E0 [U R (W − P0 + P˜1 + Q̃)]           (1)

                       E0 [U O (W − P0 + P˜1 + Q̃)] > E0 [U O (W − R + Q̃)]                 (2)

               E0 [U O (W − 2P0 + 2P˜1 + R + Q̃)] = E0 [U O (W − P0 + P˜1 + Q̃)]            (3)


   To get the equilibrium price, we can solve Equation (3) to obtain the following:

                                               γ
       W − 2P0 + 2E(P˜1 ) + R + (1 + α(b))UO − (4V ar(P˜1 ) + 4Cov(P˜1 , Q̃) + V ar(Q̃))
                                               2
                                  γ
       = W − P0 + E(P˜1 ) + UO − (V ar(P˜1 ) + 2Cov(P˜1 , Q̃) + V ar(Q̃))
                                   2

                                                        γ
             P0 = R + E(P˜1 ) + (α(b)UO − γV ar(P˜1 )) − V ar(P˜1 ) − γCov(P˜1 , Q̃)        (4)
                                                        2

   Equation (2) will be satisfied if the equilibrium price satisfies the following condition.

                          γ                                                  γ
   W − P0 + E(P˜1 ) + UH − (V ar(Q̃) + 2Cov(P˜1 , Q̃) + V ar(P˜1 )) > W − R − V ar(Q̃)
                           2                                                 2
                             γ
   → P0 < R + E(P˜1 ) + UO − V ar(P˜1 ) − γCov(P˜1 , Q̃)
                             2

We can show that the equilibrium price always satisfies the condition. That is, O-type agents
will always prefer owning to renting at the price.
   Using Equation (1), we get our main condition for the equilibrium price such that the




                                               29
R-agents will want to rent:

             γ                             γ
      W − R − V ar(Q̃) > W − P0 + E(P˜1 ) − (V ar(Q̃) + 2Cov(P˜1 , Q̃) + V ar(P˜1 ))
             2                             2

                                           γ
                       → P0 > R + E(P˜1 ) − V ar(P˜1 ) − γCov(P˜1 , Q̃)                      (5)
                                           2

Comparing Equation (4) and (5), we get


                                   α(b)UO − γV ar(P˜1 ) > 0                                  (6)


as the condition for the R-type to rent.
   As b increases, P0 decreases in equation (4) since 1) O-type agents get less utility from
owning second home, and 2) the covariance between stock value and housing price becomes
higher. Equation (6) becomes harder to hold as b increases, that is, R-type agents are less
likely to be a renter. When b is high enough to have α(b)UO − γV ar(P˜1 ) ≤ 0, R-type agents
will start to own a house. It is easy to prove the following proposition which forms the crux
of our remaining empirical work.

Proposition 1. The price-to-rent ratio rises and the (primary residence) homeownership
rate falls when there is less supply of local equity investment opportunities.

   If in fact investors suffer from local bias and invest in second homes nearby when there
is few equity investment opportunities around, we expect these low RATIO places to have
higher home prices. In Table 13, we see if this is true by regressing the price-to-rent ratio
for homes in an MSA on the MSA’s RATIO. The left-hand side variable (log PR) is the log
of price to rent ratio. log RATIO is the log ratio of the total book market value of firms
headquartered in a MSA to the income in that MSA.
   Columns (1)-(3) report the panel regression using MSA-level samples from 1990 to 2011.
Column (1) reports the univariate regression. The coefficient of interest is -0.004 with a t-
statistic of -2.709. The economic significance is -0.08 of the left-hand side variable’s standard

                                               30
deviation. This is is a sizeable effect. In Figure 2, we make a plot of this regression to show
the fitted line through the data. We see that there is a nice downward sloping relationship
between log PR and log RATIO.
   Columns (2)-(3) report the multivariate regression results. Control variables include un-
employment rate (UNEMP) and housing supply elasticity (Elasticity). The coefficient of
interest gets stronger and gets to as high as a -0.22 of economic significance. Columns (4)-
(6) report the cross-sectional regression by averaging observations across the sample period.
Column (4) reports the univariate regression. Columns (5)-(6) report the multivariate re-
gression results. The effects are stronger as before using these specifications. The coefficient
of interest from column (5) is -0.0179 with a t-statistic of -7.697. The economic significance
is now -0.39.
   Moreover, consistent with our triple difference identification strategy above, we also ex-
pect to find that high sub-prime cities with few local stocks ought to experience the biggest
price run-ups after 2002 when credit constraints got relaxed for them. There is in this pre-
diction an assumption that the easiness of credit which primarily affected housing also eased
for refinancing homes which allowed for greater liquidity to engage in other types of invest-
ments and also consumption. From Figure 3, we can see that home price appreciation pre
2007 was greatest in high subprime areas. This is controlling for income as we see that high
subprime areas with income terciles uniformly experienced greater home price appreciation
than low subprime areas. In Table 14, we then regress home price appreciation during the
periods of 1998-2005, 2002-2005 and 2002-2007, columns (1)-(3) respectively, on log RATIO,
I subprime and log RATIO*I subprime. Notice that the coefficient in front of I subprime
is positive but the interaction term is negative. So most of the home price appreciation is
occurring in low RATIO areas, that is areas where real estate is the only game in town.
   From Proposition 1, when investors invest more in second homes nearby with few equity
investment around, we also expect these low RATIO places to have lower (primary residence)
homeownership rates. In Table 15, we see if this is true by regressing the homeownership


                                              31
rate in an MSA on the MSA’s RATIO. The left-hand side variable (log HOMEOWNERSHIP
RATE) is the log of homeownership rate. We construct MSA-level homeownership rate from
the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS).7 The IPUMS consists of more than
fifty high-precision samples of the American population drawn from fifteen federal censuses
and from the American Community Surveys of 2000-2012. The data include the ownership
of dwelling, for about 2 millions household samples per year, whether the housing unit was
rented or owned by its inhabitants. Using the MSA code of the household samples which is
only available from 2005, we construct MSA-level (primary residence) homeownership rate
from 2005 to 2011 for 266 MSAs.8 Constructed homeownership rate variable shows a mean
of 68.67% and a standard deviation of 6.26.
      Panel A reports the pooled panel regression using MSA-level samples from 2005 to 2011.
Control variables include unemployment rate (UNEMP), housing supply elasticity (Elas-
ticity) and log number of population (logPOP). In column (2), the coefficient of interest
is 0.0042 with a t-statistic of 2.65. The economic significance is 0.2 of the left-hand side
variable’s standard deviation, that is 0.095. This is a sizeable effect. Panel B reports the
cross-sectional regression by averaging observations across the sample period and Panel C
reports the Fama-MacBeth regression. The results are very similar to the pooled panel
regression.



5.       Conclusion

There is now great interest in understanding the sources of fluctuations in home prices
around the world between the years of 2002 to 2007. Some argue that a toxic brew of lower
interest rates, easy credit and agency problems might have contributed to the boom and
bust patterns we saw during this time (see, e.g., Himmelberg, Mayer, and Sinai (2005),
Taylor (2009), Khandani, Lo, and Merton (2013), Mian and Sufi (2009), Keys, Mukherjee,
  7
   See Ruggles, Alexander, Genadek, Goeken, Schroeder, and Sobek (2010)
  8
   MSA-level homeownership rates are available from Census for 75 largest MSAs. Our measure of home-
ownership from the IPUMS is highly correlated to the Census for those 75 MSAs.

                                                32
Seru, and Vig (2009)). Others argue that behavioral triggers, whether they be optimistic
beliefs (see Shiller (2005), Glaeser, Gottlieb, and Gyourko (2013), Greenspan (2010), Bubb
and Kaufman (2009), Cheng, Raina, and Xiong (2013)) or momentum trading in investment
homes (Chinco and Mayer (2012), Li and Gao (2013), and Haughwout, Lee, Tracy, and
van der Klaauw (2011)) were more critical. Our paper suggests that an only-game-in-town-
effect might have exacerbated these important forces. The housing bubble came with the end
of the Internet Bubble and a period of little initial public offerings or equity supply. Whether
this was a coincidence or the lack of equity supply might have exacerbated the boom-bust
housing cycle of 2002-2007 is an interesting question for future research. More broadly,
investments in equities and investments in real estate are treated as separate endeavors by
researchers. But our analysis suggests that they are likely to be jointly determined and
understanding their interactions would significantly increase our understanding of investors’
portfolio choices and the impact of these choices on these critical financial markets.




                                              33
References

Barber, B. M., and T. Odean, 2008, “All That Glitters: The Effect of Attention and News
  on the Buying Behavior of Individual and Institutional Investors,” Review of Financial
  Studies, 21(2), 785–818.

Bubb, R., and A. Kaufman, 2009, “Securitization and Moral Hazard: Evidence from Credit
  Score Cutoff Rules,” SSRN Working Paper, pp. 1–73.

Case, K. E., and R. J. Shiller, 1989, “The Efficiency of the Market for Single-Family Homes,”
  American Economic Review, 79(1), 125–137.

Cheng, I.-H., S. Raina, and W. Xiong, 2013, “Wall Street and the Housing Bubble,” NBER
  Working Paper, pp. 1–39.

Chinco, A. M., and C. J. Mayer, 2012, “Distant Speculators and Asset Bubbles in the
  Housing Market,” NBER Working Paper, pp. 1–52.

Choi, H.-S., H. Hong, and J. Scheinkman, 2013, “Speculating on Home Improvements,”
  Journal of Financial Economics, , forthcoming.

French, K. R., and J. M. Poterba, 1991, “Investor Diversification and International Equity
  Markets,” American Economic Review, 81(2), 222–226.

Glaeser, E. L., 2007, “The Economics Approach to Cities,” NBER Working Paper, pp. 1–39.

Glaeser, E. L., J. D. Gottlieb, and J. Gyourko, 2013, “Can Cheap Credit Explain the Housing
  Boom?,” Housing and the Financial Crisis, University of Chicago Press, pp. 301–359.

Glaeser, E. L., J. Gyourko, and A. Saiz, 2008, “Housing Supply and Housing Bubbles,”
  Journal of Urban Economics, 64(2), 198–217.

Greenspan, A., 2010, “The Crisis,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, pp. 201–246.



                                             34
Grinblatt, M., and M. Keloharju, 2001, “How Distance, Language, and Culture Influence
  Stockholdings and Trades,” Journal of Finance, 56(3), 1053–1073.

Gyourko, J., and A. Saiz, 2004, “Reinvestment in the Housing Stock: the Role of Construc-
  tion Costs and the Supply Side,” Journal of Urban Economics, 55(1), 238–256.

Haughwout, A., D. Lee, J. Tracy, and W. van der Klaauw, 2011, “Real Estate Investor, the
  Leverage Cycle, and the Housing Market Crisis,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff
  Reports 514.

Himmelberg, C., C. Mayer, and T. Sinai, 2005, “Assessing High House Prices: Bubbles,
  Fundamentals and Misperceptions,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 19(4), 67–92.

Hong, H., J. D. Kubik, and J. C. Stein, 2008, “The Only Game in Town: Stock-Price
  Consequences of Local Bias,” Journal of Financial Economics, 90(1), 20–37.

Huberman, G., 2001, “Familiarity Breeds Investment,” Review of Financial Studies, 14(3),
  659–680.

Internal Revenue Service, 1992, Individual Income Tax Returns, 1990 Internal Revenue Ser-
  vice.

Kennickell, A. B., 1998, “List Sample Design for the 1998 Survey of Consumer Finances,”
  FRB Working Paper.

          , 2000, “Wealth Measurement in the Survey of Consumer Finances: Methodology
  and Directions for Future Research,” FRB Working Paper.

Kennickell, A. B., and R. L. Woodburn, 1992, “Estimation of Household Net Worth Using
  Model-Based and Design-Based Weights: Evidence from the 1989 Survey of Consumer
  Finances,” FRB Working Paper.




                                           35
Keys, B. J., T. Mukherjee, A. Seru, and V. Vig, 2009, “Financial Regulation and Securitiza-
  tion: Evidence from Subprime Mortgage Loans,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 56(5),
  700–720.

Khandani, A. E., A. W. Lo, and R. C. Merton, 2013, “Systematic Risk and the Refinancing
  Ratchet Effect,” Journal of Financial Economics, 108, 29–45.

Li, W., and Z. Gao, 2013, “Real Estate Investors and the Boom and Bust of the US Housing
  Market,” SSRN Working Paper, pp. 1–38.

Mian, A., and A. Sufi, 2009, “The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence
  from the U.S. Mortgage Default Crisis,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4),
  1449–1496.

Ruggles, S., J. T. Alexander, K. Genadek, R. Goeken, M. B. Schroeder, and M. Sobek,
  2010, “Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 5.0 [Machine-readable database],”
  Minneapolis: University of Minnesota, 2010.

Saiz, A., 2010, “The Geographic Determinants of Housing Supply,” Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 125(3), 1253–1296.

Shiller, R. J., 2005, “Irrational Exuberance, 2nd Edition,” Princeton University Press.

Sinai, T., and N. S. Souleles, 2005, “Owner-occupied Housing as a Hedge Against Rent
  Risk,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(2), 763–789.

Stein, J. C., 1995, “Prices and Trading Volume in the Housing Market: A Model with
  Down-Payment Effects,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110(2), 379–406.

Taylor, J. B., 2009, “Getting Off Track: How Government Actions and Interventions Caused,
  Prolonged, and Worsened the Financial Crisis,” Hoover Institution Press.




                                            36
Wilson, O. H., and J. William J. Smith, 1983, “Access to Tax Records for Statistical Pur-
  poses,” Proceedings of the Section on Survey Research Methods, American Statistical As-
  sociation, pp. 595–601.




                                           37
                   Table 1: Investment and Vacation Home Purchase

Panel A reports the share of home sales by intended use from the Investment and Vacation Home Buyers
Survey by the National Association of Realtors. Panel B reports the distance of second homes from primary
residence from the Investment and Vacation Home Buyers Survey.

  Panel A : Share of Home Sales by Intended Use

                       Primary Residences (%)     Vacation Properties (%)   Investment Properties (%)

  2003                            67                        12                          22
  2004                            64                        11                          25
  2005                            60                        12                          28
  2006                            64                        14                          22
  2007                            67                        12                          21
  2008                            70                         9                          21
  2009                            73                        10                          17
  2010                            73                        10                          17
  2011                            61                        11                          27

  Panel B : Distance from Primary Residence

                       Primary Residences (%)     Vacation Properties (%)   Investment Properties (%)

  5 miles or less                  -                         2                          17
  6 to 10 miles                    -                         3                           9
  11 to 15 miles                   -                         2                          12
  16 to 20 miles                   -                         4                          10
  21 to 50 miles                   -                        10                          13
  51 to 100 miles                  -                        14                          10
  101 to 500 miles                 -                        27                          10
  501 to 1000 miles                -                        11                           7
  1001 miles or more               -                        26                          13
  Median(miles)                    -                        305                         25




                                                   38
                                          Table 2: Summary Statistics
We report the summary statistics of the Survey of Consumer Finance for 1995, 1998, 2001, 2004, 2007,
and 2010 waves. % INVESTMENT REAL ESTATE IN TOTAL ASSETS is the fraction of investment real
estate in household’s total asset. % INVESTMENT REAL ESTATE IN REAL ESTATE ASSETS is the
fraction of investment real estate in household’s total real estate asset. % VACATION HOME IN TOTAL
ASSETS is the fraction of vacation home in household’s total asset. % DIRECTLY-HELD STOCKS IN
TOTAL ASSETS is the fraction of stock holdings in household’s total asset. HAVE INVESTMENT REAL
ESTATE is the dummy variable for having investment real estate. HAVE VACATION HOME is the dummy
variable for having vacation home. HAVE DIRECTLY-HELD STOCKS is the dummy variable for having
directly-held stocks. Log RATIO is the log ratio of the total book market value of firms headquartered in
a MSA to the income in that MSA. UNEMP is unemployment rate from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
HOME PRICE INDEX is the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA) Housing Price Index at the MSA
level. PAST PRICE APPRECIATION is the annual past home price appreciation in an MSA using the
                                       It −HP It−1
FHFA House Price Index, where HP HP        It−1    . Elasticity is the housing supply elasticity by MSA from
Saiz (2010). Housing Affordability Index Backfilled is the Housing Affordability Index from the National
Association of Realtors. Since the index is available only for 2009 to 2011, we backfilled the data using
time-series average of available Housing Affordability Index. FAMILY SIZE is the number of people in
each Primary Economic Unit. Log HOUSEHOLD INCOME is the log of household income. AGE, RACE,
EDUCATION, and FAMILY STRUCTURE are reported. LWP stands for the ”living with partner” in
the FAMILY STRUCTURE variable. NET WORTH CATEGORY is the dummy variable on quintiles for
household net worth amount. We report summary statistics for each group. UNATTACHED FEMALE is
the gender variable for Primary Economic Unit head, which is equal to 1 for un-partnered females and zero
for everybody else.

 Variable                                                                          Obs      Mean       Std.        Max          Min

 % INVESTMENT REAL ESTATE IN TOTAL ASSETS                                         110890    0.03       0.09         1.00          0
 % INVESTMENT REAL ESTATE IN REAL ESTATE ASSETS                                    82878    0.08       0.20            1          0
 % VACATION HOME IN TOTAL ASSETS                                                  110890    0.01       0.04         0.87          0
 % DIRECTLY-HELD STOCKS IN TOTAL ASSETS                                           108327    0.02       0.08            1          0
 HAVE INVESTMENT REAL ESTATE                                                      110890    0.13       0.34            1          0
 HAVE VACATION HOME                                                               110890    0.06       0.23            1          0
 HAVE DIRECTLY-HELD STOCKS                                                        110890    0.21       0.40            1          0

 log RATIO                                                                        110890    -1.53      1.29         0.97      -7.34
 UNEMP                                                                            110890    5.54       2.25        14.33       1.75
 HOME PRICE INDEX                                                                 110890     160      52.09          323        100
 PAST PRICE APPRECIATION                                                          110890     0.04      0.06         0.29      -0.13
 Elasticity                                                                       108235    1.59       0.84         5.36       0.63
 Housing Affordability Index Backfilled                                            99820     122      55.68          383      51.17

 FAMILY SIZE                                                                      110890    2.43       1.40        13.00          1
 log HOUSEHOLD INCOME                                                             110890    10.84      1.11        19.64          0

 AGE                           <35                                                110890     0.23       0.42           1          0
                               35 – 49                                            110890     0.33       0.47           1          0
                               50 – 64                                            110890     0.24       0.43           1          0
                               ≥65                                                110890     0.20       0.40           1          0
 RACE                          White                                              110890     0.73       0.44           1          0
                               Black                                              110890     0.14       0.35           1          0
                               Hispanic                                           110890     0.09       0.29           1          0
                               Asian & Other                                      110890     0.04       0.20           1          0
 EDUCATION                     Less than High School                              110890     0.13       0.34           1          0
                               High School or GED only                            110890     0.29       0.45           1          0
                               Some college (or Associate’s), but no Bachelor’s   110890     0.25       0.43           1          0
                               Bachelor’s                                         110890     0.20       0.40           1          0
                               MA or MS(non-MBA), plus nursing degree             110890     0.07       0.26           1          0
                               Advanced (PhD, JD, MBA, MD)                        110890     0.06       0.24           1          0
 FAMILY STRUCTURE              Not Married/LWP+Children                           110890     0.12       0.32           1          0
                               Not Married/LWP+no Children+Head(<55)              110890     0.16       0.37           1          0
                               Not Married/LWP+no Children+Head(≥55)              110890     0.13       0.34           1          0
                               Married/LWP+Children                               110890     0.32       0.47           1          0
                               Married/LWP+no Children                            110890     0.26       0.44           1          0
 NET WORTH                     CATEGORY 1/5 (Bottom)                              110890    -4018      39137       15685   -2.74e+07
                               CATEGORY 2/5                                       110890    49427      26695      126363        8298
                               CATEGORY 3/5                                       110890   193224      72139      390303       77280
                               CATEGORY 4/5                                       110890   521158     173824      959610      227826
                               CATEGORY 5/5 (Top)                                 110890   3472319   1.05e+07   4.80e+09      539836
 UNATTACHED FEMALE                                          39                    110890     0.27       0.44           1           0
  Table 3: Investment Real Estate, Vacation Homes, and Directly-held Stocks
                Ownership in the Survey of Consumer Finances
We report the household-level Logit regression results of investment home ownership, vacation home own-
ership, and directly-held stocks ownership on log RATIO. Column (1) reports the Logit regression result of
investment real estate ownership (HAVE INVESTMENT REAL ESTATE) on log RATIO with household-
level and MSA-level control variables. Household level control variables include EDUCATION, FAMILY
STRUCTURE, RACE, UNATTACHED FEMALE, AGE, NET WORTH CATEGORY, FAMILY SIZE, and
log HOUSEHOLD INCOME. MSA-level control variables include unemployment rate (UNEMP), HOME
PRICE INDEX, Housing Affordability Index Backfilled, Elasticity, and PAST PRICE APPRECIATION.
Column (2) reports the Logit regression result of vacation home ownership (HAVE VACATION HOME) on
log RATIO with controls. Column (3) reports the Logit regression result of directly-held stock ownership
(HAVE DIRECTLY-HELD STOCKS) on log RATIO with controls. EDUCATION, FAMILY STRUCTURE,
and RACE are not reported for brevity. The entries in the brackets are the marginal probabilities that
household does not own the asset. The table reports point estimates with t-statistics in parentheses. All the
standard errors are clustered by MSA. ***, **, * denotes 1%, 5%, and 10% statistical significance.
                                                    (1)              (2)                  (3)
    Variables                                HAVE INVESTMENT   HAVE VACATION      HAVE DIRECTLY-HELD
                                               REAL ESTATE         HOME                 STOCKS

    log RATIO                                    -0.0920**          -0.0295              0.0776***
                                                   (-2.520)         (-0.605)               (3.452)
                                                  [-0.0087]        [-0.0015]               [0.0098]
    Elasticity                                      0.0844          -0.0692                -0.0124
                                                    (1.365)         (-0.774)               (-0.204)
                                                    [0.008]        [-0.0035]              [-0.0016]
    UNEMP                                         -0.00582        -0.124***                -0.0177
                                                   (-0.185)         (-2.795)               (-0.579)
                                                  [-0.0006]        [-0.0062]              [-0.0022]
    HOME PRICE INDEX                             -0.000703        -0.000937               -0.00153
                                                   (-0.540)         (-0.558)               (-1.049)
                                                 [-0.00007]       [-0.00005]             [-0.00019]
    PAST PRICE APPRECIATION                          -0.527           -0.647                 -0.742
                                                   (-0.750)         (-0.846)               (-0.959)
                                                 [-0.05001]        [-0.0324]              [-0.0936]
    Housing Affordability Index Backfilled        0.000560         0.000482               0.000596
                                                    (0.596)          (0.754)                (1.487)
                                                  [0.00005]        [0.00002]              [0.00008]
    UNATTACHED FEMALE                             -0.293**             0.321             -0.231***
                                                   (-2.499)          (1.607)               (-2.938)
                                                  [-0.0278]         [0.0161]              [-0.0291]
    FAMILY SIZE                                     0.0638            -0.209                 -0.121
                                                    (0.389)         (-1.322)               (-0.893)
                                                  [0.00604]        [-0.0105]              [-0.0153]
    FAMILY SIZE2                                  -0.00969           0.0202                0.00338
                                                   (-0.544)          (1.070)                (0.197)
                                                  [-0.0009]          [0.001]               [0.0004]
    log HOUSEHOLD INCOME                          0.252***         0.432***               0.382***
                                                    (6.334)          (9.247)                (8.180)
                                                   [0.0239]         [0.0216]               [0.0482]
    NET WORTH CATEGORY (2/5)                      1.732***         1.255***               0.734***
                                                    (7.804)          (4.014)                (5.838)
                                                   [0.1643]         [0.0629]               [0.0927]
    NET WORTH CATEGORY (3/5)                      2.531***         1.878***               1.376***
                                                    (11.19)          (6.808)                (13.01)
                                                   [0.2401]          [0.094]               [0.1736]
    NET WORTH CATEGORY (4/5)                      3.370***         2.360***               2.066***
                                                    (14.53)          (7.658)                (17.21)
                                                   [0.3198]         [0.1182]               [0.2606]
    NET WORTH CATEGORY (5/5)                      4.224***         2.773***               2.669***
                                                    (17.56)          (8.278)                (16.27)
                                                   [0.4007]         [0.1389]               [0.3368]
    Constant                                     -7.830***        -10.11***              -6.983***
                                                   (-14.52)         (-14.01)               (-11.32)

    Observations                                  99,255            99,255            99,255
    R2                                             0.206            0.166              0.229
    Additional Demographic Controls               EDUCATION, RACE, FAMILY STRUCTURE, and AGE
    Year FE                                         Yes 40           Yes                Yes
          Table 4: % Share of Investment Real Estate, Vacation Homes, and
              Directly-held Stocks in the Survey of Consumer Finances
We report the household-level Tobit regression results of % share of investment real estate, vacation home,
and stock holdings in households’ asset on log RATIO. Column (1) reports the Tobit regression result of %
share of investment real estate in total assets (% INVESTMENT REAL ESTATE IN TOTAL ASSETS) on
log RATIO with household-level and MSA-level control variables. Household level control variables include
EDUCATION, FAMILY STRUCTURE, RACE, AGE, UNATTACHED FEMALE, FAMILY SIZE, NET
WORTH CATEGORY, and log HOUSEHOLD INCOME. MSA-level control variables include unemploy-
ment rate (UNEMP), HOME PRICE INDEX, Housing Affordability Index Backfilled, Elasticity, and PAST
PRICE APPRECIATION. Column (2) reports the Tobit regression result of % share of investment real
estate in total real estate assets (% INVESTMENT REAL ESTATE IN REAL ESTATE ASSETS) on log
RATIO with controls. Column (3) reports the Tobit regression result of % share of vacation home in total
assets (% VACATION HOME IN TOTAL ASSETS) on log RATIO with controls. Column (4) reports the
Tobit regression result of % directly-held stocks in total assets (%DIRECTLY-HELD STOCKS IN TOTAL
ASSETS) on log RATIO with controls. EDUCATION, FAMILY STRUCTURE, AGE, RACE, and year
FE are not reported for brevity. The table reports point estimates with t-statistics in parentheses. All the
standard errors are clustered by MSA. ***, **, * denotes 1%, 5%, and 10% statistical significance.

                                                (1)                    (2)           (3)              (4)
                                          % INVESTMENT          % INVESTMENT     % VACATION    % DIRECTLY-HELD
                                           REAL ESTATE           REAL ESTATE        HOME            STOCKS
                                                IN                  IN REAL          IN               IN
 Variables                                TOTAL ASSETS          ESTATE ASSETS   TOTAL ASSETS    TOTAL ASSETS

 log RATIO                                   -0.0107*              -0.0167         -0.00151        0.00781**
                                             (-1.652)              (-1.249)        (-0.299)         (2.343)
 Econ Sig                                      -0.15                 -0.11           -0.05            0.13

 Elasticity                                   0.0102                 0.0198         -0.00419        0.00150
                                              (0.962)               (0.850)         (-0.495)         (0.265)
 UNEMP                                      0.000377                0.00196       -0.0119***       -0.000717
                                             (0.0761)               (0.179)         (-3.158)        (-0.246)
 HOME PRICE INDEX                           0.000177               0.000233        -4.82e-05       -0.000101
                                              (0.787)               (0.482)         (-0.298)        (-0.807)
 PAST PRICE APPRECIATION                      -0.0501               -0.0821          -0.0369        -0.00572
                                             (-0.579)               (-0.451)        (-0.521)       (-0.0986)
 Housing Affordability Index Backfilled      6.04e-05              -2.16e-05        4.89e-05        6.36e-05
                                              (0.276)              (-0.0492)         (0.573)         (0.751)
 UNATTACHED FEMALE                           -0.0301*             -0.0891***          0.0168      -0.0194***
                                             (-1.816)               (-2.963)         (1.263)        (-2.836)
 FAMILY SIZE                                 -0.00505               -0.0152          -0.0158        -0.0181*
                                             (-0.252)               (-0.444)        (-1.185)        (-1.856)
 FAMILY SIZE2                               0.000483                0.00118          0.00120         0.00102
                                              (0.213)               (0.306)          (0.749)         (0.865)
 log HOUSEHOLD INCOME                        -0.00249              -0.000351       -0.00846*      0.0140***
                                             (-0.493)              (-0.0318)        (-1.693)         (3.421)
 NET WORTH CATEGORY (2/5)                   0.190***                 0.0603        0.0929***       0.0533***
                                              (5.806)               (1.214)          (4.359)         (4.763)
 NET WORTH CATEGORY (3/5)                   0.276***               0.122***        0.129***       0.0944***
                                              (7.571)               (2.600)          (6.074)         (8.064)
 NET WORTH CATEGORY (4/5)                   0.355***               0.258***        0.152***         0.134***
                                              (8.069)               (4.598)          (6.265)         (8.697)
 NET WORTH CATEGORY (5/5)                   0.406***               0.391***         0.135***        0.179***
                                              (7.166)               (5.965)          (4.350)         (8.598)
 Constant                                   -0.488***               -0.425*         -0.236**       -0.316***
                                             (-4.176)               (-1.950)        (-2.457)        (-4.606)

 Observations                                99,255              74,263          99,255           96,900
 Additional Demographic Controls                        EDUCATION, RACE, FAMILY STRUCTURE, and AGE
 Year FE                                       Yes                 Yes            Yes              Yes




                                                           41
                                 Table 5: SCF Results by Zip-code Income and by MSA Subprime Share

     Panel A reports the regression results with the indicator variables for high income zip-code, the dummy variable for post year 2002, and their
     interactions. I High Income Zipcode is an indicator variable for the top 1/3 zip-code in terms of average zip-code income, measured by the American
     Community Survey from 2006 to 2010. I after2002 is an indicator variable for the years after 2002. Column (1) reports the household-level regression
     of investment home ownership (HAVE INVESTMENT REAL ESTATE) on log RATIO with interactions with the indicator variable for high income
     zip-code and the dummy variable for post year 2002, with household-level and MSA-level control variables. Household level control variables include
     EDUCATION, FAMILY STRUCTURE, RACE, UNATTACHED FEMALE, AGE, NET WORTH CATEGORY, and FAMILY SIZE. MSA-level control
     variables include unemployment rate (UNEMP) and PAST PRICE APPRECIATION. Column (2) reports the household-level Tobit regression of %
     share of investment real estate in total assets (% INVESTMENT REAL ESTATE IN TOTAL ASSETS) on log RATIO with interactions with the
     indicator variable for high income zip-code and the dummy variable for post year 2002, with household-level and MSA-level control variables. Panel
     B reports the regression results with the indicator variables for high subprime MSAs, the dummy variable for post year 2002, and their interactions.
     I Subprime MSA is an indicator variable for the top 1/3 MSAs in terms of average subprime mortgage share among total mortgage origination from
     2002 to 2007. Column (1) reports the household-level regression of HAVE INVESTMENT REAL ESTATE on log RATIO with interactions with the
     indicator variable for high subprime MSA and the dummy variable for post year 2002, with household-level and MSA-level control variables. Column
     (2) reports the household-level Tobit regression of % INVESTMENT REAL ESTATE IN TOTAL ASSETS on log RATIO with interactions with
     the indicator variable for high subprime MSA and the dummy variable for post year 2002, with household-level and MSA-level control variables.
     Some controls are not reported for brevity. The table reports point estimates with t-statistics in parentheses. All the standard errors in columns are
     clustered by MSA. ***, **, * denotes 1%, 5%, and 10% statistical significance.
42




      Panel A: By Zip-Code Income                                                        Panel B: By MSA Subprime Share
                                                            (1)             (2)                                                         (1)             (2)
                                                           HAVE       % INVESTMENT                                                     HAVE       % INVESTMENT
                                                        INVESTMENT     REAL ESTATE                                                  INVESTMENT     REAL ESTATE
                                                           REAL             IN                                                         REAL             IN
      Variables                                           ESTATE      TOTAL ASSETS       Variables                                    ESTATE      TOTAL ASSETS

      log RATIO * I High Income Zipcode * I after2002       0.0107         0.00152       log RATIO * I Subprime MSA * I after2002    -0.0228***       -0.00445**
                                                           (1.114)         (0.578)                                                     (-3.188)         (-2.181)
      log RATIO                                           -0.00373       -0.000490       log RATIO                                    -0.0127**       -0.00259**
                                                           (-0.691)       (-0.427)                                                     (-2.424)         (-2.447)
      log RATIO * I High Income Zipcode                   -0.00623        -0.00181       log RATIO * I Subprime MSA                     0.0125          0.00238
                                                           (-0.996)       (-0.974)                                                     (1.395)          (1.530)
      log RATIO * I after2002                             -0.00964        -0.00209       log RATIO * I after2002                       0.00576         0.000615
                                                           (-1.337)       (-1.039)                                                     (0.980)          (0.446)
      I High Income Zipcode * I after2002                 0.0356**         0.00744       I Subprime MSA * I after2002                -0.0373***        -0.00660
                                                           (2.043)         (1.527)                                                     (-2.637)         (-1.628)
      I High Income Zipcode                              -0.0352***     -0.00963***      I Subprime MSA                                 0.0225          0.00467
                                                           (-2.805)       (-2.814)                                                     (1.043)          (1.332)
      I after2002                                         -0.00866        -0.00243       I after2002                                  0.0311***        0.00574*
                                                           (-0.652)       (-0.589)                                                     (2.812)          (1.898)
      Constant                                              0.0233        0.000897       Constant                                      0.00394         -0.00342
                                                           (0.857)         (0.107)                                                     (0.134)          (-0.403)

      Observations                                        111,375        111,375         Observations                                 111,375          111,375
      R2                                                   0.164          0.066          R2                                            0.164            0.066
                     Table 6: SCF Results by County Subprime Share

We report the regression results with the indicator variables for high subprime counties, the dummy variable
for post year 2002, and their interactions. I Subprime County is an indicator variable for the top 1/3
counties (within MSAs) in terms of average subprime mortgage share among total mortgage origination
from 2002 to 2007. Column (1) reports the household-level regression of HAVE INVESTMENT REAL
ESTATE on log RATIO with interactions with the indicator variable for high subprime county and the
dummy variable for post year 2002, with household-level and MSA-level control variables. Household level
control variables include EDUCATION, FAMILY STRUCTURE, RACE, UNATTACHED FEMALE, AGE,
NET WORTH CATEGORY, and FAMILY SIZE. MSA-level control variables include unemployment rate
(UNEMP) and PAST PRICE APPRECIATION. Column (2) reports the household-level Tobit regression of
% INVESTMENT REAL ESTATE IN TOTAL ASSETS on log RATIO with interactions with the indicator
variable for high subprime county and the dummy variable for post year 2002, with household-level and
MSA-level control variables. Some controls are not reported for brevity. The table reports point estimates
with t-statistics in parentheses. All the standard errors in columns are clustered by MSA. ***, **, * denotes
1%, 5%, and 10% statistical significance.

                                                           (1)                     (2)
                                                    HAVE INVESTMENT     % INVESTMENT REAL ESTATE
      Variables                                       REAL ESTATE            IN TOTAL ASSETS

      log RATIO * I Subprime County * I after2002        -0.0256**                -0.00636**
                                                          (-2.516)                  (-2.195)
      log RATIO                                           -0.00460                  -0.00112
                                                          (-0.836)                  (-1.065)
      log RATIO * I Subprime County                       0.0239**                0.00503***
                                                           (2.442)                   (2.905)
      log RATIO * I after2002                             -0.00175                 -0.000909
                                                          (-0.287)                  (-0.670)
      I Subprime County * I after2002                    -0.0470**                  -0.00455
                                                          (-2.314)                  (-0.563)
      I Subprime County                                   0.0465*                   0.00739*
                                                           (1.955)                   (1.710)
      I after2002                                         -0.00344                0.00557**
                                                          (-0.337)                   (2.279)
      Constant                                          -0.0753***                  -0.00300
                                                          (-2.635)                  (-0.363)

      Observations                                         111,456                  111,456
      R2                                                    0.061                    0.020




                                                      43
                                                          Table 7: Summary Statistics

     We report the summary statistics of MSA-level variables. NON-OWNER OCCUPIED HOME PURCHASE AMTO is the amount of non-owner
     occupied mortgage originations for home purchase in an MSA from the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA). TOTAL HOME PURCHASE
     AMTO is the total amount of mortgage originations for home purchase in an MSA from the HMDA. %NON-OCCUPIED MORTGAGES is the ratio
     of NON-OWNER OCCUPIED HOME PURCHASE AMTO to TOTAL HOME PURCHASE AMTO. Log RATIO is the log ratio of the total book
     value of firms headquartered in a MSA to the income in that MSA as in Hong, Kubik, and Stein (2008). Due to the MSAs with RATIO equal to
     zero, we add 0.00001 to RATIO before we take log. BOOK PER CAPITA is the per capita book value of firms headquartered in a MSA from the
     COMPUSTAT. INCOME PER CAPITA is the per capita income from the Bureau of Economic Analysis. PAST PRICE APPRECIATION is the
     annual home price appreciation from Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA). logPOP is the log number of population from the BEA. UNEMP is
     unemployment rate from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Housing supply elasticity (Elasticity) is from Saiz (2010). Housing Affordability Index is
     from the National Association of Realtors and is available from 2009 to 2011. Log PR is the log of price to rent ratio using the FHFA home price
     index and the fair market rent from the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.

                       Variables                                                            Obs    Mean      Std     Max       Min
44




                       NON-OWNER OCCUPIED HOME PURCHASE AMTO (millions)                     5082     198     603     11845        1
                       TOTAL HOME PURCHASE AMTO (millions)                                  5082    1670    5244     84397        7
                       %NON-OCCUPIED MORTGAGES                                              5082    0.14     0.1      0.89     0.01

                       log RATIO                                                            5082   -6.33     4.68     2.4    -11.51
                       BOOK PER CAPITA                                                      5082    5355    16474   254821        0
                       INCOME PER CAPITA                                                    5082   31463    7222    80139    12723

                       PAST PRICE APPRECIATION (%)                                          5079     3.18    6.65     34.8    -37.9
                       logPOP                                                               5082    12.63    1.06    16.76    10.75
                       UNEMP                                                                5082     5.92    2.78    30.06     1.23
                       Elasticity                                                           3920     2.52    1.42    12.15     0.63
                       Housing Affordability Index                                          444    130.60   38.83    383.4     35.1
                       log PR                                                               8684     -1.5    0.23    -0.71     -2.4
                                   Table 8: Baseline Regressions

We report the baseline regression results of the non-owner-occupied mortgage originations on RATIO. Left-
hand side variable (log %NON-OCCUPIED MORTGAGES) is the log ratio of non-owner-occupied mortgage
originations for home purchase to total mortgage origination for home purchase. Log RATIO is the log ratio
of the total book market value of firms headquartered in a MSA to the income in that MSA. Due to the
MSAs with RATIO equal to zero, we add 0.00001 to RATIO before we take log. Columns (1)-(3) report the
panel regression using MSA-level samples from 1998 to 2011. Column (1) reports the univariate regression.
Columns (2)-(3) report the multivariate regression results. Controls include unemployment rate (UNEMP)
and housing supply elasticity (Elasticity) from Saiz (2010). Columns (4)-(6) report the cross-sectional
regression by averaging observations across the sample period. Column (4) reports the univariate regression.
Columns (5)-(6) report the multivariate regression results. The table reports point estimates with t-statistics
in parentheses. All the standard errors in columns (1)-(3) are clustered by MSA. ***, **, * denotes 1%, 5%,
and 10% statistical significance.

                          (1)          (2)          (3)       (4)      (5)                        (6)
    Variables                                log %NON-OCCUPIED MORTGAGES

    log RATIO         -0.0366***   -0.0328***    -0.0401***     -0.0603***     -0.0523***      -0.0526***
                        (-7.481)     (-6.624)      (-5.869)       (-4.406)       (-3.680)        (-2.849)
    Econ Sig              -0.28        -0.25         -0.29          -0.23          -0.20           -0.18

    UNEMP                            0.0112        0.00299                      0.0243**         0.0277*
                                     (1.382)       (0.338)                       (1.984)         (1.844)
    Elasticity                                   -0.0813***                                    -0.0591***
                                                   (-3.861)                                      (-2.839)
    Constant          -2.365***     -2.900***     -2.700***     -2.691***       -2.766***       -2.673***
                       (-66.02)      (-59.67)      (-34.21)      (-21.68)        (-21.40)        (-17.44)

    Observations        5,082         5,082        3,920           363            363             280
    Adj R2              0.078         0.304        0.325          0.048          0.056           0.072
    Year FE              No            Yes          Yes            No             No              No
    Sample Period     1998-2011     1998-2011    1998-2011     Average CX     Average CX      Average CX
    Area Unit           MSA           MSA          MSA            MSA            MSA             MSA




                                                      45
                               Table 9: Decomposing the RATIO

We report the regression results decomposing the RATIO variable. Left-hand side variable (log %NON-
OCCUPIED MORTGAGES) is the log ratio of non-owner-occupied mortgage originations for home purchase
to total mortgage origination for home purchase. Right-hand side variables are the log of book value per
capita (log BOOK PER CAPITA) and the log of per capital income (log INCOME PER CAPITA). For
the MSAs with BOOK PER CAPITA equal to zero, we assign one dollar of total book value to the MSAs
before we take log. Columns (1)-(2) report the panel regression using MSA-level samples from 1998 to 2011.
Control variables include unemployment rate (UNEMP) and housing supply elasticity from Saiz (2010).
Columns (3)-(4) report the cross-sectional regression by averaging observations across the sample period.
The table reports point estimates with t-statistics in parentheses. All the standard errors in columns (1)-(2)
are clustered by MSA. ***, **, * denotes 1%, 5%, and 10% statistical significance.

                                               (1)           (2)      (3)      (4)
           Variables                                 log %NON-OCCUPIED MORTGAGES

           log BOOK PER CAPITA             -0.0129***       -0.0147***   -0.0159***   -0.0186***
                                             (-4.549)         (-4.046)     (-4.812)     (-4.595)
           Econ Sig                            -0.21            -0.22        -0.28        -0.30

           log INCOME PER CAPITA             -0.217          -0.536**      -0.212      -0.567***
                                            (-1.015)         (-2.189)     (-1.185)      (-2.678)
           Econ Sig                           -0.08            -0.19        -0.07         -0.19

           UNEMP                             0.00774         -0.00967      0.0128       -0.00446
                                             (0.795)          (-0.852)     (1.047)      (-0.289)
           Elasticity                                       -0.0989***                 -0.101***
                                                              (-4.487)                  (-4.688)
           Constant                          -0.500             3.051      -0.0623       3.909*
                                            (-0.230)          (1.217)     (-0.0338)      (1.770)

           Observations                      5,082            3,920          363          280
           Adj R2                            0.298            0.326         0.110        0.163
           Year FE                            Yes              Yes           No           No
           Sample Period                   1998-2011        1998-2011    Average CX   Average CX
           Area Unit                         MSA              MSA           MSA          MSA




                                                       46
                                                             Table 10: Robustness Check

     We report robustness checks for the baseline regression. Left-hand side variable (log %NON-OCCUPIED MORTGAGES) is the log ratio of non-
     owner-occupied mortgage originations for home purchase to total mortgage origination for home purchase. Log RATIO is the log ratio of the total
     book market value of firms headquartered in a MSA to the income in that MSA. Due to the MSAs with RATIO equal to zero, we add 0.00001 to
     RATIO before we take log. Column (1) reports the regression result with log number of population (logPOP) and other control variables. Control
     variables include unemployment rate (UNEMP) and housing supply elasticity (Elasticity) from Saiz (2010). Column (2) reports the regression result
     without vacation MSAs. Vacation MSAs are the popular vacation home areas listed from CNBC, Barron, and Forbes. Column (3) reports the
                                                                                                                      −HP It
     regression result with the future annual home price appreciation (FUTURE PRICE APPRECIATION), where HP It+1   HP It     . Column (4) reports the
                                                                                                                 It −HP It−1
     regression result with the past annual home price appreciation (PAST PRICE APPRECIATION), where HP HP           It−1    . In column (5)-(8), we control
     the Housing Affordability Index from the National Association of Realtors. In column (5)-(6), we control the Housing Affordability Index which is
     available from 2009 to 2011. In columns (7)-(8), we control for the Housing Affordability Index Backfilled, which is the time-series average of the
     Housing Affordability Index for 1998 to 2011 period. The table reports point estimates with t-statistics in parentheses. All the standard errors are
     clustered by MSA. ***, **, * denotes 1%, 5%, and 10% statistical significance.

                                                    (1)          (2)           (3)        (4)       (5)     (6)                       (7)           (8)
      Variables                                                                   log %NON-OCCUPIED MORTGAGES

      log RATIO                                 -0.0275***   -0.0391***    -0.0396***    -0.524***    -0.0304***    -0.0443***    -0.0301***    -0.0466***
47




                                                  (-3.833)     (-6.048)      (-5.873)     (-4.077)      (-3.184)      (-3.458)      (-3.582)      (-4.152)
      Econ Sig                                     -0.210        -0.30         -0.29        -0.22         -0.22         -0.28         -0.19         -0.26

      logPOP                                    -0.107***
                                                 (-3.609)
      FUTURE PRICE APPRECIATION                                             1.256***
                                                                             (6.165)
      PAST PRICE APPRECIATION                                                            1.072***
                                                                                          (4.386)
      Housing Affordability Index                                                                     -0.00309***    -0.00192
                                                                                                        (-2.941)     (-1.360)
      Housing Affordability Index Backfilled                                                                                      -0.00226***     -0.00106
                                                                                                                                    (-2.641)      (-0.914)
      Elasticity                                -0.107***    -0.0584***    -0.0763***   -0.0533***                    -0.0714                    -0.101***
                                                 (-4.261)      (-3.004)      (-3.763)     (-2.794)                    (-1.639)                    (-2.700)
      UNEMP                                      0.00707       -0.00228      0.00762     0.0236**      0.0791***     0.0592**        0.0206      -0.000886
                                                 (0.772)       (-0.272)      (0.849)      (2.460)       (3.788)       (2.579)       (1.146)      (-0.0431)
      Constant                                  -1.226***     -2.773***     -2.778***    -2.660***     -2.462***     -2.302***     -2.700***     -2.586***
                                                 (-2.844)      (-35.78)      (-34.92)     (-29.44)      (-11.73)      (-10.28)      (-21.78)      (-18.33)

      Observations                                3,920        3,584         3,920        3,920           444           417          2,156         2,030
      Adj R2                                      0.346        0.350         0.334        0.302          0.156         0.169         0.316         0.349
      Year FE                                      Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
      Sample Period                             1998-2011    1998-2011     1998-2011    1998-2011      2009-2011     2009-2011     1998-2011     1998-2011
      Area Unit                                   MSA          MSA           MSA          MSA            MSA           MSA           MSA           MSA
                           Table 11: Owner-Occupied Originations

We report the regression results of the owner-occupied mortgage originations on RATIO. Left-hand side vari-
able (log OWNER OCCUPIED MORTGAGES) is the log amount of owner-occupied mortgage originations
for home purchase. Log RATIO is the log ratio of the total book market value of firms headquartered in a
MSA to the income in that MSA. Due to the MSAs with RATIO equal to zero, we add 0.00001 to RATIO
before we take log. Columns (1)-(3) report the panel regression using MSA-level samples from 1998 to 2011.
Column (1) reports the univariate regression. Columns (2)-(3) report the multivariate regression results.
Control variables include the log amount of total mortgage originations for home purchase (logAMTO),
unemployment rate (UNEMP), and housing supply elasticity (Elasticity) from Saiz (2010). Columns (4)-(6)
report the cross-sectional regression by averaging observations across the sample period. Column (4) reports
the univariate regression. Columns (5)-(6) report the multivariate regression results. The table reports point
estimates with t-statistics in parentheses. All the standard errors in columns (1)-(3) are clustered by MSA.
***, **, * denotes 1%, 5%, and 10% statistical significance.

                          (1)          (2)          (3)       (4)      (5)                       (6)
     Variables                               log OWNER OCCUPIED MORTGAGES

     log RATIO         0.172***    0.0100***     0.0106***     0.299***       0.0140***      0.0151***
                        (14.39)     (4.311)       (3.324)       (8.365)        (3.292)        (2.833)
     Econ Sig            0.55         0.03          0.03         0.40            0.02           0.02

     logAMTO                        0.980***     0.992***                     0.991***        1.005***
                                     (139.4)       (151.0)                     (178.1)         (137.4)
     UNEMP                          -0.00497*     -0.00279                   -0.00700**       -0.00641
                                     (-1.775)     (-0.953)                     (-2.055)       (-1.497)
     Elasticity                                  0.0214***                                   0.0228***
                                                   (3.697)                                     (3.302)
     Constant          13.77***      0.245**       0.0203      15.44***         0.114           -0.109
                        (123.6)      (2.384)       (0.210)      (47.59)        (1.223)        (-0.865)

     Observations       5,082        5,082         3,920         363             363            280
     Adj R2             0.302        0.991         0.991        0.160           0.991          0.990
     Year FE             No           Yes           Yes          No              No             No
     Sample Period    1998-2011    1998-2011     1998-2011   Average CX      Average CX     Average CX
     Area Unit          MSA          MSA           MSA          MSA             MSA            MSA




                                                     48
                               Table 12: HMDA Results by MSA Income and by MSA Subprime Share

     We report the regression results of non-owner-occupied mortgage originations on RATIO with interactions with the indicator variable for high income
     MSAs/high subprime share MSAs and the dummy variable for post year 2002. Left-hand side variable (log %NON-OCCUPIED MORTGAGES) is
     the log ratio of non-owner-occupied mortgage originations for home purchase to total mortgage origination for home purchase. Log RATIO is the log
     ratio of the total book market value of firms headquartered in a MSA to the income in that MSA. Due to the MSAs with RATIO equal to zero, we
     add 0.00001 to RATIO before we take log. In panel A, we report the regression results with the indicator variables for high income MSA, the dummy
     variable for post year 2002, and their interactions. I High Income MSA is an indicator variable for the top 1/3 MSAs in terms of average income per
     capita from 1998 to 2011. I after2002 is an indicator variable for the years after 2002. In panel B, we report the regression results with the indicator
     variables for high subprime share MSAs, the dummy variable for post year 2002, and their interactions. I Subprime MSA is an indicator variable
     for the top 1/3 MSAs in terms of average subprime mortgage share among total mortgage origination from 2002 to 2007. I after2002 is an indicator
     variable for the years after 2002. We also control variables include unemployment rate (UNEMP) and housing supply elasticity (Elasticity) from Saiz
     (2010). The table reports point estimates with t-statistics in parentheses. All the standard errors in columns are clustered by MSA. ***, **, * denotes
     1%, 5%, and 10% statistical significance.

              Panel A: By MSA per capita Income                                      Panel B: By MSA Subprime Share
                                                                    (1)                                                                 (2)
                                                            log %NON-OCCUPIED                                                   log %NON-OCCUPIED
              Variables                                         MORTGAGES            Variables                                      MORTGAGES
49




              log RATIO * I High Income MSA * I after2002         0.0325**           log RATIO * I Subprime MSA * I after2002         -0.0131*
                                                                   (2.012)                                                            (-1.692)
              log RATIO                                          -0.0196**           log RATIO                                      -0.0475***
                                                                  (-2.450)                                                            (-4.481)
              log RATIO * I High Income MSA                     -0.0975***           log RATIO * I Subprime MSA                        0.0183
                                                                  (-3.265)                                                             (1.198)
              log RATIO * I after2002                             -0.00216           log RATIO * I after2002                          0.00629
                                                                  (-0.487)                                                             (1.133)
              I High Income MSA * I after2002                      0.0381            I Subprime MSA * I after2002                      -0.0224
                                                                   (0.814)                                                            (-0.482)
              I High Income MSA                                  -0.292***           I Subprime MSA                                    0.0900
                                                                  (-3.607)                                                             (1.014)
              I after2002                                         0.626***           I after2002                                     0.637***
                                                                   (18.58)                                                             (22.04)
              Elasticity                                        -0.0774***           Elasticity                                     -0.0792***
                                                                  (-3.732)                                                            (-3.807)
              UNEMP                                                0.0118            UNEMP                                             0.00243
                                                                   (1.318)                                                             (0.223)
              Constant                                           -2.633***           Constant                                        -2.733***
                                                                  (-29.53)                                                            (-30.51)

              Observations                                        3,920              Observations                                     3,920
              Adjusted R2                                         0.366              Adjusted R2                                      0.326
              Year FE                                              Yes               Year FE                                           Yes
              Sample Period                                     1998-2011            Sample Period                                  1998-2011
              Area Unit                                           MSA                Area Unit                                        MSA
                                  Table 13: Price to Rent Ratio

We regress price to rent ratio on RATIO. Left-hand side variable (log PR) is the log of price to rent ratio.
We use the home price index from the Federal Housing Finance Agency and the fair market rent from the
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. Log RATIO is the log ratio of the total book market
value of firms headquartered in a MSA to the income in that MSA. Due to the MSAs with RATIO equal to
zero, we add 0.00001 to RATIO before we take log. Columns (1)-(3) report the panel regression using MSA-
level samples from 1990 to 2011. Column (1) reports the univariate regression. Columns (2)-(3) report the
multivariate regression results. Control variables include unemployment rate (UNEMP) and housing supply
elasticity (Elasticity) from Saiz (2010). Columns (4)-(6) report the cross-sectional regression by averaging
observations across the sample period. Column (4) reports the univariate regression. Columns (5)-(6) report
the multivariate regression results. The table reports point estimates with t-statistics in parentheses. All
the standard errors in columns (1)-(3) are clustered by MSA. ***, **, * denotes 1%, 5%, and 10% statistical
significance.

                        (1)           (2)           (3)               (4)         (5)            (6)
  Variables                                                  log PR

  log RATIO         -0.00400***   -0.0107***    -0.00780***     -0.0167***    -0.0179***     -0.0120***
                      (-2.709)      (-5.876)      (-4.384)        (-7.515)      (-7.697)       (-4.531)
  Econ Sig              -0.08         -0.22         -0.15           -0.37         -0.39          -0.25

  UNEMP                           -0.0105***    -0.00645***                    -0.00656*      0.000365
                                    (-4.678)      (-2.684)                      (-1.688)      (0.0869)
  Elasticity                                     0.0478***                                   0.0493***
                                                   (6.844)                                     (8.498)
  Constant           -1.526***     -1.654***     -1.773***       -1.602***     -1.570***     -1.709***
                      (-121.1)      (-99.22)      (-65.97)        (-97.49)      (-62.73)      (-59.00)

  Observations         8,748         7,859         6,126            361          361            280
  Adj R2               0.006         0.339         0.425           0.134        0.138          0.308
  Year FE               No            Yes           Yes             No           No             No
  Sample Period      1986-2011     1990-2011     1990-2011      Average CX   Average CX     Average CX
  Area Unit            MSA           MSA           MSA             MSA          MSA            MSA




                                                    50
                           Table 14: Annual Home Price Appreciation

We regress annual home price appreciation on RATIO. Left-hand side variable (HPIAPP) is the annual
                                        It −HP It−1
home price appreciation, defined as HP HP   It−1    using the home price index (HPI) from the Federal Housing
Finance Agency. Log RATIO is the log ratio of the total book market value of firms headquartered in a MSA
to the income in that MSA. Due to the MSAs with RATIO equal to zero, we add 0.00001 to RATIO before
we take log. I Subprime MSA is an indicator variable for the top 1/3 MSAs in terms of average subprime
mortgage share among total mortgage origination from 2002 to 2007. Column (1) reports the panel regression
using MSA-level samples from 1998 to 2005. Column (2) reports the panel regression from 2002 to 2005.
Column (3) reports the panel regression from 2002 to 2007. Control variables include unemployment rate
(UNEMP) and housing supply elasticity (Elasticity) from Saiz (2010). The table reports point estimates
with t-statistics in parentheses. All the standard errors are clustered by MSA. ***, **, * denotes 1%, 5%,
and 10% statistical significance.

                                                       (1)          (2)             (3)
              Variables                                 Annual Home Price Appreciation

              log RATIO * I Subprime MSA           -0.00175**      -0.00294**       -0.00191*
                                                     (-2.063)        (-2.184)        (-1.920)
              log RATIO                             -0.000134       -0.000771      -0.000882*
                                                     (-0.308)        (-1.208)        (-1.925)
              I Subprime MSA                         0.00566          0.00969        0.00984
                                                     (1.052)          (1.131)         (1.594)
              UNEMP                                -0.00258**        -0.00389      -0.00598**
                                                     (-2.556)        (-1.606)        (-2.569)
              Elasticity                           -0.0129***      -0.0192***      -0.0138***
                                                     (-6.622)        (-6.747)        (-6.538)
              Constant                              0.0853***       0.161***         0.115***
                                                     (12.18)          (10.56)         (7.872)

              Observations                           2,240           1,120            1,680
              Adj R2                                 0.296           0.320            0.306
              Year FE                                 Yes             Yes              Yes
              Sample Period                        1998-2005       2002-2005        2002-2007
              Area Unit                              MSA             MSA              MSA




                                                     51
                                                           Table 15: Homeownership Rate

     We regress homeownership rate on RATIO. Left-hand side variable is the homeownership rate, computed by dividing the number of owner-occupied
     housing units by the number of occupied housing units of households, using the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series. Log RATIO is the log ratio
     of the total book market value of firms headquartered in a MSA to the income in that MSA. Due to the MSAs with RATIO equal to zero, we add
     0.00001 to RATIO before we take log. Panel A reports the pooled panel regression using MSA-level samples from 2005 to 2011. Control variables
     include unemployment rate (UNEMP), housing supply elasticity (Elasticity) from Saiz (2010), and the log number of population (logPOP). Panel B
     reports the cross-sectional regression by averaging observations across the sample period. Panel C reports the Fama-MacBeth regressions from 2005
     to 2011. The table reports point estimates with t-statistics in parentheses. The standard errors in Panel A are clustered by MSA. ***, **, * denotes
     1%, 5%, and 10% statistical significance.

                             Panel A: Pooled Panel                    Panel B: Cross-Sectional Average           Panel C: Fama-MacBeth
                                 (1)           (2)                         (3)             (4)                       (5)          (6)
            Variables        log HOMEOWNERSHIP RATE                    log HOMEOWNERSHIP RATE                    log HOMEOWNERSHIP RATE

            log RATIO          0.00216        0.00420***                0.00215           0.00435**              0.00212***       0.00416***
                               (1.558)          (2.650)                 (1.451)            (2.541)                 (4.558)          (8.156)
52




            Econ Sig             0.11             0.20                    0.11               0.22

            UNEMP             -0.00524*         -0.00476               -0.00606*          -0.00539*              -0.00576***      -0.00523***
                               (-1.668)         (-1.546)                (-1.859)           (-1.666)                 (-5.296)         (-4.773)
            Elasticity        0.00737*           0.00266                0.00721            0.00251                0.00725***       0.00257***
                               (1.708)           (0.552)                (1.573)             (0.512)                 (10.92)          (4.562)
            logPOP                             -0.0176**                                  -0.0180**                                -0.0176***
                                                (-2.228)                                   (-2.499)                                  (-14.91)
            Constant          4.259***          4.507***                4.260***           4.513***               4.256***          4.503***
                               (222.0)           (39.33)                 (164.4)            (43.32)                (532.2)           (459.9)

            Observations       1,638             1,638                    234               234                    1,638             1,638
            R2                 0.073             0.095                   0.044             0.070                   0.045             0.068
            Year FE             Yes               Yes                     No                No                      No                No
            Sample Period    2005-2011         2005-2011              Average CX        Average CX               2005-2011         2005-2011
            Area Unit          MSA               MSA                     MSA               MSA                     MSA               MSA
                                Figure 1: log %NON-OCCUPIED MORTGAGES and log RATIO

The figure plots log %NON-OCCUPIED MORTGAGES and logRATIO across MSAs. Log %NON-
OCCUPIED MORTGAGES and log RATIO are constructed by averaging observations across the sample
period. %NON-OCCUPIED MORTGAGES is the ratio of non-owner-occupied mortgage originations for
home purchase to total mortgage origination for home purchase. Log RATIO is the log of ratio of the total
book market value of firms headquartered in a MSA to the income in that MSA as in Hong, Kubik, and
Stein (2008). Due to the MSAs with RATIO equal to zero, we add 0.00001 to RATIO before we take log.
                   0
      log %NON−OCCUPIED MORTGAGES
   −3          −2         −1




                                    −12      −10            −8               −6                    −4
                                                         log RATIO




                                                        53
                               Figure 2: log PR and log RATIO

The figure plots log PR and logRATIO across MSAs. Log PR and log RATIO are constructed by averaging
observations across the sample period. PR is the price to rent ratio. We use the home price index from the
Federal Housing Finance Agency and the fair market rent from the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development. Log RATIO is the log of ratio of the total book market value of firms headquartered in a
MSA to the income in that MSA as in Hong, Kubik, and Stein (2008). Due to the MSAs with RATIO equal
to zero, we add 0.00001 to RATIO before we take log.
       −1.2
      log PR
   −1.7−2.2




               −12       −10              −8            −6               −4             −2              0
                                                    log RATIO




                                                   54
               Figure 3: HPIAPP by Income MSA Group and Subprime MSA Group

The figure plots annual home price appreciation (HPIAPP) by the income MSA group and by subprime
MSA group. HPIAPP is the average home price appreciation within group by year. We use the home price
index from the Federal Housing Finance Agency.



                                                 High Income                                                                                Med Income
            .15




                                                                                                       .1
            .1




                                                                                                       .05
            .05
   HPIAPP




                                                                                              HPIAPP
            0




                                                                                                       0
            −.05




                                                                                                       −.05
            −.1




                   1998   2000            2002    2004         2006   2008        2010                        1998   2000            2002    2004        2006   2008        2010
                                                     year                                                                                       year

                          High Subprime               Med Subprime           Low Subprime                            High Subprime               Med Subprime          Low Subprime




                                                 Low Income
            .15
            .1
   HPIAPP
       .05  0
            −.05




                   1998   2000            2002    2004         2006   2008        2010
                                                     year

                          High Subprime               Med Subprime           Low Subprime




                                                                                         55
