                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 MEDIA INFLUENCES ON SOCIAL OUTCOMES:
        THE IMPACT OF MTV'S 16 AND PREGNANT ON TEEN CHILDBEARING

                                       Melissa S. Kearney
                                        Phillip B. Levine

                                      Working Paper 19795
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w19795


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                           January 2014, Revised August 2015




We are grateful to Dan Fetter, Craig Garthwaite, Kelleen Kaye, Tim Moore, Diane
Schanzenbach, and Doug Staiger for very helpful comments and conversations. We acknowledge
the valuable research assistance of Filippos Petroulakis, Alex Roth, and Helen Willis. Seminar
participants at Boston College, Brookings, Dartmouth College, George Washington University,
University of Virginia Batten School, UCLA, U. Penn - Wharton, and Wellesley College offered
helpful comments. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the University of Maryland
Department of Economics and Wellesley College that enabled us to purchase the data used in this
paper. Nielsen ratings data used in this project are proprietary and cannot be shared. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2014 by Melissa S. Kearney and Phillip B. Levine. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Media Influences on Social Outcomes: The Impact of MTV's 16 and Pregnant on Teen Childbearing
Melissa S. Kearney and Phillip B. Levine
NBER Working Paper No. 19795
January 2014, Revised August 2015
JEL No. J13,L82

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper explores the impact of the introduction of the widely viewed MTV show 16 and Pregnant
on teen childbearing. The reality TV show follows the lives of pregnant teenagers during the final
months of their pregnancy and early months of motherhood. We match Vital Statistics birth data to
Nielson television ratings data to investigate whether exposure to the show had an impact on teen childbearing
rates. We implement an instrumental variables (IV) strategy using local area MTV ratings data from
a pre-period to predict local area 16 and Pregnant ratings. We also introduce event study methods,
utilizing the specific timing of the show’s introduction to identify a causal effect. The results of this
analysis imply that the introduction of this MTV show led to a 4.3 percent reduction in teen births
in the 18 months following its initial airing. This accounts for 24 percent of the overall decline in teen
births in the United States during that period. We supplement these findings with an examination of
data from Google Trends and Twitter, which suggest that this show led to increased interest in contraceptive
use and abortion, as captured by internet search and tweeting behavior.


Melissa S. Kearney
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
3105 Tydings Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
kearney@econ.umd.edu

Phillip B. Levine
Department of Economics
Wellesley College
106 Central Street
Wellesley, MA 02481
and NBER
plevine@wellesley.edu
         It is a longstanding and open question how exposure to media images affects viewers’
behavior. Policy advocates and cultural observers worry, in particular, about the impact of
exposure to sexual and violent content on adolescent behaviors. In some circles, the idea that
teenagers respond to media content is a foregone conclusion, but determining whether media
images themselves cause teens to behave in certain ways is a difficult empirical task. 1
         This paper is examines the impact of the MTV show, 16 and Pregnant, on teen
childbearing. This show purports to show the difficult reality of becoming a teen mother. As we
document below, 16 and Pregnant has drawn large audiences among relevant subpopulations.
Could exposure to these media images of pregnant teens and very young new moms have had an
impact on how teens behave, leading to changes in the likelihood of becoming teen mothers
themselves?
         The context of teen childbearing in the United States makes this question an important
one to study. In 2012, 29.4 out of every 1,000 girls between the ages of 15 and 19 gave birth in
the United States. This rate is considerably higher than that in any other developed country,
where typical rates of teen childbearing are more often in the range of 5 to 10 births per 1,000
girls in this age group (Kearney and Levine, 2012a). Though still an outlier internationally, the
U.S. teen birth rate has declined dramatically over the past 20 years, falling from 61.8 births per
1,000 teen girls in 1991. This decline has occurred in two distinct waves. Between 1991 and
2008, it fell largely continuously from 61.8 to 40.2, representing an annual average rate of
decline of 2.5 percent per year. Teen birth rates fell far more rapidly in the next four years,
dropping from 40.2 to 29.4, or 7.5 percent per year (Kearney and Levine, 2014a).
         Teen motherhood is generally considered to be an important social problem; there is
substantial policy interest in figuring out how to reduce its prevalence. In previous work
(Kearney and Levine, 2012a and 2014b), we have argued that teen motherhood is more
appropriately considered a marker of a social problem rather than a direct cause. We maintain
that view. However, children born to teen mothers tend to be immediately at an economic and
social disadvantage in life. So while it is true that “solving” the issue of teen motherhood may
not have large effects on poverty rates or other social problems for those women, it is also likely


1
 In terms of sexual behavior, evidence is cited showing that teens who watch sexual content on television are more
likely to experience a teenage pregnancy. For example, popular press pieces by Stein (2008) and Tanner (2008) cite
evidence from Chandra, et al. (2008). But evidence like this does not isolate the effect of the exposure from the choice
of a particular type of individual to watch such content.
to be true that children are off to a better start in life if they are born to older mothers, especially
if they get married, acquire more education and earnings potential, and acquire the skills needed
to be more effective parents during those additional years.
        The question of what types of policies are effective at influencing teen birth rates is still
very much an open one. When trying to explain the recent decline, policy observers have offered
many competing explanations, often pointing to the presumed success of their favored program
or policy, such as sex education programs, abstinence-only education programs, or improved
access to contraception. But, previous academic research on the topic offers limited support for
the effectiveness of any of these targeted policies. 2 This paper adds a new “policy” into the mix –
the role of what might be considered a social media campaign in the guise of a very popular
reality TV show depicting the challenges of teen pregnancy and motherhood.
        The timing of the introduction of MTV’s 16 and Pregnant is such that it might have
contributed to the most recent, very sharp decline. Ever since its introduction, various observers
have made conflicting claims about the show’s influence on teens. Some have highlighted the
show’s focus on the difficulties of raising a child at such a young age and have concluded from
this coincident timing that the show is at least partially responsible for the recent decrease in teen
childbearing rates. 3 Others argue that the show glamorizes teen pregnancy, with its cast members
essentially becoming media “stars,” whose lives are followed in the tabloids well after their show
airs. 4 Interestingly, in a study for the National Campaign to Prevent Teen and Unplanned
Pregnancy, Albert (2010) reports that 82 percent of teens who report watching 16 and Pregnant
indicate that it “helps teens better understand the challenges of pregnancy and parenthood.” Only
17 percent report that it “glamorizes teen pregnancy.”
        Our main analysis exploits geographic variation in measures of the show’s viewership (as
captured by Nielsen ratings data) to investigate whether differential exposure to the show led to
differential changes in teen birth rates. This analysis is conducted at the level of “designated
market areas” (DMAs), which reflect collections of counties representing local television
markets for which ratings data are available. We append to these data county-level Vital

2
   See Kearney and Levine (2012b) and Lopoo and Raissian (2012) for discussions of this body of research.
3
  For example, see http://www.csmonitor.com/USA/Society/2010/1221/A-force-behind-the-lower-teen-birthrate-
MTV-s-16-and-Pregnant and http://blog.thenationalcampaign.org/pregnant_pause/2011/11/us-teen-birth-rate-drops-
a-dra.php.
4
  http://www.cnn.com/2011/OPINION/05/04/henson.teen.mom.show/index.html?_s=PM:OPINION, accessed
 6/18/2013.
Statistics birth data aggregated to the DMA level for conceptions occurring between 2005 and
2010. To address the possibility that the appeal of a show about teen pregnancy might be
correlated with teen birth rate trends, we implement an instrumental variables (IV) strategy,
predicting 16 and Pregnant ratings with a broad measure of MTV ratings from a previous period.
The identifying assumption of the IV approach is that MTV ratings in the period before the show
aired would be unrelated to subsequent trends in teen childbearing, but for the introduction of the
16 and Pregnant content. We also introduce event study methods that look for changes in teen
births well-timed to the introduction of the show to identify a causal effect.
         The results of this analysis imply that the introduction of 16 and Pregnant led teens to
noticeably reduce the rate at which they give birth. Our estimates imply that this show led to a
4.3 percent reduction in teen births that would have been conceived between June 2009, when
the show began, and the end of 2010. This can explain 24 percent of the total decline in teen
births over that period.
         We supplement this analysis with an exploration of data about on-line activity to
determine whether the MTV show influenced viewers’ interest in the topics of birth control and
abortion, in so far as it is reflected in their internet search and social media activity. In particular,
we examine the potential influence of 16 and Pregnant on teens’ decision making process with
data on the frequency with which teens search for terms like “how to get birth control” or use the
terms “birth control” or “abortion” in their tweets. 5 This analysis provides some insight into the
mechanisms that would lead to changes in rates of teen childbearing in the absence of sufficient
data on actual levels of sexual activity and contraceptive use. 6
         Specifically, in this analysis we first use high frequency, national data (daily or weekly)
available from Google Trends and Twitter to look for time series spikes in searches and tweets
on the show’s title on the day/week that a new episode is released. Second, we conduct a similar
analysis using high frequency national data from these sources to look for increases in relevant
searches and tweets related to birth control and abortion co-timed with the spikes in

5
  We explored other terms attempting to identify interest in sexual activity and adoption, but were unable to identify
well-defined terms in this regard. For instance, searches for “how adopt” were dominated over our time period by the
2010 earthquake in Haiti and tweets including the term “adopt” or “adoption” were frequently not about children, but
were about issues unrelated to the concepts we were interested in capturing. In terms of sexual activity, we considered
searches for terms like “does sex hurt” or “sex first time,” as ones that may represent the reflective consideration about
having sex that we want to test. We did not find a relationship between media exposure and these search terms.
6
  Data sources that specifically include sexual activity and contraceptive use are available, but are not sufficient for
use in this project, as we describe below.
searches/tweets on the show’s title. Third, we take advantage of lower frequency data that varies
at the state level to examine whether locations with relatively higher levels of searches/tweets
about 16 and Pregnant during the period when the show is on the air also experience relatively
higher levels of searches/tweets about things like birth control. Combining these empirical
approaches enable us to take advantage of all of the potential sources of statistical identification
available in these data.
        The full set of analyses we have conducted using Google Search and Twitter data
provides supportive evidence that the show had an impact on attitudes toward pregnancy
prevention consistent with the show leading to a reduction in teen birth rates. Large spikes in
search activity and tweets about the show are evident exactly at the time a new episode was
released. In some specifications, we also see an associated spike in Google searches and twitter
messages containing the terms “birth control” and “abortion.” Locations in which the show was
more popular experienced greater increases in these types of searches/tweets when the show was
on the air.


I. Previous Research on the Impact of Media Exposure on Social Outcomes


        There are now a number of economics papers documenting causal effects of media
exposure on social outcomes. 7 One important example is the work of Gentzkow and Shapiro
(2008) that exploits variation in the timing of television’s introduction to different local markets
in the U.S. to identify the effect of preschool television exposure on standardized test scores
during adolescence, finding small positive effects on test scores. Jensen and Oster (2009)
investigate the effects of cable television introduction in a set of villages in India, finding that
exposure to cable television led to more progressive views about the role of women, in addition
to changes in other social outcomes. These studies are examples of papers that focus on exposure
to television media in general. A limitation of this type of study is that it does not consider
specific media content and thus one must speculate about the mechanism through which cable
television is having its effect.




7
  Price and Dahl (2012) provide a helpful summary of the set of studies focusing on the impact of the media on
family outcomes, with an emphasis on describing methodological challenges and approaches.
         There are examples of studies that focus on specific media content – as opposed to more
general media exposure – in political economy. For example, DellaVigna and Kaplan (2007)
consider exposure to the politically right-leaning content of Fox News on voting behavior and
Gerber, et al. (2011) examine the impact of exposure to a specific partisan television political
advertising campaign on voter preferences. There are also examples of quasi-experimental
analyses looking at outcomes of violence. Dahl and DellaVigna (2009) find that rates of violent
crime actually fall the same day that popular violent movies are released, partly attributable to an
“incapacitation effect.”
         Our paper is more closely related to a pair of papers that study the effect of exposure to
soap opera content in Brazil. These papers take advantage of variation in timing of when the
network that broadcast soap operas entered into different areas of the country. They find that the
introduction of this network led to increased rates of divorce (Chong & La Ferrera, 2009) and
lower levels of fertility (La Ferrara, Chong, and Duryea, 2012). Since soap operas portrayed
smaller families and family dissolution, there is a strong case to be made that it was exposure to
this specific content that led to these changes in social outcomes.
         Our paper makes a contribution to this literature by examining how exposure to a very
specific type of content – namely, a reality television program that portrays the difficulties of
being a new teen mother – affects rates of teen childbearing. 8 In doing so, we provide an
additional piece of evidence that content can be a very powerful mechanism driving the effect of
media on important social outcomes. Furthermore, to the best of our knowledge, ours is the first
paper to offer a credible estimate of the causal effect of specific media content on teen
childbearing rates. 9 As noted in the introduction, there is great policy interest in reducing rates of
teen childbearing, with little convincing evidence about effective ways to do so. Yet, the role that



8
  We know of one other paper that specifically examines the effect of an MTV program - Chiou and Lopez (2010)
find that businesses in Laguna Beach, CA, experienced more break-ins relative to a neighboring city following the
introduction of another MTV reality TV show, Laguna Beach: The Real Orange County, which portrays the
extensive wealth of the community.
9
  Chandra, et al. (2008) found that teens who viewed more sexual content on television were more likely to become
pregnant. This analysis links the level of exposure to media with sexual content between the ages of 12 and 17 to
subsequent rates of teen childbearing, finding that a positive relationship exists even after controlling for many
observable factors. The authors recognize that their findings are not necessarily causal, stating “although our model
included a wide range of potentially confounding factors as covariates, there is the possibility that we did not account
for all factors that may alternatively explain the relationship we uncovered.”
the media can play in contributing to further declines in teen childbearing has not been
previously addressed. 10


II. Background


A. Show Content


        MTV describes 16 and Pregnant as an “hour-long documentary series focusing on the
controversial subject of teen pregnancy. Each episode follows a 5-7 month period in the life of a
teenager as she navigates the bumpy terrain of adolescence, growing pains, rebellion, and
coming of age; all while dealing with being pregnant.” The show first aired in June of 2009.
Through October of 2013, it has been on the air for five “seasons” of 8 to 13 hour-long episodes
(47 episodes tracking individual girls plus a handful of specials). 11
        To understand the nature of the messages conveyed in the show, we hired research
assistants to view every episode of 16 and Pregnant and record aspects of its content. Appendix
A tabulates the results of that exercise. Here we offer some highlights. The girls on the show are
largely from high birth rate states (15 of 47 from Texas, Florida, and Alabama). The racial/ethnic
demographics of the girls on the show are fairly representative of the teen population in the
United States, but not of the population of new teen mothers. Across episodes, 68 percent (32 of
47) of teen moms are white, non-Hispanic. In the U.S. in 2010 57 percent of teens are white,
non-Hispanic (U.S. Census Bureau, 2014), but among teens who gave birth that year, only 39
percent are (Martin, 2012). Most girls (38 of 47) did not live in two parent households at time of
pregnancy, which is consistent with broader statistics of teens giving birth (National Campaign
to Prevent Teen and Unplanned Pregnancy, 2009).
        Among the girls on the show, ambivalence towards teen childbearing is rampant. Only 18
out of 47 report opposition to their pregnancy when they found out, although none report that

10
   In a paper written concurrently with this paper, Trudeau (forthcoming) investigates how teen birth rates changed
after the introduction of 16 and Pregnant. That paper focuses on age differences, state sexual education mandates,
and in one section of the paper, uses Nielsen ratings data form a limited set of DMAs. Relative to that paper, our
analysis considers the universe of DMAs, uses an instrumental variables strategy, and examines Google Trends and
Twitter data, among other differences.
11
   MTV only labels the show as having four seasons, but “season 2” ran from February through April and then October
through December of 2010, which we label as two seasons. The show has spawned the spin-offs, Teen Mom, Teen
Mom 2, and Teen Mom 3, which we will address subsequently.
they were looking to get pregnant. The girls commonly report that they did not think that they
would have sex or become pregnant (36 of 47) and that they were ambivalent about getting
pregnant (28 of 47). Only 5 of 47 report trying to avoid a pregnancy, but failing. Three-quarters
of the girls (36 of 47) report not using any form of contraception at the time they got pregnant.
         An important emphasis on most episodes is the relationship between the girl and the
father of her child, who is typically her boyfriend. Of all the pregnancies, four led to a marriage
prior to the birth and three led to adoption. There we no abortions. Almost all (40 of 47) of the
boyfriends stick around through the pregnancy. Many fathers (31 of 44) live with the girl and her
child afterwards and most of them (26 of 31) are heavily involved in the child’s life. Only four of
the fathers are completely uninvolved. Just over half (24 out of 44) of the relationships between
the girl and her boyfriend either collapsed or were very strained by the end of the episode.
         The show also emphasizes the implications of teen childbearing for the teen mother’s
health and well-being. Consistent with national trends, 11 out of the 47 births (23 percent)
occurred via C-section; some occurring after up to 26 hours of labor. 12 In addition, in 8 of the 47
pregnancies the mother or her baby experienced a significant health complication. One mother
needed to spend a full month in the hospital as a preventative measure. One baby needed to be
airlifted to another hospital to receive needed treatment. The show portrays extensive sleep
deprivation for the teen mothers. Overall, the realities of the lives of teen mothers are presented
in ways that may have been unknown or difficult to imagine for other teens viewing the show.


B. Show popularity and Nielsen ratings data


         Before undertaking an analysis of the effect of 16 and Pregnant on teens’ childbearing
outcomes, it is important to document that teens’ exposure to the show was substantial. 13 This is,
of course, a necessary condition for the show to have had any sizable effect on aggregate birth
rates. In addition, it must be the case that some of those who were exposed to the show were
teens who might have become teen moms, in other words “marginal teen moms.” To state the


12
   In the United States in 2007, the C-section delivery rate for women under age 20 was also 23 percent. For details,
see http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/databriefs/db35.pdf.
13
   The public controversy regarding the potential “glamorizing” effect of 16 and Pregnant may include other forms of
exposure outside of television exposure, like tabloid coverage. It is possible that our analysis could generate additional
insights if we were able to measure exposure through these alternative forms of media.
obvious, if the only girls who watched the show were ones who have a probability of zero of
becoming a teen mother, or a probability of one of becoming a teen mother, then regardless of
how compelling the show’s content was, the show would not lead to changes in teen birth rates.
Ratings data do not allow us to parse out viewership by latent probability of becoming a teen
mother, but we will establish that viewership was widespread across the country, and not
singularly clustered in areas with either unusually high or low rates of teen childbearing.
         The entertainment media, basing its assessments on Nielsen television ratings, generally
references 16 and Pregnant as a hit show (see, for instance, Adalian, 2010; and Bricklin, 2012).
Just after it was released, MTV reported that the show “has garnered amazing ratings … and
consistently taking the #1 spot in its time period among (women between ages 12 and 34) and #1
across all of television among (women between ages 18 and 24)” (Seidman, 2009). More popular
episodes attracted over 3 million viewers in total and received ratings up to 8.0 among women
between the ages of 18 and 24 (Seidman, 2010). As a point of comparison, 6.4 million viewers,
on average, watched weekly episodes of the hit ABC comedy, Modern Family, in the 2010-2011
season and the show scored an average rating of 4.9 among adults between the ages of 18 and 49
(Gorman, 2011). Although the target population of 16 and Pregnant is considerably smaller,
among that narrow group it is a very highly rated show. Indeed, a nationally representative
survey of around 1,000 teens between the ages of 12 and 19 found that 71 percent had seen an
episode of 16 and Pregnant (Albert, 2010).
         For our analysis, we have obtained ratings data for the show under an agreement with the
Nielsen Corporation and these constitute our primary measure of show viewership. Nielsen
ratings data have been the gold standard in measuring exposure to television shows for
decades. 14 The Nielsen Corporation collects these data from households either through meters
that are attached to television sets or through diaries that are kept by household members. The



14
  A number of previous economics papers have made use of Nielsen ratings data, mainly to investigate issues of racial
preference or discrimination. Kanazawa and Funk (2001) examine Nielson Ratings for professional basketball games
as a function of white player participation; Aldrich, Arcidiacono, and Vigdor (2005) examine Nielsen ratings for
ABC’s Monday Night Football as a function of quarterback race; and Myers (2008) examines how the racial make-
up of a local television news staff affects ratings. These papers examine Nielson ratings as the variable of interest and
investigate determinants of ratings. We have a different conceptual goal, which is to use Nielsen ratings as a measure
of exposure to content. Some studies in marketing and advertising have used Nielsen ratings to measure exposure to
advertising. An example from economics includes a study by Saffer, Wakefield, and Terry-McElrath (2007) on the
effect of exposure to nicotine replacement therapy advertising on youth smoking.
results of their data acquisition are used to generate “ratings points,” which represents the
percentage of the population that watched an episode of a show. Ratings by demographic status
and geographic location are also available. 15
        Geography is defined by DMAs; we have data on 205 DMAs in the continental United
States. 16 A DMA is a collection of counties that is generally larger than a metropolitan area. It is
based on the geographic region where a signal could be received from a broadcast television
tower in a given market. A DMA has an average of 15 counties with 1.5 million people each.
        Technological change has somewhat hindered Nielsen’s ability to completely monitor
household viewing habits. For several years, individuals have had the ability to record shows and
watch them later and, more recently, individuals have the ability to stream recently released
episodes of shows over the internet. Nielsen does measure some time shifting in that they can
determine whether a recorded show is watched within one, three, or seven days of its release.
The data we have obtained from Nielsen suggests the geographic correlation in ratings of shows
watched live versus recorded is very high. This means that our use of ratings within one day of
airing is a suitable measure of exposure. Similarly, despite the decline in viewership that has
occurred recently as online streaming has become more accessible, watching television shows
live is still the predominant manner in which individuals, and even teens, watch shows. 17
        The Nielsen data available to us include ratings data during the “sweeps” periods
(November, February, May, and July) in each DMA by age group – ages 12 to 17 and ages 18 to
24 – and all ages, for each season of 16 and Pregnant. The success of this show led MTV to also
generate spin-offs, called Teen Mom and Teen Mom 2. Teen Mom (initial airing date, December
2009) follows four of the “stars” from the initial season of 16 and Pregnant through their first
years of motherhood. Teen Mom 2 (initial airing date, January 2011) follows a similar strategy,


15
   Demographic information is mainly available in diary data because that is how Nielsen can determine who is
watching the television when it is on. This does introduce a potential source of bias in that different demographic
groups may have different propensities to complete the diary (cf. Kanazawa and Funk, 2001).
16
   There are 210 DMAs in total. We do not have ratings data for the 4 DMAs in Alaska and Hawaii and our crosswalk
between counties and DMAs omits the Laredo, Texas DMA, leaving us with usable data for 205 DMAs.
17
   Between 2011 and 2013, those between ages 12 and 17 (18 and 24) reduced the hours spent watching traditional
television from 24.3 (26.8) hours per week to 21.4 hours per week (23.4) (Marketing Charts, 2013). This indicates
that online viewing may be making some inroads into traditional TV viewing, but the traditional method is still
overwhelmingly the main form of exposure to television content. Moreover, MTV reports that in 2011 around 350,000
individuals per week streamed episodes of 16 and Pregnant from MTV’s website compared to the 2 million viewers,
on average, who watched the show “live” (within one day of initial airing – MTV, 2012).
focusing on “stars” of 16 and Pregnant, season 2. 18 We also were able to obtain comparable
ratings data for these sequel shows as well. To ease exposition, we will refer to this collection of
three shows simply as 16 and Pregnant. In our subsequent analysis, we aggregate the data for
those 12 to 24 and across all seasons/shows to generate an average measure of viewership in
each DMA of the entire 16 and Pregnant franchise. We do so to reduce the sampling variability
that is generated by relatively small samples of young viewers in each DMA during a single
sweeps period. 19 Because of the limited nature of the data, we are not able to take advantage of
any time series variability in the popularity of the shows or of different episodes.
          Ratings data by DMA reveal a considerable amount of geographic variation in show
popularity. In Figure 1, we report the average rating by DMA for all three shows in the 16 and
Pregnant franchise for those between ages 12 and 24 in all sweeps months during our 2009-2012
sample period in which one of these shows was on the air. The results indicate that the show is
the most popular among those in the South and in the Midwest, with some pockets of popularity
elsewhere. These facts are not crucial to our identification strategy, but relevant to building an
understanding of who watched the show and how concentrated viewership was. We would be
concerned if the show only resonated with teens in one part of the country, for example, and less
inclined to believe it could have had an effect on aggregate birth rates across the country.



     [ Insert Figure 1 Here]




18
   The exact dates that each of these shows aired during our sample window is as follows:
    16 and Pregnant: 6/11/2009-7/31/2009, 2/16/2010-4/20/2010, 10/26/2010-1/5/2011, 4/19/2011-6/28/2011,
3/27/2012-6/6/2012.
    Teen Mom: 12/8/2009-1/26/2010, 7/20/2010-10/12/2010, 7/5/2011-9/20/2011, 6/12/2012-8/28/2012.
    Teen Mom 2: 1/11/2011-3/29/2011, 12/6/2011-2/14/2012, 11/12/2012-2/12/2013.
All shows are ongoing in new seasons beyond those dates. A new series, Teen Mom 3, began in August of 2013 and
follows the lives of the girls from season 4 of 16 and Pregnant. Its later starting date pushes it beyond the window of
analysis in this paper.
19
   To be more specific, we have data from 7 months in which one of these shows was on the air during a sweeps period.
The average number of viewers tracked for those 12-24 is 192 per DMA/month. This leaves us with 1,344 viewers in
all 7 months, on average for a DMA. With an average rating of 1.8, the average number of viewers per DMA who
watched one of these shows is 24. We have chosen not to conduct this analysis on a monthly basis, because it would
leave us with just 3.5 viewers per DMA per month, on average.
          Figure 2 displays the geographic variation in baseline teen childbearing rates by DMA to
compare to the show’s popularity. 20 Teen birth rates tend to be highest in DMAs in the South and
Midwest, where the show is popular, as well as in the Southwest, where the show is not popular.
Teen birth rates are moderate in DMAs in California, where the show is not popular. Teen birth
rates are very low in New England, where the show is reasonably popular. Statistically, the
population weighted correlation between Nielsen ratings data and teen birth rates is 0.16, which
is positive, but small. This correlation is shown as a scatter plot in Figure 3, in which each data
point is a DMA.

     [ Insert Figure 2 Here]




     [ Insert Figure 3 Here]



          It is interesting, though not necessary to our identification strategy, that ratings are
neither strongly positively correlated nor strongly negatively correlated with teen birth rates. If
ratings covaried closely with teen birth rates, it might suggest selection into viewership based on
the teen childbearing environment in the area. Our IV strategy is designed to overcome this type
of selection, so such a relationship would not be insurmountable to the identification of a causal
relationship. Perhaps more importantly, if viewership had a very strong negative correlation with
teen birth rates, we might suspect that the only people tuning into the show were those teens who
were not at risk of becoming teen parents, which would make it unlikely that the show had a
sizable effect on aggregate teen birth rates. We offer these figures to make the relevant
observation that teens across the country tuned into the show (or not) essentially independently
of teen birth rates where they lived.


III. Analysis of Teen Births




20
  This figure defines teen births by age of conception rather than the more traditional age of birth for consistency with
the remainder of our analysis.
         To investigate whether exposure to the show, 16 and Pregnant, led to a change in rates of
teen childbearing, we exploit the timing of the show’s introduction combined with geographic
variation across media markets in ratings. The key to our approach is to investigate whether there
was a more rapid decline in rates of teen childbearing starting after the show was introduced in
locations in which the show was more widely viewed.


A. Data and empirical approach

         We use data on births between 2005 and 2011 from the Vital Statistics system to create a
dataset of all births conceived between January 2005 and December 2010. Vital Statistics data
contain birth certificate information, including length of gestation to determine approximate date
of conception, for virtually every live birth in the United States. The main strength of these data
is their universal nature and large sample size (several hundred thousand teen births per year).
For the purposes of this project, the ability to identify the exact age of the mother for every birth
provides us with the ability to generate counts of births for very precise age groups, including
younger and older teens. We also take advantage of the county identifiers that are available to
aggregate births by occurrence in each DMA, the geographic level at which Nielsen ratings data
are available. 21 We use a crosswalk procedure to aggregate counties into DMA units. Dating
births by approximate month of conception enables us to better link the timing of exposure to the
show to the timing of the activities that led to a subsequent birth.
         The key to our empirical approach is to relate geographic variation in changes in teen
birth rates to geographic variation in rates of exposure to the 16 and Pregnant content, as
captured by television ratings. The Ordinary Least Squares representation of this relationship is:


(1)                    ln(Bjt) = β0 + β1Rate16Pj*postt + β2Ujy + Xjyγ + θt + δjs + εjt


where t indexes quarters, j indexes media markets (DMAs) and s indexes season of the year. The
outcome variable of interest ln(B) represents the natural logarithm of the teen birth rate, defined

21
   Beginning in 2005, Vital Statistics Natality data with county identifiers require permission to use them, which we
obtained through a non-transferable researcher agreement. Prior to 2005, county level identifiers exist in public use
files, but births in smaller counties are omitted from the files. Because of this, we are unable to construct DMA level
birth rates prior to 2005.
as births to girls between ages 15 and 19 in DMA j conceived in quarter t scaled by the
population of women age 15-19. 22 We include quarter fixed effects (θt) and DMA*season fixed
effects (δjs) to control for the seasonality that exists in teen birth rates (as documented by
Buckles and Hungerman, 2013). Our sample of births consists of those that were conceived
between January 2005 and December 2010, yielding 24 quarters of data. We use quarterly
variation in births in our analysis because monthly data is noisy, particularly in smaller locations.
Along with data from 205 DMAs, our full sample consists of 4,920 DMA by quarter
observations. 23
         The explanatory variable of primary focus is the interaction of Rate16P, which represents
Nielsen ratings for the show among those between ages 12 and 24, and post, which is an
indicator variable for calendar quarters after June 2009 when the show began. The variable Ujy
and the set of variables, Xjy, control for the average unemployment rate and the percent non-
Hispanic, black and percent Hispanic, respectively, in the DMA in the year (y) in which each
quarter (t) falls. The unemployment rate is constructed by taking the population weighted
average of annualized county unemployment rates; we do this because local monthly
unemployment rates are notoriously noisy. This measure is included in the model as a proxy for
economic conditions at the time of conception. Previous work has found that higher
unemployment rates are associated with lower rates of teen childbearing (e.g., Colen,
Geronimus, and Phipps, 2006; Kearney and Levine, 2012b). Race and ethnicity measures are
constructed from county level population estimates available from the Census Bureau.
         Because we are only using data over a relatively short time period, we do not include the
usual list of other policy or demographic variables in our analysis because they do not have
sufficient variation over this time period to be important. 24 When we estimate this OLS model –


22
   The population data used for the denominator is only available annually, not quarterly.
23
   In a log birth specification, a handful of observations get dropped because no births occurred in that DMA/quarter,
explaining why listed sample sizes are often slightly less than this value.
24
   For example, none of the three main types of abortion restrictions – mandatory delay periods, state level restrictions
on Medicaid funding of abortion, and parental notification laws – changed across states during the 2006 to 2010
period. Only three states changed welfare family cap policies. A number of states implemented Medicaid Family
Planning waivers, but all in 2006 and 2007. The correlation at the state level between the real value of welfare benefits
in 2006 and in 2010 is 0.97. For a discussion of targeted state level policies potentially relevant to teen childbearing,
see the discussions in Kearney and Levine (2012b) and Lopoo and Raissian (2012). In addition to not having sufficient
variation over the short time period analyzed, the fact that these policies are at the state level provides a complication
for the potential inclusion of these policy controls in our DMA level analysis, since many DMAs cross state lines.
and the IV version presented below – the regression is weighted by female teen population in the
media market and standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the level of media market. 25
         As described earlier, the ratings measure is an average ratings taken from aggregating all
periods after 16 and Pregnant began and include Teen Mom and Teen Mom 2. The interaction of
this constant measure of ratings with a post indicator clarifies that ratings prior to the show’s
introduction are naturally set to zero and then take on the average value of the show’s ratings
afterwards. The variation exploited by this empirical specification is the uniform shock that hit
all markets when the show aired (which is captured by quarter fixed effects), plus the variation
across places in how widely viewed the program was. Again, data limitations preclude us from
exploiting variation over time within a market in the show’s popularity after its introduction. 26
         A critical issue in implementing this approach is accounting for the possibility that
locations in which the show is more popular are not randomly selected in terms of teen
childbearing rates. To address this possibility (despite the low cross-sectional correlation
between ratings and teen birth rates displayed in Figure 3) we account for time-invariant
differences across markets by including market level fixed effects in our regression models. Yet
we might still worry about unobserved time-varying differences across markets that correlate
with both the popularity of the show and the subsequent rate of teen childbearing. Perhaps the
show is particularly appealing to individuals living in locations where teen childbearing is rising
(or, as in the recent past, falling more slowly). If this were the case, the estimated relationship of
interest in an OLS model even with fixed effects would have a bias towards finding a positive
effect of the show on teen birth rates.
         To address this form of bias, we first utilize an instrumental variables (IV) approach. We
instrument for the show’s ratings using ratings among those between ages 12 and 24 for all
shows that aired on MTV on weekday evenings between 9:00 PM and 10:00 PM in the 4 sweeps
months preceding the introduction of 16 and Pregnant (July 2008 through May 2009). Since


25
   We also estimated analogous models without using sample weights and obtained qualitatively similar results. For
instance, rather than our reported coefficient in Column 1 of Table 1 of -2.368 (0.942), in the unweighted model we
get -5.361 (1.342). Although the coefficient is larger, so is the standard error. This result is consistent with the use of
population weights to reduce heteroskedasticity. We also experimented with two-way clustering on DMAs and
quarters in estimating standard errors, but that had very little effect on our results.
26
   We experimented with splitting up the post period into two nine month windows, calculating average ratings by
DMA in each window, and examining whether the show had differential effects in the two windows. That analysis
did not yield economically or statistically meaningful differences between the two periods.
those ratings are determined prior to June 2009, our instrumental variable strips out the variation
in 16 and Pregnant ratings that are specifically attributable to that particular show, and
potentially reflective of a time-varying latent preference for a show about teen mothers. Before
16 and Pregnant was introduced, MTV programming contained a range of other reality TV
shows, but none were specifically related to teen childbearing. 27
        The IV equation takes the form of the OLS equation as represented in equation [1] above,
but the variable of interest is replaced by predicted ratings.


(2)                                     � j*post t + β2 Ujy + Xjy γ+ θt + δjs + εjt
                   ln�Bjt � = β0 + β1 Rate16P

          � ∗ 𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑡𝑡 is generated by the first stage regression in the IV framework:
where 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅16𝑃𝑃𝚥𝚥


(3)            Rate16Pj*postt = β0 + β1MTV0809j*postt + β2Ujy + Xjyγ + θt + δjs + εjt


        The variable MTV0809 represents the ratings among those between ages 12 and 24 for
shows that aired between 9:00 PM to 10:00 PM on MTV between July of 2008 and May of 2009
in each media market. It is time invariant. Its interaction with post is consistent with that between
Rate16P and the post indicator, creating an instrumental variable (labeled here as the interaction
of two variables) that takes on the value of zero in the quarters before the show was introduced
and the value of ratings for shows from 2008/09 in the following quarters. 28
        To facilitate interpretation of the IV estimates, it is useful to consider the experimental
analog. First, assume some degree of inertia exists in TV viewing, so that MTV has developed a
brand loyalty leading certain individuals to be more inclined to tune in regardless of what is on.
Now suppose MTV randomly changed content across markets such that a “treatment” group of
DMAs would have seen the MTV programming content switch to 16 and Pregnant and a control
group of DMAs would have continued with existing MTV programming, which is not about teen


27
   A number of shows aired on MTV during this time period, including Real World, The Hills, and The Challenge.
Although all of the shows on MTV are geared towards teens/young adults, none of them share themes similar to those
on 16 and Pregnant.
28
   We estimated these equations without the time varying control variables (the unemployment rate and percent non-
Hispanic Black and percent Hispanic) and obtained similar results. We also estimated analogous regression models
with these control variables on the left hand sided and found no relationship between them and the MTV0809
interaction variable.
motherhood. We then would compare the subsequent change in teen births, asking whether there
was a significant change between treatment and control DMAs.
        The experiment implicit in our IV analysis is related to this sudden change of content to
16 and Pregnant, but the exposure is not a binary treatment variable. In our IV setting, the
content of what was on the air changed across the country at the same time, but “control” and
“treatment” groups are differentiated by the size of the MTV audience in the immediately
preceding period. Those locations in which the MTV audience is relatively small better
approximates the control group and locations in which the audience is relatively large better
approximates the treatment group. The treatment effect is identified off the relative change in
outcomes in relation to the relative size of the pre-existing MTV audience. If the show is
effective at changing attitudes and behaviors, then we would expect to see a relatively larger
decline in rates of teen childbearing in places with a larger MTV viewership. 29
         The concept of the IV approach is apparent in the reduced form specification:


(4)                  ln(Bjt) = β0 + β1MTV0809j*postt + β2Ujy + Xjyγ + θt + δjs + εjt


The explanatory time-invariant variable MTV0809j captures pre-existing differences in the size
of the MTV audience. This term is not included alone because it is captured by market fixed
effects. The interaction of this variable with the “post” indicator captures the change in the
relationship with teen birth rates, which could plausibly be attributed to the change in content of
what is being aired for that same audience. This idea mimics the underlying experiment that our
IV strategy is seeking to simulate.




29
  To be clear, this approach is not designed to identify the effect of assigning a random teenager or young adult to
watch 16 and Pregnant. Individuals select into MTV viewership in all periods. We are identifying the effect of the
show on teen births given the realized MTV audience. This approach allows us to say what happened because the
show was on the air. The effect might have occurred entirely among MTV viewers, or perhaps there were spillover
effects, say in the form of changing peer group norms, to non-MTV watching individuals. The effect that we observe
should be thought of as the effect of the show’s content on attitudes and behaviors, combined with MTV’s ability to
draw in an audience of teens who are susceptible to being influenced by MTV content and for whom becoming a teen
mother is a possibility, or who have influence on another individual who might become a teen mother. To state the
obvious, if no one watched MTV, or if the only ones who watched MTV were individuals who would never become
teen mothers (or influence someone who might), then regardless of how compelling the content of this show was, it
would not have affected outcomes.
  For this IV approach to be valid, we need to maintain an exclusion restriction that, conditional
on the controls in the model, subsequent trends in teen childbearing would not be correlated with
2008-2009 MTV ratings except for a direct effect of the 16 and Pregnant content. We also need
the relationship between the earlier MTV ratings and the later 16 and Pregnant ratings to be
monotonic. Figure 4 presents a simplified bivariate version of the first stage relationship in the
IV approach. It presents a simple scatter plot depicting the relationship between MTV ratings
before 16 and Pregnant started and the ratings for the 16 and Pregnant show in the period after
its introduction across DMAs. The pattern is clearly linear, demonstrating that this monotonicity
requirement holds. A bivariate regression between these two variables yields a t-statistic of
around 8.0, both weighted and unweighted. The coefficient itself suggest that ratings for 16 and
Pregnant are 1.38 points higher (more than double) than they were for a typical MTV show that
aired on weekday evenings in 2008-09. The correlation coefficient is around 0.5 weighted or
unweighted. Given the strength of these relationships, it is not surprising that the data exhibit
sufficient power in our first stage regression; the F-statistic on the omitted instrument is 48.1.




  [ Insert Figure 4 Here]


       We augment this approach by implementing event-study methods designed to examine
whether the time path of the estimated impact on birth rates changes discretely as a function of
exposure to the content of 16 and Pregnant episodes. The time path of any change in a
behavioral outcome is determined by two phenomena. The impact of the show on behavior might
accumulate over time, but it should not start before the show began. If it did, it may signal a
spurious relationship between the show’s initial release and behavioral outcomes.
       The augmented regression model takes the following form:


                   ln(B jt )=β 0 +∑ i=18 α i ( rate16Pj *preQi )+∑ i=1 β i ( rate16Pj *postQi )+
                                    5                              6

(5)
                                         φU jy + X jy γ + θt + δ js +ε jt


The first summation term counts from the first quarter of 2005 (18 quarters before 16 and
Pregnant began) to the second quarter of 2008 (five quarters beforehand). The second
summation term counts from the first quarter after the show started to 6 quarters afterwards
(2009:Q3 through 2010:Q4). The respective coefficients map out the quarterly pattern in the
birth rates in response to 16 and Pregnant ratings. Other elements in this equation include the
DMA level unemployment rate, quarterly fixed effects, and DMA*season fixed effects. This last
set of fixed effects require four base period quarters, which we set as 2008:Q3 through 2009:Q2,
representing the full year before the show began. This specification enables us to treat the values
of β as the effect of the show relative to a base year just prior to its introduction. We use an
analogous instrumental variables procedure (described earlier) to estimate this model, interacting
our single instrumental variable, MTV0809, with the relevant quarterly indicators.


B. Results


       The baseline results of our formal econometric analysis are presented in Table 1; the first
column provides OLS estimates as described by equation [1]. In that specification, we find that
an additional ratings point for 16 and Pregnant reduced the teen birth rate by around one percent
(p-value = 6.4 percent). As we described earlier, however, OLS estimates are likely to be biased
upward (toward a less negative effect). To address this, we estimate an IV model; the first stage
regression results are reported in column 2 and the IV estimates are presented in column 3. The
first stage estimates, represented by Equation [3], show a strong relationship between 16 and
Pregnant ratings and our instrument, MTV ratings in 2008-09, the year before the show began.
The IV estimates from Equation [2] indicate that a one point increase in ratings for 16 and
Pregnant (about 50 percent of its average value) reduces the teen birth rate by 2.37 percent,
which is statistically significant at any standard level. Column 4 provides reduced form estimates
represented by Equation [4].



  [Insert Table 1 Here]



       We continue with a reduced form approach to visually represent an event study analysis
of the effects of 16 and Pregnant. In Figure 5, we present a simplified, reduced form version of
Equation [5], where quarterly indicator variables are interacted with 2008-09 MTV ratings (the
instrument in our IV model) in a model that only includes quarter and DMA*season fixed effects
to absorb much of the residual variation. Figure 5 simply plots these quarterly interaction
coefficient estimates along with their confidence intervals. 30 For the period before the show
began, coefficients are not statistically significant (with one exception among 14 coefficients).
Jointly, the group is not significantly different from zero (p-value = 0.21). After the show began,
all the coefficients turn negative and two of the six are statistically significant. A test of joint
significance of those six coefficients rejects that they are all equal to zero (p-value = 0.002).



  [ Insert Figure 5 Here]



         Still, visual examination of the pre-period suggests a downward slope that goes against a
causal interpretation, despite the fact that the F-tests indicate that the higher values during that
period are insignificant. To take this visual analysis one step further, we simply introduce best
fitting lines through the pre- and post-period coefficients, which are also shown in the figure.
These lines make it clear that there is, indeed, a downward slope before 16 and Pregnant began,
but there is still a sizeable downward shift in point estimates precisely at the point when the
show was introduced. We believe this provides strong visual support for the notion of a causal
effect. 31
         We extend this event study exercise and in Figure 6, we report the results of our fully
specified IV model based on Equation [5]. Here we report IV estimates of the impact of 16 and
Pregnant in a model including all covariates and aggregating quarters into groups of three to
provide greater power. These estimates also strongly suggest a causal interpretation of the
show’s impact, with a more solid econometric underpinning. In the period before 16 and
Pregnant began, none of the quarterly groups were significantly different from the base period
(the year before the show began) and these effects are not jointly significantly different from
zero. What appears to be a slow, steady decline in point estimates is much too small to forecast


30
   In a model with DMA*season fixed effects, the base period of omitted interactions totals four, one for a particular
DMA in each of the four seasons. This means that the base period is one year long, not one quarter long. We have
chosen to use July 2008 through June 2009 as the base period to make it easier to see the “treatment effect,” which
occurs once the show starts in June 2009.
31
   This conclusion strongly relies on the assumption of linearity in the response of teen births to MTV ratings.
the decline in the coefficients once the show began. From there, the data indicate negative and
statistically significant effects on the teen birth rate associated with a one point increase in teen
births. Point estimates indicate that a one unit increase in ratings points reduced the teen birth
rate by -1.88 percent in the following three quarter period. Once the show began, its estimated
impact appears to be roughly constant. Appendix Table 1 provides the exact results from this
specification, along with results from OLS and reduced form specifications.



     [ Insert Figure 6 Here]



          In Table 2, we report estimates from IV and reduced form models for different
subpopulations. Because we found no evidence of differential effects by quarter after show
introduction, we focus on equations (2) and (4), which have just one coefficient estimated for the
effect of the show on birth rates. First we consider births to somewhat older women, including
those 20 to 24, 25 to 29, and 30 to 34. The results for women between 20 and 24 are comparable
to the estimated effect for teens; we do not consider this surprising since ratings for those who
are between the ages of 12 and 17 are similar to those who are between the ages of 18 and 24.
The point estimate of the effect declines for the older age groups and is statistically insignificant
for those who are 30 to 34, as we might expect. 32



     [Insert Table 2 Here]



          In the final three columns of Table 2, we distinguish teens by their race and ethnicity. The
point estimate of the effect for an additional one point in ratings is -2.413 (standard error of
1.075) for whites, -0.140 (standard error of 1.380) for blacks; and -3.782 (standard error of
2.063) for Hispanics. None of these are statistically different from one another. In thinking just
about the point estimates, however, it is perhaps not too surprising that the effect on teen births
to white, non-Hispanic mothers is estimated to be relatively large. As described earlier, mothers

32
  Tests of statistical significance for differences in pairwise comparisons of coefficients between the two younger age
groups and the two older age groups have p-values between 0.03 and 0.12.
on 16 and Pregnant were disproportionately white, non-Hispanic, so perhaps there was a greater
role model effect for them. This conclusion, though, should be considered more as conjecture
since the differences in results across race/ethnicity are not statistically significant and we are
unable to adequately test the race/ethnic-specific role model hypothesis. 33
         Taking these results as a whole, we conclude that 16 and Pregnant had a sizable, causal
impact on teen birth rates. We implemented an IV methodology designed to overcome the
problem of endogenous viewership for 16 and Pregnant, and those results indicate a negative
and significant effect on teen births. We also find that the timing of the impact of the show
coincided exactly with its introduction. Finally, we observe that the impact of the show was
pronounced for those age groups who actually watched it in greater numbers (up to age 24), but
dropped off at older ages. All of these findings support a causal interpretation of our results.
         To interpret the magnitude of our results, we focus on the estimate from Table 1, Column
1, which reports the results from an IV model in which we treat the impact of the show as
constant after it began. 34 Again, this estimate suggests that a one point increase in Nielsen ratings
for 16 and Pregnant and its companion series reduced teen birth rates by about 2.37 percent. We
also note that ratings for these shows averaged 1.8 ratings points. This means that the shows
would have contributed to a 2.37*1.8 = 4.27 percent reduction in teen births over our sample
period after they began airing in the middle of June 2009. According to our data, between the 4th
quarter of 2008 and the 4th quarter of 2010, the quarterly teen birth rate (defined by age of
conception) fell from 14.62 to 12.05, representing a fall of 17.6 percent. 35 The predicted drop
attributable to 16 and Pregnant can explain 4.27/17.6 or 24.3 percent of this decline.

33
   We attempted to examine this hypothesis by exploring responses based on the timing of appearances of mothers by
race/ethnicity. We distinguish mothers by whether they are white or non-white; more precise racial/ethnic breakdowns
are not readily determined by visual inspection and the frequency of what appears to be mixed race/ethnicity. Although
each season of 16 and Pregnant included both white and non-white mothers, Teen Mom and Teen Mom 2 only included
white, non-Hispanic mothers. We broke up the post period into those in which these shows were on the air and
examined whether the birth effect for white, non-Hispanic teens was larger during those quarters. The data do not
suggest such a pattern. We also found no evidence that teen birth rates for black, non-Hispanics or Hispanics fell by
more during the periods in which non-white mothers were on the show. Whether we could reasonably expect the
timing of these effects to be as precise as that imbedded in this exercise, though, is unclear and that limits its value.
34
   Data limitations restricted us from estimating models with time variation in ratings. The proper interpretation of this
set of results is that markets in which 16 and Pregnant was generally more popular experienced a reduction in teen
childbearing that did not noticeably change over time. It does not tell us that the impact was insensitive to changing
market exposure once the show began.
35
   We use a Q4 to Q4 comparison because of the clear seasonality in teen birth rates. Because detrended teen birth rates
probably fell somewhat between Q4 of 2008 and Q2 of 2009, our estimates of the impact of 16 and Pregnant are
likely to be slightly understated.
         The coefficient estimates presented in Table 1 also reveal the importance of labor market
conditions in determining teen childbearing outcomes. The estimated effect suggests that when
the labor market is weak, teens respond by having fewer children. In other words, teen births –
like non-teen births, as documented in numerous previous studies - appear to be pro-cyclical. The
magnitude of the effect is rather large: a one percentage point increase in the unemployment rate
leads to about a 1.5 percent reduction in the teen childbearing rate. 36 This means that the five
point increase in the unemployment rate that the U.S. experienced in the Great Recession would
generate a 7.5 percent reduction in teen childbearing. This amounts to 42.6 percent of the overall
decline, which is a larger effect than that which we attribute to 16 and Pregnant. The fact that a
TV show can have an impact that even approaches the magnitude of the effect of a major swing
in economic conditions is a testament to the practical significance of its impact. Overall, our
findings suggest that much of the dramatic decline in teen childbearing since 16 and Pregnant
first aired in June of 2009 can be attributed to the MTV show and to the weak labor market.


IV. Exploring Mechanisms using Google Search and Twitter Activity


         The results presented above indicate that teenagers responded to the content on 16 and
Pregnant by reducing the rate at which they gave birth. Presumably this result is driven by the
show’s content influencing the way teens think about teen motherhood – namely, showing in a
compelling and accessible way that being a teen mom (and dad) is challenging. The link must be
that this change in attitude toward teen parenthood led to an increased commitment to avoid a
pregnancy and birth. Ideally we would have data on teenage attitudes over time, preferably by
DMA, combined with data on rates of unprotected sex over time, also preferably by DMA. Data
on sexual activity and contraceptive use from available data sources, however, are not available
at the DMA level and sample sizes are sufficiently small that they are not conducive to
conducting an analysis comparable to what we have reported using Vital Statistics birth data. 37

36
   The magnitude of this effect is larger than that estimated in Kearney and Levine (2012b), which found that a one
percent increase in the unemployment rate reduces teen births by 0.6 percent. That analysis used data from 1980
through 2010, though, whereas the present study focuses on cyclical variation from the recent Great Recession. It is
conceivable that the severity of the recent recession led to changes in behavior that were not just linear extrapolations
of that observed in past, less severe, recessions.
37
   Data limitations also preclude us from conducting separate analyses of pregnancies and abortions, but we note that
teen abortion rates also fell over this period (Pazol, et al., 2013). This suggests that the shows’ impact is attributable
to a reduction in pregnancy rather than greater use of abortion.
Instead, we look to data from Google Trends and Twitter to measure changing levels of interest
in birth control and abortion, as captured by on-line search and social media activity. These data
also are not available at the DMA level, forcing us to adopt alternative identification strategies
that take advantage of the massive amounts of data available from these sources. This section
begins by describing these data sources, and then detailing these methodological approaches
before presenting our results.


A. Data from Google Trends and Twitter


         Data from Google Trends provides indexed values of the relative frequency with which
individuals search Google for a particular term over time in a particular location. Google is able
to identify geographical information for search activity through the user’s IP address. The index
is created by determining the number of searches for a particular search term as a share of the
total number of searches conducted in each time and place. Google Trends then assigns an index
value of 100 for the time/place in which this “relative search rate” is maximized. Other index
values are set by taking the ratio of the search rate in a particular time/place to the maximum
search rate. In other words, a time/place where the relative search rate is half the maximum value
would be assigned an index value of 50. Because of the massive amount of searches conducted,
Google creates this index by sampling from its underlying database. Users can request an
analysis of search patterns over any time period between 2004 and the present and across
countries, states, and cities. If the search volume resulting from the sample in a particular time
and place is too low, Google Trends will report an index value equal to zero, which is the
equivalent of a missing value. 38
         Google’s approach in constructing this index generates results that are strictly ordinal; no
cardinal interpretation can be applied to the values. Locations/places with higher index values are
those where searches for a particular term relative to total searches are higher. This could occur

38
   This approach by Google generates two potential problems. The first is sample selection bias, which would occur
if, in small samples, only those random draws that generate unusually high search activity are reported. The second is
just ordinary sampling variability, which is a problem largely for standard error calculations if we treat the reported
data as fixed constants rather than random variables. To overcome these obstacles, we repeat our searches on Google
Trends multiple times and select only those states for which data are available in each period. We then take the average
of the index values, which substantially reduces the sampling variability. States included in this analysis are CA, FL,
GA, IL, MA, MI, NJ, NY, OH, PA, TX, VA for both “how get abortion” and the same states along with MO, NC, and
WA for “how get birth control.”
because of more absolute searches for that term or fewer other searches. The process of assigning
a value of 100 to the maximum level of relative searches also hinders cardinal interpretations.
Two separate searches for different terms (i.e. “how get birth control” and “how get abortion”) in
a place/time with values of 100 almost certainly do not have equal relative search rates. They are
just the highest relative search rates. All of this discussion indicates that any analysis of Google
Trends data can only focus on the direction of any effect. Specific values cannot be compared or
specifically interpreted.
         Despite these limitations, Google Trends search data has now been used by a number of
previous authors, mostly in studies focused on forecasting economic activity and by studies in
the field of finance, 39 but also by analysts addressing social issues like we do in this paper. For
instance, Stephens-Davidoff (2013a and 2013b) uses Google Trends data to explore the impact
of racism on votes for Barak Obama (comparing changes in election results between 2004 and
2008 as a function of the rate of Google searches for racial epithets by state) and to better track
child maltreatment over the course of the business cycle (when searches for terms like “child
abuse” or “child neglect” may rise by those suspicious of this form of activity).
         Twitter records all “tweets” – defined as messages to the online Twitter message service,
where messages are limited to 140 characters – made by individuals. Accessing those data is not
as straightforward as using Google Trends. One can conduct a search on twitter.com/search and
receive a list of recent tweets that contain a search term. There is no way to access historical data
nor is there a way to count the frequency of tweets on this public website. The Twitter “fire
hose” (a library of past tweets) can be obtained, but it is extremely difficult to work with because
of the format and amount of data available. Obtaining these data requires the use of a third party
vendor that has a contract with Twitter to process searches, aggregating the frequency of tweets
that contain specific search terms and providing geographic variation in their frequency. We used




39
  Choi and Varian (2009a and 2009b) showed that Google Trends could help predict economic indexes, including
predictions of tourism activity and unemployment insurance claims. Choi and Liu (2011) cite nearly 20 papers that
have used Google Search data to study outcomes in a variety of market contexts: capital markets, entertainment
markets, labor markets, real estate markets, and healthcare markets. Google Trends data have also been used in a
number of finance studies as a measure of investor attention and search activity, for example, in Da, Gao and Engelberg
(2011) and Vlastakis and Markellos (2012). It has also been used as a measure of job search activity by Baker and
Fradkin (2013) and Garthwaite, Gross, and Notowidigo (2014).
Topsy Labs. 40 As with our use of Google Trends data, we restrict our attention to tweets
including 16 and Pregnant, ignoring Teen Mom and Teen Mom 2 because of the ambiguity of
those terms in a tweet.
         One limitation in these data is that geographic detail is difficult to obtain. Only a very
small share of users identify where they live when they open their Twitter account and those
locations are not updated if the account holder moves. Twitter also does not release IP addresses
for tweets coming from the Twitter fire hose (largely because of the extent of tweeting from cell
phones), so geography cannot be identified that way. To determine the location of the person
sending the tweet, Topsy uses a probabilistic model that assigns an individual to a place based on
a large number of factors. Examples include some information provided in the user’s profile,
check-ins at events/locations (i.e. foursquare), times tweets are made (to help get time zone),
specific tweet content (“if you don't drive at least 80 on the mass pike, get off the mass pike”),
and geographic detail contained in hashtags (“Excited for our upcoming kickball tournament to
benefit NCCF! Hope you can join us on 9/14! #chevychase #bethesda”). They can then use the
small sample of account holders who report geographic information to validate their methods.
They report: “our methods allow us to geoinfer the origin of tweets with over 90% coverage by
country, 80% accuracy by state/province, 40% accuracy by city, at a 90-95% confidence level.” 41
         In our analysis, we use all available tweets between January 1, 2009 and December 31,
2012; 38 billion tweets from the United States in English are available over this time period. 42
Using these data, we can tabulate the total number of tweets made from each state, conditional
on the availability of location. We then calculate a “tweet rate” by determining the number of

40
   In December of 2013, Apple Inc. purchased Topsy Labs. Although the service’s future is unclear, at that time they
ceased accepting new user contracts. The data we have extracted from Topsy Labs are available upon request from
us, but they can no longer be accessed at this time from Topsy Labs itself. Other providers of Twitter data are available,
however.
41
   This statement was provided in a personal communication between us and Topsy in an email dated May 21, 2013.
We should also indicate that the process of generating these geographic data appears to be a work in progress. In
working with these data we have identified data abnormalities that seem to occur in the geographic data, but not the
national data. Over time, some of these issues have been resolved and new issues introduced as the algorithm for
creating these data has been modified. The basic patterns of our results have never been substantively affected, but we
believe it is prudent to interpret our reported results using geographic Twitter data with some caution.
42
   The data available to us do not include all tweets made during this period. We do not have access to tweets that have
been deleted at the request of a user or tweets from users who have closed their account. This also raises another issue
with respect to the use of these data – even the historical data is dynamic. As users delete tweets or close accounts,
the available historical data changes. This means that subsequent investigators who attempt to replicate our results
will not be able to do so without obtaining the exact data extract that we obtained. We are able to provide these data
upon request.
tweets per one million total tweets that contain a specific search term (in the United States in
English). As with Google Trends data, no demographic detail, including age, is available on the
person sending the tweet. We simply assume that those tweeting about 16 and Pregnant are more
likely to be younger and a potential viewer of the show. Appendix B describes specific Twitter
content related to the entry “16 and Pregnant” and other associated terms. 43


B. Empirical Approaches


         The nature of the Google and Twitter data requires us to implement alternative
approaches in this analysis relative to those which we reported earlier using Vital Statistics birth
data. It seems the best way to take advantage of the strength of these data, which rests in their
sheer volume, is to focus on the time series nature and the frequency with which outcomes can
be measured. We can establish causal relationships if the exact timing of an outcome matches
perfectly with the introduction of or exposure to the show. For instance, if searches/tweets
regarding 16 and Pregnant spike in the next 24 hours after the show is aired and then reverts
back to some lower rate immediately afterwards, we are inclined to conclude that the show itself
is responsible for that spike. This analysis is usefully presented graphically.
         In addressing other outcomes, like searches looking for information on birth control or
tweets that include mentions of birth control, a similar strategy may be applied, although
regression-based methods appear more appropriate. We can certainly consider, for instance, daily
trends in the number of tweets mentioning birth control and look for spikes on the days when the
show was on the air. That may be a more difficult task, though, because many tweets are likely
to mention birth control regardless of the show. Observing a spike, therefore, would be rather
unlikely; an upward blip from what is otherwise a large and noisy number of tweets containing
that term is a more plausible outcome. Graphical approaches, therefore, would be unlikely to
yield relevant insights.

43
  Few examples exist of papers that use Twitter data in an economics analysis of individual behavior. There are a
handful of studies in political science that use Twitter data to identify political ideology and study information and
influence networks in this context (cf. Barbera, 2013). Another set of papers in the field of finance are also available
that examine the relationship between Twitter data and financial activity (for example, Blakespoor, Miller, and White,
2012). Liu, Rui, and Whinston (2013) find that positive tweets increase movie sales and negative tweets decrease
sales. We believe we are the first to use Twitter data in an empirical application to measure what those tweeting are
thinking as an intermediate step in a broader investigation of an important social outcome.
       Instead, we estimate regression models that are designed to capture this form of
identification. Regressions have the property of averaging out some of the statistical noise so
they may be more conducive to identifying correlated spikes when the spikes themselves are not
sufficiently large to clearly reveal themselves in a figure. We estimate the following Ordinary
Least Squares regression model:


(6)                        searchBCt = β0 + β1NewReleaset + Xtγ + εt


where searchBC is shorthand for a search or tweet for a term like “birth control,” NewRelease
indicates that period in which a new episode is released, and X represents quadratic trends and,
when we use weekly data from Google Trends, month fixed effects as described below.
       Because of the way the data are tracked, we use different units of time depending on
whether we are looking at Google Trends data or Twitter data. When we use Google Trends data,
we consider the entire time period between January 2009, the beginning of the year in which the
show began, and December 2012, and focus on weekly variation, distinguishing between the
weeks in which a new episode was in season relative to other weeks of the year. Because of the
potential for seasonal variation in this approach, we also include seasonal fixed effects when we
use these data. When we use Twitter data, we restrict our attention just to those weeks in which
the show is “in season” (which we listed previously) and take advantage of daily variation in
outcomes. In our analysis of these data, we examine the response the day the show aired as well
as the following day to approximate the 24 hour period following the airing of a new episode.
This would modestly alter equation [6] to take the following form:


(7)               searchBCt = β0 + β1NewReleaset + β2NewReleaset-1 + Xtγ + εt


       We extend this analysis by directly treating searches/tweets about 16 and Pregnant as a
measure of exposure and examining whether increased exposure (as captured by this measure)
alters the likelihood of searching for other terms related to pregnancy determinants. Formally, we
estimate the model:


(8)                          searchBCt = β0 + β1search16Pt + Xtγ + εt
This model has the advantage of being able to account for variation in the popularity of particular
episodes of the show. In essence, placing an indicator for new release on the right hand side
captures exposure to an episode of average popularity. Instead, by using a specific measure of
the popularity of each individual episode taken from the same medium (i.e. tweets about birth
control as a function of tweets about 16 and Pregnant), our model is more powerful. We estimate
these models using data in the same units and timeframe as we indicated for equation [6].
       In all of these approaches using high frequency data, we believe that the results plausibly
provide causal estimates of the impact of the show. For the results to be spurious, there would
need to be some other nationally trending variable whose time series pattern is correlated with
the specific day or week that 16 and Pregnant aired over the course of a few years. Although
there may be something that satisfies this, we are at a loss to imagine what that might be.
       In one final identification approach, we consider the relationship between searches/tweets
for pregnancy-related behavior and exposure to 16 and Pregnant using lower frequency data that
varies geographically. Searches/Tweets for 16 and Pregnant prior to the show’s introduction will
be minimal, but those searches increase differentially in some states compared to others. This
approach simply asks whether those differentials are linked to changes in search/tweet activity
for our measures of pregnancy-related behaviors. A straightforward extension of the model
above captures the methodology we introduce here, as represented by equation [9]:


(9)                    searchBCjt = β0 + β1search16Pjt + β2Ujt + γj + δt + εjt


Much of the notation is as previously defined. The additional subscript j represents geography,
states in this case. State and period fixed effects are also added along with U, the state
unemployment rate.
       This approach is the most closely associated with our earlier analysis of Vital Statistics
birth data, with some important exceptions. First, we cannot estimate this model using quarterly
data in the period before and after the show began. Google Trends data are too thin to do so;
instead we aggregate over the January 2005-May 2009 and June 2009-December 2010 periods in
all states with available data in both periods in our analysis. The longer interval in the pre-period
is attributable to lower search volume over that period and the desire to obtain the largest feasible
sample of states (recall that states with too low a search volume for a particular term are not
reported in Google Trends). Twitter was not used extensively until around the time when 16 and
Pregnant was introduced. In those data, we use state variation between January 2009 and
December 2012, breaking up that larger period into 11 intervals in which the show was and was
not on the air. Second, the key explanatory variable is not the level of Nielsen ratings; we are
unable to include those ratings in this analysis because Google Trends and Twitter data are not
available at the county or DMA level. Third, for similar reasons we are also unable to estimate
instrumental variables models using MTV ratings before the show began. Despite these
limitations, we believe that this analysis can provide supportive, if perhaps not dispositive,
evidence. 44


C. Results


         We begin by presenting graphical evidence indicating that young people clearly increased
their internet activities related to the show exactly at the times when new shows aired. Figure 7
displays weekly data between the beginning of 2009 and the end of 2012, highlighting the weeks
during that period in which new episodes of the show were released. These data show clear signs
of spikes in searches and tweets precisely in the weeks of this period in which new episodes were
available. Searches peaked in the spring of 2011 and tweets peaked in the summer of 2009, both
during periods in which the show was on the air. Other variability is present in the data, but the
predominant pattern is the presence of these spikes.




44
   We have experimented with aggregating Nielsen ratings to the state level by assuming that ratings across counties
within a DMA are constant and applying county population estimates. We then combined these state level ratings data
along with Google Trends data on search activity at the state level for specific terms. Note that this is not possible
using Twitter data because tweeting was only common during the “post” period. Using these Google Trends data, we
estimate models comparable to those reported previously except using ratings as the key explanatory variable in both
OLS and IV specifications. From this analysis we learned: (1) Google searches for 16 and Pregnant and Nielsen
ratings are positively correlated, (2) if we replace 16 and Pregnant Google search index values with 16 and Pregnant
ratings, we also find statistically significant effects of ratings on our other Google search terms (how to get birth
control or how to get an abortion) in comparable OLS specifications, and (3) these data are not sufficient to estimate
IV models based on the subset of states for which we have relevant search data because first stage regressions have
very limited power in this context. We also tried using search volume for MTV shows popular in 2008-09 (including
“The Hills,” “Real World,” and “The Challenge”) as alternative instruments, but it became apparent that only searches
for “The Hills” can be identified from Google Trends as focusing specifically on the TV show. Search data for this
one show was insufficient to provide sufficient identification for the IV approach.
     [ Insert Figure 7 Here]



          We next plot daily trends in searches and spikes between November 1, 2010 and
December 21, 2010, as shown in Figure 8. We chose a period this short because Google Trends
daily rate data are only available when the search is restricted to a relatively short period of time.
We chose these particular days because they are in the middle of 16 and Pregnant’s run since it
first aired through the end of our sample period. As with the weekly data, we see the existence of
spikes in the data that are well-timed to the release of a new show. Interestingly, the spike does
not occur on the day the episode is released, but the following day. This makes sense if
individuals watch the show at night and want to talk about it with their friends the next day. We
view these spikes as supportive of extensive exposure to the show.



     [ Insert Figure 8 Here]



          Next, we turn to estimates of equations [6] and [7] above, investigating whether airing a
new episode increased searches/tweets related to birth control or abortion. In our analysis of
Google Trends data, the specific search terms that we considered were “How Get Birth Control;”
“How Get Birth Control Pill;” and “How Get Abortion.” 45 Table 3 presents the results of this
analysis with results for our Google Trends examination reported on the left side of the table. We
are unable to detect statistically significant increases for any of these search terms using these
data. We report the results of a similar exercise using Twitter data in the right side of the table,
focusing on tweets that mention birth control or abortion. Using these data, we see that tweets
including the term, “abortion,” rise by about 14 percent on the day a new episode is released and
an additional 21 percent the following day. Tweets including the term “birth control” rise by 12
percent the day a new episode is released and 23 percent the following day. 46

45
   We also experimented with terms that might capture increased interest in getting pregnant or becoming a teen mom,
but that exploration was not fruitful.
46
   When we estimate this OLS relationship putting the search index value or the tweet rate for the phrase “16 and
Pregnant” on the left-hand side, the estimated coefficient indicates that the search index for 16 and Pregnant jumps
39 points (out of a maximum of 100) in the weeks in which a new episode is released and the tweet rate rises 28
  [Insert Table 3 Here]



         We report the results of estimating equation [8] in the top panel of Table 4. This analysis
estimates regression models where the dependent variable reflects search/tweet activity for terms
related to unprotected sexual activity and the key independent variable reflects search/tweet
activity mentioning 16 and Pregnant. These results indicate that increases in Google searches for
16 and Pregnant are related to a statistically significant increase in searches for “how get birth
control pills.” Similarly, when we turn to Twitter data on the right side of the table, we see that
the elasticity between tweets containing “birth control”/”abortion” and tweets containing 16 and
Pregnant is 0.077/0.064; both are statistically significant.



  [Insert Table 4 Here]



         Estimates from difference-in-difference models characterized by equation [9], using
lower frequency data that includes state variation, are reported in the lower panel of Table 4. The
results of this analysis show that in states in which search activity for 16 and Pregnant rose the
most following the introduction of the show, searches related to getting birth control and
abortion also rose the most. 47 Tweets including the term, “birth control,” also rose by a
statistically significant 13.7 percent in response to increased rates of Twitter activity regarding
the show. Overall, the evidence reported here strongly suggests that exposure to 16 and Pregnant
altered searches and tweets by teens (presumably) regarding abortion and contraception,




percent the day a new episode airs and 109 percent (100*(eβ – 1) where β = 0.249 and 0.738) the following day. The
magnitude of these results is not surprising based on the visual representation of these relationships in Figures 6 and
7. But as described above, we have no meaningful way to interpret these magnitudes; we interpret the fact that there
are statistically significant increases in these measures of search and twitter activity as merely consistent with a
response to the show, but unfortunately not one that can be readily translated into an absolute number of searches or
tweets.
47
   The more specific search regarding how to get birth control pills resulted in too little search activity at the state level
to be useful for this analysis as most states had no reported index value in the earlier period.
providing perhaps a glimpse into their thinking regarding these intermediary steps leading to
giving birth.


V. Discussion
       Using data from numerous sources, we have examined the impact that the MTV show, 16
and Pregnant, has had on rates of teen childbearing in the United States. We find that exposure
to the 16 and Pregnant franchise of shows had a sizable impact on the rate at which teens give
birth in the United States, generating a 4.3 percent reduction in teen births that would have been
conceived between June 2009, when the show began, and the end of 2010. That reduction can
account for 24 percent of the decline over that period. Data from Google Trends and Twitter
offer supportive evidence suggesting that the show influenced attitudes, in particular, raising
teens’ interest in birth control and abortion. We do not have sufficient data to carefully evaluate
the role that more contraceptive use or more frequent use of abortion played in contributing to
this effect. We do know, however, that aggregate abortion rates for teens were also declining
over this period (Pazol, et al., 2013), suggesting that a reduction in pregnancy is the likely
mechanism.
       These findings have important policy implications. Most teen pregnancy prevention
efforts are focused on giving teenagers information about how to avoid pregnancies – either
through comprehensive sex education or an abstinence-only focused curriculum – or by
providing expanded access to contraception. This show produced by MTV was not specifically
designed as an anti-teen childbearing campaign, but it seems to have had that effect by showing
that being a pregnant teen and a new mother is hard – it strains relationships with friends,
parents, and the baby’s father, and means physical discomfort, potential health problems, and
sleep deprivation. Apparently those images affected teenage viewers’ motivation to avoid that
outcome. This implies that addressing teens’ motivation for avoiding teen parenthood can be an
effective tool and, furthermore, that compelling social media can be used as a policy lever to do
so.
       The fact that MTV knows how to make shows that teens like to watch, which speak to
them in ways that resonate, presumably is critical to the show’s impact. Apparently, this
approach has the potential to yield large results with important social consequences. Typically,
the public concern addresses potential negative influences of media exposure, but this study finds
it may have positive influences as well. Presumably the effect on the attitudes or behaviors of
teens and young adults could be positive or negative, depending on the specific media content
and context. We find that media has the potential to be a powerful driver of social outcomes.
Appendix A: Contents of “16 and Pregnant” Episodes




   1) Show caters to teens in states with high teen birth rate
          a. (15/47 in TX, FL, AL)


   2) Ambivalence towards teen pregnancy is rampant
          a. Only 18 out of 47 report opposition to their pregnancy when they found out,
              although none report that they were looking to get pregnant
          b. Once pregnant, 43 of 47 report ambivalence towards giving birth
          c. Most common reasons for getting pregnant include inexperience (36/47) and
              ambivalence (28/47). Only 5/47 report trying to avoid a pregnancy but failed


   3) Abortion is rarely discussed and the decision not to have one is more about ambivalence
      than constraints
          a. Most (35/47) did not discuss considering an abortion
          b. Of those the 12 that did, only 3 didn’t abort because of a philosophical objection
          c. 1 did so because they were afraid to tell their parents in a parental consent state


   4) Contraceptive mistakes not major cause of pregnancies
          a. Most (36/47) report not using contraception at time of pregnancy (can’t tell for 2
              others)
          b. Of those 9 who report using contraception, 7 report using pill
          c. Suggests either not telling the truth or not taking pill every day


   5) Relationships were monogamous
          a. No girl reported having sex with other partners at time of pregnancy


   6) Limited information about girls’ family background
          a. Most girls (38/47) did not live in two parent households at time of pregnancy.
       b. Very little specific information provided about the families of the girls (parents’
           employment, occupation, education)


7) Demographics of the girls largely match demographics of the population, but do not
   match demographics of teen girls giving birth
       a. 32/47 of girls are non-Hispanic white, eight are Hispanic, five are black, non-
           Hispanic, and two are other race, non-Hispanic


8) The vast majority of the boyfriends stick around, although relationships are strained
       a. Of all the pregnancies, only four led to a marriage prior to the birth
       b. Almost all (40/47) of the boyfriends stick around through the pregnancy
       c. By the end of the episode (on average, about a month after birth), most (32/44)
           are still in relationship after the birth (note that there were three adoptions)
       d. Many, but not all fathers (31/44) are living with their children
       e. For a large minority (12/32) of those still in relationship, that relationship is very
           strained.
       f. Of all the pregnancies, only four led to a marriage prior to the birth
       g. The majority of fathers (26/44) are still heavily involved in their child’s life, and
           most of the others (14/44) have limited involvement. Only 4/44 are totally out of
           picture


9) After the birth, parents of teen often heavily involved
       a. Most parents (42/47) involved in teen’s life during pregnancy and 32 of them
           provide active support during and after pregnancy
       b. Majority of girls (32/44) still live with parents after giving birth


10) Girls on the show are doing well in their educational attainment under the circumstances
       a. Only 11 of 44 of teen mothers have dropped out. This is not much higher than the
           national average for all students.


11) Health issues for the mother and the child were prevalent at “normal” rates
a. 11 out of the 47 births took place via C-section
b. 6 out of 47 births involved some health complication for the child
c. 5 out of the 47 mothers experienced some health problems themselves during
   pregnancy (early contractions, bed rest, preeclampsia)
d. Some level of sleep deprivation was rampant
e. Little indication that giving birth led to satisfaction or joy from the experience
Appendix B: Specific Tweet Content
We consider it beyond the scope of our research to systematically review the specific content of
the millions of tweets that address 16 and Pregnant. But we did run a basic search and scan a
handful of the specific tweets using data available from search.twitter.com. 48 We found that
instructive, and share some of our findings here.


When we have done this for the search term, 16 and Pregnant, a small number of the resulting
tweets indicate that the person was making a largely innocuous tweet:
         When I go places with Tessa people give me rude looks because they think she is
         my baby and I was 16 and Pregnant.
In many other instances, the tweet is clearly about the show, although still largely content free:
         I just saw a fat kid wearing a shirt that said 16 and Pregnant.
Others are clearly more pointed and give an indicating of what the person tweeting is actually
thinking:
         16 and Pregnant just makes me not ever want to have a kid hahaha.
         still not overly impressed with my decision to take a spring class. I’ve seen better choices
         on 16 and Pregnant.
Examples of tweets that capture the potential glamorizing effect are also present, but far less
common:
         I wanna be 16 and Pregnant. Who wanna be my baby daddy?
         Perhaps more revealing are the results one obtains from a similar exercise where the
search terms include “16 and Pregnant” and “birth control.” The types of tweets that routinely
appear include the following:
         16 and Pregnant is a great way of birth control.
         seriously, watching #16 and Pregnant is birth control itself
         watching 16 and Pregnant is a great refresher on why NOT to get pregnant. Perfect
         birth control
         Teen Mom and 16 and Pregnant are birth control for me … That shit makes me never
         want kids.


48
  These exact tweets may not be reproducible from that source in the future because it is based on searches of recent
tweets. We have screen shots capturing what was returned when we conducted these searches.
Tweets that mention 16 and Pregnant and abortion largely take two forms. Some are purely
political:
        Romney is against abortion so basically that means 3676 new seasons of teen
        mom and 16 and Pregnant.
        If abortion was running for public office, "16 and Pregnant" would be its most
        effective campaign ad,”
        this week on 16 and Pregnant the virgin mary has to deal with joseph trying to
        pressure her into an abortion.


Others clarify that the individuals are thinking about abortion more broadly:
        Watching 16 and Pregnant, I'd rather have an abortion than give my baby up for
        adoption.
        Good thing I never have to choose
        What would happen if you were 16 and Pregnant? — i dont know to be honest, im
        against abortion, hopefully im not.
Appendix Table 1: Estimates of the Impact of 16 and Pregnant Ratings on Teen Birth Rates

                                      OLS              IV         Reduced Form
                                       (1)             (2)             (3)
  Rating*(Q1:2005-Q3:2005)           -0.043           1.075           1.782
                                     (1.148)         (1.897)         (3.077)

  Rating*(Q4:2005-Q2:2006)            0.246           1.579            2.464
                                     (0.874)         (1.272)          (2.069)

  Rating*(Q3:2006-Q1:2007)           -0.120           0.993            1.551
                                     (0.580)         (0.942)          (1.508)

  Rating*(Q2:2007-Q4:2007)           -0.234           0.072            0.171
                                     (0.433)         (0.763)          (1.266)

  Rating*(Q1:2008-Q2:2008)           -0.272           0.605            0.933
                                     (0.494)         (0.685)          (1.121)

  Base Period: (Q3:2008-               ---              ---             ---
  Q2:2009)

  Rating*(Q3:2009-Q1:2010)           -1.035          -1.880           -2.816
                                     (0.334)         (0.562)          (0.957)

  Rating*(Q2:2010-Q4:2010)           -1.127          -1.510           -2.328
                                     (0.400)         (0.677)          (1.178)

   Unemployment                        -1.435           -1.490            -1.524
   Rate                               (0.405)          (0.384)           (0.442)
Notes: The data used for this analysis represents quarterly birth rates by DMA for conceptions leading to
live births between 2005 and 2010. The sample size in each model is 4919 (205 DMAs, 24 quarters, and
one observation was dropped because there were no teen births). The dependent variable, the birth rate, is
measured in natural logs. The rating variable represents ratings for 16 and Pregnant in OLS and IV
models and MTV ratings in 2008-09 in the reduced form model. Coefficients and standard errors
(reported in parentheses) are multiplied by 100. Each model also includes the percentage of a DMA’s
female teen that are Hispanic and non-Hispanic black along with quarter and DMA*season fixed effects.
Regressions are weighted by the relevant sample sizes for each outcome. Reported standard errors are
clustered at the DMA level. Bolded results are statistically significant at the 5 percent level.
REFERENCES

Adalian, Josef . 2010. “It’s a Hit! MTV’s ’16 and Pregnant’ Delivers Huge Ratings.” The Wrap:
       Covering Hollywood. February 18. Available at: http://www.thewrap.com/tv/column-
       post/its-hit-mtvs-16-and-pregnant-delivers-huge-ratings-14381 (accessed 10/10/2013).

Albert, Bill. 2010. With One Voice 2010: America’s Adults and Teens Sound Off about Teen
        Pregnancy. Washington, DC: The National Campaign to Prevent Teen and Unplanned
        Pregnancy.

Aldrich, Eric M, Peter S. Arcidiacono, and Jacob L. Vigdor. 2005. "Do People Value Racial
       Diversity? Evidence from Nielsen Ratings," The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis &
       Policy 0(1): 4.

Baker, Scott and Andrey Fradkin. 2013. “The Impact of Unemployment Insurance on Job
       Search: Evidence from Google Search Data.” Stanford Working Paper.

Barbera, Paolo. 2013. “Birds of the Same Feather Tweet Together. Bayesian Ideal Point
       Estimation Using Twitter Data.” NYU Working Paper.
       http://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=2108098.

Blakespoor, Elizabeth, Gregory S. Miller and Hal D. White. 2012. “The Role of Dissemination
       in Market Liquidity: Evidence from Firms' Use of Twitter.” Research Papers 2106,
       Stanford University, Graduate School of Business. Available at:
       http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1657169 (accessed 9/16/2014).

Bricklin, Julia. 2012. “Why We Need MTV’s ’16 and Pregnant’.” Forbes. Available online at:
       http://www.forbes.com/sites/juliabricklin/2012/03/30/540/ (accessed 10/10/2013).

Buckles, Kasey and Daniel Hungerman. 2013. “Season of Birth and Later Outcomes: Old
      Questions, New Answers.” Review of Economics and Statistics 95(3): 711-724.

Chandra, Anita, Steven C. Martino, Rebecca L. Collins, Marc N. Elliott, Sandra H. Berry, David
      E. Kanouse, and Angela Miu. 2008. “Does Watching Sex on Television Predict Teen
      Pregnancy? Findings from a National Longitudinal Survey of Youth,” Pediatrics 122(5):
      1047-1054.

Chiou, Lesley, and Mary Lopez. 2010. “The Reality of Reality Television: Does Reality TV
       Influence Local Crime Rates?” Economics Letters 108(3): 330–333.

Choi, Hyunyoung and Paul Liu. 2011. “Reading Tea Leaves in the Tourism Industry: a Case
       Study in the Gulf Oil Spill, 2011.” Google Technical Report.
       http://google.com/googleblogs/pdfs/google_gulf_tourism_march2011.pdf

Choi, Hyunyoung, and Hal Varian. 2009a. “Predicting the Present with Google Trends." Google
       Technical Report. http://google.com/googleblogs/pdfs/google_predicting_the_present.pdf
Choi, Hyunyoung and Hal Varian. 2009b. “Predicting Initial Claims for Unemployment
       Benefits." Google Technical Report.
       http://research.google.com/archive/papers/initialclaimsUS.pdf

Chong, Alberto and Eliana La Ferrara. 2009. “Television and Divorce: Evidence from Brazilian
      Novelas” Journal of The European Economic Association 7(2-3):
       458-468.

Colen, Cynthia G., Arline T. Geronimus, and Maureen G. Phipps. 2006. “Getting a Piece of the
       Pie? The Economic Boom of the 1990s and Declining Teen Birth Rates in the United
       States.” Social Science and Medicine 63(6): 1531-1545.

Da, Zhi., Joseph Engelberg, and Pengji Gao. 2011. “In Search of Attention" The Journal of
       Finance 66(5): 1461–1499.

Dahl, Gordon and Stefano DellaVigna. 2009. "Does Movie Violence Increase Violent Crime?"
       Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(2): 677-734.

DellaVigna, Stefano, and Ethan Kaplan. 2007. “The Fox News Effect: Media Bias and Voting,”
      Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (3): 1187-1234.

Garthwaite, Craig, Tal Gross, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo. 2014. “Public Health Insurance,
      Labor Supply, and Employment Lock. Quarterly Journal of Economics 192(3): 653-696.

Gentzkow, Matthew, and Jesse M Shapiro. 2008. “Preschool Television Viewing and Adolescent
      Test Scores: Historical Evidence from the Coleman Study”. Quarterly Journal of
      Economics 123, 279 – 323.

Gerber, Alan S., James G. Gimbel, Donald P. Green, and Daron R. Shaw. 2011. “How Large
       and Long-lasting Are the Persuasive Effects of Televised Campaign Ads? Results from a
       Randomized Field Experiment.” American Political Science Review 105(1): 135-150.

Gorman, Bill (2011). “2010-11 Season Broadcast Primetime Show 18-49 Ratings Averages.”
     Available at: http://tvbythenumbers.zap2it.com/2011/06/01/2010-11-season-broadcast-
     primetime-show-18-49-ratings-averages/94402/ (accessed 10/10/2013).

Jensen, Robert and Emily Oster. 2009. “The Power of TV: Cable Television and Women’s
       Status in India,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(3): 1057-1094.

Kanazawa, Mark. T. and Jonas P. Funk. 2001. “Racial Discrimination in Professional Basketball:
      Evidence from Nielsen Ratings.” Economic Inquiry 39(4): 599–608.

Kearney, Melissa S. and Phillip B. Levine. 2014a. Policy Brief: Trends in Teen Childbearing:
      What’s Going On? Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.
Kearney, Melissa Schettini, and Phillip B. Levine. 2014b. “Income Inequality and Early Non-
      Marital Childbearing: An Economic Exploration of the "Culture of Despair." Journal of
      Human Resources 49(1): 1-31.

Kearney, Melissa S. and Phillip B. Levine. 2012a. "Why is the Teen Birth Rate in the United
      States so High and Why Does it Matter?" Journal of Economic Perspectives 26(2): 141-
      166.

Kearney, Melissa S. and Phillip Levine. 2012b. “Investigating Recent Trends in the U.S. Teen
      Birth Rates,” NBER working paper 17964.

La Ferrara, Eliana, Alberto Chong, and Suzanne Duryea. 2012. “Soap Operas and Fertility:
       Evidence from Brazil.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 4(4): 1-31.

Liu, Yizao, Huaxia Riu, and Andrew Whinston. 2013. “Whose and What Chatter Matters? The
       Impact of Tweets on Movie Sales. Decision Support Systems 55(4): 863–870

Lopoo, Leonard M. and Kerri M. Raissian. 2012. “Policy Retrospective: Natalist Policies in the
       United States.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 31(4): 905-946.

Marketing Charts. 2013. “Are Young People Watching Less TV? (Updated – Q2 2013 Data).”
      Available at: http://www.marketingcharts.com/wp/television/are-young-people-watching-
      less-tv-24817/, accessed 6/24/2013.

Martin, Joyce A. Martin, Brady E. Hamilton, Stephanie J. Ventura, Michelle J.K. Osterman,
       Elizabeth C. Wilson, and T.J. Mathews (2012). “Births: Final Data for 2010.” National
       Vital Statistics Reports 61(1).

Myers, Caitlin Knowles. 2008. “Discrimination as a Competitive Device: The Case of Local
       Television News.” The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy 8(1): 28.

MTV. 2012. MTV’s Groundbreaking Docu-Series “16 and Pregnant” Returns on Tuesday,
      March 27 At 10pm Et/Pt. Available at:
      http://mtvpress.com/press/release/mtvs_groundbreaking_docu_series_16_and_pregnant_r
      eturns_on_tuesday_march_27 (accessed 10/10/2013).

National Campaign to Prevent Teen and Unplanned Pregnancy. 2010. “Evaluating the Impact of
       MTV’s 16 and Pregnant on Teen Viewers’ Attitudes about Teen Pregnancy.” Science
       Says 45.

National Campaign to Prevent Teen and Unplanned Pregnancy. 2009. “Socio-Economic and
       Family Characteristics of Teen Childbearing.” Science Says 41.

Pazol, Karen, Andreea A. Creanga, Kim D. Burley, Brenda Hayes, and Denise J. Jamieson.
       2013. “Abortion Surveillance – United States, 2010.” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly
       Report: Surveillance Summaries 62(08):1-44.
Price, Joseph and Gordon B. Dahl. 2012. “Using Natural Experiments to Study the Impact of
        Media on the Family.” Family Relations 61(3): 363-373.

Saffer, Henry, Melanie Wakefield and Yvonne Terry-McElrath. 2007. “The Effect of Nicotine
        Replacement Therapy Advertising on Youth Smoking.” NBER Working Paper 12964.

Seidman, Robert. 2010. “Season Premiere of MTV's 16 and Pregnant Scores Series High 3.4
      Million Viewers.” Available at: http://tvbythenumbers.zap2it.com/2010/02/18/season-
      premiere-of-mtvs-16-and-pregnant-scores-series-high-3-4-million-viewers/42357/
      (accessed 10/10/2013).

Seidman, Robert. 2009. MTV Greenlights Season Two of Hit Series “16 & Pregnant”. Available
      at: http://tvbythenumbers.zap2it.com/2009/06/30/mtv-greenlights-season-two-of-hit-
      series-16-pregnant/21672/ (accessed 10/10/2013).

Stein, Rob. 2008. “Study First to Link TV Sex To Real Teen Pregnancies.” Washington Post.
        Available at: http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/story/2008/11/03/
        ST2008110300038.html (accessed 10/5/2013).

Stephens-Davidoff, Seth. 2013a. “The Cost of Racial Animus on a Black Presidential Candidate:
       Using Google Search Data to Find What Surveys Miss.” Harvard University, unpublished
       manuscript.

Stephens-Davidoff, Seth. 2013b. “Unreported Victims of an Economic Downturn.” Harvard
       University, unpublished manuscript.

Trudeau, Jennifer. Forthcoming. “The Role of New Media on Teen Sexual Behaviors and
      Fertility Outcomes: The Case of 16 and Pregnant.” Southern Economic Journal.

U.S. Census Bureau (2014). Annual Estimates of the Resident Population by Sex, Age, Race
       Alone or in Combination, and Hispanic Origin for the United States and States: April 1,
       2010 to July 1, 2013. Available at:
        http://factfinder2.census.gov/faces/tableservices/jsf/pages/productview.xhtml?src=bkmk

Vlastakis, Nikolaos & Raphael N. Markellos. 2012. "Information Demand and Stock Market
       Volatility," Journal of Banking & Finance 36(6): 1808-1821.
Table 1: Estimates of the Impact of 16 and Pregnant Ratings on Teen
Birth Rates

                             OLS         First Stage       IV         Reduced
                             (1)             (2)           (3)         Form
                                                                        (4)
  Dependent Variable                      16 and
                           ln(birth      Pregnant       ln(birth
                             rate)        Ratings         rate)     ln(birth rate)
  16 and Pregnant
  Ratings                  -1.020*                      -2.368**
                           (0.552)                       (0.942)

  MTV Ratings 2008-
  09                                     1.511***                     -3.581**
                                          (0.204)                      (1.512)

   Unemployment             -1.440***        -0.001      -1.487***       -1.485***
   Rate                       (0.401)        (0.026)       (0.375)         (0.432)
   F-Statistic on
   Omitted Instrument                         48.1
Notes: The birth data used for this analysis represents quarterly birth rates by
DMA for conceptions leading to live births between 2005 and 2010. The sample
size in each model is 4919 (205 DMAs, 24 quarters, and one observation was
dropped because there were no teen births). Coefficients and standard errors
(reported in parentheses) in birth rate regressions are multiplied by 100. Each
model also includes the percentage of a DMA’s female teen that are Hispanic and
non-Hispanic black along with quarter and DMA*season fixed effects.
Regressions are weighted by the relevant sample sizes for each outcome.
Reported standard errors are clustered at the DMA level.
*** Significant at the 1 percent level.
** Significant at the 5 percent level.
* Significant at the 10 percent level.
Table 2: Estimates of the Impact of 16 and Pregnant Ratings on Birth
Rates, by Demographic Group
                                                                                 Black,
                                                                     White,      Non-
                                                                      Non-      Hispanic
                Age          Age          Age             Age       Hispanic    Age 15-    Hispanic
               15-19        20-24        25-29           30-34      Age 15-19      19      Age 15-19

                                                   IV

  Rating      -2.368**     -2.422**     -1.606**          -0.328    -2.413**     -0.140      -3.782
               (0.942)      (0.993)      (0.817)         (0.689)     (1.075)    (1.380)     (2.063)

  Unemp.     -1.487***    -1.810***    -0.800***        -0.910***   -1.399***    -0.243    -2.512***
  Rate        (0.375)      (0.308)      (0.229)          (0.146)     (0.329)    (1.049)     (0.784)


                                            Reduced Form

  Rating      -3.581**    -3.498***     -2.344**          -0.455    -3.370**     -0.194      -6.510
               (1.517)     (1.312)       (1.151)         (1.016)     (1.581)    (2.109)     (4.432)

  Unemp.     -1.485***    -1.726***    -0.721***        -0.897***   -1.354***    -0.240    -2.418***
  Rate        (0.432)      (0.325)      (0.252)          (0.165)     (0.375)    (1.170)     (0.944)

  Sample
  Size         4,919        4,920        4,920           4,918        4,911      4,513      4,750
Notes: This data used for this analysis represents quarterly birth rates by DMA for
conceptions leading to live births between 2005 and 2010. The sample size in each model
starts at 4,920 (205 DMAs, 24 quarters, and then drops DMA/quarter cells in which there
were no teen births). The dependent variable, the birth rate, is measured in natural logs.
Coefficients and standard errors (reported in parentheses) are multiplied by 100. Each
model also includes quarter and DMA*season fixed effects and age-specific models
include the percentage of the relevant population that is Hispanic and non-Hispanic
black. Regressions are weighted by the relevant sample sizes for each outcome. Reported
standard errors are clustered at the DMA level.
*** Significant at the 1 percent level; ** Significant at the 5 percent level; * Significant
at the 10 percent level.
Table 3: Impact of Episode Release on National Google Searches and
Tweets about Sexual Activity, Contraception, and Abortion
                                                                      Twitter: ln(Tweet
                                Google Trends: Search Index                 Rate)

                                          “How Get
                           “How Get         Birth
                             Birth         Control “How Get          “Birth
                            Control”        Pill”  Abortion”        Control” “Abortion”
 Week New 16 and             0.825          2.227   -1.627            ---       ---
 Pregnant Episode Released (1.216)         (2.010)  (1.730)

 Day New 16 and Pregnant          ---        ---         ---        0.120***       0.142***
 Episode Released                                                    (0.047)        (0.036)

 Day New 16 and Pregnant          ---        ---         ---        0.230***       0.212***
 Episode Released - Lagged                                           (0.058)        (0.046)

 Number of Weeks                   209       209         209           336           336
 (Searches)/
 Days (Tweets)
Notes: Google Trends data are weekly observations between January 4, 2009 and
December 30, 2012. Twitter data are daily observations between January 1, 2009
and December 31, 2012, but just “in-season” days. Standard errors reported in
parentheses. These models also include quadratic trends and, in Google Trends
analysis, monthly dummy variables. Twitter regressions are weighted by the total
number of tweets made on each day.
*** Significant at the 1 percent level;
** Significant at the 5 percent level.
* Significant at the 10 percent level.
Table 4: Impact of Searches/Tweets about 16 and Pregnant on Searches
and Tweets and about Birth Control, and Abortion

                          Google Trends: Search Index                   Twitter: ln(Tweet Rate)
                                        “How
                                         Get
                          “How Get       Birth
                            Birth      Control    “How Get                 “Birth
                           Control”      Pill”    Abortion”               Control”       “Abortion”

                                    National, High Frequency Data

 Search                      0.012        0.069       -0.074**
 Index/ln(Tweet             (0.026)      (0.042)       (0.036)
 Rate)                                                                    0.077**        0.064***
 16 and Pregnant                                                          (0.034)         (0.025)

 Number of Weeks
 (Searches)/Days
 (Tweets)                     209          209           209                 336            336

                                 State-Level, Lower Frequency Data

  Search                     0.751***         ---       0.505**             0.137**       -0.087
  Index/ln(Tweet              (0.127)         ---       (0.239)             (0.054)       (0.075)
  Rate)
  16 and Pregnant
  Number of                                                                   537           537
  States/Periods                30            ---          24
Notes: For national, high frequency specifications see notes to Table 4. For state-
level, lower frequency data, Google Trends data represent two periods, January
2005 through May 2009 and June 2009 through December 2010. These data are
only available for states with enough searches for data to be regularly reported
(see the text for a discussion of this issue). Twitter data represent 51 states and 11
time periods between January 2009 and December 2012 when 16 and Pregnant
was on and off the air. A small number of observations are dropped because no
tweets were reported in that state and period (small states in early periods) and
this is a log specification. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. All
regressions include state and period fixed effects and estimates are obtained from
models weighted by the total number of tweets made in the state/period.
*** Significant at the 1 percent level; ** Significant at the 5 percent level;
* Significant at the 10 percent level.
                                     Average Rating
                 < 0.75      0.75-1.25     1.25-1.75      1.75-2.5      2.5+

Figure 1: Nielsen Ratings for 16 and Pregnant/Teen Mom/Teen Mom 2
for those Aged 12 to 24, by Designated Market Area
Source: Authors’ calculations based on Nielsen data from 2009 through
2012.
                               Teen Birth Rates (by age of conception)
                             < 40      40-55       55-65      65-80      80+
     Figure 2: Teen Birth Rates in 2008 by Designated Market Area


Notes: Teen birth rates by age of conception reflect the number of births
conceived while the mother was between age 15 and 19 per 1,000 girls
between ages 15 and 19.

Source: Authors’ calculations based on Vital Statistics birth data.
Figure 3: Relationship between 16 and Pregnant Ratings and Teen Birth
Rates in 2008
Figure 4: Relationship between MTV Ratings in 2008/09 and Ratings for
16 and Pregnant/Teen Mom (verification of IV monotonicity assumption)

Source: Authors' calculations based on Nielsen data from 2008 through
2012.
Notes: All data points reflect ratings for those between the ages of 12 and
24. Data from 2008/09 reflect average ratings between July 2008 and
May 2009 for all shows airing between 9:00PM and 10:00PM on
weekdays. Data for 16 and Pregnant/Teen Mom reflect average ratings
over all seasons through May 2012 for all shows in the franchise
(including Teen Mom 2).
Figure 5: Reduced Form Event Study Estimates of the Impact of 16 and
Pregnant

notes: Estimates reflect coefficients on 2008-09 MTV Ratings interacted
with Quarter from a regression model controlling for DMA*season fixed
effects. Dashed lines reflect 95% confidence intervals. Dotted lines
reflect the best fitting lines through the pre- and post-period coefficients.
Figure 6: IV Event Study Estimates of the Impact of 16 and Pregnant


notes: Estimates reflect coefficients on 16 and Pregnant Ratings from an
IV model where 2008-09 MTV Ratings are the instruments. Other
control variables include labor market conditions, age and racial
composition, and DMA*season fixed effects. Dotted lines reflect 95%
confidence intervals.
 Figure 7: Weekly Google Searches and Tweets about 16 and Pregnant


note: shaded areas reflect weeks that new episodes of 16 and Pregnant
were broadcast.
source: Search index values are available directly from Google Trends.
Tweet rates are computed based on the frequency of tweets obtained
from Topsy Labs.
Figure 8: Daily Google Searches and Tweets about 16 and Pregnant


note: vertical lines reflect days that new episodes of 16 and Pregnant
were broadcast.
source: Search index values are available directly from Google Trends.
Tweet rates are computed based on the frequency of tweets obtained
from Topsy Lab.
