                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            FOR A FEW DOLLARS MORE:
                      RESERVES AND GROWTH IN TIMES OF CRISES

                                          Matthieu Bussière
                                            Gong Cheng
                                          Menzie D. Chinn
                                           Noëmie Lisack

                                        Working Paper 19791
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19791


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2014




The views presented in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the
Banque de France or the Eurosystem. We would like to thank Nicolas Coeurdacier, Laurent Ferrara,
Jérôme Héricourt, Hiro Ito, Philippe Martin, Maury Obstfeld, Steven Phillips as well as participants
in the EMG Workshop in City University of London, the 11th INFINITI Conference, the 62th Annual
Congress of the AFSE and the 2013 EEA Annual Meetings for helpful comments and suggestions.
Part of this work was conducted while Cheng was an economist, Chinn was a consultant, and Lisack
was an intern, at the Banque de France. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Matthieu Bussière, Gong Cheng, Menzie D. Chinn, and Noëmie Lisack. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
For a Few Dollars More: Reserves and Growth in Times of Crises
Matthieu Bussière, Gong Cheng, Menzie D. Chinn, and Noëmie Lisack
NBER Working Paper No. 19791
January 2014
JEL No. F31,G01

                                               ABSTRACT

Based on a dataset of 112 emerging economies and developing countries, this paper addresses two key
questions regarding the accumulation of international reserves: first, has the accumulation of reserves
effectively protected countries during the 2008-09 financial crisis? And second, what explains the pattern
of reserve accumulation observed during and after the crisis? More specifically, the paper investigates
the relation between international reserves and the existence of capital controls. We find that the level
of reserves matters: countries with high reserves relative to short-term debt suffered less from the crisis,
particularly if associated with a less open capital account. In the immediate aftermath of the crisis,
countries that depleted foreign reserves during the crisis quickly rebuilt their stocks. This rapid rebuilding
has, however, been followed by a deceleration in the pace of accumulation. The timing of this deceleration
roughly coincides with the point when reserves reached their pre-crisis level and may be related to
the fact that short-term debt accumulation has also decelerated in most countries over this period.


Matthieu Bussière                                     Menzie D. Chinn
Banque de France                                      Department of Economics
31 rue Croix des Petits Champs                        University of Wisconsin
75001 Paris                                           1180 Observatory Drive
France                                                Madison, WI 53706
Matthieu.Bussiere@banque-france.fr                    and NBER
                                                      mchinn@lafollette.wisc.edu
Gong Cheng
Sciences Po                                           Noëmie Lisack
28 rue des Saints-Pères                               European University Institute
75007 Paris, France                                   Villa San Paolo - Via della Piazzuola 43
gong.cheng@sciencespo.fr                              I-50133 Firenze
                                                      Italy
                                                      noemie.lisack@eui.eu
1       Introduction
    In the decade preceding the 2008 global ﬁnancial crisis (GFC), emerging market
economies accumulated large stocks of international reserves (ﬁgure 1). The unprece-
dented pace of reserve accumulation was, at least partly, a response to the lessons drawn
from previous ﬁnancial crises which predominantly aﬀected emerging markets. Most re-
search on emerging market crises suggests that countries with an insuﬃcient level of
reserves, measured against appropriately chosen benchmarks, suﬀered more from crises
in the 1990s1 . A natural question arising from this observation is to what extent the
accumulation of international reserves has protected countries from the negative shock of
the latest crisis: have countries with more reserves fared better, in terms of output growth
performance, than countries with less reserves? Are there, in addition, other policy tools
that can strengthen or dampen the eﬀects of reserves on growth performance?




                            Figure 1: World international reserves

    The ﬁrst objective of this paper is therefore to identify the relationship between pre-
crisis foreign reserve accumulation and economic growth during the GFC; the latter can be
viewed as an ultimate test for the usefulness of reserves as an insurance mechanism. One
aspect we pay particularly close attention to in this paper is the interconnection between
international reserve holdings and capital controls. Indeed, one may ask whether a higher
level of reserves is needed in a country with a more open capital account, to the extent
that an open capital account would expose the country to volatile international capital
    1
    For a detailed review of this literature, see Flood and Marion (1999), Berg and Pattillo (1999),
Reinhart and Kaminsky (1999), Bussière and Mulder (1999), Gourinchas and Obstfeld (2012), Catao
and Milesi-Ferretti (2013) and Obstfeld (2013).

                                                 2
ﬂows. According to this view, reserve accumulation and capital account controls can be
understood as substitutes in the quest to avoid ﬁnancial crises. An alternative view is that
these two policy tools can be complementary and reinforce each other: reserves are all the
more useful when the capital account is closed. Finally, the paper also devotes attention
to the endogeneity issue that may arise from this simple exercise: it is possible that the
policy authorities of a highly vulnerable country decide to accumulate more reserves. In
this case a simple regression may yield biased results, which we account for using an
instrumental variable approach. Aside from this ﬁrst objective, which focuses on the
initial stage of the crisis, the paper also investigates the patterns of reserve accumulation
in the subsequent periods. Indeed, the ﬁnding that more reserves before the crisis have
indeed beneﬁted countries during the GFC may have prompted countries to accumulate
even more reserves after the crisis. We therefore seek to uncover the patterns of reserve
accumulation after the GFC, distinguishing between the immediate aftermath of the
crisis, which recorded a strong rebound, and the following period, during which the pace
of reserve accumulation decelerated.

    Against this background, the paper presents three sets of ﬁndings. First, we test the
hypothesis that international reserves fulﬁll the protective role they are often assigned
to, by testing whether the extent of the crisis (proxied here by two diﬀerent measures
of output collapse, which control for idiosyncratic factors) are related to the level of re-
serves before the crisis. More speciﬁcally, given the debate on what constitutes the most
appropriate metrics for international reserves, we construct a set of reserve ratios, ex-
pressing reserves as a percentage of GDP, imports, M2 and short-term debt. The results
indicate that when reserves are measured as a percentage of short-term debt, there is a
statistically signiﬁcant relationship with the dependent variable, but not for the other
reserve adequacy ratios (i.e. reserves/M2, reserves/imports and reserves/GDP). This re-
sult is robust to using alternative deﬁnitions of the crisis variable, diﬀerent sub-samples
(emerging market countries only or combined with developing countries) or introducing
additional control variables such as trade openness, dummy variables for oil exporting
countries or ﬁnancial centers, and so forth. In this set of regressions we also use an instru-
mental variable approach to account for a potential endogeneity bias. We develop two
main instruments for our reserve ratio, focusing on reserve accumulation in neighboring
countries as an alternative accumulation motive.
    Second, we focus on the interaction between international reserves and capital account
openness by introducing an interaction term involving these two variables. We ﬁnd that
the coeﬃcient of the interacted term is sometimes signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero. The
magnitude of the marginal eﬀects of reserves depends on the degree of capital controls;
that is, a less open capital account reinforces the positive marginal eﬀect of reserves that



                                              3
we ﬁnd in the ﬁrst set of regressions2 . This ﬁnding is especially interesting given the
observation in ﬁgure 23 – namely in comparison with advanced countries, developing and
emerging market economies have accumulated more international reserves and have kept
their capital account more closed. Advanced countries, by contrast, chose to open their
capital account with a clear jump towards greater ﬁnancial openness around 1992-1993,
but typically do not hold large amounts of reserves.




                     Figure 2: International reserves vs. capital controls

    The third set of results aims at identifying changes in the behavior of foreign reserve
accumulation after the GFC. To study this, we rely upon data of higher frequency (i.e.
monthly and quarterly data). We examine whether countries which experienced greater
foreign reserve depletion during the crisis tended to rebuild a large stock of reserve assets
in the wake of the crisis. We also investigate the patterns of reserve accumulation in
more recent years. We ﬁnd that the countries that used more reserves during the crisis
also rebuilt them more quickly in the aftermath of the crisis. However, in the subsequent
period, the pace of reserve accumulation slowed down. One possible explanation may stem
from the fact that the level of short-term debt growth declined for most countries, perhaps
because of higher risk aversion. To further investigate this hypothesis, we estimated
a VECM comprising both reserves and short-term debt: the results suggest that the
slowdown in reserves may be related to the slowdown of short-term debt accumulation.

    Our paper follows three strands of literature: the motives of foreign reserve accumu-
   2
      The relationship between capital controls and foreign reserve accumulation is complex. Several
parallel stories can be advanced regarding why the stock of reserves is larger in an economy with capital
controls (for keeping the domestic currency undervalued, or for social welfare concerns). We provide an
analysis of the subject in Section 3.3. In any case, the multiple motives for reserve accumulation do not
prevent us to test the usefulness of reserve holdings during the crisis, alone or with capital controls.
    3
      In ﬁgure 2, the y-axis represents the average reserves to GDP ratio and the x-axis represents the
average ﬁnancial openness in a given country group.


                                                   4
lation, the impact of foreign reserve accumulation on real economic growth during crisis
times and the behavior of reserve holding during and after the GFC. Starting with the
literature on the insurance motive of reserve accumulation, both the early literature in
the 1970s4 and a more recent literature based on open-economy macroeconomic models
suggest that reserves constitute a buﬀer stock to limit the impact of negative trade and
ﬁnancial shocks on output should a country be hit by balance-of-payment shocks or ‘sud-
den stops’. In fact, as Jeanne and Rancière (2011), Benigno and Fornaro (2012), Bianchi
et al. (2012) demonstrate, a suﬃcient stock of reserves is useful to purchase foreign im-
ports and to repay external debt coming due when no external borrowing is possible.
Based on a calibration using a sample of sudden stops in 34 middle-income countries over
1975-2003, Jeanne and Rancière (2011) show that the negative impact of the ﬁnancial
account reversal on domestic absorption can be oﬀset by reserves. In this perspective, an
average country needs to hold a stock of reserves equivalent to 9.1% of its GDP. Our pa-
per thus provides empirical evidence of the role of reserves as insurance against negative
external shocks.
    In parallel, our paper is closely related to a rich pool of recent empirical studies
examining the role of international reserves on macroeconomic performance during the
GFC. Rose and Spiegel (2009), Rose and Spiegel (2010), Blanchard et al. (2010), Llaudes
et al. (2010) and Frankel and Saravelos (2012) are among the ﬁrst papers looking at the
impact of the GFC on emerging market economies by regressing a set of crisis impact
variables (e.g. output losses, consumption growth changes, exchange market pressure
index, etc.) on numerous pre-crisis policy variables, including foreign reserves. Blanchard
et al. (2010) and Rose and Spiegel (2010) advance the proposition that the pre-crisis level
of foreign reserves does not play a central role in protecting countries from the global
ﬁnancial crisis. In contrast, Frankel and Saravelos (2012) ﬁnd that the foreign reserve
level (scaled by GDP, external debt and imports) in 2007, along with exchange rate
movements, is a signiﬁcant leading indicator of the cross-country incidence of the crisis:
the higher the foreign reserve ratios, the less likely an economy would be hit by the global
ﬁnancial crisis. In the same vein, Llaudes et al. (2010) ﬁnd a positive and statistically
signiﬁcant role of reserves scaled by short-term debt on output growth during the crisis.
They further argue that this relationship is non-linear; namely, reserves had a more
signiﬁcant impact on output in countries with low levels of reserves but much less in
countries with high levels of reserves.
    Our paper incorporates several novel aspects. The above cited papers are all broad
studies examining many diﬀerent aspects of the crisis impact using a number of diﬀerent
policy variables. In contrast, our paper focuses on the relationship between pre-crisis
reserve accumulation and real economic growth during the crisis. The most important
contribution of our paper is to assess the impact of reserves alongside another policy
   4
       Bahmani-Oskooee and Brown (2002) provide a detailed review.

                                                  5
instrument, capital controls. We provide intuition and empirical evidence on the com-
plementarity between reserves and capital controls in terms of managing the impact of
the global ﬁnancial crisis. Moreover, we go beyond a mere documentation of the correla-
tion between reserves and growth by introducing instrumental variables. In addition, the
results from these early papers lead to diverging conclusions as diﬀerent authors used dif-
ferent reserve metrics and diﬀerent country observations. The samples used are smaller
than in the present study. Blanchard et al. (2010) run a regression using 29 country
points and Llaudes et al. (2010) have a mixed sample of emerging economies and de-
veloping countries with 40 observations. For our paper, we construct a large dataset of
more than 100 emerging and developing countries and we follow a rigorous econometric
procedure to establish the relationship between reserves and economic growth.
    Finally, our paper is also related to several papers that examine the use of reserves
during the GFC and the rebuilding afterwards. Aizenman and Sun (2009), Aizenman
and Hutchison (2010), Dominguez (2012) and Dominguez et al. (2012) have all addressed
the following question: if international reserves are held to cope with potential external
shocks, were they used during the GFC? Aizenman and Hutchison (2010) focus on the
trade-oﬀ between exchange rate depreciation and foreign reserve losses for countries facing
a high exchange market pressure during the 2008-2009 crisis. They highlight the ‘fear of
losing reserves’ - many countries chose to let their currency depreciate rather than to risk
a run on their foreign exchange reserves - and the greater vulnerability of countries with a
higher ratio of foreign liabilities to GDP. These results corroborate those of Aizenman and
Sun (2009) with regard to the preference for exchange rate depreciation among emerging
countries.
    In contrast, Dominguez (2012) and Dominguez et al. (2012) distinguish between the
total stock of reserves and actively managed reserves; the latter are reserves sold or
purchased by a country’s authority net of any valuation eﬀect and interests payment.
Based on this new deﬁnition, they ﬁnd that countries have actively used foreign reserves
during the crisis period. Dominguez (2012) ﬁnds that countries whose pre-crisis reserves
exceeded optimal levels predicted by standard models of reserve accumulation were the
most likely to use their reserves during the crisis. In addition, Dominguez et al. (2012)
advance the proposition that both pre-crisis level of reserves and an active management
of foreign reserve assets during the crisis are positively correlated with the GDP growth
in the wake of the global ﬁnancial crisis. A limitation of using the decomposition of
reserves is that the available sample is very small. One can only calculate the actively
managed component of reserves for countries which have subscribed to the IMF’s Special
Data Dissemination Standard (SDDS) in the Reserve Template5 .
    Compared to this strand of literature on the use of reserves, we defend the thesis

   5
     There are currently 70 countries which have subscribed to the SDDS, where 41 are emerging and
developing countries.

                                                6
that the pre-crisis level of reserves still matters. For us, international reserves should be
viewed as being akin to ‘nuclear weapon’ having a deterrent eﬀect, rather than to true
‘gunpowder’, to be used in intervention. In other words, having a large stock of reserves
prior to any external shocks will deter speculators from attacking. This is of course
consistent with the literature of the second generation crisis model (e.g. Obstfeld (1986))
that demonstrates that the occurrence of a speculative attack on a country’s currency
is conditional on this country’s foreign reserve holdings. A suﬃcient level of reserves
will hence obviate the need for a country to intervene massively as the risk of crises is
minimized.
    Finally, we also extend some results of Dominguez (2012) and Dominguez et al. (2012)
with regard to the reserve accumulation behavior after the ﬁnancial crisis. Dominguez
(2012) argues that countries that experienced losses on their reserve stocks during the
crisis tended to accumulate more afterwards. We conﬁrm this trend using more recent
data. Moreover, we further document that the pace of reserve accumulation has deceler-
ated in many emerging economies in the last couple of years. We attribute this outcome
to a plateauing of the underlying target variable, short term debt.

    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data and the
methodology used. Section 3 presents our main econometric analysis of the role of in-
ternational reserves on economic growth during the GFC. Section 4 examines countries’
behavior in reserve accumulation in the wake of the ﬁnancial crisis and section 5 con-
cludes.


2     Data and speciﬁcation
2.1       Data and key variables
    Our primary data source for annual, quarterly and monthly international reserves is
the database International Financial Statistics (IFS) of the International Monetary Fund
(IMF). The macroeconomic data of diﬀerent frequencies are also retrieved from the IFS
and complemented with the World Development Indicators (WDI) issued by the World
Bank (WB). For selected countries that are absent from the IMF and WB databases (e.g.
Taiwan), national sources are used.
    To preserve the homogeneity of our sample in terms of reserve accumulation and
capital account policy, we decided to focus only on non-advanced countries (NAC).
Our database includes 161 countries, divided into two sub-samples: 32 emerging mar-
ket economies (EME) and 129 developing countries (LDC). EMEs are deﬁned according
to a combined criteria of the IMF and the economic magazine the Economist. For 49
countries, we did not have enough observations for the key independent variables includ-


                                             7
ing control variables; therefore, 112 countries are eﬀectively used in our main regressions.
The details about our country coverage can be found in Appendix A.

International reserves

    Several important features of the reserve data we use in this paper need to be high-
lighted.

    Which assets are included in reserves? International reserves can be deﬁned as the
immediately available external assets denominated in foreign currencies that a country’s
government or monetary authority eﬀectively holds. According to the IFS, total inter-
national reserves comprise foreign exchange reserves6 , reserve position in the Fund, the
U.S. dollar value of SDR holdings and gold holdings7 . Except gold holdings, all the other
assets are included in the reserve data we use in the scope of this paper. The reason
to exclude gold holdings is that the gold share is very small in non-advanced countries
and gold holdings are less liquid than other reserve assets. As foreign reserves constitute
the major component of international reserves (reserve position in the Fund and SDR
holdings are also very small), we will interchangeably use the terms international reserves
and foreign reserves in this paper.
    Similarly, external assets held by sovereign wealth funds are not included in our reserve
data. Foreign assets held by a sovereign wealth fund and that under control of a central
bank are indeed managed under very diﬀerent principles. While higher returns and
strategic value are the objective of reserve management in a sovereign wealth fund, the
liquidity and security of foreign assets are the guidelines for reserve management in a
central bank. As we focus on the insurance role of foreign reserves, we only consider
those foreign assets managed under the liquidity and security motives.
    Moreover, the IMF credit facilities (e.g. Precautionary and liquidity line, Flexible
credit line, Stand-by facility, etc.) and bilateral swap lines between countries are not
included in foreign reserves deﬁned by the IFS and used in this paper8 . There are funda-
mental diﬀerences between the self-owned stock of foreign reserves and ad hoc contingent
facility instruments which are short-term in nature. A few papers examine the substi-
tutability between swap lines and foreign reserves (See Aizenman et al. (2011), Obstfeld
et al. (2009)); this is however out of the scope of this paper.
    Finally, it is very important to notice that there is an issuance of 183 billion of Special
Drawing Rights by the IMF in August 2009 (equivalent to 283 billion of U.S. dollars). This
   6
      This includes ‘oﬃcial claims on nonresidents in the form of foreign banknotes, bank deposits, trea-
sury bills, short- and long-term government securities and other claims usable in the event of balance of
payments need’ (IFS Yearbook 2012).
    7
      Gold holdings are expressed in millions of ﬁne troy ounces and valued in U.S. dollar by each country.
    8
      However, we used a dummy variable for the Fed swap lines. This only concerns Korea and Mexico in
our non-advanced country sample. The introduction of this dummy does not change our results. Details
are available upon request.


                                                    8
is in part due to the requirements of reforming the international monetary system under
the G20 negotiations. This new issuance can be regarded as an exogenous increase of
member countries’ SDRs, thus of their stock of foreign reserves; it leads to an unexpected
jump in the reserve data from 2009 and constitutes an issue when we examine the after-
crisis behavior of reserve accumulation. Therefore, in order to concentrate on a given
country’s own decision of holding foreign reserves, we subtract this newly issued SDR in
2009 from our monthly and quarterly data on foreign reserves which is used in Section 4.

    How to incorporate reserve data into our analysis? In this paper, we will use reserve
adequacy ratios (in log9 ) instead of the absolute level of reserves. The reasons are two-fold.
First, a reserve adequacy ratio facilitates cross-country comparison; the heterogeneity in
the stock of reserves is tremendous, for example between China, which holds more than
a third of the world foreign reserves, and small African countries. Second, the absolute
level of reserves does not provide useful information about the robustness and resilience
of a country facing shocks; at most it shows the country has enough ﬁnancial resources to
purchase reserve assets. On the contrary, reserve adequacy ratios do provide information
about how reserves can be deployed to cope with some underlying target variables. Based
on an extensive literature, we use the following four indicators:

    • GDP based indicator : log( Reserves
                                  GDP
                                          × 100) (rsv gdp)

    • Trade based indicator: log( Reserves
                                  Imports
                                           × 12) (rsv imports)

    • Debt based indicator: log( Short-term
                                    Reserves
                                            debt
                                                 × 100) (rsv std)

    • Money based indicator: log( Reserves
                                    M2
                                           × 100) (rsv m2)

   The GDP based indicator is a way to control for country size, no further information
can be inferred from it. The trade based indicator is a traditional metric of the reserve
adequacy. It reﬂects the capacity of a country to purchase foreign goods (for production
or ﬁnal consumption) even in case of limited or no access to external ﬁnancing. The
common wisdom requires that foreign reserves cover at least three-month imports. The
debt based indicator has developed with the ﬁnancial integration of emerging market
economies and less developed countries. When a country’s economic growth is ﬁnanced
by external debt, it is important for that country to insure the service of its debt, at least
that coming due in short-term. Suﬃcient foreign reserves need to cover the repayment of
    9
      We use the log ratio in our regressions for several reasons. First, it is commonly used in the existing
literature regarding the role of foreign reserves during crises in emerging market economies. Second,
the evolution of international reserves, especially in non-advanced countries, is non-linear, displaying an
exponential pattern. Third, based on our analysis, the eﬀect of ex ante holding of reserves on economic
growth is non-linear; it exhibits positive and concave patterns, meaning that the marginal contribution
of the reserve adequacy ratio on growth is diminishing. The eﬀect is more pronounced for countries with
low values of reserves to short-term debt ratio. Llaudes et al. (2010) provides a more detailed account
on the non-linearity of this eﬀect.


                                                     9
all the short-term debt denominated in foreign currencies. The money based indicator has
gained popularity with Obstfeld et al. (2010) who emphasize the role of foreign reserves
on stabilizing domestic ﬁnancial market. A country needs to hold enough foreign reserves
to oﬀset the capital ﬂight triggered by a weak conﬁdence in the market of that economy.
The amount of immediately available domestic assets which can be drained out during
an episode of capital ﬂight is proxied by the monetary aggregate M2 . This amount of
assets needs to be covered by foreign reserves.

Capital controls

    An important control variable for our analysis regards the controls on capital ﬂows.
There are a number of measures of capital controls in the literature, either de jure or
de facto 10 . Our measure of capital controls is based on the de jure measure of capital
openness constructed by Chinn and Ito (2006). This is not only a widely used index
of the ﬁnancial openness, it also captures well regulatory restrictions on capital account
transactions, which is essential as we focus on policy variables.
    For ease of interpretation, we invert the Chinn-Ito index such that the higher our
capital control index, the more stringent the constraints on both capital inﬂows and
outﬂows. Table 1 summarizes the basic statistic descriptions of our measure. We observe
that advanced countries are much more ﬁnancially open than non-advanced countries.
50% of advanced countries have a fully open capital account; their capital control index
reaches the minimum −2.50.
                   Table 1: capital controls: Descriptive Statistics (2007)


                              Non-advanced countries        Advanced countries
                              EME     LDC      Total
                   mean       -0.69   -0.04 -0.18           -2.20
                   median     -0.12   1.14 0.29             -2.50
                   s.d.       1.53    1.58 1.59             0.61
                   min        -2.50   -2.50 -2.50           -2.50
                   max        1.14    1.86 1.86             -0.12
                   obs        31      117   148             30



2.2     Speciﬁcation
   The analysis of this paper is based on cross-section econometrics; this allows us to
make cross-country comparisons and to homogenize the shock of the recent crisis. Our
benchmark speciﬁcation is described below:
  10
    For de jure measures see Chinn and Ito (2006), Kose et al. (2009), etc.; for de facto measures see
Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007)

                                                 10
                            yi,09 = β0 + β1 rsvi,07 + βXi,07 + i,09                           (1)

    rsvi,07 stands for one of the four reserve adequacy ratios mentioned above. Xi,07 cor-
responds to additional control variables. Note that all the independent variables (except
for dummies) are lagged two periods11 . Taking lagged independent variables allows us to
have a snapshot of the situation of the country before the start of the crisis, and to use
this picture to explain its performance during the crisis. Using later values for reserves
and other controls would be problematic, since countries may already have changed their
reserve holdings by the end of 2008 due to the start of the crisis. Yet, this does not solve
endogeneity issues, which we will tackle in Section 3.4.

Construction of the dependent variable yi,09

   To assess the role of foreign reserves in mitigating the crisis impact on real economic
growth in 2009, we need to construct appropriate measures of the GFC impact. Based
on the above-cited literature on this issue, we use two measures that aim at capturing
the gap between the actual real economic growth rate and a counterfactual growth rate
should the crisis have not occurred.
    The ﬁrst method calculates the diﬀerence between the realized real economic growth
rate and a linear prediction from a historical mean. We call this dependent variable
‘purged real GDP growth’, and denote it rgdp residual in our equations and tables. It
is obtained as follows:


                                                           i,09
                            rgdp residuali,09 = Δryi,09 − Δry
                                      i,09 = α̂0 + α̂1 Δry i,03−08
                                     Δry

   The coeﬃcients α̂0 and α̂1 are estimated using a preliminary regression:

                              Δryi,09 = α0 + α1 Δry i,03−08 + i,09

    This preliminary regression assumes constant coeﬃcients across countries, namely the
contribution of the historical trend to real economic growth rate at a given time t being
identical for all countries in our sample.
    Our alternative dependent variable follows Blanchard et al. (2010) and Berkmen et
al. (2012) and captures the change between the actual real GDP growth in 2009 and the
IMF World Economic Outlook (WEO) forecast in the ﬁrst quarter of 2008 (before the
Lehman collapse in September of the same year). This variable measures the real output
  11
    As a robustness test, we have also used independent variables lagged three periods. The results
remain very similar to that presented in the paper. Details can be provided upon request.

                                                11
losses due to the unexpected magnitude of the ﬁnancial crisis. We call it ‘unexpected
real GDP growth’ and denote it rgdp f e. One caveat about this variable is that there
might be estimation errors associated with the forecast model that the IMF adopts. We
assume that these errors are not time-varying and consistent over time.
    We have also tried another potential dependent variable: the diﬀerence between actual
real GDP growth and a historical mean, over 2003-2008. We ﬁnd consistent results using
this diﬀerent dependent variable12 .

    In Appendix B, ﬁgures 11 and 12 illustrate the ranking of a few big emerging market
economies (belonging to the G20) in terms of our two dependent variables rgdp residual
or rgdp f e. In the same appendix, a list of the main variables used in our econometric
analysis is also available.


3        Econometric analysis: the role of pre-crisis reserve
         adequacy during the GFC
3.1      Reserve adequacy ratios: which one works better?
    Based on the 2008-2009 global ﬁnancial crisis, we ﬁrst try to examine whether ex ante
foreign reserve accumulation has played any role in preventing output losses during the
crisis. We pay a particular attention to the distinct explanatory power of each of the
above-mentioned four reserve metrics.
    We ﬁnd that the reserves to short-term debt ratio is the most useful indicator to ex-
plain the real output growth during the crisis. The stock of foreign reserves scaled by the
level of short-term debt two years prior to the crisis is positively and signiﬁcantly corre-
lated with the real GDP growth deviation from the trend. We illustrate this result using
the full sample and the ‘purged real GDP growth’ as dependent variable in table 2 (The
diﬀerent numbers of observations are due to the data availability of the scaling variables.).


   This result is robust if we switch the dependent variable to the ‘unexpected real GDP
growth’ (table 12 in Appendix C). The coeﬃcient associated with the reserves to short-
term debt ratio is signiﬁcant. We have also checked the robustness of this result by
removing outliers13 and small countries14 from the sample. As can be seen in tables 13
and 14 in Appendix C, the main conclusions remain unchanged. Given that China has

    12
      The results using this third variable as dependent variable are available upon request.
    13
      The outliers removed are countries whose reserve adequacy ratio or dependent variable fall below
the 1st percentile or above the 99th percentile. It corresponds to Armenia, Bahamas, Botswana, Latvia,
Lebanon, Liberia, Libya.
   14
      We use the World Bank classiﬁcation to deﬁne small countries.

                                                 12
                    Table 2: Results with diﬀerent reserve adequacy ratios


                                  (1)               (2)                (3)               (4)
                            rgdp residual      rgdp residual      rgdp residual     rgdp residual
   L2.log rsv/gdp               -0.359
                               (0.607)

   L2.log rsv/imports                               0.704
                                                   (0.627)

   L2.log rsv/m2                                                     -0.0378
                                                                     (0.564)

   L2.log rsv/std                                                                       0.624∗∗
                                                                                        (0.257)

   Constant                       1.522             -0.590             0.491            -3.165∗∗
                                (1.814)            (1.058)           (2.097)            (1.588)
   Observations                    143               134                138               138
   R2                            0.002              0.009             0.000              0.042
   Adjusted R2                   -0.005             0.002             -0.007             0.035
   Standard errors in parentheses
   Homoscedasticity not rejected according to the White test
   ∗
     p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01


a very speciﬁc behavior in terms of reserve accumulation, we also removed this country
from the sample, and obtained largely unchanged results15 .


3.2     Do reserves matter for economic growth during the GFC?
   In order to better understand the inﬂuence of reserve holdings on output growth, we
add control variables and estimate the full speciﬁcation of our regression equation (1).
The control variables Xi,07 include capital controls, trade openness, an exchange rate



  15
     As these ﬁndings are obtained with a ratio, a natural question to ask is which term in the ratio
drives the results. However, this is a complex question: testing both terms separately may not be
conclusive if what really matters is the ratio of the two. Bearing this caveat in mind, we ran two
additional sets of regressions. First, when using log( reserves         reserves
                                                         ST D ) and log( GDP ), both are signiﬁcant with
rgdp residual as dependent variable, but only the ﬁrst term is signiﬁcant with rgdp f e as dependent
variable. Second, when using log( reserves                ST D
                                        ST D ) and log( GDP ), only the second term is signiﬁcant with
rgdp residual as dependent variable, and nothing is signiﬁcant with rgdp f e as dependent variable
(with a collinearity issue). Third, log( reserves          ST D
                                           GDP ) and log( GDP ) have also been used to replace the reserve
adequacy ratio. Only the second term turns out to be signiﬁcant; but this result cannot validate the
hypothesis that short-term debt matters more than foreign reserves, as log( reserves
                                                                                 GDP ) is not a signiﬁcant
regressor even in a bivariate regression with our two dependent variables (table 2). These complementary
results, which are available upon request, are therefore mixed, such that it is hard to conclude whether
one of the two terms is predominantly driving the main result.


                                                   13
regime dummy16 and an oil exporter dummy17 .
    After controlling for further speciﬁc characteristics of diﬀerent countries, we still ﬁnd
that the accumulation of foreign reserves prior to the crisis positively and signiﬁcantly
contributes to the real GDP growth during the crisis. The signiﬁcance and magnitude
of the coeﬃcient associated with the reserve adequacy ratio remain similar when adding
controls, for both of our dependent variables (columns (1) and (2) in table 3).
    We further test the robustness of our results by estimating the same regressions using
trimmed samples. Appendix D provides the results obtained after outliers18 or/and small
countries are ruled out. The coeﬃcients have the same signs as in table 3 but have larger
magnitude and stronger signiﬁcance. One additional control variable, trade openness,
turns out to be signiﬁcant and has a negative sign as expected when rgdp residual is
used as dependent variable. The goodness of ﬁt, in terms of R2 and adjusted R2 , also
becomes larger. Hence, our results can be regarded as robust and do not depend on the
inclusion of outliers and small countries.

    For robustness, we tested our results with additional control variables (i.e. net foreign
assets and current account balance); the results are qualitatively similar. More restric-
tively trimmed samples have also been used throughout the paper19 ; the estimates of
interest (reserves to short-term debt ratio and capital controls) become even larger and
more signiﬁcant. These results are available upon request.


3.3     Controlling for the interaction between reserves and capital
        controls
    The introduction of an interacted term between foreign reserves and capital controls
as a further control variable can help us check the robustness of our results, and shed
light on the complementarity between foreign reserves and capital controls.
    We show how the role of foreign reserves on economic growth may depend on other
relevant policies, in particular capital account management, and then present the speci-
ﬁcation we adopt to estimate the interacted term.
   16
       Our exchange rate regime dummy is constructed based on the classiﬁcation by Reinhart and Rogoﬀ
(2004). It takes the value 1 when a country has a ‘crawling peg’ or more controlled exchange rate regime;
it takes the value 0 when a country has a ‘managed ﬂoating’ or ‘free ﬂoating’ regime.
    17
       The countries classiﬁed as oil exporters/producers are the following: Algeria, Angola, Bahrain,
Cameroon, Chad, Congo, Ecuador, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Iran, Iraq, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Libya,
Mexico, Nigeria, Oman, Qatar, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago, Turk-
menistan, United Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan, Venezuela, Yemen.
    18
       Deﬁned in the same line as in footnote 12, namely all observations which fall below the 1st percentile
or above the 99th percentile of any continuous variables (i.e. dependent variable, reserve ratio and trade
openness). This criteria will apply in the subsequent sections when outliers are eliminated. As a result
we further drop Brazil, Hong Kong, Rwanda and Singapore from the sample (no ﬁnancial centers in this
case).
    19
       In these regressions, we have removed the top and bottom 5% observations of any continuous
variables, or countries whose reserves to short-term debt ratio exceeds 1000 (75th percentile) in 2007.


                                                     14
               Table 3: Full speciﬁcation


                                    (1)           (2)
                                  rgdp fe    rgdp residual
L2.log rsv/std                    0.615∗∗       0.729∗∗
                                  (0.291)       (0.317)

L2.capital controls               0.498∗        0.689∗∗
                                  (0.282)       (0.307)

L2.exchange regime index           -1.282        -0.652
                                  (1.335)       (1.457)

L2.trade openness                 -0.0194∗      -0.0184
                                  (0.0117)     (0.0128)

oil dummy                         -2.612∗∗       -1.561
                                  (1.292)       (1.410)

ﬁnancial center                    5.374         5.284
                                  (4.941)       (5.395)

Constant                          -5.527∗∗       -1.400
                                  (2.358)       (2.575)
Observations                        112           112
R2                                 0.154         0.155
Adjusted R2                        0.106         0.107
Standard errors in parentheses
Homoscedasticity not rejected according to the White test
∗
  p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                             15
Intuition

   Our empirical results suggest that foreign reserves and capital controls are comple-
ments with regard to their impact on economic growth during the GFC. We provide here
an intuition which supports this particular relationship. In fact, if foreign reserves can
be seen as munitions of liquidity that can be deployed when a country is cut oﬀ from
external ﬁnancial markets, a closed capital account can be interpreted as a neutralized
playing ﬁeld for the impact of reserves to be eﬀective. Indeed, capital controls insure that
public capital outﬂows (foreign reserve purchasing) are not completely oﬀset by private
capital inﬂows (accumulation of private foreign liabilities). As a matter of fact, foreign
reserves can be used to provide an aggregate insurance to the economy, but the moral
hazard associated with foreign reserve accumulation might incite the private sector, ﬁrms
and banks, to take extra risks given that the government will provide foreign currency
liquidity when it is necessary. Therefore, the insurance provided by foreign reserves can
be oﬀset by private capital inﬂows should the capital account be completely open. There
are a few recent theoretical works which support our intuition and empirical ﬁnding. For
example, Benigno and Fornaro (2012), Bacchetta et al. (2013) and Cheng (2013) all ar-
gue that the imperfect substitutability between public and private capital ﬂows is crucial
for foreign reserves to play a role. According to this strand of literature, foreign reserve
accumulation and a closed capital account are complements rather than substitutes.

Speciﬁcation

    There are several ways to introduce an interactive term. To facilitate interpretation,
we use a demeaned interacted term: (rsv stdi − rsv stdi ) × (cci − cci ) as stated in equa-
tion (2). Using this setting, the coeﬃcient before rsv stdi (respectively cci ) refers to the
marginal eﬀect of that variable when cci (respectively rsv stdi ) is valued at its mean.
Note that xi,07 refers to the set of control variables we used in Section 3.2 except capital
controls.



yi,09 = β0 +β1 rsv stdi,07 +β2 cci,07 +β3 (rsv stdi,07 − rsv std07 ) × (cci,07 − cc07 ) +βxi,07 +i,09
                                                                                  
                                                           interaction
                                                                                                (2)
   The marginal eﬀect of foreign reserves is calculated as follows:


                               ∂yi,09
                                         = β1 + β3 × (cci,07 − cc07 )
                            ∂rsv stdi,07

   To fully validate the introduction of an interacted term, we need to make sure that
a statistically signiﬁcant coeﬃcient before the interacted term does not come from a

                                                16
bivariate relationship between the two variables incorporated in the interacted term,
namely rsv stdi and cci in this paper20 .

Results

   In the following exercise, we try to identify the contribution of foreign reserves to
support economic growth during the crisis time, conditional on the degree of capital
account openness.


   In table 4, columns (1) and (2), we see that foreign reserves and capital controls
both contribute to reduce a country’s real GDP losses during the recent ﬁnancial crisis
(they both have a positive and signiﬁcant coeﬃcient). The coeﬃcient associated with
the interacted term is also signiﬁcant and positive, reinforcing the marginal eﬀects of the
reserve adequacy ratio and of capital controls. One can look at the joint F-test (test
scores reported at the bottom of table 4) between reserves and the interaction term in
order to infer the signiﬁcance of the impact of foreign reserves on growth. These estimates
are indeed jointly highly signiﬁcant (at the 98% signiﬁcance level).
    Taking into account the interactive term, we can calculate the marginal eﬀects of
foreign reserves in terms of capital controls using the estimates presented in table 4
column (2):


                            ∂yi,09
                                      = 0.623 + 0.333 × (cci,07 − cc07 )
                         ∂rsv stdi,07

    The marginal eﬀect of reserves on our purged measure of GDP growth is equal to
0.623 for a country that has average capital controls. The more stringent a country’s
capital account (higher value of cc), the more pronounced the marginal eﬀect of the ex
ante foreign reserve adequacy ratio on economic growth during the GFC. Figure 3a gives
an illustrative overview of the evolution of the marginal eﬀects of reserves as a function
of the tightness of capital controls. The marginal eﬀects of reserves is increasing and
becomes positive slightly before capital controls reach their 3rd decile (cc > −1.18);
it becomes signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero when capital controls are beyond their 5th
decile (cc > −1.12). Moreover, ﬁgure 3b shows how the predicted real detrended economic
growth improves with a higher reserves to short-term debt ratio when all other variables
(including capital controls) are valued at their mean value.



  20
     To avoid spurious regressions, we have controlled for the quadratic forms of rsv stdi and cci re-
spectively. We have also orthogonalized these two key variables using the Frisch-Waugh theorem before
constructing the interacted term. The details of these results are available upon request.

                                                 17
               Table 4: Foreign reserve accumulation and capital controls


                                               full sample            without outliers
                                           (1)           (2)         (3)          (4)
                                        rgdp fe rgdp residual     rgdp fe rgdp residual
L2.log rsv/std                           0.506∗        0.623∗     0.911∗∗∗     0.866∗∗∗
                                        (0.291)        (0.319)    (0.305)      (0.329)

L2.capital controls                     0.586∗∗        0.774∗∗    0.0713       0.281
                                        (0.281)        (0.308)    (0.274)     (0.292)

L2.log rsv/std × capital controls       0.345∗∗        0.333∗     0.0965       0.170
                                        (0.170)        (0.187)    (0.199)     (0.216)

L2.exchange regime index                 -1.344         -0.711     -0.934      -0.260
                                        (1.316)        (1.443)    (1.234)     (1.316)

L2.trade openness                       -0.0191∗        -0.0181   -0.0233∗∗   -0.0283∗∗
                                        (0.0115)       (0.0126)   (0.0105)    (0.0113)

oil dummy                               -2.642∗∗        -1.590    -3.124∗∗∗    -1.962
                                        (1.273)        (1.396)     (1.137)    (1.214)

ﬁnancial center                          4.718          4.649
                                        (4.881)        (5.352)

Constant                                -4.981∗∗        -0.872    -6.921∗∗∗    -1.477
                                        (2.340)        (2.566)     (2.305)    (2.477)
Observations                               112            112        104         102
R2                                        0.186         0.180       0.215       0.206
Adjusted R2                               0.131         0.125       0.166       0.156
F-test capital controls                   3.656         4.155       0.127      0.615
P-value                                  0.0292        0.0184       0.881      0.543
F-test reserves                           4.350          4.287      5.359       4.685
P-value                                  0.0153        0.0163      0.00620    0.0115
Standard errors in parentheses
Homoscedasticity not rejected according to the White test
∗
  p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                               18
        (a) Marginal eﬀects of reserves                  (b) Predicted real economic growth

                          Figure 3: Marginal eﬀects and predictions


    Here again, we check for robustness by dropping outliers21 . Whereas the previous
results (without the interaction term between reserves and capital controls) were fairly
robust to this change of sample, here both the coeﬃcients of capital controls and of the
interaction term lose signiﬁcance when we control for outliers, as one can see in columns
(3) and (4) of table 422 . However, the coeﬃcient associated with the reserves to short-term
debt ratio is highly signiﬁcant and increases in magnitude. From this, we can conclude
that the impact of the reserve adequacy ratio itself is still fairly robust, even after we drop
outliers from our sample. Finally, as regards the magnitude of the coeﬃcient associated
with the reserve adequacy ratio, it seems that the estimate we obtained in our benchmark
regression (table 3) is rather a minimal value, since the associated coeﬃcient tends to
increase when excluding outliers.


3.4     Accounting for endogeneity
    As mentioned above, using foreign reserves as an explanatory variable to explain
real economic growth can cause endogeneity issues. Foreign reserves might be held by
a central bank as in anticipation of a future negative shock to the national economy;
foreign reserves and higher GDP growth might also both be by-products of a mercantilist
exchange rate policy. So far, we have been using lagged metrics of foreign reserves as our
main explanatory variable without controlling for endogeneity; this is also the method
adopted by most existing empirical papers on foreign reserves. This may induce a bias in
our coeﬃcient estimates, the direction of which is however ambiguous. On the one hand,
if we consider that fragile countries accumulate more reserves for precautionary reasons,

  21
      Results are similar when excluding both small countries and outliers. They are presented in Ap-
pendix E table 17. Results using more restrictively trimmed samples are available upon request.
   22
      Note that by dropping outliers (top and bottom 1% of observations of each continuous variable),
we drop all ﬁnancial centers from our sample, which explains the absence of the ﬁnancial center dummy
in columns (3) and (4) of table 4.

                                                 19
and are more likely to be aﬀected in a crisis (because of the idiosyncratic fragility), we
can argue that the OLS coeﬃcient associated to reserves may be biased downwards. On
the other hand, reserve accumulation can be a buy-product of an undervalued domestic
currency which stimulates economic growth through strong exports. This mechanism
implies an upward bias of our OLS coeﬃcient. It is therefore diﬃcult to predict the
direction of the bias altogether. We go one step further to account for endogeneity
and reverse causality by choosing appropriate instrumental variables for foreign reserve
metrics.

Construction of instrumental variables

    Finding an instrumental variable for reserves is not an easy task. An appropriate
instrumental variable needs to fulﬁll two conditions: ﬁrst, it needs to be correlated with
the instrumented variable; second, it must be uncorrelated with the error term in the
original OLS regression (equation (1)). We have thought of various candidates, including
a dummy for the occurrence of currency crises in the 1970’s and 1980’s, a measure of
the severity of past crises, real GDP per capita expressed in purchasing power parity,
or metrics of regional peer pressure for reserves accumulation. After carefully examin-
ing diﬀerent possibilities, we conclude that the regional peer pressure is the best suited
instrumental variable with respect to our analysis.
    Regional peer pressure for reserve accumulation captures the idea of ‘keeping up with
the Joneses’, namely a country might be motivated to hold foreign reserves as its neigh-
bors do so. In many empirical papers23 , this idea of regional peer pressure is introduced to
study the demand function of foreign reserves. Therefore, it should be highly correlated
with foreign reserve accumulation per se. Furthermore, these instrumental variables al-
low us to focus on reserves accumulated for ‘neighborhood’ motives, and disregard those
related to precautionary or mercantilist motives, which are related to the economic per-
formance of a country and therefore endogenous.

   As for our instrumental variables, we propose two proxies to measure the regional
peer pressure:

   • IDW 06i : An inverse distance weighted mean for country i measures the average
     of the reserves to GDP ratio of all other countries in the world (j = i) weighted by
     the inverse distance between country i and country j (so that country i’s neighbors
     matter more than remoter countries). We assume that country i can only observe
     the decision made by other countries in terms of reserve accumulation in the pre-
     vious year. As a result, we use the inverse distance weighted mean in 2006 as the
        instrument for the reserves to short-term debt ratio in 2007. The advantage of this

  23
       See Bastourre et al. (2009), Cheung and Sengupta (2011), etc.

                                                   20
       instrument is that it is more broadly deﬁned and comprises much more information
       than regional dummies. The construction of IDW 06i is detailed below and the
       data on geographical distance is retrieved from Mayer and Zignago (2011). Note
       that country i’s own reserve ratio is not included in its distance weighted mean.


                                                               Reservesj
                                     IDW 06i =            wij
                                                   j=i
                                                                 GDPj
                                            (distij )−2
                                     wij =            −2
                                             k=i (distik )




   • J onesesi : The Joneses index deﬁned by Cheung and Sengupta (2011) is calculated
     by the sum of the reserves to GDP ratio of country i’s neighboring countries j = i in
     a given geographical region24 . Here again, country i’s own reserve ratio is excluded
     from this sum.

                                                  Reservesj
                                   Jonesesi =
                                                 j=i
                                                           GDPj


    Given the regional patterns we observe in terms of reserves accumulation (Asian coun-
tries for instance accumulate much more reserves than others), we expect a positive cor-
relation between our instrumental variable and our reserve adequacy ratio. Moreover, we
need to insure that our instrumental variables are orthogonal to the error term in our
original OLS regression. Remember that our dependent variable in equation (1) mea-
sures a country’s economic performance during the global ﬁnancial crisis compared to
non-crisis times, namely a ‘detrended’ real GDP growth rate. This is thus a measure
of short-term economic growth, mainly aﬀected by circumstantial factors (i.e. tempo-
rary external shocks). The importance of reserve holdings of a country’s neighbors in
2006 should not be directly related to the impact of the 2009 ﬁnancial crisis on economic
growth.
    Hence, the reserve accumulation behavior of neighbor countries before the crisis has
no clear relationship with residuals of our OLS regression (which correspond to the crisis
impact that is not explained by reserves, capital controls, trade openness, exchange rate
regime, and ﬁnancial centers)25 .
  24
     We deﬁne 8 regions: East Asia & Paciﬁc, South Asia, Eastern Europe & Central Asia, Latin
America & Caribbean, Middle East & North Africa, Sub-Saharan Africa, European Union (27) and
North America. Advanced countries being dropped out, the latter two regions, European Union (27)
and North America do not have observations.
  25
     One caveat: one may argue that countries in a given region have similar trade and ﬁnancial ﬂows,


                                                 21
    We provide the results of the ﬁrst-stage regressions using our candidate instrumental
variables, in table 18 in Appendix F. Column (1) shows the results using the distance-
weighted index, column (2) uses the Joneses index, while column (3) uses both variables
as joint instruments. In all three cases we ﬁnd a signiﬁcant correlation with the instru-
mented variable, reserves to short-term debt ratio, and obtain signs consistent with our
expectation, namely the stronger regional pressure, the higher reserve adequacy ratio.
The R2 is also reasonably large, around 14% in all three cases. These ﬁndings conﬁrm
our choice of instrumental variables. The sign and goodness of ﬁt of the distance-weighted
index remain stable when we drop outliers; that of the Joneses index is slightly weaker
(see table 19 in Appendix F).


Two-stage least square regressions

    We present in table 5 the results of the second stage regression when the reserve
adequacy ratio is instrumented. To facilitate interpretation, we repeat our OLS results in
column (1). Columns (2), (3) and (4) respectively show the ﬁnal results of the two-stage
least square procedure (2SLS) using the distance-weighted index, the Joneses index and
both.
    Using instrumental variables, the coeﬃcients of interest in our regressions are not
signiﬁcant any more. This result is not very surprising, since we know that the 2SLS
procedure usually yields larger standard errors, driving down the signiﬁcance of the 2SLS
estimates. For this reason, it is hard to conclude anything in terms of bias correction
and magnitude. The signs of the 2SLS estimates are consistent with the OLS estimates,
although the magnitude of the 2SLS estimates are higher, but none of the coeﬃcients
estimated through 2SLS are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero26 .
    For robustness checks, table 20 in Appendix F presents similar results when dropping
outliers from the sample. We also instrumented the reserve adequacy ratio when adding
the interaction term between reserves and capital controls in the regression; results are
fairly similar to that presented above and are available upon request.




therefore the pattern of their reserve accumulation may have a common component related to common
growth expectations in the region. This would weaken the exogeneity of our instruments.
   26
      Considering that the corresponding Hausman test fails to reject the null hypothesis of exogenous
right-hand-side variables, we feel more conﬁdent on relying on our OLS estimates.

                                                 22
                                  Table 5: 2SLS: Second stage

                                    (1)                (2)               (3)        (4)
                                   OLS       distance weighted index   Joneses     both
L2.log rsv/std                    0.729∗∗             2.088             0.944      1.413
                                  (0.317)            (1.888)           (1.485)    (1.213)

L2.capital controls               0.689∗∗             0.506            0.660∗     0.597∗
                                  (0.307)            (0.408)           (0.356)    (0.343)

L2.exchange regime index           -0.652             -1.330            -0.759     -0.993
                                  (1.457)            (1.789)           (1.589)    (1.556)

L2.trade openness                  -0.0184          -0.00567            -0.0164    -0.0120
                                  (0.0128)          (0.0220)           (0.0184)   (0.0167)

oil dummy                          -1.561             -2.131            -1.651     -1.848
                                  (1.410)            (1.673)           (1.498)    (1.479)

ﬁnancial center                    5.284              1.700             4.718      3.479
                                  (5.395)            (7.488)           (6.488)    (6.169)

Constant                           -1.400             -9.972            -2.754     -5.716
                                  (2.575)            (12.03)           (9.502)    (7.821)
Observations                        112                 112              112        112
R2                                 0.155              0.007             0.151      0.117
Adjusted R2                        0.107              -0.049            0.103      0.067
Hausman p − value                     .                0.442            0.886      0.563
Standard errors in parentheses
∗
  p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                               23
3.5     Foreign reserves: gunpowder or nuclear weapons?
    We have so far seen that foreign reserve adequacy (relative to short-term debt) con-
tributes, on its own or jointly with capital controls, to real output growth during the recent
global ﬁnancial crisis. Other papers (e.g. Aizenman and Sun (2009) and Dominguez et al.
(2012)) rather focus on reserve depletion and its impact on economic growth of the same
period. These diﬀerent views reﬂect an interesting question behind: are foreign reserves
‘gunpowder’, meaning that they have to be deployed during a war (crisis), or are they
akin to ‘nuclear weapons’ - the mere existence of reserves suﬃces to act as a protection?
We try to bring some empirical evidence to this question here.
    First, we want to know whether countries that had a larger pre-crisis level of reserves
compared to short-term debts depleted more reserves during the GFC. The scatter plot
in ﬁgure 4 does not show a clear relationship between pre-crisis reserve adequacy and
reserve depletion during the GFC27 . This feature remains true even if we exclude outliers.
It seems like only countries whose pre-crisis reserves to short-term debt ratio falls in the
middle range depleted reserve assets during the GFC; both countries which had a very
high or very low reserve adequacy ratio did not use much their reserves. Notice that
in order to cover a broader range of non-advanced countries, we use the change in the
total reserve stock as our proxy for reserve depletion during the GFC (diﬀerent from
Dominguez et al. (2012) who use SDDS data).




                         Figure 4: Depletion vs. Pre-crisis adequacy

    Next, we proceed to include a control variable of reserve depletion in our main speciﬁ-
cation, equation (2), so that we can see whether this control variable has an eﬀect on the
coeﬃcients we estimated above. In particular, we are interested to see whether including
reserve depletion changes the coeﬃcient of pre-crisis reserve adequacy ratio.
  27
    We also tested this relationship empirically using an OLS regression. Results can be provided upon
request.

                                                 24
    For this exercise, we construct a dummy variable as a proxy of reserve depletion. It
takes the value 1 if the growth rate of reserves is zero or negative between 2008 and 2009
and the value 0 otherwise. We ﬁnd that the pre-crisis reserve adequacy ratio remains
statistically signiﬁcant when the variable of reserve depletion is added (reserve depletion
itself not signiﬁcant, see table 6).

                     Table 6: Reserve depletion as a control variable


                                                    (1)              (2)
                                               rgdp residual    rgdp residual
               L2.log rsv/std                     0.729∗∗          0.752∗∗
                                                  (0.317)          (0.321)

               L2.capital controls                  0.689∗∗         0.719∗∗
                                                    (0.307)         (0.313)

               L2.exchange regime index              -0.652          -0.681
                                                    (1.457)         (1.469)

               L2.trade openness                     -0.0184        -0.0169
                                                    (0.0128)       (0.0130)

               oil dummy                             -1.561          -1.179
                                                    (1.410)         (1.563)

               ﬁnancial center                       5.284           4.844
                                                    (5.395)         (5.458)

               reserve depletion dummy                               -0.758
                                                                    (1.422)

               Constant                              -1.400          -1.594
                                                    (2.575)         (2.603)
               Observations                           112              111
               R2                                    0.155            0.157
               Adjusted R2                           0.107            0.100
               Standard errors in parentheses
               Homoscedasticity not rejected according to the White test
               ∗
                 p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




4    Foreign reserve accumulation after the global ﬁ-
     nancial crisis
   So far, we have analyzed the role of foreign reserves on real economic growth during
the GFC and have concluded that suﬃcient reserves with respect to a country’s short-

                                               25
term debt level are important to limit output losses during a crisis. Did the GFC then
reshape countries’ perception about the necessity of hoarding foreign reserves? As noted
by the IMF, ‘[a]uthorities in several countries, including some advanced economies, had
started focusing anew on the role of reserves in crisis mitigation and management [...]
and even several small advanced countries have since taken a new look at their need for
reserves in relation to the international exposures of their ﬁnancial systems (IEO (2012)).’
    In fact, in line with existing papers (Dominguez et al. (2012)), we ﬁnd that many
countries see their reserves ‘bounce back’ immediately after a period of reserve losses
during the GFC. Compared to the existing literature, this paper takes advantage of more
recent data to better describe reserve rebuilding after the GFC, and more importantly,
to document a recent trend of deceleration in reserve accumulation.
    Figure 5 illustrates how the monthly growth rate in foreign reserve accumulation has
changed from a high speed before the crisis to a relatively slow pace in more recent years.
We can especially observe a spectacular depletion of reserves during the crisis period, a
fast ‘bounce-back’ in the aftermath of the crisis followed by a ‘ﬂattening-out’. We will
document these three phenomena in this section.




                   Figure 5: Evolution of foreign reserve accumulation



4.1    Reserve rebuilding in the immediate aftermath of the crisis
   Two features draw our attention with respect to reserve rebuilding. First, a signiﬁcant
rebuilding is more pronounced in countries which had a relatively low pre-crisis reserve
adequacy ratio. Figure 6 shows a scatter plot comparing pre-crisis reserves to short-term
debt in December 2007 with reserve rebuilding from April to December 2009. This time


                                            26
span is deﬁned as the period immediately following the peak of the GFC. We take the
timing of being hit by the GFC from Dominguez et al. (2012)28 .
   We can see a clear negative relationship between these two variables. Namely, the
lower the pre-crisis reserve adequacy ratio, the stronger the rebuilding. This might reﬂect
an increasing demand for reserves in countries that were insuﬃciently self-insured before
the GFC.




                    Figure 6: Rebuilding vs. Pre-crisis level of reserves

    We further test this bivariate relationship with a simple OLS regression speciﬁed as
follows:
                                                     rsv
                    Δrsv09m04−09m12,i = γ0 + γ1 log(     )07m12 + γx + i                 (3)
                                                     std
    x stands for control variables, including especially a dummy variable which indicates
whether a country drew credit lines from the IMF before 2009Q1. We construct this
dummy variable based on the IMF annual report and we conjecture that if a country
resorted to an IMF program during the crisis its willingness to re-build foreign reserves
after the ﬁnancial crisis would be enhanced.
    We observe from table 7 that the post-crisis reserve rebuilding rate is signiﬁcantly and
negatively correlated with pre-crisis reserve adequacy ratio in most cases. The coeﬃcient
of the pre-crisis adequacy ratio loses the signiﬁcance once we add the oil country dummy.
Oil countries did not seem to recover their reserve stock after the GFC; this however
might be due to the collapse of world oil demand. This result is robust after controlling
for outliers (column (4)). A more pronounced reserve rebuilding seems to be associated
with a lower pre-crisis reserve adequacy ratio.
   We now turn to the relationship between reserve rebuilding after the crisis and reserve
depletion during the crisis. From ﬁgure 7, we observe that a massive depletion of reserves
  28
    Dominguez et al. (2012) report that most non-advanced countries experienced the crisis between
2008Q4 and 2009Q1 in spite of some heterogeneities.

                                               27
                 Table 7: Reserve rebuilding vs. Pre-crisis adequacy ratio

                                            full sample           w/t outliers
                                     (1)         (2)       (3)        (4)
                                 rebuilding rebuilding rebuilding rebuilding
       log rsv/std (07m12)        -3.326∗∗     -2.368    -2.724∗    -2.636∗
                                   (1.555)    (1.565)    (1.542)    (1.478)

       IMF credit dummy                        10.83∗∗    12.24∗∗      10.67∗∗
                                               (5.269)    (5.151)      (4.340)

       ﬁnancial center                          -5.035     -3.413       -3.143
                                               (19.79)    (19.81)      (15.91)

       oil dummy                                -7.138
                                               (5.960)

       Constant                    32.95∗∗∗    25.94∗∗∗   26.06∗∗∗    25.36∗∗∗
                                   (9.121)     (9.391)    (9.420)     (8.947)
       Observations                   73          73         73          69
       R2                           0.061       0.151      0.133       0.152
       Adjusted R2                  0.047       0.101      0.096       0.113
       Standard errors in parentheses
       ∗
         p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01


during the crisis is associated with a stronger rebound. This seems once again to conﬁrm
countries’ increasing appetite for reserve assets as a self-insurance.
   We can also test this relationship using the following OLS regression:

                  Δrsv09m04−09m12,i = γ0 + γ1 Δrsv08m09−09m03,i + γx + i              (4)

    Table 8 shows that the negative relationship between the growth rate of reserves
during and after the GFC that we can see from the scatter plot in ﬁgure 7 is statistically
signiﬁcant. A higher rebuilding rate is associated with a more severe reserve depletion.
This result is also robust even if we control for other variables (column (2)) or eliminate
outliers (column (3)).




                                               28
        Figure 7: Rebuilding vs. Depletion of reserves




      Table 8: Reserve rebuilding vs. Reserve depletion


                                full sample       w/t outliers
                              (1)          (2)        (3)
                          rebuilding rebuilding rebuilding
reserve depletion          -0.394∗∗∗    -0.427∗∗∗  -0.232∗∗∗
                           (0.0844)     (0.0802)   (0.0779)

IMF credit dummy                        8.497∗      10.06∗∗
                                        (4.504)     (3.939)

oil dummy                               -13.25∗∗    -11.39∗∗
                                        (5.118)     (4.307)

ﬁnancial center                          -1.185
                                        (17.48)

Constant                   10.10∗∗∗     9.843∗∗∗    11.03∗∗∗
                           (2.237)      (2.847)     (2.374)
Observations                  77           76          73
R2                          0.225        0.358       0.266
Adjusted R2                 0.215        0.322       0.234
Standard errors in parentheses
∗
  p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                  29
4.2       Foreign reserve accumulation: a recent deceleration
    Thanks to ampler data, we now analyze the more recent behavior in reserve accumu-
lation. We observe a noticeable slow-down in the pace of foreign reserve accumulation
in several emerging market economies, like India, Russia, and some Eastern European
countries (e.g. Bulgaria, Croatia and Romania). One important exception is China.




    Figure 8: Recent foreign reserve accumulation in BRIC, Hong Kong and Taiwan

    From ﬁgure 8, apart from China where foreign reserve accumulation has a clearly
diﬀerent pattern, there is a general tendency of a deceleration in the pace of foreign
reserve purchasing from the end of 2009. This tendency is especially observable in India,
Russia and Hong Kong; foreign reserves in Taiwan also tail oﬀ, though with a delay, from
mid-201029 .
   A ‘ﬂattening-out’ of foreign reserve accumulation is also noticeable in other countries
when a more recent period is considered. This is the case for Indonesia, Malaysia and
Thailand (ﬁgure 9) and many East European countries (ﬁgure 10) from the end of 2010.
    What drives this ‘ﬂattening’ in foreign reserve accumulation? We come up with several
possible explanations. First, it is possible that, once a country reached its pre-crisis level
of reserves, it slows down the accumulation as foreign reserves are no free lunch and the
opportunity cost and risks associated with valuation eﬀects may be high. Second, the
deceleration of foreign reserve accumulation may reﬂect a change of policy priority with
regard to monetary autonomy, exchange rate stability and ﬁnancial openness in the wake
of the 2008-2009 ﬁnancial crisis, as Aizenman et al. (2010) put forward. After all, reserve
accumulation may be motivated by the need to reconcile the ‘Impossible Trinity’ (this
is however an aspect of reserve accumulation that we do not consider in this paper).
Last but not least, if foreign reserve accumulation tails oﬀ, it might be because of the
  29
       The GFC period corresponds to the ﬁnding of Dominguez et al. (2012) as noted before.

                                                  30
    Figure 9: Selected Asian countries




Figure 10: Selected East European countries




                    31
stabilization of the underlying macroeconomic variable that foreign reserves are used to
cover. In our paper, we argue that this macroeconomic variable is short-term debt. With
the ‘ﬂattening-out’ of short-term debt after the ﬁnancial crisis (the reasons why short-
term debt diminishes after the GFC are multiple, e.g. Great Retrenchment), the demand
for foreign reserves must fall.

    We can test the relationship between short-term debt and foreign reserves based on a
Vector Error Correction Model (VECM), which can identify the long-run co-integration
relation as well as short-term dynamics between these two variables. Due to the avail-
ability of data and the minimum data points needed, we use quarterly data of reserves
and short-term debt, as well as other control variables for this exercise. We consider the
period running from 2002Q1 to 2012Q1.
    The VECM speciﬁcation can be written as:

                                                                              
 Δlog(rsvi,t ) = φi log(rsvi,t−1 )−θ0 −θ1 log(stdi,t−1 ) +δ1,i Δlog(stdi,t )+δi Δxi,t +i,t (5)

    φi is the error correcting term, namely the speed of adjustment. If it is signiﬁcantly
negative, one can conclude that there is convergence to the long run relationship which
is described as follows:
                             log(rsvi,t−1 ) = θ0 + θ1 log(stdi,t−1 )
                                                                                      
    The short run dynamics are captured by the short run coeﬃcients δ1,i and δi .
    To estimate equation (5), several methods can be used. Below we present the esti-
mation results using pooled mean group estimates, which assume a common long-run
coeﬃcient across countries but heterogeneous short-term adjustment.
    From table 9, we observe that there is a clear positive long-run relationship between
foreign reserves and short-term debt both expressed in logarithm. In the baseline case
(column (1)), log(rsvi,t ) = 0.436 log(stdi,t ). In the short-term, the error correction coef-
ﬁcient (-0.0743) is signiﬁcant and negative, meaning that if foreign reserves exceed the
long-run equilibrium level a country reduces its foreign reserve accumulation with an
adjustment rate of 7% in the baseline case.
    As a robustness check, we also tried diﬀerent estimation methods and used additional
control variables. The main coeﬃcients presented in table 9 do not change in signs nor
in magnitude.
    The VECM conﬁrms our initial guess on why foreign reserve accumulation tails oﬀ in
recent years. It is likely that the underlying target variable for foreign reserves, namely
short-term debt, stabilizes after the ﬁnancial crisis; this, in turn, may be associated with
the global liquidity crunch and Great Retrenchment (Milesi-Ferretti and Tille (2011)) in
international capital ﬂows that took place in the wake of the GFC.



                                              32
      Table 9: Vector Error Correction Model (2002Q1 - 2012Q1)


                            (1)                (2)               (3)
                      Δ log(reserves)    Δ log(reserves)   Δ log(reserves)
Long-run
L.std log                  0.436∗∗∗          0.445∗∗∗         0.448∗∗∗
                           (0.0249)          (0.0243)         (0.0270)
Short-run
error correction          -0.0743∗∗∗         -0.0815∗∗∗       -0.186∗∗∗
                           (0.0107)           (0.0130)        (0.0514)

D.std log                  0.138∗∗∗          0.128∗∗∗         0.148∗∗∗
                           (0.0188)          (0.0173)         (0.0277)

LD.reserves log                              0.113∗∗∗          0.0338
                                             (0.0296)         (0.0399)

L2D.reserves log                             -0.0357∗         -0.131∗∗∗
                                             (0.0213)         (0.0436)

Δ log(RGDP)                                                     0.282
                                                               (0.485)

Δ log(M2)                                                       0.225
                                                               (0.199)

Δ log(REER)                                                    0.0474
                                                              (0.0920)

Constant                   0.438∗∗∗          0.468∗∗∗         0.950∗∗∗
                           (0.0584)          (0.0697)         (0.230)
Observations                 2752              2750             1093
Standard errors in parentheses
∗
  p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                        33
5    Conclusion
    In the late 1990s and early 2000s, a consensus developed that reserves were useful in
averting, or at least mitigating, the occurrence of crises in emerging market and developing
countries. Policy makers from these countries have apparently absorbed the lessons from
this literature, as the level of international reserves dramatically increased in the 2000s
(even accepting that other motives have played a role). The results presented in this
paper suggest that the Great Financial Crisis has further demonstrated the usefulness of
reserves: empirically, the countries that held more reserves as a percentage of short-term
debt have been less negatively impacted than others, ceteris paribus. The results also
suggest that this eﬀect is especially strong when the capital account is less open.

    Given that reserves seem to have played a role in oﬀsetting the eﬀect of the crisis,
it is not surprising that the countries that depleted reserves to a greater extent are
also the ones that rebuilt them more quickly in the direct aftermath of the crisis, as
shown in the paper. One possible factor is that policy makers in emerging market and
developing countries have concluded from the experience of the GFC that reserves are
indeed very useful in protecting countries against crises. Nonetheless, we also ﬁnd that
in the most recent period, the pace of reserve accumulation has slowed down, in line with
the deceleration in the pace of short-term debt. This outcome suggests that countries
target the level of short-term debt: if, for whatever reason, short-term debt accumulation
decelerates, then reserves are likely to follow the same course.




                                            34
References
Aizenman, Joshua, and Michael M. Hutchison (2010) ‘Exchange market pressure and ab-
  sorption by international reserves: Emerging markets and fear of reserve loss during the
  2008-09 crisis.’ NBER Working Papers 16260, National Bureau of Economic Research,
  Inc, September

Aizenman, Joshua, and Yi Sun (2009) ‘The ﬁnancial crisis and sizable international re-
  serves depletion: From ‘fear of ﬂoating’ to the ‘fear of losing international reserves’ ?’
  NBER Working Papers 15308, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, October

Aizenman, Joshua, Menzie D. Chinn, and Hiro Ito (2010) ‘The emerging global ﬁnan-
  cial architecture: Tracing and evaluating new patterns of the trilemma conﬁguration.’
  Journal of International Money and Finance 29(4), 615–641

Aizenman, Joshua, Yothin Jinjarak, and Donghyun Park (2011) ‘International reserves
  and swap lines: Substitutes or complements?’ International Review of Economics &
  Finance 20(1), 5–18

Bacchetta, Philippe, Kenza Benhima, and Yannick Kalantzis (2013) ‘Capital controls
  with international reserve accumulation: Can this be optimal?’ American Economic
  Journal: Macroeconomics 5(3), 229–62

Bahmani-Oskooee, M., and F. Brown (2002) ‘Demand for international reserves: a review
  article.’ Applied Economics 34(10), 1209–1226

Bastourre, Diego, Jorge Carrera, and Javier Ibarlucia (2009) ‘What is driving reserve
  accumulation? A dynamic panel data approach.’ Review of International Economics
  17(4), 861–877

Benigno, Gianluca, and Luca Fornaro (2012) ‘Reserve accumulation, growth and ﬁnancial
  crises.’ CEP Discussion Papers dp1161, Centre for Economic Performance, LSE, August

Berg, Andrew, and Catherine Pattillo (1999) ‘Are currency crises predictable? A test.’
  IMF Staﬀ Papers 46(2), 1

Berkmen, S. Pelin, Gaston Gelos, Robert Rennhack, and James P. Walsh (2012) ‘The
  global ﬁnancial crisis: Explaining cross-country diﬀerences in the output impact.’ Jour-
  nal of International Money and Finance 31(1), 42–59

Bianchi, Javier, Juan Carlos Hatchondo, and Leonardo Martinez (2012) ‘International
  reserves and rollover risk.’ NBER Working Papers 18628, National Bureau of Economic
  Research, Inc, December



                                            35
Blanchard, Olivier J., Mitali Das, and Hamid Faruqee (2010) ‘The initial impact of
  the crisis on emerging market countries.’ Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 41(1
  (Spring), 263–323

Bussière, Matthieu, and Christian B. Mulder (1999) ‘External vulnerability in emerging
  market economies - how high liquidity can oﬀset weak fundamentals and the eﬀects of
  contagion.’ IMF Working Papers 99/88, International Monetary Fund, July

Catao, Luis, and Gian-Maria Milesi-Ferretti (2013) ‘External liabilities and crises.’ IMF
  Working Papers 13/113, International Monetary Fund, May

Cheng, G. (2013) ‘A growth perspective on foreign reserve accumulation.’ Working papers
 443, Banque de France

Cheung, Yin-Wong, and Rajeswari Sengupta (2011) ‘Accumulation of reserves and keep-
  ing up with the joneses: The case of LATAM economies.’ International Review of
  Economics & Finance 20(1), 19–31

Chinn, Menzie, and Hiro Ito (2006) ‘What matters for ﬁnancial development? Capital
 controls, institutions, and interactions.’ Journal of Development Economics 81(1), 163–
 192

Dominguez, Kathryn M.E. (2012) ‘Foreign reserve management during the global ﬁnan-
 cial crisis.’ Journal of International Money and Finance 31(8), 2017–2037

Dominguez, Kathryn M.E., Yuko Hashimoto, and Takatoshi Ito (2012) ‘International
 reserves and the global ﬁnancial crisis.’ Journal of International Economics 88(2), 388
  – 406

Flood, Robert, and Nancy Marion (1999) ‘Perspectives on the recent currency crisis
  literature.’ International Journal of Finance & Economics 4(1), 1–26

Frankel, Jeﬀrey, and George Saravelos (2012) ‘Can leading indicators assess country vul-
  nerability? Evidence from the 2008-09 global ﬁnancial crisis.’ Journal of International
  Economics 87(2), 216–231

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Maurice Obstfeld (2012) ‘Stories of the twentieth century
 for the twenty-ﬁrst.’ American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 4(1), 226–65

IEO (2012) ‘International reserves: IMF concerns and country perspectives.’ In ‘IEO
  report’ (International Monetary Fund)

Jeanne, Olivier, and Romain Rancière (2011) ‘The optimal level of international reserves
  for emerging market countries: A new formula and some applications.’ Economic Jour-
  nal 121(555), 905–930

                                           36
Kose, M Ayhan, Eswar Prasad, Kenneth Rogoﬀ, and Shang-Jin Wei (2009) ‘Financial
 globalization: A reappraisal.’ IMF Staﬀ Papers 56(1), 8–62

Lane, Philip R., and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti (2007) ‘The external wealth of nations
  mark II: Revised and extended estimates of foreign assets and liabilities, 1970-2004.’
  Journal of International Economics 73(2), 223–250

Llaudes, Ricardo, Ferhan Salman, and Mali Chivakul (2010) ‘The impact of the great
  recession on emerging markets.’ IMF Working Papers 10/237, International Monetary
  Fund, October

Mayer, Thierry, and Soledad Zignago (2011) ‘Notes on CEPII’s distances measures: The
 geodist database.’ Working Papers 2011-25, CEPII research center, December

Milesi-Ferretti, Gian-Maria, and Cédric Tille (2011) ‘The great retrenchment: Interna-
 tional capital ﬂows during the global ﬁnancial crisis.’ Economic Policy 26(66), 285–342

Obstfeld, Maurice (1986) ‘Rational and self-fulﬁlling balance-of-payments crises.’ Amer-
 ican Economic Review 76(1), 72–81

Obstfeld, Maurice (2013) ‘Never say never: commentary on a policymaker’s reﬂections.’
 Manuscript, UC Berkeley, November

Obstfeld, Maurice, Jay C. Shambaugh, and Alan M. Taylor (2009) ‘Financial instability,
 reserves, and central bank swap lines in the panic of 2008.’ American Economic Review
 99(2), 480–86

Obstfeld, Maurice, Jay C. Shambaugh, and Alan M. Taylor (2010) ‘Financial stability, the
 trilemma, and international reserves.’ American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics
 2(2), 57–94

Reinhart, Carmen M., and Graciela L. Kaminsky (1999) ‘The twin crises: The causes of
  banking and balance-of-payments problems.’ American Economic Review 89(3), 473–
  500

Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoﬀ (2004) ‘The modern history of exchange
  rate arrangements: A reinterpretation.’ The Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(1), 1–
  48

Rose, Andrew K., and Mark M. Spiegel (2009) ‘Cross-country causes and consequences
  of the 2008 crisis: Early warning.’ CEPR Discussion Papers 7354, C.E.P.R. Discussion
  Papers, July

  (2010) ‘Cross-country causes and consequences of the 2008 crisis: International linkages
  and American exposure.’ Paciﬁc Economic Review 15(3), 340–363

                                           37
A     Country sample
   For Eastern European countries, we decided to classify countries at the periphery of
Europe and not in the Eurozone as emerging market economies, whereas countries that
belong to the Eurozone are considered as advanced economies and not included in our
sample.
                                     Table 10: Country list

          country                    cncode   region                       regioncode   country group

          Afghanistan                AFG      South Asia                   1            LDC
          Albania                    ALB      Europe & Central Asia        8            LDC
          Algeria                    DZA      Middle East & North Africa   4            LDC
          Angola                     AGO      Sub-Saharan Africa           7            LDC
          Antigua and Barbuda        ATG      Latin America & Caribbean    3            LDC
          Argentina                  ARG      Latin America & Caribbean    3            EME
          Armenia                    ARM      Europe & Central Asia        8            LDC
          Aruba                      ABW      Latin America & Caribbean    3            LDC
          Azerbaijan                 AZE      Europe & Central Asia        8            LDC
          Bahamas                    BHS      Latin America & Caribbean    3            LDC
          Bahrain                    BHR      Middle East & North Africa   4            LDC
          Bangladesh                 BGD      South Asia                   1            LDC
          Barbados                   BRB      Latin America & Caribbean    3            LDC
          Belarus                    BLR      Europe & Central Asia        8            LDC
          Belize                     BLZ      Latin America & Caribbean    3            LDC
          Benin                      BEN      Sub-Saharan Africa           7            LDC
          Bhutan                     BTN      South Asia                   1            LDC
          Bolivia                    BOL      Latin America & Caribbean    3            LDC
          Bosnia and Herzegovina     BIH      Europe & Central Asia        8            LDC
          Botswana                   BWA      Sub-Saharan Africa           7            LDC
          Brazil                     BRA      Latin America & Caribbean    3            EME
          Brunei Darussalam          BRN      East Asia & Paciﬁc           6            LDC
          Bulgaria                   BGR      Europe & Central Asia        8            EME
          Burkina Faso               BFA      Sub-Saharan Africa           7            LDC
          Burundi                    BDI      Sub-Saharan Africa           7            LDC
          Cambodia                   KHM      East Asia & Paciﬁc           6            LDC
          Cameroon                   CMR      Sub-Saharan Africa           7            LDC
          Cape Verde                 CPV      Sub-Saharan Africa           7            LDC
          Central African Republic   CAF      Sub-Saharan Africa           7            LDC
          Chad                       TCD      Sub-Saharan Africa           7            LDC
          Chile                      CHL      Latin America & Caribbean    3            EME
          China                      CHN      East Asia & Paciﬁc           6            EME
          Colombia                   COL      Latin America & Caribbean    3            EME
          Comoros                    COM      Sub-Saharan Africa           7            LDC
          Congo                      COG      Sub-Saharan Africa           7            LDC
          Congo (Dem)                ZAR      Sub-Saharan Africa           7            LDC
          Costa Rica                 CRI      Latin America & Caribbean    3            LDC
          Cote d’Ivoire              CIV      Sub-Saharan Africa           7            LDC
          Croatia                    HRV      Europe & Central Asia        8            LDC
          Czech Republic             CZE      Europe & Central Asia        8            EME
          Djibouti                   DJI      Middle East & North Africa   4            LDC
          Dominica                   DMA      Latin America & Caribbean    3            LDC
          Dominican Republic         DOM      Latin America & Caribbean    3            LDC
          Ecuador                    ECU      Latin America & Caribbean    3            LDC
          Egypt                      EGY      Middle East & North Africa   4            EME
          El Salvador                SLV      Latin America & Caribbean    3            LDC
          Equatorial Guinea          GNQ      Middle East & North Africa   4            LDC
          Eritrea                    ERI      Sub-Saharan Africa           7            LDC
          Ethiopia                   ETH      Sub-Saharan Africa           7            LDC
          Fiji                       FJI      East Asia & Paciﬁc           6            LDC
          Gabon                      GAB      Sub-Saharan Africa           7            LDC
          Gambia                     GMB      Sub-Saharan Africa           7            LDC
          Georgia                    GEO      Europe & Central Asia        8            LDC
          Ghana                      GHA      Sub-Saharan Africa           7            LDC
          Grenada                    GRD      Latin America & Caribbean    3            LDC
          Guatemala                  GTM      Latin America & Caribbean    3            LDC
          Guinea                     GIN      Sub-Saharan Africa           7            LDC
          Guinea-Bissau              GNB      Sub-Saharan Africa           7            LDC
          Guyana                     GUY      Latin America & Caribbean    3            LDC
          Haiti                      HTI      Latin America & Caribbean    3            LDC
          Honduras                   HND      Latin America & Caribbean    3            LDC
          Hong Kong                  HKG      East Asia & Paciﬁc           6            EME
          Hungary                    HUN      Europe & Central Asia        8            EME
          India                      IND      South Asia                   1            EME
          Indonesia                  IDN      East Asia & Paciﬁc           6            EME
          Iran                       IRN      Middle East & North Africa   4            LDC




                                                   38
Iraq                             IRQ   Middle East & North Africa   4   LDC
Jamaica                          JAM   Latin America & Caribbean    3   LDC
Jordan                           JOR   Middle East & North Africa   4   LDC
Kazakhstan                       KAZ   Europe & Central Asia        8   LDC
Kenya                            KEN   Sub-Saharan Africa           7   LDC
Kiribati                         KIR   East Asia & Paciﬁc           6   LDC
Korea                            KOR   East Asia & Paciﬁc           6   EME
Kosovo                           KSV   Europe & Central Asia        8   LDC
Kuwait                           KWT   Middle East & North Africa   4   LDC
Kyrgyz Republic                  KGZ   Europe & Central Asia        8   LDC
Lao                              LAO   East Asia & Paciﬁc           6   LDC
Latvia                           LVA   Europe & Central Asia        8   EME
Lebanon                          LBN   Middle East & North Africa   4   LDC
Lesotho                          LSO   Sub-Saharan Africa           7   LDC
Liberia                          LBR   Sub-Saharan Africa           7   LDC
Libya                            LBY   Middle East & North Africa   4   LDC
Lithuania                        LTU   Europe & Central Asia        8   EME
Macao                            MAC   East Asia & Paciﬁc           6   LDC
Macedonia                        MKD   Europe & Central Asia        8   LDC
Madagascar                       MDG   Sub-Saharan Africa           7   LDC
Malawi                           MWI   Sub-Saharan Africa           7   LDC
Malaysia                         MYS   East Asia & Paciﬁc           6   EME
Maldives                         MDV   South Asia                   1   LDC
Mali                             MLI   Sub-Saharan Africa           7   LDC
Marshall Islands                 MHL   East Asia & Paciﬁc           6   LDC
Mauritania                       MRT   Sub-Saharan Africa           7   LDC
Mauritius                        MUS   Sub-Saharan Africa           7   EME
Mexico                           MEX   Latin America & Caribbean    3   LDC
Micronesia                       FSM   East Asia & Paciﬁc           6   LDC
Moldova                          MDA   Europe & Central Asia        8   LDC
Mongolia                         MNG   East Asia & Paciﬁc           6   LDC
Montenegro                       MNE   Europe & Central Asia        8   LDC
Montserrat                       MSR   Latin America & Caribbean    3   LDC
Morocco                          MAR   Middle East & North Africa   4   EME
Mozambique                       MOZ   Sub-Saharan Africa           7   LDC
Myanmar                          MMR   East Asia & Paciﬁc           6   LDC
Namibia                          NAM   Sub-Saharan Africa           7   LDC
Nepal                            NPL   South Asia                   1   LDC
Nicaragua                        NIC   Latin America & Caribbean    3   LDC
Niger                            NER   Sub-Saharan Africa           7   LDC
Nigeria                          NGA   Sub-Saharan Africa           7   LDC
Oman                             OMN   Middle East & North Africa   4   LDC
Pakistan                         PAK   South Asia                   1   EME
Panama                           PAN   Latin America & Caribbean    3   LDC
Papua New Guinea                 PNG   East Asia & Paciﬁc           6   LDC
Paraguay                         PRY   Latin America & Caribbean    3   LDC
Peru                             PER   Latin America & Caribbean    3   EME
Philippines                      PHL   East Asia & Paciﬁc           6   EME
Poland                           POL   Europe & Central Asia        8   EME
Qatar                            QAT   Middle East & North Africa   4   LDC
Romania                          ROM   Europe & Central Asia        8   EME
Russia                           RUS   Europe & Central Asia        8   EME
Rwanda                           RWA   Sub-Saharan Africa           7   LDC
Samoa                            WSM   East Asia & Paciﬁc           6   LDC
Sao Tome and Principe            STP   Sub-Saharan Africa           7   LDC
Saudi Arabia                     SAU   Middle East & North Africa   4   EME
Senegal                          SEN   Sub-Saharan Africa           7   LDC
Serbia                           SRB   Europe & Central Asia        8   LDC
Seychelles                       SYC   Sub-Saharan Africa           7   LDC
Sierra Leone                     SLE   Sub-Saharan Africa           7   LDC
Singapore                        SGP   East Asia & Paciﬁc           6   EME
Solomon Islands                  SLB   East Asia & Paciﬁc           6   LDC
Somalia                          SOM   Sub-Saharan Africa           7   LDC
South Africa                     ZAF   Sub-Saharan Africa           7   EME
Sri Lanka                        LKA   South Asia                   1   LDC
St. Kitts and Nevis              KNA   Latin America & Caribbean    3   LDC
St. Lucia                        LCA   Latin America & Caribbean    3   LDC
St. Vincent and the Grenadines   VCT   Latin America & Caribbean    3   LDC
Sudan                            SDN   Sub-Saharan Africa           7   LDC
Suriname                         SUR   Latin America & Caribbean    3   LDC
Swaziland                        SWZ   Sub-Saharan Africa           7   LDC
Syrian Arab Republic             SYR   Middle East & North Africa   4   LDC
Taiwan                           TWN   East Asia & Paciﬁc           6   EME
Tajikistan                       TJK   Europe & Central Asia        8   LDC
Tanzania                         TZA   Sub-Saharan Africa           7   LDC
Thailand                         THA   East Asia & Paciﬁc           6   EME
Timor-Leste                      TMP   East Asia & Paciﬁc           6   LDC
Togo                             TGO   Sub-Saharan Africa           7   LDC




                                           39
Tonga                  TON   East Asia & Paciﬁc           6   LDC
Trinidad and Tobago    TTO   Latin America & Caribbean    3   LDC
Tunisia                TUN   Middle East & North Africa   4   LDC
Turkey                 TUR   Europe & Central Asia        8   EME
Turkmenistan           TKM   Europe & Central Asia        8   LDC
Tuvalu                 TUV   East Asia & Paciﬁc           6   LDC
Uganda                 UGA   Sub-Saharan Africa           7   LDC
Ukraine                UKR   Europe & Central Asia        8   EME
United Arab Emirates   ARE   Middle East & North Africa   4   LDC
Uruguay                URY   Latin America & Caribbean    3   LDC
Uzbekistan             UZB   Europe & Central Asia        8   LDC
Vanuatu                VUT   East Asia & Paciﬁc           6   LDC
Venezuela              VEN   Latin America & Caribbean    3   EME
Vietnam                VNM   East Asia & Paciﬁc           6   LDC
Yemen                  YEM   Middle East & North Africa   4   LDC
Zambia                 ZMB   Sub-Saharan Africa           7   LDC
Zimbabwe               ZWE   Sub-Saharan Africa           7   LDC




                                 40
B     Variables used for econometric analysis
                        Table 11: Key variable description

Variable                 Full Name                    Description             Source
rgdp residual            Purged    real    GDP        real GDP 09 - lin-      IMF IFS (2012)
                         growth                       ear prediction from a
                                                      mean 03-08
rgdp f e                 Unexpected            real   real GDP 09 - fore-     IMF WEO (2008),
                         GDP growth                   cast in 2008Q1          IFS (2012)
rsv                      Reserve adequacy ra-         One of the four ratios IMF IFS (2012)
                         tios                         detailed in p.9
rsv std                  Reserves to short-           log reserves
                                                           s.t.debt
                                                                    × 100     IMF IFS (2012)
                         term debt ratio in log
capital controls (cc)    Capital control index        −kaopen                 Chinn and Ito (2006)
trade openness           Trade openness index         X+M
                                                      GDP
                                                            × 100             IMF IFS (2012)
exchange regime dummy    De facto exchange            dummy variable          Reinhart and Rogoﬀ
                         rate classiﬁcation                                   (2004)
oil dummy                Oil            pro-          dummy variable          IMF (2012)
                         ducer/exporter
                         index
ﬁnancial center          Financial center in-         dummy variable          IMF (2012)
                         dex
Δrsv08m09−09m03          Reserve depletion            log-diﬀerence     of    IMF (2012)
                                                      reserves     between
                                                      08m09 and 09m03
Δrsv09m04−09m12          Reserve rebuilding           log-diﬀerence     of    IMF (2012)
                                                      reserves     between
                                                      09m04 and 09m12




                                          41
Figure 11: Crisis impact using rgdp residual




  Figure 12: Crisis impact using rgdp f e




                    42
C     Complementary results for Section 3.1
Table 12: Results with diﬀerent reserve adequacy ratios, with rgdp f e as dependent
variable


                                     (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)
                                   rgdp fe      rgdp fe     rgdp fe     rgdp fe
           L2.log rsv/gdp          -0.0670
                                   (0.566)

           L2.log rsv/imports                    0.810
                                                (0.574)

           L2.log rsv/m2                                    -0.0315
                                                            (0.524)

           L2.log rsv/std                                               0.671∗∗∗
                                                                        (0.238)

           Constant                -4.956∗∗∗    -6.455∗∗∗   -5.131∗∗∗   -9.090∗∗∗
                                    (1.691)      (0.970)     (1.948)     (1.473)
           Observations               142          133          138        138
           R2                        0.000        0.015        0.000      0.055
           Adjusted R2               -0.007       0.007       -0.007      0.048
           Standard errors in parentheses
           Homoscedasticity not rejected according to the White test
           ∗
             p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                               43
     Table 13: Results with diﬀerent reserve adequacy ratios, without outliers


                              (1)             (2)                (3)             (4)
                        rgdp residual    rgdp residual      rgdp residual   rgdp residual
L2.log rsv/gdp              -0.135
                           (0.630)

L2.log rsv/imports                            0.649
                                             (0.677)

L2.log rsv/m2                                                   0.468
                                                               (0.595)

L2.log rsv/std                                                                0.857∗∗∗
                                                                              (0.253)

Constant                     0.966            -0.350            -1.200        -4.406∗∗∗
                           (1.876)           (1.116)           (2.202)         (1.561)
Observations                  135              126                130            131
R2                          0.000             0.007              0.005          0.082
Adjusted R2                 -0.007            -0.001            -0.003          0.075
Standard errors in parentheses
Homoscedasticity not rejected according to the White test
∗
  p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                             44
Table 14: Results with diﬀerent reserve adequacy ratios, without outliers and small
countries


                                (1)             (2)                (3)             (4)
                          rgdp residual    rgdp residual      rgdp residual   rgdp residual
  L2.log rsv/gdp              -0.723
                             (0.729)

  L2.log rsv/imports                            0.213
                                               (0.816)

  L2.log rsv/m2                                                   -0.431
                                                                 (0.775)

  L2.log rsv/std                                                                0.957∗∗∗
                                                                                (0.355)

  Constant                     3.006             0.611             2.336        -4.971∗∗
                             (2.160)           (1.391)           (2.898)        (2.216)
  Observations                  100               95                 97           101
  R2                          0.010             0.001              0.003         0.068
  Adjusted R2                 -0.000            -0.010            -0.007         0.059
  Standard errors in parentheses
  Homoscedasticity not rejected according to the White test
  ∗
    p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                               45
D   Complementary results for Section 3.2
               Table 15: Full speciﬁcation without outliers


                                               (1)            (2)
                                            rgdp fe     rgdp residual
          L2.log rsv/std                    0.951∗∗∗       0.937∗∗∗
                                            (0.292)        (0.316)

          L2.capital controls               0.0352          0.220
                                            (0.263)        (0.281)

          L2.exchange regime index           -0.892         -0.196
                                            (1.226)        (1.311)

          L2.trade openness               -0.0235∗∗       -0.0286∗∗
                                          (0.0104)        (0.0113)

          oil dummy                         -3.142∗∗∗       -1.987
                                             (1.132)       (1.211)

          Constant                          -7.111∗∗∗       -1.830
                                             (2.263)       (2.431)
          Observations                         104           102
          R2                                  0.213         0.201
          Adjusted R2                         0.173         0.159
          Standard errors in parentheses
          Homoscedasticity not rejected according to the White test
          ∗
            p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                       46
Table 16: Full speciﬁcation without outliers and small countries


                                         (1)           (2)
                                      rgdp fe     rgdp residual
    L2.log rsv/std                    1.311∗∗∗       1.239∗∗
                                      (0.469)        (0.512)

    L2.capital controls               -0.0365         0.315
                                      (0.352)        (0.373)

    L2.exchange regime index           -1.147         -0.341
                                      (1.323)        (1.410)

    L2.trade openness               -0.0274∗∗       -0.0302∗∗
                                    (0.0127)        (0.0138)

    oil dummy                         -2.925∗∗        -1.852
                                      (1.260)        (1.344)

    Constant                          -8.958∗∗∗       -3.422
                                       (3.111)       (3.357)
    Observations                          82            80
    R2                                  0.206         0.197
    Adjusted R2                         0.153         0.143
    Standard errors in parentheses
    Homoscedasticity not rejected according to the White test
    ∗
      p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                 47
E     Complementary results for Section 3.3
Table 17: Foreign reserve accumulation and capital controls, without outliers and small
countries


                                                        (1)            (2)
                                                     rgdp fe      rgdp residual
             L2.log rsv/std                          1.355∗∗∗        1.292∗∗
                                                     (0.472)         (0.516)

             L2.capital controls                     -0.00486         0.347
                                                      (0.354)        (0.375)

             L2.log rsv/std × capital controls         0.248          0.277
                                                      (0.273)        (0.299)

             L2.exchange regime index                  -1.342         -0.540
                                                      (1.342)        (1.428)

             L2.trade openness                       -0.0269∗∗      -0.0300∗∗
                                                     (0.0128)       (0.0139)

             oil dummy                               -2.953∗∗         -1.900
                                                     (1.261)         (1.346)

             Constant                                -9.293∗∗∗        -3.791
                                                      (3.136)        (3.384)
             Observations                                82             80
             R2                                        0.214           0.207
             Adjusted R2                               0.151           0.141
             F-test capital controls                   0.417           0.786
             P-value                                   0.660           0.459
             F-test reserves                           4.309           3.345
             P-value                                  0.0169         0.0407
             Standard errors in parentheses
             Homoscedasticity not rejected according to the White test
             ∗
               p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                              48
F      Complementary results for Section 3.4
F.1     Results of the 1st-stage regressions

                           Table 18: First stage regression for 2SLS

                                             (1)                (2)            (3)
                                       L2.log rsv/std     L2.log rsv/std L2.log rsv/std
      L2.capital controls                   0.107              0.101         0.0800
                                           (0.111)            (0.108)        (0.112)

      L2.exchange regime index             0.591∗∗            0.576∗∗       0.650∗∗
                                           (0.297)            (0.268)       (0.299)

      L2.trade openness                   -0.0109∗∗          -0.0106∗∗     -0.0119∗∗
                                          (0.00447)          (0.00440)     (0.00467)

      oil dummy                             0.517              0.364         0.455
                                           (0.394)            (0.359)       (0.395)

      ﬁnancial center                      3.095∗∗            2.803∗        3.194∗∗
                                           (1.440)            (1.419)       (1.475)

      L2.distance weighted index           0.0325∗∗                         0.0287∗
                                           (0.0150)                         (0.0149)

      L2.Joneses                                             0.00228∗∗     0.00209∗
                                                             (0.00111)     (0.00106)

      Constant                             5.749∗∗∗           5.037∗∗∗      4.646∗∗∗
                                           (0.375)            (0.679)       (0.646)
      Observations                           112                112           112
      R2                                    0.132              0.143         0.164
      Adjusted R2                           0.082              0.094         0.108
      Standard errors in parentheses
      Homoscedasticity not rejected according to the White test
      ∗
        p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                                 49
                Table 19: First stage regression, without outliers

                                       (1)                (2)            (3)
                                 L2.log rsv/std     L2.log rsv/std L2.log rsv/std
L2.capital controls                  0.199∗∗            0.196∗∗        0.177∗
                                    (0.0909)           (0.0871)       (0.0918)

L2.exchange regime index              0.423             0.470∗        0.491∗
                                     (0.286)            (0.269)       (0.292)

L2.trade openness                    -0.00735          -0.00744∗     -0.00815∗
                                    (0.00445)          (0.00447)     (0.00461)

oil dummy                             0.537              0.421         0.491
                                     (0.369)            (0.342)       (0.372)

L2.distance weighted index           0.0255∗                           0.0227
                                     (0.0149)                         (0.0151)

L2.Joneses                                              0.00157        0.00144
                                                      (0.000989)     (0.000967)

Constant                             5.683∗∗∗           5.230∗∗∗      4.921∗∗∗
                                     (0.408)            (0.659)       (0.617)
Observations                           102                102           102
R2                                    0.149              0.154         0.169
Adjusted R2                           0.105              0.110         0.116
Standard errors in parentheses
Homoscedasticity not rejected according to the White test
∗
  p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                           50
F.2    Results of the 2nd-stage regressions

                     Table 20: Second stage regression, without outliers

                                     (1)                (2)               (3)        (4)
                                    OLS       distance weighted index   Joneses     both
L2.log rsv/std                    0.937∗∗∗             1.116             1.541      1.353
                                  (0.316)             (2.070)           (1.896)    (1.467)

L2.capital controls                 0.220              0.180            0.0852      0.127
                                   (0.281)            (0.531)           (0.501)    (0.421)

L2.exchange regime index            -0.196             -0.266            -0.434     -0.360
                                   (1.311)            (1.507)           (1.490)    (1.402)

L2.trade openness                 -0.0286∗∗           -0.0274            -0.0247   -0.0259∗
                                  (0.0113)           (0.0172)           (0.0164)   (0.0144)

oil dummy                           -1.987             -2.070            -2.267     -2.180
                                   (1.211)            (1.510)           (1.476)    (1.358)

Constant                            -1.830             -2.923            -5.524     -4.375
                                   (2.431)            (12.74)           (11.68)    (9.086)
Observations                         102                102               102        102
R2                                  0.201              0.198             0.170      0.186
Adjusted R2                         0.159              0.156             0.127      0.144
Hausman p − value                      .               0.932             0.750      0.776
Standard errors in parentheses
∗
  p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                                51
